 SKCW. WUPCTTCMS  KINCSIS  u  MAY 77  vol 6 no 6  Vancouver status of women  %Wfl&'T&'K&¥W&  >»>}}}>>>>»>>»»»>»»>>»  • Afeministperspectiveon pornography  at VS^       kjnesis means change ATTACK ON CHILDCARE  ABORTION  In September of '75, there was a waiting list of 200 children needing childcare in Vancouver.  In September '76, there were 300 vacant places.  And for '77 - '78, the Department of  Human Resources has budgeted 30% less  for childcare than it did in the previous year.  What happened?  The campaign for quality childcare  has been waged by the women's movement for years. Childcare has become  a household word, but quality childcare is further away than ever.  In April of 1973, under an improved  provincial scheme, new non-profit societies of parent boards were permitted to receive grants of up to $20,  00 to meet the capital costs of childcare centres. Susidies were provided  to parents on a sliding scale according to net incomes.  Twelve months ago, the government announced a new funding policy concerning childcare. It increased the amount  it would subsidize each child by $20.  But it also removed the ceiling on  the amount which could be charged for  childcare; surcharges over and above  the subsidy amount were permitted.  This surcharge means that low income  parents and single parents can often  no longer afford childcare.  Parents on social assistance, most immigrant parents (except for those with  official refugee status) and two student parent families can no longer  receive childcare subsidies.  This accounts for the 300 vacancies.  They exist because parents cannot afford childcare, not because they do not  want it.  Parent Boards  Threatened  With Closure  Of Centres  But that's not all. There are further  plans afoot to sabotage what little  childcare there is left. Parent boards  of the-non-profit organizations are  being asked to account for their  capital grant expenditures, dollar  for dollar. According to the letter  of the law, it is the responsibility  of the parent boards to provide for,  amongst other things: hiring of  staff, provision of food, clothing,  equipment and supplies, the development of the centre's philosophy,  emergency policy, attendance records, administrative records etc.  The workers are responsible only  for the care of the children and the  day-to-day running of the centre.  But in fact the workers usually  also carry out many of those duties  which, according to the Societies  Act, are the prerogative of the  parent boards. There are very few  child care centres in Vancouver with  parent boards strong enough to withstand these legalistic attacks. Childcare is in danger of being eroded  further; we are moving backwards, fast.  EUNUCHS OF THE FORBIDDEN CITY, a Tama-  hnous Theatre production, was running  at the Vancouver East Cultural Centre  in the last two weeks of April.  The play, which concerned the rise of  a Chinese empress to power in some  distant dynasty, contained various  scenes of sexual violence against women. It employed the old line about  women smelling like fish. In one scene,  the empress has her anus and vagina  penetrated by the imperial seal. As  THE PLAY STANK-  soon as it is inserted in her vagina,  she has an orgasm. Of course. In another, the empress 'makes love' with  a woman, using a 2 foot long dildo.  All this in the name of trendy comedy.  The play reeked of sexism. Feminists  pointed this out on the evening of  April 23. They filled the hall with  skunk-like odors, denounced the play,  and walked out.  "They have no humourous perspective," said the director.  'More Employment'  AVery Strange  Story  Human Resources Minister Bill Vander  Zalm has announced that his ministry  had a surplus of $100 million for the  financial year ending March 31, 1977.  Vander Zalm attributed part of the  surplus to mild winter conditions  which encouraged more employment and  resulted in lower welfare expenditures.  He said it's also due to  "the general move away from welfare  that seems to be increasing all the  time in the province." (Province,  April 19/77)  Three years ago, there were about 25  people at the Annual General Meeting of  Vancouver General Hospital. This year,  there were about 2,500. The crowd was  not there to listen to the reports of  the Board members, nor to endure the  arch remarks by management about the  strike of the previous year. They were  there to support or condemn VGH's pro-  abortion policy.  The pro-abortion slate was re-elected,  with an average of 900 votes each. The  anti-abortion forces averaged 400 votes  a-piece. However, possibly more than  600 "Pro-Lifers" were excluded from  the voting by a residency requirement  which limited prospective VGH membership  to those who live within Vancouver.  This motion to limit residency was  carried by 142 votes to 109. If it had  not been moved and carried, the voting  would have been much closer.  This Annual General Meeting is an exercise in absurdity, not democracy. The  Hyatt Regency Ballroom was crammed, and  an overflow crowd had to be accommodated  downstairs. Will it be the Gardens or  the Coliseum next year?  Such absurdities are^occasioned by the  Federal government's refusal to admit  that it's time to remove abortion from  the criminal code forever.  Eaton's  Exploits  Eaton's gimmick for  this year's Mother's  Day is to exploit the  women's movement.  The perversion of  people's struggles  for purposes of profit is not new. In  1913 advertisers  used the women's suffrage campaign to sell  breakfast oats.  mothers pay  This year, Eaton's is urging us to  buy shirts, pantyhose, gloves and  'the hottest jewelry item from Paris'  for Mom because: "Your mother's heritage is a part of your roots.(Somebody's being watching T.V.) Honour  her this Mother's Day. Along with  their goods for sale goes a feature  in their series: Remarkable women in  the history of British Columbia.  Mary Ellen Smith, the first woman  in the B.C. legislature, is selling  shirts. Alice Elizabeth Jowest,  B.C.'s earliest prospector is  peddling panty hose.  Companies have always recognised that  there is room within the system for  'corpo woman', as long as you separate  her from her sisters. But it is ironic  indeed that Eaton's should be cashing in on feminism. Ask their female  employees about working conditions  in the store. Call Eaton's and register your reactions to their ads. ISSN 0317-9095  Vol.VI,#5  SUBSCRIBE!  NAME:    MAY '77  BEFORE WE GO UNDER  MEMBERSHIP DONATION $  INSTITUTIONAL SUB: $10.00 p.a.  RENEWAL:     MEMBER:  KINESIS is sent to all members in good  standing of VSW. Membership fees are by  yearly donation. In determining your  donation, we ask you to balance your  own financial situation with the fact  that KINESIS costs (at least!) $5.00  per person to print and mail each month.  KINESIS costs 35 cents per copy in bookstores. Help KINESIS by distributing it  in your community.  KINESIS is published monthly by the  Vancouver Status of Women. Its objective is to promote understanding  about the changing position of women  in society.  Views expressed in KINESIS are those of  the writer, and unless specifically  stated do not reflect VSW policy. All  unsigned material in this paper is the  responsibility of the editorial and  production committee.  PUBLICATION DATE: The first week of  each month.  COPY DEADLINE: The 15th of the previous  month.  KINESIS STAFF THIS ISSUE: Janet Beebe,  Lilith Brewster, Leila Harding, Linda  Hourie, Marg Nelson, and Gayla Reid.  SUBMISSIONS: KINESIS welcomes all submissions from the feminist community.  We will use pseudonyms when requested.  The editorial committee reserves the  right to edit in the interests of clarity, brevity and taste.  CORRESPONDENCE: KINESIS, Vancouver  Status of Women, 2029 West 4th Ave.,  Vancouver, B.C. Canada. V6J 1N3.  Phone us: 736 3748.  GRAPHICS CREDITS: The graphics in this  issue are from Liberation News Service,  to which KINESIS subscribes.  Other graphics credits: p.4, Emergency Librarian; pp. 10,15 and 24:  Women's Survival Catalogue; pp. 11,  12 and 13 Time Magazine; p.15 vulva  is from Betty Dodson's Liberating  Masturbation; p. 17 Federal Government blurb; p.18 United for a Non-  Exploitive New Age; photo on p.3  Karen Richardson; photo p. 11 Jerry  Boorda; p.4 Women's Karate Assoc;  Northern Notes photos Diana Ellis,  others by Gayla Reid.  This is the last month that the subs,  will be $5.00 for the year, SO GET YOUR  SUBSCRIPTIONS IN NOW FOR YOUR BUDDIES  KINESIS:  Please renew my subscription to  Kinesis. Enclosed is a money order  in the amount of $6.00. Kinesis is  the best way I can keep in touch with  the women's movement.  I find that  living in a small town is a very  painful process in that women find  it a painful process to be radical  feminists. Our group is continually  going through growing pains; adding  and dropping members and trying to  find a common level of commitment  that will satisfy everyone's needs.  So far the adjustments haven't been  fulfilling for anyone but we are  trying alternatives all the time.  What happens though is that one  tends to expend more energy keeping  everyone together rather than "doing" things to promote improvement  in the status of women.  In outlying  areas like Quesnel the support needed by women from other women (and  men) is tremendous. We are just  starting to realize that this problem will have to be dealt with first  and then we can try to be active in  the movement.  What happens is that women who are  already at an active level want to  move and the others in the area want  them not to move so there is friction in the group. We are presently still trying to face and iron  out these problems by having the  group split into CR and active members but with a small group this  also causes problems.  So we keep  trying until we get tired, then rest  and try again.  Keep up the good work and feel sure  that I support you fully.  Patricia Busch  R.R.I Cariboo Service,  Box 27, Quesnel, B.C.  V2J 3H5  KINESIS:  Enclosed is a small cheque toward a  membership in VSW.  I realize it does  not totally cover the cost of Kinesis  but it really is all Vander Zalm and  I can put out at this time. However  sisters, some day all our ships will  come in, and FSW will push them a  little faster.  Margo Dunn  1TMJ. f)  ^StS^  \m  ji  ,  ~   WM®*  JUNE  2\  TH€  VSW  AGM  NO  L€SS  Thank you very much for providing me  with complimentary issues of KINESIS"  I am happy to enclose a cheque for  $5.00 for one year's subscription,  and wish you well in all your continuing efforts.  Yours sincerely,  G.Scott Wallace MLA  Leader  Progressive Conservative  Party of British Columbia  KINESIS:  Enclosed is a donation for another  year's subscription. I value the  information and views that KINESIS  provides and I hope my meagre cheque  will help out.  Since I am a full-time student I  regret that there is little time for  active participation. However, KINESIS  is my newsline with the feminist community and I want to say that it is  greatly appreciated.  Yours truly,  R.Mar  KINESIS:  We received your copy of March 1977;  it's great!  Should we pay for that  or is it a free subscription? If  not, please can you send an invoice  for what it costs? Thank you very  much.  Andre Roux  Statistics Canada Library  KINESIS:  Sorry I cannot contribute more but I  am a single parent at home with my  two children. Also, I am going to  school, so money is tight. I enjoy  reading KINESIS every month. Keep  up the work, it is needed - now  more than ever. If we let up a bit  we will slip back and have to start  the climb all over again.  Sincerely,  Linda Tate UNEMPLOYED:   1000000  Now even the government admits that  there are more than one million unemployed people in Canada.  The  official figure is 8%.  It's safe  to say that the real figure is probably twice that.  Unemployment is running at 30% in  Newfoundland, 28% in Cape Breton,  25% in the Gaspe region, 25% in the  Powell River area and 14% in Nanaimo.  In Montreal, the figure is 20%  (these are the figures quoted by  Broadbent in the House of Commons).  VSW member Mercia Stickney-concentrated upon-the issue of unemployment recently when addressing an NDP  mini-caucus in Vancouver. Here are  excerpts from her address:  "In the last year or so, our primary  industries have retrenched, throwing  workers onto the unemployment rolls.  But from the late sixties on there  has been an unemployment rate hovering around 5%, but this rate has  been promoted as being acceptable.  The explanation for the 5% rate is  that it is caused by the influx of  young people and housewives into the  labour force. We are thus left to  draw the inference that the inability of these people to find employment is not really a serious matter.  For those of us falling into this  rate of unemployment that is considered acceptable, our plight is exacerbated when the unemployment level rises and we find "good-will"  wearing thin as those on whom we  depend face financial difficulties  themselves.  The unemployment rate for women has  since the late sixties been running  2% to 3% higher than for men.  But  in fact the difference is higher  than this, for it is women who disappear from the labour force calculations when the cost of daycare  (as happened last year) so eats into  wages that there is little monetary  return left for job efforts.  Indeed,  some women are forced to move from  the work-place to the welfare rolls  because they simply cannot afford to  pay for daycare and to have enough  left over to meet basic family needs.  "BY BEING UNEMPLOYED WE ARE SAVING  OURSELVES FROM A RUINOUS INFLATION."  Then too, there are the women who  become discouraged from trying for  jobs when there are so many applications for the one position, and  positions which don't pay much at  that.  It is known that the average earnings of women across Canada are 55%  of the average male earnings, and  that these average earnings of women  for 1976 were $6,543.  This aspect  of women's unemployment is hidden,  not showing up in Labour Force Surveys. A Labour Force Survey questionnaire which asks "What did you  do mostly last week?" classes a  woman who answers "housework" as  outside the labour force, whereas  a Census question' "Did you look for  work last week?" reveals that the  women did look for work, although  she was doing housework as well.  Thus she is part of the unemployment rolls, in fact, not outside  the labour force as recorded.  When women do get jobs, the skills  required for the job are underrated.  Clerical skills for which so many  women have been trained are considered of less monetary value than  those of operating a fork lift.  Just last year in B.C. the practical nurses received the same pay  rate as the male orderlies, and this  year the hospital boards complain  TURN TO C0L.1 p.18  LORANGER VISITS  Julie Loranger, the newly appointed  federal Coordinator on the Status of  Women, was in Vancouver March 22-25  to introduce herself to federal and  provincial officials of B.C.  While in town she met with the Wo-  ment's Economic Rights Branch, Western Conference/Opportunities for  Women, Women's Resources Centre,  Victoria SWAG and Vancouver Status  of Women among others.  Her office was originally established  in 1971 after the tabling of the Royal Commission Report on the Status of  Women.  In those days it was headed  by Freda Paltiel and later by Martha  Hynna.  It advised the federal cabinet through  Privy Council on how to implement the  recommendations of the Royal Commission Report but due to the bureaucracy  involved was rendered ineffective.  Julie Loranger at VSW  turn to col.1,p.23  beware  bill c 24  BILL C-24  "We have a government of pack rats;  they hide everything." Mr. Baldwin  (MP for Peace River), commenting on  Bill C-24 in the House.  The Federal Government is in the, process of hurrying through an extremely  repressive immigration bill.  If'this  bill is passed, our immigrant sisters  and brothers are in for a tougfr time.  According to Bill C-24, immigrants  will be subject to a whole different  set of regulations from those affecting citizens.  Thus they will prove  scapegoats during the current economic crisis.  Take a close look at Bill C-24.  If this bill is passed, the government will have:  - the right to subject immigrants to  constant surveillance  - the right to force immigrant workers  to work in certain areas for specified periods as part of a captive  labour force  - the right to fingerprint and photograph all immigrants  - the right to arrest without warrant  - the right to deport on the basis of  secret reports without appeal  - the right to deport on the suspicion that a person is likely to commit a crime, or is associated with  an organization suspected of violence or of attempts to overthrow  any government (think about this  one!)  The government will be able to impose  arbitrary and unrestricted terms as a  condition to entry.  The thrust of this bill is not only  to interfere with any political activity by immigrants, but to ensure  that they can be used as a cheap labour pool.  Bill C-24 is yet another page in the  long history of discrimination and  exploitation of immigrants.  In British Columbia alone, there are many  and varied examples of racist treatment of immigrants.  - In 1903, a $500 "head tax" was  placed on Chinese immigrants, in  order to restrict the entry of  Chinese people into Canada, after  their labour on the railways was  no longer required.  - In 1914, the Federal Government,  faced with widespread labour unrest, quarantined the Komagata  Maru in Vancouver harbour, denying entry to more than 300 East  Indians and subjecting them to  inhuman living conditions.  - The "Green Paper" on immigration  continued this racism, proposing  quotas on the number of people  arriving from Third World countries while encouraging white,  middle-class immigrants.  Write to Bud Cullen, Minister of  Manpower and Immigration, House of  Commons, Parliament Buildings, in  Ottawa, and demand the immediate  withdrawal of this bill. Feminist Karate Association  by Dulce Oikawa  "She* fights like a man." That's how  many female karate artists describe  Lorraine Roberts, chief instructress  of the Feminist Karate Association.  To require comparison to a man,  somehow indicates that B.C. women  in the martial arts have not as yet  "come into their own." Lorraine  Roberts and Marsha Enomoto, members  of the Feminist Karate Association,  however, devote their extra-curricular energies attempting to change  that image.  Initially, what must be clarified is  a definition of the term "martial  arts." It is less of a dramatic  flying leap into the air as performed by Bruce Lee.  It is not violence,  blood and cracked bones.  It is much  more — it is, an art.  It's believed that the origin of the  martial arts go back to the 6th century, evolving from a system of self-  defense taught to Chinese monks by a  Buddhist monk from India.  Because  of religious beliefs, monks could not  carry weapons; instead they learned  to fashion their arms, hands, elbows,  legs, knee and foot into offensive  weapons. The Chinese art is known  as kung-fu/gung-fu, t'ai-chi-ch'uan.  From there, it went to Okinawa and  then to Japan where it became known  as karate.  (Aikido and judo are two  other systems that had its roots in  Japan but with a distinctly different philosophical bend).  The Korean  system is known as tae-kwon-do. Each  system, however, has a different  style inherent within itself; e.g.  in karate there is a shito-ryu,  shotokan, gojuryu, etc. style!  Serious study of any of these martial art forms require severe discipline of the body and ultimately of  the mind. Lorraine Roberts had been  schooled in this kind of discipline  through the Yoshukai karate style  and latterly in the wu ying mun (a  combination of karate and kung-fu).  Marsha Enomoto, founder of the Feminist Karate Association, contributes  three years of judo and kung-fu  training to the Association.  The history of the Feminist Karate  Association goes back to 1974, when  Marsha attended an All Women's Tournament in Seattle - a gathering of  women of various martial art disciplines.  "It was an exciting experience meeting with other women who  had broken through a male-dominated  art," exclaimed Marsha.  "When I  returned to Vancouver I wanted to  share that excitement." Marsha was  interviewed on "Good Morning" radio  by Vera Rosenbluth. As a result,  four women who had been struggling  in'isolation at martial art schools  in Vancouver contacted Marsha and  the five women met collectively to  share and exchange their views,  skills and experience in the arts.  One of the women, Patty Clark, a  brown belt from the Shotokan style  of karate, offered to teach her  skills to interested women. As  many as twenty-five women, primarily university students, began  meeting regularly at the Kitsilano community centre and eventually at UBC for regular instructions  from Patty and Marsha.  Classes generally consisted of:  warm-up exercises followed by basic  stance, punching, blocking and kicking techniques. These techniques  were then blended together in what  is termed "kata" meaning, "a systematically organized series-of  offensive and defensive techniques  performed in a set sequence against  imaginary multiple opponents."  Classes sometimes ended with "kum-  ite" or sparring (fighting) sessions.  In the spring of 1976, Lorraine Roberts replaced Patty as chief instructress. With two years of karate under her belt, Lorraine brought  with her, a reputation of "the un-  conquered female" in the Vancouver  martial arts circuit. Unlike Patty,  whose persuasion leaned towards  teaching the formalized kata forms,  Lorraine tended towards free spar  ring. The FKA began equipping itself with protective gear - shin  pads, face masks and padded gloves  for more regular and frequent sparring sessions.  "Women aren't conditioned mentally to fight," says  Lorraine, "and I have to keep saying  stop apologizing everytime you make  contact with your opponent!  Guys are  used to getting hurt or throwing a  hard punch at someone because boys  are brought up wrestling. With women,  it's a whole new world.  It takes a  long time for women to overcome that  fear of hurting and being hurt. You  don't become a fighter until that  happens," says Lorraine.  professionals chatter  The Legal Services Commission, which  was created by the provincial government to plan the development of legal  services in B.C., held Community  Hearings on Legal Services during  March of 1977. During these hearings,  VSW presented a brief to the Commission about the inadequacy of legal  services for women.  The Legal Services Commission spent  between $10,000 - $30,000 (depending  on whose figures one accepts and  whether or not you include the per  diem payments to the part-time Commissioners) finding out what the legal needs of the community are; who  is served; who can't get the services  they need and how best to provide  these services in an urban setting.  For the most part the hearings appeared to be a cover to justify the  existence of the Commission.  I suppose to some degree the Commission did learn something, because  repeatedly groups and individuals  complained about the lack of legal  services available to specific  groups or made specific complaints  about the manner in which the legal  profession had handled specflc cases.  What showed up clearly in the final'  hearings was an almost complete lack  of empathy for those community groups  who wanted to use the public hearings  to make public statements about the  present delivery of legal services.  The evening that VSW was asked to  present a brief was probably typical. Transition House spoke first,  while papers were being shuffled,  before the press arrived, and before  most of the audience arrived.  They  were reminded to be brief.  The only  woman on the Commission asked a few  sympathetic question; counsel for  the Commission asked a naive question ("Why don't more women press  charges...the police are unwilling  to intervene in family dispute because women don't follow through  and press charges.") and then they  were hurried off.  VSW was last of  the list, when everyone had left  and we were encouraged to be brief.  However, those representatives of  the traditional institutions were  met warmly and allowed to ramble on  at great length about all kinds of  ills, most of which could never be  solved by the Legal Services Commission. They discussed, quite  happily, the costs of defending conspiracy charges and several legal  problems raised by law reform  recommendations.  It was probably  not deliberate - just the usual  communication gap that occurs.  Professionals love to talk with  other professionals...buzz words  fly...as each tries to impress the  other with her/his particular  knowledge. They are probably concerned in the liberal church conscience way about the needs of  the poor and oppressed, but are  uncomfortable and naturally somewhat defensive when they are told  that the system that works for them  and provides them with their livelihood doesn't work for you or me. FDS  'for ihd un-naiumi  ^natural odor...  J \  Don't Be AshaTriSd'To Belh Public.  in THE '/VOW SOLUTION TO OUR IN-.  ADEQUATE PROFIT MARGINS!  .-!  (AL>0 EFFECTIVE A5 AN INDUSTRIAL STRENGTH CLEANER.)  (LNS) NEW YORK - The National Advertising Division has been swamped with  letters - over 4,700 - since "Dear  Abby" suggested in her advice column  that people send in their complaints  about "feminine hygiene" TV advertising.  Advertising Age reports that this is  a record number of complaints on a  single subject sent to the ad complaint centre of the Council of Better  Business Bureaus.  Feminine hygiene products have been  big-time advertising since 1970.  Profits hit an estimated $53 million  in 1971, and today a reported 24  million women use vaginal deodorants.  Most complaints questioned the propriety of TV advertising of the "gyna-  cosmetic", which the ads call "a 'now'  solution to that age-old female problem."  Safety was another issue. When the  spray first surfaced, the Food and  Drug Administration (FDA) classified  it as a cosmetic and therefore extensive testing for safety was not required.  Questions were first raised  in November 1970 when a Montreal gynecologist reported in the Journal of  Obstetrics and Gynecology that he had  treated about 20 to 25 patients with  itching and burning in the vulva area.  All had used the sprays daily.  As the irritation reports increased,  the FDA began to look into the matter and pinpointed hexachlorophene  as the cause. That chemical was eventually eliminated from vaginal sprays  but the sprays are still on the market and still causing irritation.  "Some women spray these deodorants  directly inside the vulva or on menstrual pads or tampons instead of  the surface of the genital area,"  writes Carol Horos in her book  Vaginal Health.  "Spraying any chemical on the vaginal area's fragile membranes can  cause irritation and inflammation  of the vulva. Swelling itching or  even allergic skin reactions are  typical problems...  "If undocumented reports that the  propellant in the spray works well  on roaches turn out to be true,"  continued Horos, "women might do  better to aim it at the kitchen  floor."  Prisoners" Rights  The Prisoners' Rights Group is pressuring the government into admitting  that there is a desperate need for  more juvenile facilities.  On March 14th, a young woman hanged  herself in the RCMP cells in Courtenay. Her name was Lorie Miles.  She  was sixteen years old.  On March 29th, a 14-year-old jumped  to her death from Boundary Road overpass, eight days after her first attempt. Her name was Susan Bochon.  Lack of mental health facilities to  care for young women and girls in  deep trouble, can be pointed to as  the main reason for Lorie's and Susan's deaths.  What has the Provincial Attorney  General Garde Gardom to say about  this?  The Prisoners' Rights Group has sent  letters and telegrams to the Attorney  General. They have tried repeatedly  to contact him by phone.  Gardom has  not been willing to meet with any member of the group to discuss the situation.  In order to force him to meet with  them, members and supporters of the  'ñ†Prisoners' Rights Group staged a one  hour demonstration April 14th in  front of the Attorney General's  plush Angus Drive mansion.  The group  called upon the Gardoms' only to be  turned away at the front door.  Gardom:, the message went, was not at  home.  The Group carried banners reading:  "Gardom and Vander Zalm - Don't you  give a bloody damn"., and ."Girls suicide, while budgets bloat".  The Group points oiit that the suicide  rate among young people in B.C. (between the ages of 10-29) has more  than doubled in the past twelve years.  Despite this, the provincial government displays a greater interest in  balancing the budget than it does in  PICKET OUTSIDE THE A.G.'S HOME  providing sufficient funding for juvenile care programs.  The Vancouver Resources Board has  places for only 30 young people In  emergency homes. Every place is  filled.  The Central City Mission,  a Vancouver society which has been  operating youth group homes for a-  bout 25 years, is closing down four  homes.  There does not appear to be  any likelihood that they will reconsider.  The CCM acting executive  director, Barry Shaw, has said that  youth programs require "a great deal  more time and a great deal more effort than we can give."  Vander Zalm's Department of Human  Resources has indicated no willingness to allocate extra funds and  additional space for this basic  community need.  If there's enough money to build  prisons, then surely there's enough  money to provide mental health care  to young people who need it. Many  prisoners would not be locked away  today if they had received a minimum  of assistance as school students.  The Prisoners' Rights Group does not  want more surveys and more studies.  It wants mental health facilities  open for public appraisal.  For more information about the Prisoners' Rights Group, contact them  at 3965 Pandora Street, Burnaby.  (Phone: 299-7178)  QUARTERLY MEETING  The recentralization of services to  the community was the subject of  the spring quarterly membership  meeting of VSW. A summary of the  discussion follows:  Legal Services Commission lost 13  staff members last year, connected  with: (1) Public Education and (2)  Community Law Offices.  Legal Aid has been cut back, but is  still in existence.  Groups funded last year are: Vancouver Community Legal Assistance Society, Elizabeth Fry, People's Law  School, UBC Summer Students' Law  Program.  Groups not funded last  year are: Surrey, Fairview Slopes,  Vancouver Status of Women, B.C.  Civil Liberties.  Education  Core Curriculum: "With the exception of those areas which have been  delegated to the local school boards,  responsibility for what is taught  is the responsibility of the Minister of Education."  Which means:  - Out of 12 courses available in  high school, 10 are mandatory, two  can be developed through the local  school board.  - From these two possible options  are: Women's Studies, Family Life  Education, art, p.e., etc.  The Minister of Education has chosen  which areas the local school boards  will deal with, and they are the hot  areas that the Ministry wants to stay  out of, i.e. sex education.  Out of each $1.00 going into education, 850 comes from the community.  The Minister of Education pays 15c.  Vancouver Resources Board  There are two kinds of social services within the Vancouver Resources  Board - statutory and non-statutory.  Statutory social services are basically those services which must be  given, and non-statutory services are  those that come from agencies that  are funded by community grants. The  Community Resource Board system allowed for elected representatives of  each community to determine priorities and fund their communities ac-  cording to needs. With each new cut  in statutory social services that  GAIN legislation brings, there is  increased pressure to provide that  service through community grant funding. Hence, outside community agencies will be gradually wiped out. women  round  wor  rid  SOUTH   AFRICA  Last month's KINESIS published a general  description of the legal position of  black women in South Africa. These are  selections from an article by South  African feminists (Anne V.Mayne and  Ann Levett) about feminism in South  Africa.  The political system in South Africa is  so repressive that one's energy is often  drained from the start. Racism is the  overwhelming fact of political life.  As for raising consciousness about the  issues of the women's movement, the  radio and tv are state-controlled -  with a strongly Calvinist church bias.  The press tends to trivialize feminist  issues.  DEMONSTRATIONS BANNED  Public demonstrations and marches are  virtually illegal. To organize a demo-  nestration, permission must be obtained  from the town clerk three weeks in advance and he must approve every word  in every placard. (Permission for any  sort of demonstration is rarely granted.)  Since 1970, little flickers of modern  feminism have sparked up in various  parts of the country and have died. A  group that got going in Johannesburg in  1971 was dispersed by the Security  Branch (political police) because of  its involvement with left-wing politics.  In 1973 in Capetown, a few middle class  white women started a study groups  around some feminist books and this  grew into a rap group which included a  few black women.  Over the period 1974-6, there appears to  have been a mushrooming of small, unconnected pockets of women - mostly  white, middle class, and many of them  academics - in the major cities, organized around study groups and CR groups.  There are no umbrella organizations  and any communication between groups  has been largely coincidental via individuals .  In 1973, the Abortion Law Reform League  was started. A woman could only have an  abortion to save her life. In 1974, the  law was "liberalized" to permit abortion  for cases of rape, incest, imbecility  or where continued pregnancy would cause  severe physical damage or where the  child is likely to be defective. Even in  these cases, the red tape is so very involved that very few women actually succeed in obtaining a legal abortion.  turn to p. 16  uftemartfensUi  Wetoetfmy  Demonstrations marking International  Women's Day around the world centred  on economic issues, the right to  abortion and contraception, and government attempts to cut back women's  rights.  In Bilbao, Spain 1,000 women held a  mass meeting and march.  This was  the first time in history that March  8 has been celebrated in the Basque  country. The mass meeting, attended  mainly by young women, heard women  speak about their struggles in the  workers movement, and their oppression as housewives and in prisons.  In Australia, the most significant  aspect of the marches around the  country was their emphasis on economic demands.  In most cities, women  turned out in much greater numbers  than in 1976, with.1,000 in Adelaide,  2,000 in Sydney, 700 in Melbourne,  and 150 in Brisbane.  Seven thousand demonstrated in Brussels March 5. The march, which was  organized by 28 abortion committees  throughout the country and supported  by a wide range of political organizations and trade unions, was called  to demand "a woman's right to choose".  Marches and rallies took place in virtually every major city in the United  States, involving thousands of women.  A central demand of many actions was  the ratification of the Equal Rights  Amendment to the U.S. constitution.  The biggest actions were in San Francisco and New York, with 1,000 turning out in each city. (Labour Challenge)  BELGIUM  BELGIUM - In Baudour, near Mons, 200  women working for Siemens, have been  occupying their factory since the 12th  of October 1976.  The management decided to close the factory, making  200 people, of whom 180 were women,  redundant. The women are fighting  the anti-social policy of their boss  and also accusing the lack of responsibility of the Belgian state. They  also want to show that women need work  and want to fight the too common opinion that women like being unemployed.  CHILE  COMMITTEE FOR THE DEFENSE OF HUMAN  RIGHTS IN CHILE EXPRESSES SOLIDARITY  WITH POLITICAL PRISONERS IN ARGENTINAo  This month, the Committee for the  Defense of Human Rights in Chile is  expressing solidarity with women  prisoners in Argentina, where thousands of women and men are suffering  imprisonment, torture and death  under the military dictatorship.  The Committee is organizing a letter-  writing campaign this month for  three Argentinian political prisoners.  They are:  MANUELA ELMINA SANTUCHO. She is a  lawyer who was defending political  prisoners. She was kidnapped by the  army at Calle Warnes 735 Capitol  Federal Argentina on July 13 1976.  Her parents have received news that  she has been tortured. She is being  kept at La Atomica , in Ezeiza, in  the province of Buenos Aires. Under  the pretext that her sanity has been  lost, and that she is causing a disturbance to the other prisoners, they  are planning to execute her. She has  several small children. Only a massive outcry from the international  community can save her lifec  LILIANA DELFINO, arrested by the military on the same day that MARIO  ROBERTO SANTUCHO, a member of the  Argentinian Revolutionary Workers'  Party, was killed. The military says  that she's dead, but she has been  seen alive in Campa De Mayo, a concentration camp. She also has 2 young  children.  CHRISTINA SILVIA NAVAJAS DE SANTUCHO  was kidnapped, also on July 13, '76.  She is a sociologist, and the mother  of two. The army has denied that she  has been imprisoned, but she has been  seen in the hands of Argentinian police.  CONTACT THE COMMITTEE FOR THE DEFENSE  OF HUMAN RIGHTS IN CHILE at 906 - 207  West Hastings, Vancouver" 669 5545.  Send letters of protest to:  General Jorge Videla  President of the Republic  Casa Rosada  Buenos Aires  Argentina  Horacio Arce       *urt Wffeim  56 Sparkes St, #816 ^Tn  SeCretary  Ottawa, Ontario,    "';' .  " "  New York, N.Y. all schools teach sexism:  From Accent on Reading by G.M. Chron-  ister. Grade 7 Language Arts: Jake  is a tomboy, and Snap is her brother.  They are playing about on some logs  together, and Jake gets put 'in her  place'. The narrator is another boy,  Snap's friend.  Snap and Jake are  spinning a log near a waterfall:  "Snap threw a quick look over his  shoulder. His red face turned white.  'Jake!' he shouted.  'The falls!  Look over your shoulder!' Jake  laughed scornfully, 'You look!'  'But Jacqueline! You'll get killed!'  Jake glanced at him suddenly, her  eyes big...Her feet slipped, the log  changed its speed, and down they  both went.  But they didn't both go  the same way.  Snap flew clear, but  Jake hit the log on her way down.  She came up groaning and holding  her head. Almost immediately, Snap  was at her side, helping her...Snap  and I got Jake ashore just as the log  went over the falls.  Jake lay there  on the bank motionless for quite a  while.  Finally I tried artificial  respiration. Then she came to in a  hurry.  'Ouch!' she said.  'You all  right?' Snap and I breathed anxiously.  She gave us a strange look. 'I  guess so.  But don't call me Jake  any more,' she said. 'Call me -  Jacqueline.'"  From Strawberries and Other Secrets  by James A. MacNeil and Glen A. Sor-  estad.  A Junior English Text.  This  is a story of manly adventure, featuring a hero by the name of Lenin-  gen, who is master-minding an escape  of his community across a dam: "The  women and children, and then the  herds of cattle, were escorted by  peons on rafts over the river, to  remain on the other side in absolute  safety until the plunderers had departed.  Leningen gave this instruction, not because he believed the  .noncombatants were in any danger,  but in order to avoid hampering the  efficiency of the defenders. 'Critical situations first become circuses,' he explained.to his mon,  'when women and oxen get excited.'"  From Language Patterns, Grade 2:  "Winter Fishing: Saturday was crisp  and cold. The sun made everything  look like a fairy land. 'Let's go  fishing,* said Mr. Moyer.  'Fishing!'  said Joyce and Bill.  'Oh father,  what a joke! We have to wait until  spring to go fishing.'  'Oh no,'  said father. 'You can go fishing  with me today.  I think you'll enjoy it. Put on your heavy coats.  Mother will pack us a lunch and some  hot chocolate for us. Will you come  fishing with me?'  'Yes, yes!' exclaim the children." The picture  above is the story of mother, father,  daughter and son.  But the woman,  presumably, has nothing to say.  From Pageant of the Past by Dawn ana  John Trueman.  Grade 7 Social Sciences:  "The Athenian man was expect-  <ed to give his services wholly to the  state; the Athenian woman was expected to give hers wholly to the home.  Yet even if she did not have as much  freedom as her sisters from other  Greek states, it was true in Athens,  as in the world ever since man was  created, that the hand that rocks  the cradle rules the world. Many a  time Tromes had seen his mother pretty herself up specially when she knew  his father would come home from lunch  instead of taking it at the Agora  (market-place), or when he had been  away for some time because it was  his turn to be a 'commander' of a  ship...On these occasions she would  don her most becoming saffron-coloured tunic.  Then she would carefully dress her blue-black hair  (sometimes much blacker than others  Tromes noted), and make up her face  by applying white-lead, vegetable  dyes, and rouge, and rubbing lampblack under her eyes and her eyebrows. And so, beautiful and perfumed, she would sit herself  gracefully in a chair beside her  husband's couch, and as the meal  progressed would adroitly steer the  conversation towards some particular objective which she intended to  win that day!" And in Rome, according to the Pageant of the Past,  things were much the same.  Here a  Roman woman, Racilia, is married:  "...with marriage, the Roman daughter left her family, her home, and  the household gods and spirits of  her ancestors, and exchanged all  these for those of her husband. It  was a serious and, we would hope,  a final step. Racilia herself had  been a vision of loveliness in her  old-fashioned straight white tunic  with a woollen sash, her saffron  coloured cloak, and her matching  yellow shoes.  Her hair, an unusually beautiful mass of auburn curls,  had been combed into six locks separated by ribbons, and over it her  veil fell softly, modestly, a^flam-  ing orange mist held in place by  orange blossoms."  From Incentives by Robert Livesay  and Bruce Archer.  English 8 Curriculum.  This is a list of twelve  people gathered in an atomic bomb  shelter designed for two, and which  can support only five at the most.  Seven people will have to turned  out.  The students have to decide  who will stay (!) The following  are the people in the shelter:  Reverend Good: 28 years old, he is  intelligent and possesses common  sense and the ability to organize  people. Mr. Wise: 68 years old. A  solid member of the community, a  friendly, grandfatherly type, with  natural wisdom.  Ben Brash: 23,  involved in many athletic activities...  Pierre le Bon: 21,factory  worker of French Canadian ancestry;  Miss S. Shape,.20 years old, works  as a secretary. She is a vivacious  young woman with an attractive face  and figure, and she knows it - she  has a slight Narcissus complex. She  constantly flirts with men and caused a quarrel between Ben Brash and  Pierre le Bon.  Bill Joint and Ann  Joint,  Bill is a salesman.  Ann is  20 and now a housewife, having married the boy she dated in high  school; Ann and Bill are still very  much in love.  Ann is pregnant - the  baby is due any time. Joey Black:  works in a garage, Black.  Miss Shy:  20 years old, is a nurse.  Miss Shy  is anti-social; she is physically  unattractive, is afraid of men, has  an inferiority complex, and is used  to living alone.  She has a weak  constitution.  Archibald Bookworm:  19 years old, very high IQ. Physically weak, socially inept, but a budding  scientist. Miss Freeze: 30 years old,  single, extremely attractive, an  interior decorator.  She is modern  in her tastes and outlook.  She hates  men and sees no reason why she should  spend her life as a servant to one of  them. Mrs. Nervepills: 50 years old,  a widow and a hypochondriac.  She is  easily upset, and is subject to fainting spells and fits of hysteria.  COLLECT EXAMPLES OF SEXIST TEXTS  and send them in to VSW's education  person, Nadine Allen. 2029 West 4th  Ave, Vancouver.  The Big Bass  Mom is sitting on the sand.  Dad is standing on the dock.  Dad has a rod.  LANGUAGE PATTERNS - Grade One. Dear Sisters:  As most of you know, I was hired a  year ago by the Women's Programme of  the Federal Department of Secretary  of State, to work as a "Community  Education Consultant on Women's Issues" in northern B.C.  The mandate  of the job was to assist women's  groups in organizing, to raise  status of women issues in the different communities, to assist in the  development of a communications network among women's groups in the  north, and to begin to work up strategies of effecting attitude change  on status of women issues in various  institutions.  40,000 miles later I  sit down, back at my home in Vancouver, to begin a final debriefing on  this "year of the north" that I have  been trying to share with you each  month in Kinesis. At the same time  I question this need I have to tell  you about it - surely the travelogue  must be tiring? - am I overtelling  the Stories? I have no grand analysis to elucidate, few theories to  expound, but I do feel a need to  pass on the excitement and reflections of a year spent travelling  throughout the northern region of  B.C. working with northern women and  groups.  I also feel a certain responsibility to share with you some  of the trials and joys, as there are  all too few jobs such as this for the  many women eminently qualified to  carry them out.  First thoughts - our movement, despite the economic recession, funding  cutbacks and internal concerns about  lack of direction, is alive and well.  Yes, perhaps we are in a state of  flux (I like to think of it as a kind  of vibrant flux!) but the strongest  feeling I had this year (and continue  to have) was one of hope and energy.  In the city it may be easier to drift  into a state of"ennui"- of worry -  of internal dissension, but in the  non-urban area those feelings are few  and far between. There is literally  no time for them. My experience this  year tells me that northern women's  groups are among the healthiest anywhere in terms of local action, local  energy, commitment and plans for the  future.  Because of the service oriented focus  of many women's groups, it is not always easy for them to take the time to  see the relationship between the oppression of women as a whole and the  lack of services in their community.  Usually quite isolated, many women  think that this is happening only in  their own community and that if they  DIANA AND SANDY GREENAWAY OF PRINCE  GEORGE AT FORT ST.JAMES ON STUART LAKE  NORTHERN WOMEN'S TASK FORCE ON SINGLE INDUSTRY TOWNS March '77  Northern  work hard enough they can "make things  better". As a result there are women  battling day and night against a system that has little intention of bending to their demands. The burn-out  potential is very great, but they  insist that their job has to be done.  To walk into these towns and suggest  that politically their actions are  questionable, would be to make a  grave error in judgment.  These women  are doing what women around the world  have been taught to do best - to help  make things better for people around  them - except feminist women of the  north are doing it with a particular  feminist focus and this means they  are walking a real tightrope in their  communities. They need all the support they can'get. *  Interestingly enough, smaller communities tend to have a more easily  available "decision maker/power broker'  system and although some groups have  made successful forays into that system (notably Terrace Women's Organization), the majority of women and  groups in non-urban areas have not  yet seen that there are more opportunities for them to begin to effect  social change through the political  route in their community than there  are for their big city sisters. The  key is teaching these skills to those  of us who, by virtue of our socialization, have not even imagined that  such a power broker system exists.  Over the past two years there has  been phenomenal growth of the women's  movement in northern B.C.  Certainly  the reports of the other seven consultants working in the rest of Canada reveal that B.C. is in an advanced  stage of development when it comes to  communications networks between women  in different regions, towns and groups.  There are a number of reasons for  this: the IWY van tour did much to  identify women interested in women's  issues, the Western Canadian Women's  New Service consistently relayed information beyond the lower mainland  area, the B.C. Federation of Women  is committed to regional representation on its Standing Committee, the  Vancouver Status of Women has had a  province-wide focus for several years,  magazines such as Priorities, Makara  and Images are spread out all over  B.C., the Status of Women program  within the B.C. Teacher's Federation  and the organizing of women through  the B.C. Federation of Labour has  created other networks, and the Women's Rally for Action in 1976 was  an important organizing tool.  The  major focus I took this year was to  take advantage of this groundwork  and work to strengthen the communications links between northern women  specifically, hopefully assisting in  the creation of a northern women's  consciousness - a northern women's  bloc. For a long time women in the  north have been working on women's  issues as perceived and defined by  urban women's groups.  I'm not suggesting that this is a bad thing,  only that the lifestyles and problems in the north are different from  the south (city) and those differences must be recognized and worked  with rather than used to divide.  There is a growing recognition by  northern women of their own skills,  that they can begin to meet their  own needs for resource persons, information and skill sharing; that  their voices can combine collectively  and loudly to be heard in places  other than their own community.  They are realizing that they do have  something to say, that their issues  are a part of the whole and that  they can play a larger role in the  development and thrust of the women's  movement in B.C. and Canada.  MEMBERS OF -THE TS'AIKU WOMEN'S CENTRE - BURNS LAKE  Notes  BY DIANA ELLIS  (formerly Bissell)  JOYCE HAMILTON OF BURNS LAKE WITH DIANA  Women's groups in northern B.C. have,  in large part, developed around the  lack of social services in the community.  In that sense they are working  for all the residents of their community.  The special focus on women comes  from the feminist perspective that most  of the groups espouse.  The two larges population centres in  the northern half of the province are  Prince George (62,000) and Prince Rupert (18,000).  The majority of towns  range from 2,000 to 10,000 in area  population.  The size of a community  plays a large part in the decisions  that a women's groups will make about  the kinds of organizing they will do.  A radical stance is simply not tolerated in a small community; there is a  certain pressure to slide into a  "let's not shake up the system" mold,  threaded with real concern about .the  ramifications for one's family and  community life if one is marked as a  "libber".  It takes more than concern,  a need, a frustration, or a sense of  injustice to become involved in the  women's movement in a small town - it  takes courage.  Small informal unfunded groups do  meet to discuss consciousness-raising, politics and feminist theory;  indeed, such groups often form the  nucleus of a larger group or centre,  but in fact the immediate needs are  to lobby for or create in some small  way more services to meet the needs  of women.  Northern women are being  beaten, are being told there are no  jobs available, and even if there  were jobs, that daycare is totally  inadequate.  The nearest hospital,  which may be a hundred miles away  will more than likely not perform  abortions and women have very little  choice of medical personnel in their  town much less any possibility of  finding a non-sexist doctor.  They  often have to travel long distances  to another community to see a family  counsellor, housing is inadequate,  public transportation is non-existent.  The effect of these and myriad other  deficiencies of northern small town  living shows most seriously on the  faces of these women who so often  live in isolation.  No wonder then  that women's groups have gathered  their energies around these concerns.  By virtue of the fact that I was being  paid to travel all through the north,  and could therefore hear the different  /similar stories being told by women  hundreds of miles apart, we have been  able to isolate a number of issues  that expand beyond individual communities into a northwide focus. A small  amount of contract money was available  to each consultant and has been used  in northern B.C. specifically on the  development of northwide issues/needs.  Some of these have developed into ongoing structures that are quite exciting.  Marie Mitchell of the Prince George  Women's Collective is presently completing a contract to conduct "skill  development workshops" in communities  throughout the north.  These workshops  are focused on skills development for  women - learning to understand the  decision making structures of governments and how women can'have more effect on those structures.  Interestingly enough, as Marie was doing them,  she found that even more important to  many groups at this stage, was their  need to learn internal organizing  skills such as picking winnable issues to work on, setting realistic  goals and priorities for their group,  developing community support, learning to work effectively with one another.  It all keeps coming back to  the basics - before one can become  politically active in the community  and before one can even begin to act  on (and understand) the politics of  the women's movement, the groups have  to have their own operations and  "ideology" tunning smoothly.  This  is no small job in a town where there  may be widely conflicting ideologies  within the group, where the needs of  the women in the community are so  great that there is a tendency for  the women's centre to try to meet all  of those needs within the few short  months of their grant, and where  there is an automatic shying away from  things "political". Marie's tremendous flexibility and expertise enabled her to quickly ascertain where  each group was at and meet whatever  need they had regarding skill development.  The models she developed  should be looked at and utilized by  groups in other areas of the province.  There is no end to the need for skills  development.  It is the kind of exercise that has to be done over and  over again as new women become involved, as old issues fade away or become  tired, and it has to be done each time  with excitement and commitment.  ALL PHOTOS BY DIANA ELLIS  'Ģ  A key issue identified and isolated  during the course of several months  of travelling was the issue of women  and economic development. There is  no doubt that the north is going to  have its resources developed/exploited  and it is important - indeed it is an  absolute necessity - that women insist  on playing an active role in this  development. At first glance people  may not see the development of a mine,  smelter, pipeline, single industry  town or mill as a women's issue, but  as it is so often women who are suffering from the inadequate planning  of this development (read that to mean  the exclusion of women from any planning of this development) it is indeed  a women's issue. We have used some  contract money to focus on this issue  by creating the Northern B.C. Women's  Task Force on Single Industry Resource  Communities.  There are three organizers - Joan Kotarski of Mackenzie in  the northeast, Gina Baker of Fraser  Lake in the north central area, and  the Kitimat Status of Women in the  northwest. The purpose of the task  force is to assist and involve women  living in these communities in defining the needs of the communities as  they relate to women, and to develop  techniques that will more effectively  identify the problems relevant to women in single industry resource towns.  Another contract was let with the Women's Research Centre to teach basic  research skills to the organizers,  there have been two major meetings of  the Task Force, resource material has  been located and shared and extensive  interviewing/research done. The final  reports will be completed in mid-May  and will mark the first time that  specific questions about the quality  of life in these single industry towns  have been asked and answered by the  women themselves. What we are saying  in effect is that these women know  what is good and bad about their communities, and that it is their experience that -is most valid, not the  conclusions reached by an outside consulting firm hired to go into a town  for a week to circulate a questionnaire.  These reports will be widely  circulated, the research strategies  shared with women in other such towns,  and we are now in the process of  working up a plan for a major conference on Women and Economic Development  In the North for the fall.  29  ALISON CAMPBELL AND BOBBIE FORD OF  VANDERHOOF  - "Women Working." Native  Women's  Priorities  There is another contract being completed by Val Napoleon (formerly of  the Smithers Native Friendship Centre)  and she is focusing on native women's  issues through a series of workshops  on that topic for non-native women's  groups. Val has attended a number of  feminist conferences and has always  walked away struck by the fact that  the issues for native women are so  much more basic (like nutrition,  lifeskills, communication skills),  yet at the same time she recognized  that there is a need to communicate  with white women: to teach them what  the native women's issues are; to  learn specific skills from the non-  native women's movement and apply  those skills to native women's organizing. The workshops that she is  doing are a first step in providing  an opportunity for non-native women's  groups to learn what native women are  concerned about and at the same time  Val will continue to build the communications network of northern native  women.  There are 19 feminist oriented women's  groups throughout northern B.C. and  myriad others dealing with women but  , not within a specific feminist framework. Over and over again they identified priority issues as (1) lack of  social services (legal aid, health  and medical facilities, daycare, transition houses, family counsellors),  (2) lack of employment for women  (the few jobs available are traditional stereotyped jobs, no childcare provision for shiftworkers,  little hiring of women in mines,  mills, etc.), (3) special needs  relating to isolated northern liv-  More NORTHERN NOTES by Diana Bissell (who is returning to her former name, Diana Ellis)  ing (high cost of transportation,  problems in getting anywhere in  winter, lack of easily available  resource material and educational  programs), (4) the need to develop  community education programs on  women's rights for the community,  (5) the need to develop mere effective organizing skills within groups,  (6) the need to develop a greater  political awareness around women's  issues. The 19 groups, from the  Queen Charlotte Islands on the West  to Dawson Creek and Fort Nelson in  the East, from Quesnel in the South  to Whitehorse in the North are meeting these needs in an incredible  variety of ways. They are operating  thrift shops (with "women's sitting  rooms" in the back for community discussion groups); developing silk-  screening enterprises to teach women  a particular skill and raise money  for the group; they are doing advocacy and ombuds work on a large scale;  opening childminding centres and home-  maker services; operating bus lines;  running symposiums on everything from  assertiveness training to health issues; implementing women's studies  courses at local colleges; starting  single parents groups; running for  the local village council; sponsoring  craft workshops; and tending to beaten women in their own homes.  Support  must continue to be extended to individual projects and women's centres  and as well, more emphasis should be  given to the facilitation of discussion, conferences and actions that  will broaden the base of the northern  women's movement, and continue the  development of northwide issues, hopefully avoiding to some' extent the burn  out syndrome so often found in small  (and sometimes large) communities  where one group works in isolation  from others.  THE MACKENZIE CONTINGENT TO THE  TASK FORCE MEETING: L-R: Joan  Kotarski, Sandra Wilkins, Gill  Shannon and Karen Klassen.  I would like to end this on a personal note. The past year of wearing  the title "Community education consultant on women's issues for northern  B.C." has been one of the most challenging; exciting, difficult, fun and  tiring years of my life. My perspective on the women's movement, and my  appreciation of the special problems  the non-urban woman faces has broadened considerably. One does not travel  40,000 miles by bus, car, ferry,  plane and train without gaining new  insights into the vast problems and  uncertainties of organizing women  around issues that a large part of  the country's population still view  as superfluous.  I want to say thank  you once again to all those northern  women who fed me, accepted me into  their homes, shared their children  and problems with me, and gave of  their knowledge and skills unselfishly. Most gratifying of all, they  offered continued support.  It is  not an easy thing to move from an  organization such as Vancouver Status  of Women to being perceived as a  "government consultant" and you northern women were working with me all  the way. Thank you sisters.  ABORTION  * THE VALADE VITAE AD  * ANTI-ABORTIONISTS TORCH U.S. CLINIC  THE VALADE VITAE AD - HOW IT GRABS US  "Unborn people have as much right  to liva, as you do. Abortion kills."  The soft black-and-white profile of  a reflective woman, head bent, curves  of back, breast and belly announcing  her pregnant status.  It's a slap in the face. The slap  comes after being sucked in by the  soft italic writing, the soft black-  and-white air-brush photo. Just as  the ads. of Third World foster parents  band-aid schemes exploit the large  black eyes of starving children, this  Valade Vitae ad. draws upon the  resevoirs of guilt and self-righteousness. Abortion.kills : the slogan  exploits any consciousness about the  abrogation of human rights you might  have developed. If you have had an  abortion, or you have a friend, lover  or mother who has, you are an accomplice  in murder.  When this ad. appeared in the B.C.  buses in the lower mainland, a number of people got busy and defaced  them. B.C.Hydro received numerous complaints about the content of the ad.  I'  The ad. company responsible for the  ad. was contacted. They defended  their ad. A magazine called Marketing  column on the ad. which gave  information that the Toronto Transit  Commission had refused to carry the  ad. stating that it was "excessive  in its language and we, in particular,  objected to the illustration implying  that an abortion would be performed  on a lady as far along as the woman in  the ad. obviously is. And she's made  to look like seven or eight months'  pregnant or I'm a monkey's uncle."  Since the wave of protests, B.C.  Hydro has removed the ad. from their  buses and it has not reappeared elsewhere .  The advertisement had been sponsored  by the Grey Nuns of Winnipeg, who had  committed between $50,000 to $100,000  to the campaign. The ad. agency claimed  that the ad. was without any contact  number because the Valade Vitae group  had "only been in existence for one  month," and therefore (?) wished to  remain anonymous.  "Right to Lifers" in St. Paul, Minnesota (U.S.) are waging a vigilante  terror campaign to end legal abortion.  On February 23, the St. Paul Planned  Parenthood abortion clinic was destroyed by arson.  The members of the  board have been receiving death  threats against their children. Well-  organized anti-abortion vigilantes  have been steadily escalating their  war against women's right to abortion  since the clinic opened last October.  The right to lifers began their campaign against the clinic as soon as  it opened. Windows were smashed, red  paint was spashed and graffitti announced: "Abortion kills." The clinic  staff and Planned Parenthood board  members were harassed continuously,  and this harassment has been carried  on just as ruthlessly since the arson.  Clinic staff and board members are  receiving calls describing what their  children wore to school that day,  their children's daily r.outine,&  warning that if they do not stop  plans to re-open the clinic, their  children will be murdered. In  addition, staff and board members'  names have been published in the  local newspapers with the recommendation that concerned community members  pressure them into closing down the  clinic, (facts from THE GUARDIAN) PORNOGRAPHY  from a  feminist  perspective  Sado-masochism, rape and incest have  long been the mainstays of the pornography business. But its enterprising entrepreneurs have found a novel  way to generate profits: "chicken  porn", the sexual exploitation of  children. Likewise, the advertising  industry has clued into a profitable  sales gimmick: sexual violence. And  the mass media, with its undisguised  profit orientation, is also peddling  violence, sex and race stereotyping  for all they're worth.  In this section, Kinesis looks at the new wave  of obscenity.  Sexual and physical violence, especially against women, is the currently  trendy way to promote records. Warner Communications Inc. (one of the  biggies, with a gross income in '75  of more than 682 million bucks) brings  you the following album covers:  I'm Black and Blue from the Rolling  Stones and I Love It (see illus.)  Jump On It, by Montrose (mentioned  in October '76 Kinesis) featuring  a close-up of a woman's crotch,  with the invitation to 'jump on it*.  Comin' Back for More, by David Blue:  a woman caressing a gun.  Warner Bros. Presents Montrose: a  woman in a black slip being carried away by a monster.  Cut the Cake, by the Average White  Band: a wedge of cake slicing  through a woman's buttocks.  Do You Wanna Do a Thing, by Bloodstone: men grabbing partially  dressed women, suggesting gang  rape.  A series of albums by the Ohio Players, with names like Pain, Pleasure,  Ecstasy and Climax: all showing  women being chained, hanged, or  trussed up in leather.  Wild Angel, by Nelson Slater: woman  wearing a chain gag.  Choice Cuts, by the Pure Food and  Drug Act: woman's buttocks stamped  with the album title.  Feminists Fight Back  The feminist boycott of Warner Communications' sexist labels is now  four months old.  The boycott is being organized by an  ad hoc coalition group called Women  Against Violence Against Women (WAVAW).  It was formed in Log Angeles to protest the showing there of Snuff - a  porno film which allegedly shows the  actual murder of a woman.  WAVAW now has centres in New York,  San Francisco and Philadelphia as  well. The group, which is supported  by NOW, points out that: "These album  covers are dangerous because they  contribute to an overall environment  that puts across the message that  women are victims, innately and willingly." The issue, they explain,  is not of artistic integrity or of  censorship, but of corporate responsibility.  Violence is in  In the Fashion World,  Vogue  Recent copies of Vogue's various editions feature the following:  - a woman being assaulted in a bathtub.  - a man in a dinner jacket caressing  the hand of a nude woman who has  just been strangled with a telephone cord.  - a cover picture of a woman in an  S&M harness. *  - a vicious dog with teeth bared,  looking at a woman's crotch.  - a sequence of pictures with a man  smashing a woman across the face,  followed by her cuddling up gratefully to him.  The battered woman's jumpsuit sold  "beautifully" and "business-wise it  was very successful," a Vogue spokesperson reported.  Store Windows Join the Trend  - A store in Cambridge, Mass. features  a dead woman, blood running from her  mouth, tumbling out of a garbage can.  COVER OF OHIO PLAYERS' ALBUM, PLEASURE  Men's shoes are placed on her head  and neck, with the caption: "We'll  kill for these." Sales increased  by 25%.  - A store in New York City shows a  woman committing suicide by overdosing on pills.  - A store in Boston, features a woman dragging a female body wrapped  in rugs.  Sales of featured jeans  up by 500%.  - The Bay in Vancouver displays a  group of male mannikins as "fifties  bikers". One has a broken nose,  another a band-aid on his forehead.  A female mannikin is lying on her  back, straddling a bike, legs wide  apart.  SEE PHOTOGRAPH THIS PAGE  Added to the sexism, there was a  classist inference to the display:  violence is a part of the life of  the working class, those nasty folk  who ride motorbikes and who don't  come from the good suburbs.  Feminists organized into an ad hoc  committee called Women Against  Violent Advertising, set up an informational picket outside this Bay  window display at noon on Thursday,  April 7th. Alerted by the media,  window dressers scurried down to  sit the female mannikin up on the  bike. Advertising manager McCul-  lough claimed that the display was  not meant to offend anyone, "but  it's so hard to think of everything.'  The action was in accordance with  the policy of the British Columbia  Federation of Women, which states:  "WHEREAS there must be a radical  change throughout the entire structure of the media...BE IT RESOLVED  THAT B.C.F.W. member groups...protest the sexism which permeates the  media today.  So far, Women Against Violent Advertising is only an ad hoc committee.  Women interested in working to combat sexual violence in the media  'could form themselves into a provisional MEDIA SUB-COMMITTEE of  B.C.F.W. In order to organize actions with a truly provincial scope.  Interested women could contact B.C.  F.W. action organizer Sue Moore at  736-3746, to discuss the ways in  which this sub-committee could be  set up.  'ñ† Pornography — the propaganda of rape  Chicken Porn  "Chicken porn is a multimillion dollar business."  "It's a big business."  "There's a profit at work here."  These are statements from groups  which are organizing in the States  against "chicken porn" (i.e. Odyssey House and Concern for Children).  Apparently raping, beating, mauling,  and maiming of women isn't enough.  Let's get the kids in on the act. As  Marge Eisler of Concern for Children  says, "They're into kids now as the  latest way of selling the stuff."  "Lollytots" and "Children's Love" are  among the titles recently seized in  New York.  Incest is a favourite  theme of "chicken porn".  Girls, usually depicted to be around 11 or 12  years of age are shown at first resisting but soon enjoying the violation of their fathers and older brothers. Lesbian rape is another recurrent theme, again with the victim  portrayed as a pre-teen who "didn't  know the pleasure that was within her  until it was unlocked by her mistress.'  The system that gives rise to the  sexual exploitation of children is  the same system which napalmed six-  year-old children in Vietnam, and  which reported on that napalming in  the evening news in between Kraft  commercials.  Televiolence  Not much need be said to introduce  this topic.  Just open your TV Guide  and it's all there. Every evening,  children and adults alike are subject to marathons of brutality: police and private eye stories, "adventure stories", Kojack, Police Woman,  Police Story, Charley's Angels...  Above all else, the proliferation of  cop and quasi-cbp shows legitimize  the state's monopoly on official  violence.  In glorious colour, TV  lays the groundwork for increased  repression and authoritarianism. It  offers aggression as a means of resolving individual, personal disputes.  It counsels passivity in  accepting the stepped-up social violence that is dispensed by the government at home and abroad.  If your  buddy steals your skateboard, beat  her/him up. But never expect to be  able to organize against the system,  with its incredible technological  advantage.  Every night, we're told that we're  capable of only individual action;  every night we're assured that police terror is commonplace, that  it's an heroic response to the pressing need to maintain "law and order".  Our diet of these lies is enlivened  only by ads which exploit our sexuality and further demand that we  identify ourselves as passive consumers .  TV has of course got its hands on  "women's liberation" and perverted  it in new and sophisticated ways.  Women are still either dangerous,  marginal or exotic. Charley's Angels represents the current, sick  mixture: the three women private  detectives exist to preserve private property. They themselves are  Charley's property. He owns them,  and calls them his angels.  They  take all their orders from him. Each  is exploited to the nth degree for  her physical appearance.  But in  keeping with media's notion of "liberation" they are good with guns.  They know.how to "fight like a man".  The show is enlivened with "humorous" moments, when they are permitted to whine to Charley's sidekick  about how much they want Charley to  buy them a particular dress. Liberation, mass media style.  New Depths  A new magazine has hit the US newsstands.  It's called Violent World.  The publisher says: "This is a commercial enterprise.  I expect to be  selling a million copies a month  within the year." Its editor explains: "The sex magazine market is  saturated. Violence is going to be  the next big thing i'n this field, and  we're in on the ground floor."  "Our readers are not interested in  politics," the editor continues. One  picture in the first edition shows a  Thai student bleeding to death.  Apolitical?  Other Violent World pictures show  babies being beaten to death, a man  who claims that he eats children, a  picture of a man with his head impaled on an iron fence.  If you want to do something about  sexual violence, contact Sue Moore,  B.C.F.W.'s action organizer (736-  3746).  WOMAN IN AN S&M HARNESS (Time illus.)  Pornography as sexual violence against  women is a difficult perspective for  even the most progressive male, as  these excerpts from Al Gormundsun's  article in the Northern Times indicate  In the Northern Times, Vol 2, #61,  Gormundsun writes:  Let me turn the underlying idea of  my argument into a question: is  there anything about porn that makes  it more objectionable than any other  product in the society?  I think not.  That is, I can see lots of things  objectionable about practically all  products in society, about how they  are made, how they're sold, what  they're used for, and who profits  from them.  And porn is one of those  products.  But if you object to the  organization of the society, stamping out porn isn't going to solve  any of your problems.  The war on  porn is just a diversion.  Getting  people hot under the collar about  it, in the long run, is just a way  of turning their attention from the  problems of the whole system.  The most negative aspect of porn,  it seems to me, is that it is another social arena in which the  degradation of women is practised.  Most porn is marketed to men, and  what it depicts are women submitting to, serving, fulfilling the  sexual needs of men, with the implication that that's their major  proper function in society. But  the oppression of women pervades  all of capitalist society, not  merely the sidestreets of porn.  Women In our society aren't equal.  In the only countries where the  struggle for women's equality is  positively promoted throughout the  society (as in China, for example),  the societies are socialist, and  unsurprisingly, they don't market  porn.  Let me make myself clear: I'm not  offering a defence of porn. Rather  I'm saying that I don't see that  porn is particularly different from  anything else in the society.  In a  way, it even makes sense in a capitalist society. Focussing on eradicating porn, then, is misleading.  It leads us away from seeing the  real problems. Personally, I'd like  to live in a society that didn't  'need' porn. The way to such a  system is not to attack porn, but  to transform the system which spews  out both the products and the relations that make up this society. SEXUAL VIOLENCE  iis valis  In the fall of 1975, the New York  Post reported that a set of pornographic movies which culminated in  the actual dismemberment of the actress had been the object of a nationwide investigation by the police  and the FBI.  They were called "snuff films" in  honour of Charles Manson who used  the word "snuff" to mean "murder"  and who reportedly filmed ritual  murders committed in California in  the late 1960s.  These snuff films,  made in South America where life  was said to be cheap, were available only to a select clientele for  private viewing at a cost of $1500  for a collection of 8 reels.  At one private showing in New York  City, each viewer paid $200 to see  what he believed was a record of  real horror on a surprised woman's  face as she realized the playacting had turned into a nightmare  reality in which the knife attack  upon her by her male sexual partners was only too genuine. Detective Sgt. Joseph Horman of the New  York Police Department's Organized  Crime Control Bureau called these  films the "ultimate obscenity".  Sadism  The view of woman as an obscene object to be degraded is, of course,  an old one, and evidently so interwoven in every aspect of our culture  that we take it for granted as normal and react only to the gross,  but quite logical, manifestations  of it, such as snuff films.  In Florida recently, a woman - Jane  Verlaine - brought obscenity charges  against a movie theatre which was  showing "Snuff". The judge, Burton  Ledina, did not even react to the  snuff film. He dismissed the charges without even having seen the  evidence in court.  The problem goes beyond the question  of taste when women are shown being  strangled during sexual intercourse,  raped by a gang of men, or "ravished"  (as Newsweek put it) by a snake.  The February 1977 Ms. magazine reported that the women audience at  the first International Tribunal on  Crimes Against Women held in 1976  in Brussels was so horrified at a  Danish film showing three men raping a woman that it had to be stopped.  Susan Brownmiller: WHAT PORNOGRAPHY  DOES TO WOMEN  "Now that women have begun to talk in  plain language on subjects such as  abortion, lesbianism, prostitution,  masturbation and rape, we are presumed  to be allies of the new pornography  as well. This fallacy assumes that  pornography Is first of. all a valid  extension of what is vaguely titled  sexual liberation, and more to the  point, that it contains a .commonality  of interest to male and female alike.  Assuredly, this is not the case."  (Brownmiller is the author of Against  Our Will, an analysis of rape.)  The rape scene, however, so terrifying to women, is exciting to many men  and is a staple of pornography. The  British Longford Report on pornography  quotes from a typical porno publication, which happens to be from California: "I would have to say that  tying a girl up gives you a very decided sensual power over that girl...  I really dig chains..."  Dehumanizing  & anti-female  Even the non-violent pornography is  questionable because of its attitude  toward women and nudity.  In her  March 1977 speech at the University  of British Columbia, Ti-Grace Atkinson mentioned that in Ancient Greece  the masters, who used to cover themselves with clothing, advocated  keeping the slaves unclothed as much  as possible in order to keep them  vulnerable and subjugated.  It is  this master attitude toward nudity  which is present in most of the male  publications from Playboy to the hardcore pornography.  It is present  throughout our culture and is vividly  represented in the images of film  stars like Marilyn Monroe (a victim)  and John Wayne (an aggressor).  90% of all pornographic .material is  geared to the male heterosexual market.  Buyers of porn are predominantly white, middle-class, iniddle-aged  married males. (Susan Brownmiller)  If pornography were just a private  fantasy publicly shared, it would  probably have to be left alone, but  it is a public activity like prostitution, in which women and young  girls, often from economically deprived families, are bought and  used to perform degrading sexual  services, the reproductions of  which are sold for tremendous profits.  (In the United States, it  is at least a $3 billion business.)  The fact that many women cooperate  with their own exploitation, and  even like it, is not a particularly  surprising phenomenon or relevant  to the evaluation of the business  which exploits them. There were  Jews who opened the oven doors for  other Jews in Nazi Germany (which  by the way, perfected the art of  pornography) and Afri-American  slaves who supported slavery and  betrayed other slaves who planned  revolts. People adjust to almost  everything required of them by  more powerful people, and sometimes  become strong supporters of a way  of life which exists at their expense.  When Alfred Kinsey exposed women to  obscene material, he found that  most of them did not respond favourably, and some were even offended,  and this puzzled him. He attributed  their "perverse attitude" to what  he thought was their greater submission to social convention.  Joan Matthews: WHAT MOVIES' PORNOGRAPHY DOES TO MEN AND WOMEN  "In a porn film, the man doesn't have  to establish an equal relationship  with the woman because he has a right  to possess her, and if she doesn't  agree, he can use some sort of force,  i.e. rape, abduction. No feeling of  trust has to be developed in a porn  film because there is_ no trust, only  domination by the male.  And the woman  is either shown as totally depraved  (therefore valueless) or as an innocent who finally feels gratitude to  the male for making her realize that  her dehumanization and degradation are  THE WAY IT WAS MEANT TO BE.  "And let's not forget the actress in  porn films.  Georgia Stark was quoted  in Newsweek: 'The first film I made  was really a downer. Afterwards I  started to think about suicide.  But  after a while I got so I could do the  Eleanor Rigby thing - you know, leave  your mind in a jar by the door.  Then  I'd know I'm just an animal and they  are just taking pictures of men, an  animal.' (Matthews wrote this for  Her Self, a Michigan community newspaper.) Quoted from Media Report to  Women, September 1974.  But Susan Brownmiller, who sees pornography as a male invention to dehumanize women, offers another explanation for this rejection of obscenity  in her well-researched book, Against  Our Will: Men, Women and Rape. Women experience distaste when viewing  pornography, she declares, because  of their "gut knowledge that we and  our bodies are stripped, exposed and  contorted for the purpose of ridicule  to bolster that 'masculine esteem'  which gets its kicks and sense of  power from viewing females as anonymous, panting playthings, adult toys,  dehumanized objects to be used, a-  bused, broken and discarded."  Because pornography touches extremes  of feeling and action, it can be a  powerful stimulant. The Longford  Report uses the term "addiction" in  connection with pornography and  quotes pornographers talking about  the exposure of new people to porno  as a "first shot" to get them hooked.  Our societies are only beginning to  explore the nature of pornography  and its effects upon people. Porn     : sexism   hides  behind      'free speech *  \  It is still generally seen as a harmless male hobby, except where it involves children. A male hobby it is.  Kinsey, who studied extensive amounts  of pornography for 15 years (that  seems like an unnecessarily long  time), observed that practically all  of pornographic material throughout  the world was produced by men. Both  the US and the British reports on  pornography characterize it as a  business run by men for men.  Harmless it cannot be for it is a  powerful expression of the widely  held view of woman as property to  be used as desired or as food to be  consumed (a piece of meat, honey,  sugar, etc.). Whatever the official  stance of society is, most women  understand, at some level, the politics of pornography. This politics  is particularly well defined in the  daily newspaper accounts of the  lives and deaths (especially deaths)  of women and In police reports linking pornography with sexual crimes  against women.  Since pornography is basically sexual aggression toward women, it  seems inevitable that the logical  consequence of it would be rape, and  it is reasonable to expect rape sometimes to end in death.        * Gang  assaults tend to be particularly vicious.  In sexual crimes against women  pornographic fantasies become reality.  Winston Mosely, the New York murderer of Kitty Genovese, raped her while  she lay dying of the stab wounds inflicted by him because, as he later  told the police, he liked his women  quiet. Like the women in porno pictures. Here in British Columbia,  the body of a 9-year-old girl was  found last year tied to a tree in a  forest near Mission. She had been  sexually molested and strangled by  a 34-year-old man.  and Fantasy  It is a mistake to dismiss men like  Mosely and the Mission girl's killer  as deviant and mentally disturbed.  Mentally disturbed they may be, but  not deviant. The expression of one's  disturbance is to a large extent determined by one's culture, and these  men are very much in tune with our  culture. There is a connection between these killers and Roger Vadim  who made the film Charlotte in which  a woman is strangled by a man during  sexual intercourse. One is a creator or producer in celluloid of a  fantasy that the others act out in  reality. Our fantasies define us  as much as our acts and each aspect  of us can be seen in the other.  Even those of us who try to shut  pornography out of our lives are  affected by its ubiquitous exis  tence. It creates a world In which  we women are routinely harassed and  periodically attacked by men simply  because we are women.  The March 13, 1976, Vancouver Sun  Weekend magazine carried a, vivid article by Ruth Ellen Ruston on the  brutal murders of women in Strath-  roy, a small Ontario town, and the  terror of women there living by themselves. The town or the surrounding  area harboured a killer (or killers),  who could not be caught (because he  was so like other men?). Ruston's  statistics are disturbing: 5 out of  6 victims of violent crime are women  but only one out of 9 charged with  these crimes.  Before leaving Strath-  roy, she noted its reading material  - magazine racks filled with Penthouse, Detective Cases, Secret Story  and other publications featuring  stories of various rapes and exhibiting pictures of women, often in  grotesque positions, submitting sexually to the fantasies of the male  reader.  Great! 50% sex and 50% violence.  Just what we need.  In B.C., the killers of at least 23  women and girls since 1969 are still  unidentified and among us. Police  call them sex killers and advise  women not to go anywhere unaccompanied.  It must suit the male establishment to limit the freedom of  the potential female victims rather  than tha*- of the fellow male aggressors because I have never heard the  police suggest women learn self-  defence skills.  Robin Morgan, a political activist,  expresses in an essay published in  Voices From Women's Liberation a  disillusionment with radical men  which other women have also experienced.  She rejects men who support  "Women's Lib" and publish pornography; who buy a prostitute for the  night as a birthday gift; who work  to bring about the Revolution which  will create a Utopian world in which  there will be free food, free grass,  free clothing and free women...(But  I thought women did not cost anything already - they certainly pro  vide free labour: cleaning, cooking,  volunteer work in hospitals, etc.)  It's still a world where women are  regarded as things.  That the number of sexual crimes a-  gainst women is increasing should  not be surprising because our society allows tons of pornographic  material, legal and illegal, to pour  in and pollute the minds of its  people. The evidence is overwhelming that what happens to women is  not considered of much importance.  Material victimizing black or Indian men (or some other male group  not In power) would not be tolerated the way material abusing women  is.  I cannot help thinking that  if the bodies of women and girls  found in B.C. forests, tied to a  tree or left in a ditch by their  male killers, were those of Canadian Indian men, shock and outrage  would sweep our society, the political implications would be grasped  immediately and Indians would organize for self-defense.  Liberal Views  Many educated and liberal women have  had difficulty acknowledging openly  their opposition to pornography because it is an issue their men so  strongly support.  For pornography  is an area radical and liberal men  are not so radical or even liberal  in. Their sympathy extends to other  oppressed men and generally stops  short of women.  They were the ones  who made a hero out of Eldridge  Cleaver when he publicly boasted of  his hatred and rape of women. Attracting and pleasing men have been  and continue to be important to many  women and they naturally wish to  avoid being labelled frigid, prudish or jealous of the fun they are  told the women in porno pictures or  films (particularly snuff films, I  suppose) are having.  No group of men are similarly exploited because of the fear of retaliation by the male victims. Perhaps the reason the US is not in-  nundated with Nazi bookstores the  way it is with pornographic institutions can be glimpsed in the incident that occurred the night before  Passover in San Francisco. On April  1, 1977 about 50 persons swinging  tire irons and axes demolished a  Nazi bookstore five days after it  opened. They turned over the shelves  and set fire to the literature. One  hundred and fifty people watching  from the outside hissed at the fire  engines and "police cars when they  arrived on the scene.  The Vancouver Sun will sympathetically print a Winnipeg editorial in  which it is stated that "all anti-  Semitism leads to death of Jews",  but will not see the connection between pornography, which sexually  abuses women and girls, and their  own news items about rape and the  sexually molested bodies of murdered  women periodically found in B.C. NOT SEXUALITY,  IS  PORNOGRAPHIC  One of the most difficult aspects of pornography  is the number of incompatible allies we appear to  develop. Mayor Jack Volrich can be seen scouring  Granville Street in pursuit of 'chicken porn';  Ed McKitka condemns as lewd the painting of a nude  woman, and Attorney General Garde Gardom speaks  of the necessity to conform to 'Canadian community standards.'  As if that isn't enough, we have George Mussallem  et.al. muttering about 'deviants', and lauding the  sanctity of the family.  Above them all we have the tight-lipped ghosts of  Calvin, Saints Augustine and Paul, fearful of women  and the sins of the flesh.  Hardly suitable company for feminists.  These pillars of the community are operating on a  false premise: that sexuality in its many expressions, is obscene. It's not sexuality that's obscene,  it's sexism.  It is imperative that we develop a feminist perspective on pornography, and that it is so clearly  articulated that we cannot be mistaken for the traditional forces of law and order. Such forces are  fuelled by misogyny. It may benefit the establish-,  ment media to lump us in with these conservatives,  but it confuses the issue from a feminist perspective.  We do not fear sexuality and we do not support state  violence. We condemn as pornographic and obscene  all attempts to suppress and dominate people in  a sexist way. Sexism is like racism and classism  in that it involves the exploitation and manipulation of one group by another for its own power  and profit.  HUE REPORT  THE HITE REPORT is an example of where  feminists and right-wingers would define  their real differences. Ed McKitka et,  al. might well wish to ban the book  from the local drug store. Feminists  will want to read it and to pass it  around, because THE HITE REPORT is a  beautiful affirmation of women's sexuality.  As Shere Hite points out, women have  never been asked how we feel about sex.  Female sexuality has been seen as essentially a response to male sexuality &  intercourse. THE HITE REPORT presents  our own responses, in our own words,  so that we can begin to acknowledge our  own truth, and to 'devise more kind,  generous and personal ways of relating.*  The report is a US study of sexuality  in which 3,000 women, from 14 to 78  talk about their feelings towards masturbation, orgasm, clitoral stimulation  and the so-called sexual revolution.  Lesbian and heterosexual relationships  are both explored.  Here are some of the women's comments,  chosen more or less at random:  ON MASTURBATION  "If I can come to orgasm by myself, I  don't feel I have to have sex for that  reason alone and can really dig knowing  a guy without that tension there and  really dig just touching and enjoying  both his body and mine. Since I don't  usually have orgasm with my partner,  this is very important to me."  "Until I was 29 I never masturbated.  So masturbation has a symbolic meaning for me. It was one of my first  overt expressions of self-love."  ON ORGASM  "During clitoral stimulation, the unbearable pressure is suddenly dissipated, my raw nerves stripped. During  intercourse, my whole body is involved  and feels tingly, especially my hands  and feet, and my husband says my vaginal walls quiver."  "I get very wet, then start getting  dry. I don't know what an orgasm is,  and occasionally feel cheated, but if  the wet/dry happens, I always feel  tired, relaxed and content. Is this  orgasm?"  "I did not have an orgasm until I  was 21, through masturabation. I did  not have one with another person until  I was 33, despite the fact I was married  at eighteen."  FEELINGS ABOUT CLITORAL STIMULATION  "I asked my lovers to stimulate my  clitoris, but my husband always says,  'Only whores enjoy clitoral stimulation.'"  "I think in terms of debits and credits  I blew him, so he should go down on me,  etc."  "I ask for it sometimes even though  it's embarassing."  FEELINGS ABOUT CUNNILINGUS  "ItJs messy. My husband must brush his  teeth and wash his face after."  "I am afraid I smell. I also feel that  I must come when so much attention is  paid to my doing just that."  "I like soft, gentle kisses above the  hair and between my legs. Long laps  of tongue up and down my vagina and  anus. Should be moist and with sound."  "I like to see his face and mouth down  there and know that he's exploring me-  with his tongue, his mouth and eyes."  "A tongue offers gentleness and pre-7  cision and wetness and is the perfect  organ for contact. And besides, it  produces sensational orgasms!"  HOW DO WOMEN RELATE PHYSICALLY?  "Sex with a woman includes: touching,  kissing, smiling, looking serious,  embracing, talking, digital intercourse, caressing, looking, cunnil-  ingus, undressing, remembering later,  making sounds, sometimes gently biting, sometimes crying and breathing  and sighing together."  Shere Hite's book contains many facts  that you can't find in male literature  about sex. For example, she reports  that the majority of women do not  experience orgasm regularly as a result  of intercourse. Buy the book and  pass it along to your friends. THE  HITE REPORT, Dell paperback, $2.75. WOMEN IN SOUTH AFRICA  \ituw     —  continued from p.6  In 1975, a sort of turning point was  reached for South African feminists.  Throughout that year - the so-called  International Women's Year - the established national women's organizations  held numerous sj iposia on the position  of women  During the same year, a group- of women  in Durban put out a publication called  "Women Power", a guide to the legal  rights of both black and white South  African women.  In November, 1975, there was a government sponsored, multiracial conference  of Eminent Women in Grahamstown. It  was a glittering affair,opened by the  Prime Minister's wife, Tini Vorster,  who categorically stated that a woman's  place was always firmly behind her husband, to encourage him in his important work; her place is in the home,  where it is her duty to inculcate in  his children Christian Nationalist  values.  The opening speech was followed by an  address by Margaret Mead on the future  of the nuclear family, after which an  ashen, tight-lipped Tini was escorted  out by an apologetic organizer.  In December, 1975, the Black Women's  Federation was formed. Since the recent political upheaval, most of  the executive (7 women) have been  arrested and detained for taking part  in demonstrations against apartheid.  J  In 1976, the movement to liberalize  abortion laws became national in the  form of Abortion Reform Action Group  (ARAG). This group puts out a highly  informative quarterly newsletter,  lobbies parliamentarians and organizes  public meetings.  In 1975-6, an organization was started  by and for domestic workers, one of the  most exploited groups of women in  South Africa. A national conference  was held in an effort to improve their  status and working conditions.  In September 1975 In Pretoria, about  250 women attended a national Women's  Legal Status Committee Conference.  One outcome was the formation of a  permanent lobbying committee to press  for the reforms endorsed.  As is obvious, different groups inSouth  Africa have different priorities. The  Durban women's groups, Women in Action,  devotes its energy to teaching black  women basic skills: literacy, sewing,  typing etc. A group of Cape Town feminists has found that a way of exposing  women to the ideas of the movement is  by way of weekend workshops - informal  symposia on such topics as our bodies,  health, anger. There are workshops  on self-defense, music:, yoga, etc.  Rape crisis groups were initiated in  Cape Town, Johannesburg and Durban  in 1976-77, with about 15-20 women  involved in each centre. These groups  are still collecting information and  are not yet fully functioning.  Racism  vs  In the major centres there are numerous study groups and rap groups which  seem to be viable. In Cape Town there  is a self-defense group and two sexuality groups. There seems to be a  growing national awareness of the  significance of woman power as a means  to social and political change. The  issue of sexism vs.racism is a major  division amongst radical women in South  Africa. Some women are able to give  time to both areas, but much political  activity is banned (e.g. demonstrations and marches). On the other hand,  there are specific areas in which  feminists can be active in South Africa: abortion law reform, rape crisis  and equal pay (which touches racism  and sexism).  It is also* important to recognize  that these issues can be a binding  factor between black and white women,  affecting us all, and that through  working together the customary social  separation is overcome. Finally we  realize that personal change leads  inevitably to political awareness  and action, and that personal change  too is political. (Info from Big  Mama Rag, and Off Our Backs.)  F-eminist Karate  continued from p.4  Basic to all feminist martial art  schools ii Vancouver and likewise with  the Feminist Karate Association is  the involvement of its members in  the initiation and promotion of self-  defense classes.  Lorraine, Marsha, club secretary  Veronica Woollacott and member Diana  Smith, regularly teach self-defence  classes at colleges and night schools  "We've also given numerous workshops  at women's conferences," explains  Marsha.  "Also, if a group of women  at a particular office get together  and request our services, we'll conduct a special workshop," advises  Marsha.  What's the difference between what's  taught at the FKA weekly classes  versus self-defence classes?  Lorraine explains that, "you learn  flexibility, strength and mental  control that's required to properly  execute punches and kicks.  In self-  defence, you've got to fight dirty.  When you're being attacked you don't  have time to go into a front stance  and throw a reverse punch. You're  going to kick the guy in the balls  and gouge him in the eyes with your  fingers.  It's those first few minutes of attack that count. We show  the vulnerable points of an attacker ?s body and how to react quickly  in attacking those areas. We also  show you how to get out of common  arm locks; and holds," continues  Lorraine.  Marsha estimates that over 200 women  go through these self-defence classes  a year.  "That means we've made contact with some 600 women in three  years," adds Marsha.  "Many of them  continue with FKA classes.  Some  stay, others give up when they realize the long-term systematic training  that's required.  "We show a slide-tape presentation  on 'To Stop Rape' and we work with  Rape Relief on request," continues  Marsha. Veronica and Diana are  currently working as research-instructors with Rape Relief.  Law enforcement officers, however,  express scepticism about the effectiveness of short-term self-  defence classes.  "Just a little  can do more harm," is their lament.  "Knowing how to swim even a little  way may save you from drowning—  that's how we equate self-defence,"  counters Marsha. All four instructors, Lorraine, Marsha, Veronica and  Diana acclaim loudly, "It's the  attitude of women we're trying to  get at.  If you think you're weak,  you're a victim already. You're  raped before the attack! We're  preparing women to be aggressive  and how to externalize that aggression." They continue, "women who  discover this new physical aggressiveness within themselves, find  that they become more assertive  generally."  A favourite 'psyching out exercise'  used at self-defence classes goes  like this: the women are asked to  walk silently about the room and  make eye to eye contact with each  other. Those who feel they are  physically stronger than others are  asked to line up at one end of the  room and those who feel weaker opposite them.  Then, opponents from  the 'strong' and 'weak' team under- '  go a 'pushing' contest on a mat.  It soon becomes apparent that size  and weight are not the important  factor in determining who wins,"  announce the four experts.  "The  5'2" 110-pound woman herself becomes startled to discover that it's  her anger and determination that is  the force that pushes the 5'8", 160-  pounder off the mat. That is when  a woman's physical consciousness is  raised. And that is what the Feminist Karate Association is all about!  If you'd like to be physically woken  up' - call Marsha at 736-2881 or  Rape Relief at 732-1613 between 9:00  and 5:00 pm.  Classes are held Sunday  at 10:30 am, Wednesday at 7:00 pm.  Fee:  $15.00/month.  If you have a 30' x 30' permanent  space to offer/rent, they'd also  appreciate hearing from you.  FEMINIST JOB - JOB FOR FEMINIST  Vancouver Status of Women needs an  OMBUDS-RESEARCHER. Duties include:  feminist legal research, legislative  criticism, reference library development and ombuds.clinical work.  Feminist with para-legal, collective  experience preferred. Resumes to be  in by May 20. Call 736 3746 for info. Many see that in this nightmare land,  language has no meaning and the work  of the writer is ruined. Many see  that the triumph of authoritarian  consciousness is its ability to render the spoken and written word meaningless - so that we cannot talk or  hear each other speak...It is the  work of the writer to reclaim language... (it is) a sacred trust.  It  means telling the truth.  It means  being incorruptible.  It means not  being afraid and never lying...To  keep the sacred trust of the writer  is simply to respect the people and  to love the community."  Andrea Dworkin, preface  to Woman Hating, p. 25  WOM€N  loving  WOM€N  hating  Women Loving by Ruth Falk, Random  House N.Y., 1975, paperback, 550 pp.  Women Loving by Ruth Falk is a problematic book.  I had to re-read it  to review it:  in the year and a  half between readings I had not forgotten it, but I found my memory to  be very different from my current  experience.  The central problems  with the book are two:  its philosophical intent and its quality as  writing.  I will tackle the latter  first.  Falk does not write well enough to  be a novelist or a journalist, nor  is her work poetic despite her  claims. When she comments on her  writing, "(this section) may be too  intense to read in one sitting" it  is embarrassing.  She most needs an  editor who would cut her redundancy  and excess, (the book's length is  not merited by its content) but two  other aspects of writing quality  surface.  Falk is not concrete e-  nough in her description of experience.  She tells us about how she  felt, not how she felt.  She does  not convey the experience to us. I  am confused as I write this, because  she does say "I felt angry.  I felt  hurt." etc.  But somehow most of  this remains abstracted from us; it  is a continual disappointment. When  she actually tells an anecdote about  giving another woman a bloody nose,  in the catch-the-bridal-bouquet-bout,  it's a pleasant relief.  But this  leads to the second problem in the  writing - which is also a key to the  philosophical problem.  Falk seems lost in the personal. I  do not advocate objectivity by any  means, but a writer must learn what  is happening to her readers.  Her  readers are not herself.  Somehow  the coyness, and pretensions in the  language are connected to this issue. When she does become aware of  herself as if observed, it is too  much like she acted as if she were  in a movie. It is what a friend  calls Diary Living. "Dear Diary,  Today I touched Ann's arm."  But Falk evidently believes that the  personal is the entrance to the universal.  She says "If I went deep  enough into my feelings I would  touch upon something in everyone."  This is not only suspect as philosophy, but also not true.  She does  not get out of her own self often;  I am sure she can remember the horse  back ride with Jessica, but we cannot. Her lesser aim, however, is  achieved and I appreciate for it.  I have not yet told you what the  book is "about".  It is an account  of Ruth Falk's life during several  years in which she began (and I  think succeeded in) trying to work  out her love feelings for women. In  the course of this time she left a  professionally oriented life in  Washington.D.C. and moved to California. Her experience of the upper-counter-culture is significant.  There are few records of what happened to so many of us. And this  is what she meant to do: she decided  "if I ever worked out my love feelings for women, I would write about  it". My final assessment is that  behind all the tedious writing and  disappointing intensity she has done  something valuable.  I could fault  her for wanting models, for wanting  a text on how to live.  "I had always looked for a book" - on how to  be a woman, how to love, how to love  women, etc. But this is certainly  a cultural phenomenon, not Ruth Falk  less, she has tackled a difficult  subject and evidently worked hard  for us. My criticisms co-exist with  appreciation.  Woman Hating by Andrea Dworkin,  Dutton N.Y. 1974, paperback, 214 pp.  Andrea Dworkin's Woman Hating is the  work of a scholar for the cause of  feminism.  Its absolutely clear prose  and professional quality are nourishing; what it uncovers is horrifying.  The title is explicit: this is a  study of institutionalized misogyny.  The book is divided into 4 sections,  the first three dealing with specific areas of misogyny, the last with  an alternative model, not surprisingly, based on androgyny.  I found the first two sections,  which are in essence literary analysis, very much less satisfying than  the herstory section which deals  with footbinding in China and the  persecution of European witches.  However, it is only that she states  again what is so true and evident,  that may feel disappointing.  I would  certainly recommend the entire book  for educational uses.  In particular  these chapters would be of great use  to any person beginning to think a-  bout ideological messages in culture.  The work on footbinding uncovers 8  centuries of mystification about torture. Millions of Chinese girls were  tortured in the cause of eroticism,  and so effective is the obfuscation  about this cultural artifact that I  had never thought of footbinding in  TRUTH-TELLING: Women Hating & Women Loving  Book review by Sandra Heindsmann.  as an individual.  It is a cause for  much writing between women.  I wonder  how much my disappointment in the  book, in 1975, was that I wanted her  to tell me more than I knew. My  other question brings us back, however, to the problem of writing. I  am curious as to how much Falk's  career in "mental health" undercut  her sensibility as a writer. When  she admits dark feelings they seem  only dim. Novelists for centuries  have probed much deeper.  It is understandably different to present  one's self as a book - but perhaps  that is the problem.  Falk seems to  want to be evolved and to present  wisdom.  I think at this stage it  is our job    to tell the truth.  Professionalism, technique, style  are not the issues.  Quality in writing comes from a kind of sincerity  - a virtue.I am sure Ruth Falk admires - but it is the sincerity  which is behind an unbending examination of experience which records  everything and judges as a separate  but necessary process.  Falk seems  not to be able to edit herself one  way or the other: she says too much  and tells us too little. Neverthe-  this way. To be explicit, girls*  feet at the age of 5 or 6 were wrapped in long bandages turning the  toes under the sole so that the foot  became distorted and useless for  walking, the body became distorted,  and the foot so injured that it was  permanently diseased, festering and  putrifying until often the toes fell  off.  The class division of women  here is a bit reversed: upper class  girls were spared nothing and were  made to hobble on knobbed bundles  of pain, their own feet become  knives.  Servants and peasants had  to be able to work. No woman ever  took off her bindings except to  clean and medicate the stumps, because the sight and smell was so  sickening. Contrarily, the girls  spent their time embroidering shoes.  Not only were the feet themselves  supposed to be erotic, but the  practice was justified by its supposed effect on internal anatomy.  Binding of feet "caused" the vagina  to develop "exquisite folds" which  compensated the woman in raptures  of sexual ecstasy. Oh thank you  dear sir for mutilating me and then  giving me such pleasure, to p. 22 18 from page three UNEMPLOYMENT, CONT  bitterly that they cannot afford to  maintain that rate of pay.  It has  been well shown that when occupations  are or become heavily staffed by women, the status of those occupations  fall and the value of the labour  performed is downgraded.  The very structure of employment  conditions means that women can be  made to appear as not being serious  about securing paid work.  Society  places the responsibility of looking  after children on women - and significantly regards this labour as not  work but love - but considers anything less than thirty-five hours  per week to be a minor attachment  to the workforce.  Such labour hours  are known as part-time work and disbar the worker from participation in  such returns as pension plans, fringe  benefits, holiday pay, etc.  Continual consciousness of economic  insecurity is a condition of feminine life: women are the last hired  and the first fired.  Seniority rankings by length of service mean that  women who bear children and give  some years to their rearing (as they  are conditioned by society to do)  must always lag behind in the vulnerable levels of service. Too, the  woman whose labour is committed to  the household or to the family business has no economic security outside the good-will of husband.  Our society functions on the unpaid  and low-paid services of women, yet  it begrudges them the social supports, like affordable childcare, to  permit them to get even those low-  paid jobs. And we say to the wives  who do only one job instead of two,  and put their time to keeping a household functioning, that their labour  cannot provide even a pension for  them.  These difficulties that we meet in  getting our livelihood are not recognized by our society. They are  effectively made invisible by being  regarded as "women's", not social  issues.  We have been thoroughly  conditioned over the centuries to  view women's needs as trivial.  The  lack of structural social supports,  the low-status of part-time work,  of occupations staffed mainly by  women, and of housework reflect this  idea that what concerns women is  not of a serious nature.  There is going to be, we fear, the  same sort of past knee-jerk reaction  to the present level of unemployment.  Concessions will be made to business,  especially those in the primary industries, in the hope of stimulating  investment and creating employment.  This may bring the rate back to the  "acceptable" level - and women will  still be facing the same problems of  economic survival.  This knee-jerk  reaction puts wealth into a section  of the economy which has no benefit  for women except as they are in a  dependency situation.  An unconditional guaranteed annual  income available universally to all  adults through a negative income  tax scheme would be a far better  method of "stimulating" the economy.  POVERTY KILLS  Planed Obsolescence  is when your hew Shoes  itfear out Joelbre  the laces breaK..  ^ Inflation is When  fMh(T them. cosi$ more  than getting heWoheS.  WOMEN IN NEED: A SOURCEBOOK  The Canada Council on Social Development's most recent publication examines the problems faced by low-income  women and looks at existing policies,  programs and services relevant to women. Copies are available from CCSD,  55 Parkdale, Ottawa, K1Y 1E5 for $3  a copy.  In its introduction, the sourcebook  cites figures for women heads of  households in 1973.  It is safe to  assume that things have grown worse,  rather than better, since then.  In  59% of the households headed by women - including families and unattached individuals - the annual income was under $5,000. Almost three  quarters of women 65 and over lived  on incomes under $5,000, as did 69.4%  of those under 25.  Another grim fact: Food prices have  risen 52% since 1969.  It would be  a joke to think that low-income  workers' salaries and welfare payments have increased at this rate.  As this sourcebook points out,  POVERTY KILLS:-  - Poor people die from heart attacks  at twice the rate of people who are  not poor.  Poor Kids  Twenty-five per cent of the children under 16 in  Canada live in poverty conditions. Almost  one-half of them live in the richest province-  —Ontario.   - The death rate from influenza,  pneumonia, and gastroenteritis is  four times as great in working class  areas as in middle-class suburbs.  - Poor people get most types of  cancer more often; and once they  get it, their chances for living are  not the same as for people who are  not poor.  In 1969 in Montreal,  there were 70% more deaths from  cancer in working class areas than  in richer areas.  - Deaths among poor babies in working class areas are three times as  frequent as among babies in middle  and upper-class suburbs.  The native people of this country  are the hardest hit by inadequate  health care. Women of all ages  under sixty have a mortality rate  of five times the national average.  Also recommended reading: THE FEDERATED ANTI-POVERTY GROUPS  OF B.C. newsletter. This monthly  newsletter has excellent information  about the status of low-income people  in this province. Contact them at  3 - 411 Sixth Street, New Westminster, B.C. V3L 3B1.  THE ECONOMICS OF INJUSTICE points  out that one out of every four  Canadians lives without the basic  amenities of life. How just is  economic development which tends  to maintain or increase the poverty of 25% of the population? "The  Canadian economy can be seen in  simple terms as a machine with  two basic ingredients - labour and  capital.  The machine produces  wealth which, in turn, is parcelled out to Canadians in a variety  of forms. Defenders of the present  distribution cite the fact that  the average wage has increased  greatly (from $2,450 in 1951 to  $10,694 in 1973) as proof that  people are much better off today  than they have ever been.  This  figure tells us only that we are  producing much more wealth than  we were 25 years ago.  It does not  tell us who is receiving this wealth.  In 1973, 40% of the population  received 70% of the wealth. The  top 10% of the population receives  45 times as much as the bottom 10%.  Since 1951, the top 10% has increased its share of national income by some 12%.  The Economics of Injustice comments:  "Those in the upper levels are consolidating and increasing their  share of the wealth while those in  the bottom income levels grow relatively worse off.  At this point we  might ask in simple human terms  whether any person is worth 40 or  50 times more than another."  Copies of this pamphlet can be obtained from: Poverty, c/o Research  and Resource in Social Issues, United Church of Canada, 85 St. Clair  Avenue E., Toronto 7, Ontario.  WOMEN UNITED FOR A NON-EXPLOITATIVE  NEW AGE is the name of a group of  women from Victoria B.C. of varying  ages and backgrounds who have been  brought together by a mutual concern:  the need for a guaranteed annual income. They support the immediate  implementation of a universal guaranteed income for all people in Canada, regardless of job status or  employabillty status, including  both a support program and wage  supplementation, distributed to  individual adults rather than heads  of households.  Contact them at WOMEN  UNITED FOR A NON-EXPLOITATIVE NEW  AGE, c/o 2 - 2715 Fernwood Road,  Victoria, B.C. V8T 2Z8. FEMINIST RESOURCES  The following materials are now, or  soon will be housed in the VSW reference library.  Unfortunately, we  do not have extra copies to sell or  give away but they will be on file  for research purposes.  Copies can  be ordered from the publishers as  listed in each case.  Our reference  library is open five days a week,  from 9 am to 5 pm except Tuesday  afternoons.  Last month about fifty  women, mainly high school and university students did research in  the office.  As we are getting busier all the time, it is best to call  me for an appointment as sometimes  there isn't enough desk-space to  accommodate everyone.  See you soon.  - Karen Richardson (736-3746)  The Arbitrary Enfranchisement of  Indian Women: 5-page brief presented to UN Habitat 1976 arguing against  the loss of Indian status of native  women married to white men.  Free  from Indian Rights for Indian Women,  10831 - 130 Street, Edmonton, Alta.  The New Woman Centre: 175-page annual report on feminist service to  women, public education and political action on women's rights. $12  from New Woman Centre, 3465 Cote  des Neiges, #71, Montreal, Quebec.  Women and the Church: 56-page report  on conference of Canadian Women and  Religion.  Items on Christian's  responsibility to the women's movement, women in the Old Testament,  church images of women, sexist  language in the Bible.  Free from  CWR at 1332 Osier Street, Saskatoon  Saskatchewan.  Human Rights in Canada: 56-page  booklet on federal and provincial  human rights legislation with analysis of law and review of enforcement techniques.  $2.00 from Supply  and .Services Canada, Ottawa, Ontario.  Published by Labour Canada.  Wife Battering: A Review and Preliminary Enquiry into Local Incidence,  Needs and Resources: 150-page report  by United Way on wife-beating in'  Vancouver.  September 1976.  Free  from United Way, 1625 West 8th Ave.  Vancouver, B.C.  Interviewing Women Candidates; 4-  page brochure for supervisors listing do's and don'ts toward treating  women applicants.  25$ each from  Superintendent of Documents, U.S.  Government Printing-Office, Washington, D.C. USA 20402.  Drugs, Alcohol and Women: 288 pages  of presentations to a conference  attended by 80 experts in medical,  legal, sociological and economic  fields.  Free from NRCA Inc.,  Freudberg Building, 4201 Connecticut Avenue NW, Washington DC USA  20008.  WOMEN IN URBAN PLANNING  The following materials are available from the American Society of  Planning Officials Bookstore, 1313  East 60, Chicago, IL 60637 USA.  PLANNING, WOMEN AND CHANGE; 78 pp  booklet detailing planning concepts  as they effect women, and making  recommendations for change. $6.00  WOMEN IN PLANNING: A Report on  their Status in Public Planning  Agencies: 28 pp. including analyses  of salaries and supervisory  experienceo  DAYCARE CENTRES: 33pp booklet providing the planner with conceptual  and analytic tools to plan for  daycare services.  Study of Insurance Practices Affecting Women: free from Iowa Commission  on Status of Women, 507 Tenth Street  Des Moines, Iowa, USA 50319.  Report on Sex Discrimination in Insurance: free from Women's Task Force  Michigan Department of Commerce,  Insurance Bureau, Lansing, Michigan,  USA.  Credit for Women: Men Only: credit  granting guidelines free from Saskatchewan Advisory Council on the  Status of Women, 214-230 - 23 St.  E., Saskatoon, Saskatchewan.  M M MM  Audio-Visual Resources for Women:  4-page list of films about women and  the church.  25<: from Ecumenical  Women's Centre, 1653 West School  Street, Chicago, Illinois USA 60657.  Task Force on Older Women: list of  inexpensive CR materials on sex and  age discrimination.  Free from National Organization for Women, 3800  Harrison Street, Oakland, CA USA  94611.  Women In the Public Service: Analysis of Employment Statistics 1975:  25-page brief which concludes that  despite an equal opportunities office in federal government, status  of women employed there is worse.  Free from Advisory Council on Status  of Women, Box 1541, Station B, Ottawa, Ontario.  National Film Board of Canada Film  Catalogue 1974-1976: 4-page section  "Of Special Interest to Women". Free  from nearest NFB office or write to  NFB, PO Box 6100, Montreal, Quebec.  Legal Services Commission Info Kit:  folding binder of pamphlets on credit, unified family court, UIC,  debt, daycare, tenancy, marriage,  etc.  Free from LSC at 1100-675 W.  Hastings Street, Vancouver, B.C.  Maternity: fold-out pamphlet explaining maternity leave benefits  under the Unemployment Insurance  Commission. Free from your nearest  UIC Office.  The following materials are  available from THE DEPARTMENT  OF SUPPLY AND SERVICES, Ottawa,  Ontario.  HUMAN RIGHTS IN CANADA: Legislation and Decisions: 70 pp  paperback outlining human rights  laws in this country as of December 1974, and sampling of  pertinent decisions rendered by  the courts.  CANADIAN MOTHER AND CHILD: 176pp.  paperback manual on parenthood. 75c  DIVORCE: 144pp. working paper,#13  of the Law Reform Commission of  Canada, preliminary report of  divorce reform in Canada. Bilingual.  1975. $2.00  THE FLAME: NEWSLETTER OF THE COALITION  OF WOMEN AND RELIGION: bulletin from  4759-15th Avenue NE, Seattle, Wash.,  USA 98105.  Survival in the Seventies: Organizational Skills Resource Materials:  47-page report .on incorporating as  a society, committee development,  budgeting for services, managing  volunteers, working with bureaucracies, lobbying.  $1.00 from SPARC,  2210 West 12th Avenue, Vancouver,  BC.  Women's Rights Manifesto of the BC  NDP: 12-page booklet on NDP policy  on women's rights and developed by  the NDP Women's Rights Committee.  75C from 3485 West 15th Avenue,  Vancouver, B.C.  Women on Skid Row: Proposal for  Shelter for Alcoholics and Homeless  Women in Montreal: 57-page funding  proposal by Montreal Women's Shelter Committee, May 1976.  French or  English.  $3.50 from Phyl Davies,  Catholic Community Services, Inc.  1857 de Maisonneuve West, Montreal,  Quebec.  Women in Need: A Sourcebook: 180-  page booklet evaluating various  government assistance programs with  recommendations for change.  $3.75.  January 1977, Canada Council on  Social Development, 55 Parkdale  Avenue, Box 3505, Station C, Ottawa  Ontario. DEBATES  Following is .a report of what the  Members of the Legislature of B.C.  (MLAs) said about status of women  issues in the period March 10 to  April 15, 1977.  For the full text of the debates,  subscribe to Hansard, the official  daily record of the house.  It is  $15 per year from Queen's'Printer  in Victoria.  Or ask your MLA to put you on his/  her complimentary mailing list for  free copies of Hansard.  Chances  are the list will be full but you  can try anyway.  In some cases you will note in this  report that an MLA may ask a Cabinet Minister a question and receive  no reply. This is not unusual. It  is not that we didn't report the  answer.  - Karen Richardson  WIFE BEATING/TRANSITION HOUSES  On March 15, 1977 NDP MLA Rosemary  Brown (Vancouver-Burrard) attacked  the Minister of Human Resources for  not funding more battered women's  transition houses.  She noted that a battered woman is  not eligible for welfare if her  husband wants her back, even if she  doesn't want to return to him, and  pointed out a case in which a woman  wa.s consequently murdered by her  spouse.  Brown also said that because the  social worker must interview the  husband and identify the location  of the wife, the battered woman  can no longer hide from her violent spouse.  Brown stated that 30 to 40% of all  homicides (murders) in North America happen between family members  and 20% of all police deaths on the  job result from family dispute intervention.  She emphasized that when women are  battered it is a legitimate reason  for them to leave the home and marriage.  Brown traced the history of the establishment of transition houses by  the women's movement as an alternative to lack of services provided  by the Department of Human Resources  There are now transition houses in  Vancouver, Victoria, Langley, Kamloops, and Prince George, she said.  North Vancouver and Vernon applied  for money to set up transition houses but were denied by DHR. Port  Coquitlam she noted, received funding for a transition house from DHR  only after lengthy lobbying with  their MLA George Kerster who intervened on their behalf.  Brown explained that Vancouver transition house is funded by the Vancouver Resources Board, which may be  disbanded by DHR. Victoria transition house had been through numerous  "quality tests" or "fraud evaluations" to make sure that battered  women are not just lying to get a  free room, she said.  Brown gave the following figures on  the service provided at each transition house (time period not specified) :  Kamloops  Vancouver  800 women  678 women  B.C  HON.  MEMBS  Prince George  Langley  Victoria  1080 women  122 women  180 women  When Vander Zalm called Brown's figures into question, she reminded him  the facts were gathered by the Coalition of B.C. Transition Houses.  She  said that the Vancouver Community  Services' study showed that battered  women's first priority is shelter,  followed by counselling and money.  She said there is no further need for  pilot studies to document needs when  Vander Zalm asked for "particulars".  Brown said every major B.C. city needs  a battered women's transition house  and that Vander Zalm should make a  commitment to providing seed money so  that new shelters could be set up on  a 24-hour basis.  She noted that, transition houses  have to do a "dance of the dialectic"  to get funding and gave Ishtar in  Langley as an. example.  It is funded  through the Department of Health as  an extended care unit!  Progressive Conservative Leader  Scott Wallace (Oak Bay) emphasized  that wife beating is a serious  problem and notedithat the Family  Violence Conference had "exciting  potential".  Leader of the Liberals, Gordon  Gibson (North Vancouver-Capilano)  said "there is a genuine middle-  of-the-night kind of need" for  transition houses.  NDP MLA Karen Sanford (Comox) reminded the legislature that the  Campbell River Women's Centre in  her riding had applied to the DHR  a year ago, for money to start a  transition house but had not had  a reply. Vander Zalm didn't recall receiving the application! He  said he would have to consider each  application on its own merits.  Vander Zalm needs his desk swamped  with letters in support of funding  to start new transition houses and  c.r. material on battered women.  Write to him today!  Women's Centres  On March 10, 1977 NDP MLA Karen Sanford (Comox) noted that the Campbell  River Women's Centre applied to Provincial Secretary last year for funding but were denied. They did not  apply this year because "they became  so discouraged," she said.  "Most of  their time is spent trying to raise  enough pennies, nickels and dimes  to keep operating.  Grace McCarthy, Provincial Secretary  (Little Mountain) congratulated the  CRWC for doing volunteer work and  suggested they apply to her under  the First Citizens Fund (native women, take note! $$$) for projects  on native women's rights, confusing  CRWC with another women's centre.  McCarthy advised any organization  which applied to her for funding  is told, "we do not have funding".  However, "...if there is a special project which would be of benefit to the community...we will  consider that under that grant  fund." Doubletalk?  On March 16, 1977 NDP MLA Rosemary  Brown (Vancouver-Burrard) noted  that the Vernon Women's Centre keeps  corresponding with her regarding  their funding application to DHR.  She said their Socred MLA Pat Jordan (North Okanagan) was not representing them in the legislature,  and asked her why she hated women.  Jordan repled she did not.  The same day Brown also asked the  Minister of Human Resources what he  had done about the grant application  sent to him one year ago by the  Coalition of B.C. Rape Relief Centres. Vander Zalm did not answer.  B.C. WOMEN APPOINTMENTS  On March 10, 1977 Provincial Secretary refuted NDP MLA Eileen Dailly's  (Burnaby-North) criticism of token  women appointments to college boards  under the Socreds. McCarthy said  that Pat McGeer, Minister of Education recommended women appointments  to cabinet and she concurred. Her  signature is on the orders-in-coun-  cil appointments but the recommendations are made by cabinet ministers.  McCarthy said, "This cabinet is very  cognizant of the role that women can  play in this government and has so  demonstrated by action, not words."  (We haven't forgotten the firing of  Gene Errington and Julia Goulden.)  C.F.P. FOR HOUSEWIVES  Leader of the Progressive Conservatives, Scott Wallace (Oak Bay) asked  Vander Zalm if he is pressuring the  federal government to include housewives in the C.P.P. He quoted the  Royal Commission Report on the Status  of Women - of all women aged 65 and  over In 1971, 74% received less than  $1,500 per year and 90% received less  than $3,000 per year.  CHILDCARE  On March 14, 1977 Rosemary Brown  criticized the Minister of Human  Resources - "He's been in office  for nearly 19 months, and he has  used this office to destroy any  kind of childcare service that  previously existed in this province."  MUCH MORE INFORMATION ABOUT THIS AND  OTHER WOMEN'S ISSUES ON HAND AT VSW. All ld\- No Action  RAPE  On March 15, 1977 MP Bob Brisco,  Progressive Conservative (Kootenay  West) asked the Minister of Justice  if he would amend legislation so  that rapists could not be released  on bail to attack "hapless and helpless victims". He noted that 3 rapists had been released on bail in  Nelson, B.C. recently.  The Honourable Ron Basford replied  that he would ask the B.C. Attorney  General Garde Gardom about the background of these cases, since rapists  are released by provincial Crown  Counsel.  NACLobbiesMPs  The National Action Committee on the  Status of Women lobbied with federal  MPs on Monday, March 21, 1977 in Ottawa. Hansard is revealing for that  day.  Normally the House of Commons  discusses maybe one or less women's  issue per day.  That day however, as  a result of the presence of the NAC  lobby, 7 women's issues were discussed. Of course, discussion isn't  enough.  But it's a start.  Next  time a member of your women's centre  is in Ottawa, if ever, make sure to  drop by and see your MP.  It makes a  difference.  Or invite your MP to  the centre next time he or she is in  the constituency.  C.P.P.  On March 21, 1977 NDP MP Knowles  (Manitoba) moved that the House urge  the federal government to amend the  C.P.P. to provide pensions to home-  makers equal to that of those employed  outside the home; and to review employee pension plans so that pensions  of widows will be the same as those of  widowers. The motion was defeated,  Ask your MP why?  Daycare  On March 21, 1977 NDP MP Symes (Ontario) asked the House to instruct the  federal government to provide adequate funding for day-care centres.  He explained that lack of daycare  seriously affects working women. The  motion was defeated. Ask your MP if  he/she voted against it.  UIC AND WOMEN  On March 24, 1977 NDP MP Rodriguez  (Ontario) asked the Minister of Employment if he would withdraw the  UIC appeal against benefits to Mrs.  Stella Bliss of B.C., who won her  case because section 46 of UIC Act  contravenes the Canadian Bill of  Rights regarding rights of working  pregnant women.  The Honourable Bud  Cullen replied no. (See Kinesis,  April 1977).  Unemployment  On March 17, 1977 NDP Leader Ed  Broadbent (Ontario) noted the Canadian Union of Public Employees  presented him with a very moving  brief regarding women's unemployment,  "...women in Canada suffer disproportionately more than men...women  are the last to be hired and the  first to be fired...It should concern us that the female sex in Canada, which has historically been  unfairly treated - and those of us  in   the opposite sex in the past  few years are gradually becoming  conscious of the fact - should be  aware of the discrimination that  exists toward the female sex which  is particularly felt at times of  unemployment." So what are they  going to do about it?  Abortion  On April 1, 1977 Whiteway moved that  the Minister of Health introduce  legislation that would remove "danger to health" as a condition for  abortion, from the Criminal Code.  He reasoned that the Badgley report  shows this clause is grossly misused and "applied virtually as  abortion on demand". He said 178  Canadian children would be killed  before birth daily by abortion. The  motion was defeated.  WOMEN AS MARGINAL EMPLOYEES  On April 1, 1977 Progressive Conservative MP MacDonald (P.E.I.)  asked the Minister of Employment  to define the term "marginally  employed" as it relates to women  who are encountering "very real  difficulties" with the government's  unemployment program.  The Honourable Bud Cullen replied  "an affirmative action approach  has been taken to deal with women  in the work place. We are trying  to remove some of the hurdles or  handicaps women face when trying  to get into the work force. We  have to break down the attitudes  which exist in industry, and we are  in fact doing that.  I do not want  to catalogue what jwe are doing here  at this time but I would be happy  to write to the honourable member  and tell him abou* the millions of  dollars being put into this category. Write to Mr. Cullen and ask  him for specifics.  SECRETARIAL PAY  On April 4, 1977 MP Ed Broadbent,  Leader of the NDP, moved that the  House instruct the "commissioners  of internal economy" to review  pay awards so that the majority of  secretarial and clerical workers  receive increases of least 8%.  Mr. Broadbent noted that wage and  salary increases awarded to House  of Commons staff are lower than the  cost of living. The majority of  clerical and secretarial staff received 6% increases while high paid  classifications were awarded 8% to  10%.  Unfortunately, the motion was  defeated. Write to your MP and ask  why.  WIDOWS PENSIONS  On March 25, 1977 NDP MP Knowles  (Manitoba) asked the Speaker of the  House if he would give serious study  to veteran's widows pensions in  cases where the veteran's disability  pension was less than 48%.  The Honourable Daniel MacDonald, Minister  of Veterans Affairs answered yes,  this is under study. Hurray for  Knowles. This is the millionth time  he has raised the issue!  OTTAWA  HON.  MEMBS.  SINGLE PARENT WORKING WOMEN  On March 21, 1977 Joe Clark, Leader  of the Progressive Conservatives  (Ontario MP) asked the Prime Minister if the budget is going to bring  specific programs to encourage jobs  for women who are heads of families.  He noted that 9% of families in  Canada are single parent headed and  of those 78% are headed by women.  The acting Prime Minister, Honourable Allan MacEachen answered it was  not possible for him to forecast the  contents of the budget.  Affirmative Action  Broadbent asked the Minister if he  would make a commitment to undertake an affirmative action program  designed to upgrate the skills of  women, to qualify them for executive  positions. Cullen replied he would  give the matter careful consideration.  Urge Cullen to do so. Write him today.  MALE/FEMALE WAGE GAP (AIB)  Broadbent asked the Minister of Finance what he intends to do to redress the increasing male/female  wage gap under the current AIB program, or afterwards.  The Honourable Donald MacDonald  replied the AIB program contains  specific exceptions to permit greater increases for women in cases of  equal pay. He noted the initiative  for filing a .claim under that clause  "rests with the collective bargaining representatives of the women in  question."  (Has he forgotten the  majority of women are not unionized?  Besides, it's the employer who must  ask for the exemption. Fat chance!)  He said the NAC delegation had been  invited to meet with Ms. Menzies,  vice-chairman of the AIB in this  regard.  These are perforce brief summaries,  and there is more information on  hand at VSW about women's issues'  debates in both houses. Drop by &  read all about it. book review from p.17 cont.  But feudal China is far away. The  practice was abolished (by the communists?) and the remnants or echoes  exist only in girdles and high heels  and other cosmetic discomforts (see  the Joy of Sex for comments on the  titillation for the wearer of high  heels). The witches are another  story.  At a conservative estimate, according to Dworkin, 9 million women were  burnt or drowned as witches in Europe. The ratio of female to male  victims was 20 to 1, or 100 to 1.  In the name of the Christian Church  - and the Christ and his God, the  Father - in Britain, Wales, Ireland,  Scotland, Germany, France, Switzerland, Italy, Spain and America (she  does not specify nations here), women were killed in great numbers by  legal procedure, to protect men.  What men needed to be protected from  it seems, was primarily eros (the  very reason for Chinese sex-torture).  In the Christian kingdoms sex originated IN the woman, emanated from  her and to obliterate its insidious  power one logically destroyed its  source. The research is explicit:  according to the classic book on  witches by their legal persecutors  the Malleus Maleflcarum, the word  woman means "the lust of the flesh".  Dworkin says, "To be dreamt of often ended in slow burning on the  stake."  Dworkin goes further than this in  her uncovering.  Instead of lodging  her case against the persecution  by claiming an entirely unjustified projection, she tells us the  truth about witches. There were  (are) witches; they were enemies of  the Church in that they practised  a contrary (and pre-existing) religion.  Its name is the Old Religion.  It was an anarchic nature-  based religion practised by women.  It was both a fertility culture and  a medicinal one.  It was the witches  who began western medicine by their  experimentation with herbal medication. Medicinally (the malice of  the A.M.A. and its Canadian version)  and theologically, replacement here  equals revenge. The god of the Old  Religion had always worn horns: he  became the Christians' Devil. This  practice of making the conquered  religion's god into an anti-god is  world-wide (see Astarte, and the  female goddesses in the old testament vs. Jehovah). Dworkin puts the  sexual rituals and drug taking into  a societal perspective which makes  their practice understandable.  She,  further, traces the gradual transition from an underground subversive  religion faithful to its own traditions, to the adoption of the beliefs  of the Christians: that witchcraft  was only the turning upside down of  the Church's religion. This alone  explains much cultural confusion.  And this is another piece in the  massive jigsaw of woman as other/  woman as evil.  Satan really is a  woman.  To finish my commendation, I found  Dworkin's preface and afterword tremendously inspiring.  She talks here  of the task of revolutionary writing.  I took my epigram from the preface.  These alone ought to be passed around  as an essay among us. And in reference to her difference with her publisher, if she ever receives this re  view, may I say to you: that this  book reviewer so much likes minimal  punctuation and anti-capitals (if  I may pun) that I had to relearn  capitalization of letters after a  moratorium of years.  In any case  the switch to an essay in her own  form is very effective. We leave '  the book exhilarated.  Truth leaps  off the page.  The following titles are waiting to  be reviewed by KINESIS readers and  VSW members. They have been donated  to us by publishers who request a  printed review in return, so by reviewing them, you are helping us to  stock our lending library.  The only  requirement we make is that you keep  the review as short as possible (one  page).  It can be as formal or informal as you like. We are not after  an academic approach - just the lay-  woman's view of whether the book is  feminist or not.  We've had a lot  of positive reviews lately. Any one  interested in doing a critical one?  If so, please contact me if you want  to write about any of the following  books:  Self-Assertion for Women, A Guide to  Becoming Androgynous  Non-Sexist Education for Young Children, A Practical Guide  Class and Feminism  Lesbian Images (will somebody please  review this one?)  The Woman Suffrage Movement in Canada  The Start of Liberation  Complete Book of Midwifery, A Modern  Woman's Guide to a Hospital Alternative in Childbirth  Contributions of Women to Aviation  Contributions of Women to Sports  Maria Tallchief, Story of an American Indian  Sex Variant Women in Literature  Women Remembered, Collection of Biographies from the Furies  The Traffic in Women and Other Essays  on Feminism  Rights of the Pregnant Parent, How  to Have Easier, Healthier, Hospital  Birth - Together  Privilege of Sex, A Century of Canadian Women  Womanhood Media Supplement, Current  Resources About Women  The Parlour Rebellion, Profiles in  the Struggle for Women's Rights  Songs to a Handsome Woman  Contributions of Women to Education  The Trial of Inez Garcia  The Wheel of Things, Biography of  Lucy Maud Montgomery  Lesbianism and the Women's Movement  All Our Lives - A Women's Songbook  Countrywomen, A Handbook for the New  Farmer  women  in jbcus  WOMEN IN FOCUS Production & Distribution Centre - New Additions to 1977  Catalogue:  Tl-Grace Atkinson: Radical Activist/  Political Theorist 3/4* VideoCassette  Colour No. 41.34.C Rental: $15,00.  In this thought-provoking interview,  Ti-Grace Atkinson covers many topics  which are of importance to women.  She begins by giving us a historical  perspective of how she became involved in Feminism.  She continues  by defining what the terms "feminist"  and "class" mean to her, and speaks  about what part Socialist Feminism,  and men, play in the Women's Movement of today.  Ti-Grace argues that the anti-feminist institutions of motherhood and  marriage are sometimes brought back  into the Women's Liberation Movement  under new guises so that women can  deal with the conflicts in their  lives.  "Violence from the government...directed at women..is something women  are not psychologically prepared for.  She tells us "not to sellout", and  suggests a few thoughts on "mechanisms for survival".  Karen: Women in Sport 3/4" Video-  Cassette Colour No. 42.'3.4.C Rental $20.00  This is a video tape of the film  Karen: Women in Sport. This film  documents a young girl's fight for  acceptance by her peers and a local  soccer league.  (See page 16 of  1977 Catalogue for full details of  same).  This video tape copy of the film  is preceded by an interview with  Marion Barling, the producer. She  talks about her reasons for being  in the media, and about how this  film was made.  She also discusses  the importance of understanding how  film and video have a major place  in forming the ideology of society.  Marion argues that women must find  new methods to portray their experience of the world to each other,  and thereby reject past male-defined  images of themselves.  "We must become involved in both the technical  and the ideological processes of  film-making."  Contact WOMEN IN FOCUS Production &  Distribution Centre, #6 - 45 Kings-  way, Vancouver B.C. Canada. Telephone: (604) 872-2250. loranger  continued from p. 3  At the end of International Women's  Year 1975, the office became independent, a small department unto itself,  reporting directly to the Minister  Responsible for the Status of Women,  now Marc Lalonde.  Loranger's office is not part of  Lalonde's other portfolio, Health  and Welfare. After less than a year  in operation, Loranger's mandate has  changed significantly.  All federal government departments  now have either a committee or appointment to ensure that women's  issues are considered while policy  develops, not as a belated afterthought, so that feminist matters  are integrated into the system.  Loranger's office has considerable  liaison with these committees and  officers.  She has the authority to  8° into these committees without  being invited! No other federal  office has that kind of inter-departmental entree.  We asked her why the federal government had not established a women's  ministry as a separate portfolio.  She explained this would give the  other departments an excuse not to  deal with women's issues.  Lornager thinks it will come in "due  course" but that it is more important right now to have a "powerful  male" minister such as Lalonde rather than a token female appointment.  She says the women of Canada are  "lucky" to have a politician as committed to women as Lalonde.  Apparently, the present female cabinet ministers, as well as the women  MPs in Ottawa are all leery of a  women's ministry because it could  be made powerless so easily.  There is no possibility of regional  extensions of Loranger's office but  she tries her best to communicate  with women's groups across the country with a quarterly bulletin called  INFORMATION: The Status of Women  which is free.  Loranger will also update the annual  report on the status of women in  Canada and hopes to determine specifically how many of the recommendations of the Royal Commission have  been implemented in each province.  So how does her office differ from  the federal Advisory Council on the  Status of Women? ACSW is only an  advisory body.  It is not part of  the federal civil service and therefore does not have the power which  Loranger's office has.  While ACSW generates public pressure  on federal government by educating  the public through the press, Loranger is pressuring the system from  within.   .  "    ". ,  ,  by Karen Richardson  VSW  BCFW  Access  WANTED  •a  SOMEONE TO TAKE CARE OF MY TWO BOYS  ages 8 and 5, in my home at 6941  Halifax, Burnaby (near SFU), May 10-  20. Michael is in school, Ivan is  in day care at SFU part-time.  Use  of car could be arranged. Payment  negotiable.  PLEASE CALL LINDA, 294-8984.  LESBIAN DROP-IN every Wednesday  night at VSW at 8.00 pm.  EVERY SECOND THURSDAY OF THE MONTH  is ORIENTATION NIGHT AT VSW. If you  want to get involved, come along at  7.30 pm on Thursday, May 14 or May  28th. VSW has many membership activities and it's easy to get involved.  IF YOU LIVE IN SOUTH VANCOUVER AND  YOU ARE A FEMINIST, you will be  missing out on something if you  don't call Susan Hoeppner at VSW.  VSW has been organizing in South  Vancouver very successfully, and  you will have an opportunity to  participate in local community  development, from a feminist perspective.  We have been maintaining a low profile about our community orgaizing  in Kinesis, but will be making detailed reports when major actions  are underway. Call 736 3746.  THE ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING OF VSW  takes place on the third Tuesday of  June. The nominating committee has  been active and they will be contacting you personally. Profiles of  those running from office will be  mailed to each VSW member within  the month.  GUIDE TO THE B.C. WOMEN'S MOVEMENT,  15 pp. updated April '77. Only $1.00  and invaluable. From VSW office,  2029 West 4th Ave.  FOR THOSE WHO HAVE BEEN THROUGH CR  AND WHO WANT TO DO SOMETHING MORE:  call Susan Hoeppner at VSW, 736  3746 and she will organize a RAP  GROUP, with action orientation.  VSW NEEDS WORKERS FOR THE WOMAN ALIVE  T.V. SHOW: we want interviewers and  script-writers. If you want to get  involved, call Susan Hoeppner at 736  3746.  VSW HAS ADDED THE FOLLOWING A/V TAPES  to our library: Woman with a Camera;  Press Gang; Women in the Chilean Resistance; Women and Words; High School  Women; Northern Women and Del Martin.  Write us for any of these tapes.  BODY IMAGE CONSCIOUSNESS RAISING  Are you interested in a special CR  group which would emphasize negative  body image and how it affects us as  women?  As the goal is specific, you may feel  you would like to take part even  though you have already completed  another CR group.  If you are interested, please call Elaine after 6:00  p.m. at 685-6061 before the end of  May.  BCFW committee to bring feminist films  to Vancouver is being organized. Call  Women in Focus 872 2250 or Leigh Dee-  ring at 734 3406.  BCFW Collective Action Organizing  Sub-Committee meets at VSW on May  5, 7.30  BCFW Transition House Subcommittee  meets at VSW on May 19, 7.30  BCFW Convention Planning has begun.  Interested people should contact  Action Organizer Sue Moore at 736  3746.  BCFW Health Subcommitte is coordinating a survey of 52-4 hospitals in  B.C. to determine current policies  on the availability of abortion in  this province. Contact Jenna Jord-  ison at Vancouver Women's Health  Collective, 1520 West 6th Ave. 736  6696  BCFW Rights of Lesbians Subcommittee  meets Saturday May 21st at 152 E  8th Ave.  BCFW is sponsoring A DAY ON FEMINISM,  June 11, 1977, Sunrise East Learning  Centre, 2543 Renfrew Street, Vancouver. For details call Yvette at  732 7957.  BCFW CONSTITUTION REVIEW COMMITTEE  has begun meetings. For info call  Nym at 462 9858  RAPE RELIEF is holding a series of  self-defense workshops. May 4, 7  and 11: two evenings and one Saturday (10-4) at YWCA, Vancouver.  May 14 and 15 (Sat/Sun both 10-  4) at New West. YWCA. Call the  Y for info.  WOMEN IN FOCUS will be airing the  Ti-Grace Atkinson program (see page  opposite)-on May 6 at 8.30 pm, Channel 10.  ABBOTSFORD WOMEN'S FESTIVAL, May  13 (Friday evening) and Sat. May  14th. Fraser Valley College. For  details about childcare and freeway route, call Sue Moore at  736 3746.  The FULL CIRCLE WOMEN'S COFFEEHOUSE  COLLECTIVE, at 152 East 8th Ave,  Vancouver, has a full calendar  of May events. Every Monday night  at 8, the coffeehouse is for women  and men ; every Friday night at  8, for women only.  THE WOMEN'S CULTURAL EXCHANGE ALSO  HAS A COMPLETE MAY CALENDAR OF MAY  EVENTS. Location is 217 B E 16th  Ave. Call Jesse at 327 5392 for  details.  ^     Lesbian  Phone  Line  LESBIAN PHONE LINE, Monday through Friday, 6.00 to 9.00 pm. Need somebody to  talk with? Call us. 874 7119 Vancouver status of women  2029 west 4th avenue  Vancouver, b.c. V6J1N3  736 3746  Serials Division,  Main Library, U.:  VANCOUVER, B.C.  * r  Hi  suNt>\y  MONDAy  TUESC^y  w/EDMESDay  THURSD^y  FRICAy  ^^sTURpveV  1  2  Foil Circle  CofffcKooge  ^1 Wamei>>* C0»tofal  W.«..».,K«ttKC.i.  Setf-H.lpCKnJo  Ch0«/iclio.q:3op.«.  Less/am DRoP-Ttv  VSW,  ^•»»vrw/7:",J,.  VSW-V»h *ov+k  IWee-tina,    -7.-3op.rn.  6  VVomeM Iw Focos  Chan/ifi |o, «.{.,.»  y-7 RbW RfiKP  /   WorKihop  ' 5"»o8o«»«»d.VWcft  8  9  Coff.«h.ose  151 E 8tk  io  Women's Health Co«-.  S»lt-Helf,Ctin',c  I9BS W*tk. s:*>  Channel (o , t:»o f •»•  V_£»tAM DfioPlisJ  VSW.  •j -n Kin«i$~  LX    ^ubmiis'.oru  VJW- On«nt*Koo,7:»e.  13  RtSBorSFoRO  Wonnen's Festal  Coffee^.uS*  Tsze 8+)., »p">  VNJOMF.N  Oflcy  j^ Port Rsu»«f  J^-J" Vll©«K$HOP  iNltwW/estyoKn  P|B8oTSPO<Jo  Women's Fes+iwal  (S-r.ev«,.woo,eo.r>l~<)  •New V}*sY Y wc A.  16  Coffee h.os*  152. E 9th  8oo (>•*•  17  18  Channel io,q:3opTn..  L-eSeiAN D«oP -Xm  Lv-7£"b<~M"i,*««-  •L/ 7-.?op-*> at VS*/  VSW- Van- South  meetimj , 7.To j./*.  20  CofTeeKoos*.  15Z.6- ath,a:»»Pm-  x04 Wo«w/\*i Coll««-*l  X L £■ whAog*.: 'A Lo.te.  at tr»« «r\v*'»\ ^ru'^-w  ff:*.r.m.  2Z          /  XL    29  25    X  24       /  25  C*.<j/wi«/ lo,<».j«/i«  L_£s«i«M O«op-r*  vjw/,  26  VSWOrLoW.-on/Tjo  27  Coffee Kouvj  I5Z6 8th, 8:oo^-^