 Vancouver Status of Women  2029 W 4th Avenue  Vancouver, B.C. V6J1N3  UPDATES: BLISS BGWLGY BIMINI'S  ' r  WHO WILL BC D.C's OMBUDS ?  STORASKA DISCRCDITCD  'INTIMAT€ STRANGERS': CRITIQUE  'SCARLET RIBBONS'  fiction by MELODIC J CORRIGALL  ALL ABOUT HOUSTON  WOMCN ON THC LAND, RCVICWS  COURSCS, CVCNTS  1  5  5  6  10 \  U  SUBSCRIBE TO KINESIS!  Published by Vancouver Status of Women  2029 West 4th Avenue, Vancouver, B.C.  Subscriber Only   Member/Subscriber_  AMOUNT ENCLOSED:  Subs are $8/year Individual (or what you can afford), $15/year Institutions.  VSW membership is by donation. Please remember that VSW operates on  inadequate funding — we need member support!  #3*1  SI^CIM. COLLECTIONS  KINGSIS  50 c  JANUARY 78  Vol 7 no 2  Vancouver Status of Women  Aj\  JAN 3 11978  Quilt  by  Persimmon  Blackbridge   and Sima  Elizabeth  Shefrin  Kinesis means change page 1  FEMINIST WINS  EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES APPOINTMENT  Shelagh Day has been appointed the city's  first equal employment opportunities officer.  This position was created by city council  September 13, with all councillors except  Mayor Volrich and Warnett Kennedy voting  in favour. Creation of the position was due  to lobbying by minority, handicapped and  women's groups. Councillor Darlene Mazari  headed the Equal Employment Opportunities  Committee (EEOC) committee, arid members  of Vancouver Status of Women were active  participants.  Shelagh Day has been a Human Rights Branch  officer for three years, prior to this appointment. She was a member of the EEOC committee and has been a feminist activist since  the sixties. The EEOC committee had found  ample evidence of discrimination at City Hall.  Such discrimination reflects the discriminatory practices of the whole society towards  women, visible minorities and the handicapped. None of these groups is proportionately represented at all job levels.  Shelagh Day will be starting her work at City  Hall on February 1. At V.S.W. we admire  Shelagh as a strong feminist and skillful  defender of human rights. We give her our  full support.  GATE CASE WILL GO TO  SUPREME COURT  The Gay Alliance Towards Equality (GATE)  has won leave to appeal to the Supreme Court  of Canada the Vancouver Sun's refusal to  print an advertisement for their publication,  Gay Tide.  GATE lawyers will argue that the rejection of  the ad. contravened the B.C. Human Rights  Code. The decision will be an important one  for the cause of gay rights in Canada.  Neither the federal human rights code nor the'  B.C. human rights code so far prohibits discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation.  ABOUT THE BIMINI QUILT  by Persimmon Blackbridge and  Sima Elizabeth Shefrin  We've been working on the Bimini quilt for  almost exactly the duration of thestrike. The  quilt is quite large — up to 80 inches at its  largest points. It's made of fabric, stuffing,  leather and green garbage bag plastic.  We have both been doing political art for  several years. When we first met each other  we were each working on anti-pipeline pieces:  Persimmon in clay and Elizabeth in yarn. We  decided to do a piece together about a week  before the Bimini strike started. Then we ran  into each other on the picket line enough  times to make it clear what our subject should  be.  Neither of us has worked at Bimini's, but  we've both been underpaid, overworked, and  subject to the whims of bosses. The work  SORWUC is doing is important to us and we  wanted to commemorate their incredible  endurance as well as walking the picket line.  We are both striving toward an integration of  art, politics, and personal life. We both feel  that everyone can do artwork. Art isn't a  matter of some inborn gift — it's a matter of  being in touch with yourself, being relaxed,  and putting in a lot of hard work and  practice. We also feel that there's no objective  good or bad art. Everyone has their own  tastes and they 're all equally valid.  BIMINI WORKERS WIN CONTRACT  SORWUC VICTORY!  The striking Bimini workers have won a first  contract. Bimini employees were certified  with SORWUC (Service, Office and Retail  Workers Union of Canada) in January of last  year. After ten months without a first contract, they went on strike October 20th. For  about twelve weeks, Bimini neighborhood  pub remained deserted, with the community  supporting the waitresses.  On Friday, December 30th, the contract was  signed. SORWUC had agreed to binding  arbitration and accepted the recommendations of their representative at arbitration,  Ed Sims.  The workers are going back in with power  they did not have when they went on strike.  Assessing the contract, Bimini worker Margot  Holmes commented: "The contract is satisfactory, by and large, with regard to nonmonetary matters, such as scheduling. As far  as wages go, it's a great improvement over  before, although it's not perfect. A permanent  waitress will now be making about $5.00.  Before our contract, a starting waitress made  $3.00, with the chance of a 25 cent raise  every few months if management was feeling  friendly."  "Things are a lot less tense in the pub than  they were before the strike," she added.  BIMINI       STRIKE  Inquiry into B.C. Women's Prisons  THE STATE OF WOMEN'S JAILS  IS TO BE INVESTIGATED  BY THE B.C. SUPREME COURT  The investigation, which is scheduled to begin  mid-January, has been launched in response  to mismanagement at the women's unit of  Oakalla. Sexual abuse of female inmates by  male guards was included in the allegations.  Justice Patricia Proudfoot was appointed by  the Attorney General's Ministry to head the  inquiry. She will be receiving briefs from  groups concerned with the status of women's  prisons in this province. The British Columbia  Federation of Women (BCFW) is preparing  a brief.  Proudfoot is empowered to investigate management practices in prison, including the  hiring and promotion of staff. She will also  assess the programs (or the lack of them)  available to women while in prison.  Since the allegations of sexual abuse were  made public, the male head of the women's  unit at Oakalla has been replaced by a  woman.  BEWLEY INQUIRY JANUARY 16  The B.C. Judicial Council has set January 16,  1978, as the day for its inquiry into statements made by Judge A.L. Bewley.  Feminist lawyer Lyn Smith will act as counsel  at the inquiry for Vancouver Status of  Women and SORWUC (Service, Office and  Retail Workers Union of Canada) who now  join with the British Columbia Federation of  Women (BCFW) as formal complainants  against Bewley's sexist comments. "Women  don't get much brains before they're 30",  commented Bewley in a recent trial.  The judicial council, whose function is to  improve the quality of judicial services in  B.C., was asked to carry out this inquiry by  the BCFW on November 4.  BC FED SUPPORTS BLISS APPEAL  A generous donation of $100 from the B.C.  Federation of Labour to the Stella Bliss  Appeal Fund has brought the fund to approx.  $900.00.  ^ A feature of the fund-raising has been the  S lovely number- of small donations from indi-  j? vidual feminists and women's groups throughout the country. We've had lots of cheques  for amounts from $2.00 to $20.00.  Thank you sisters!  As regular readers of Kinesis will know, the  Stella Bliss case challenges the discriminatory  nature of Section 46 of the UIC Act. Section  46 does not permit women to choose between  ^ maternity benefits or regular UIC benefits.  ^ The case has been through various levels of  RQ the judiciary and is now going to the Supreme  s Court of Canada. Vancouver Community  ^ Legal Assistance Society lawyers will take the  appeal to Ottawa.  Notice of appeal has been filed and served on  the government. The lawyers expect that the  case will be scheduled to be heard in the session of the Supreme Court which opens April  25th.  FESTIVITIES AND FLU  slowed down production of the January  Kinesis. We hope next month's will be on  time! page 2  KINCSIS  ISSN 0317-9095  NEW YEAR'S RESOLUTION: WRITE FOR  KINESIS!  Happy New Year, Sisters!  January 1978  BODY POLITIC RAIDED:  VANCOUVER GAY PEOPLE PROTEST  Kinesis is published monthly by the Vancouver  Status of Women. Its objectives are to enhance  understanding about the changing position of  women in society and to work actively towards  achieving change.  Views expressed in Kinesis are those of the writer  and DO NOT necessarily reflect VSW policy. All  unsigned material is the responsibility of the  Kinesis editorial and production crew.  SUBMISSIONS: VSW welcomes submissions  from the feminist community and in particular,  from VSW members. We do reserve the right to  edit, and submission does not guarantee publica-  tio . Include a SASE if you want your work  returned.  CORRESPONDENCE - Kinesis, Vancouver  Status of Women, 2029 West 4th Avenue, Vancouver, B.C.  V6J IN3.  You can help our subscription base by delivering  free copies in your community. Call VSW and  we'll send you some: 736-3746.  Membership to Vancouver Status of Women  is by donation and. Kinesis is mailed monthly  to all members.  Individual subscriptions to Kinesis are $8.00  per year and we would ask members to base  their donations on this and their own financial position. >  As we now have the status of a charitable  organisation and, as we are unable to pay for co  Kinesis from these funds due to government §  regulations, we will be issuing tax deductable ^  receipts  for  the balance of all membership  donations over $8.00. ^  Please remember that VSW operates on  inadequate funding — we need member  support!  ANTI-GAY CAMPAIGNERS  Citizens Against Homosexual Rights  Legislation is a recently formed national  committee aimed at fighting legislation which  would curb discrimination against gay people.  A Baptist minister from Port Hope, Ontario,  is the committee's first chairperson. The minister, Rev. Joseph MacDonald, says: "homosexuality  is not normal. .It's a perversion."  The group will work with the Council for  National Righteousness, a continent-wide  organization of 40,000 members, which  campaigns against the women's movement,  abortion and euthanasia. (CP Info)  MEDIA ACTION  Tramp perfume — advertised on tv. British-  American Cosmetic Co., 7 Curity Avenue,  Toronto.  Warners Wrap Bra - advertised with the  headline "Wrap your package" in a  magazine ad in Redbook. Warners, Box 7010,  Ottawa.  WRITE TODAY!  LETTER  I think the paper does a good job but tends to  be one-sided. It stresses "woman as disadvantaged" and "woman as oppressed"; whereas  "woman as talent", "women as great resources", "women as achievers at whatever" gets  little space. We don't need reasons to be more  passive than we already are as a result of our  conditioning . . .  Vancouver — Feminists attended a demonstration here Dec. 31st in protest against police  harassment of the Toronto gay newspaper,  Body Politic . The Vancouver action was  sponsored by the Gay Alliance Towards  Equality (GATE).  On Friday, December 30, Toronto and Ontario provincial police entered the offices of  Pink Triangle Press, which publishes Body  Politic. The magazine, they claimed, was  distributing obscene literature through the  mails. They confiscated material for the next  issue of Body Politic and the entire subscription list. Hearing for the charge comes up  on January 20.  The obscenity charge concerned descriptions  of adult males having sex with boys 12-14  years of age. Many people, feminists included,  would have difficulty supporting the issue of  boys and adult males having sex. It appears  that this is exactly why the police chose the  issue in order to bust the magazine. Alternative cultures are always having to endure such  harassments. Obscenity has been used as a  catch-all for all kinds of political investigations and harassments. But, of course,  obscenity is never busted when it appears in  the B.C. Hydro buses in the form of  panty-hose ads.  The issue we protest is police harassment of a  gay newspaper. Confiscation of its mailing  list gives the police information for future  investigation of gay people.  This kind of intimidation, coming at a time of  anti-gay hysteria, is meant to keep us in the  closet. It is meant to prevent our political  struggles for gay rights.  It is not a crime to be gay. We're out and we  intend to stay out.  AT   VSW  CHRISTMAS  PARTY  BELLS   THUNDERCLOUD,  EILEEN   0'LAURA  AND   FRIENDS  INDIAN RIGHTS FOR INDIAN WOMEN  Ottawa (Upstream) — Indian Rights for  Indian Women is a national organization  formed by native women in 1971. When  native women held their fourth annual meeting in the fall of last year, in Ottawa,  Upstream, the Ottawa feminist newspaper,  was there.  The keynote speaker for the first morning was  Noel Starblanket, president of the National  Indian Brotherhood of Canada (NIB). Esther  Shannon of Upstream comments:  In his speech Starblanket made no  commitment other than to meet with native  women to discuss their concerns .... The  NIB is a male dominated organization that has  shown little interest in the plight of Indian  women who have lost their status as a result  of the Indian Act. It has been and continues  to be against the inclusion of the Indian  Women organization on its executive council  and it has continually referred the question of  who is and who is not an Indian back to the  550 Indian bands across the country.  (An Indian woman who marries a non-Indian  loses her status as an Indian while Indian men  do not.)  Here, thanks to Upstream, is Esther  Shannon's report of the rest of the conference proceedings:  Following the afternoon break the meeting  reconvened to hear reports from Indian  women from three reserves in Canada.  Tobique in New Brunswick, Goodfish Lake in  Alberta and Caughnawaga in Quebec. Women  from these three reserves are facing critical  shortages in housing, eviction from their  reserves as a result of their non status under  the Indian Act, and loss of oil and mineral  rights. Their situation is desperate and they  have appealed to all the government departments that are involved with Indians in  Canada, as well as the National Indian Brotherhood for aid. They have so far received  no help from anyone.  Women from the Tobique Reserve are currently occupying their band office and have  occupied the building in an effort to force  the band council and chief to take action to  deal with the housing shortage. When a marriage break up occurs the husband inevitably turns the wife and children out of the  house. Also the office was occupied because  they have no other place to live. Once they  are put out of their homes no alternative  housing is available to them. The band office  has 18 rooms for a staff of 8 people.  The final day of the conference was closed to  the public. In the morning delegates attended  workshops on: How To Lobby, Indian  Women's Rights, Alternatives to the Indian  Act and Human Rights.  In the afternoon the following resolutions  were put to the floor and passed:  1. All Indian women should retain their present Indian status and nq. woman should be  evicted from a reservation until the Indian  Act is revised.  turn to page 4. page 3  JOB DISCRIMINATION  Billie Lee Linton v. Nabob Foods  QUEBEC WOMEN TAKE CASES TO  ALBERTA HRC  A Human Rights Board of Inquiry ruled recently in a split 2-1 decision that Billie Lee  Linton was not discriminated against by  Nabob Foods when she was demoted from  her position of order-selector in the warehouse.  For the women of B.C., this ruling is a  setback. It is an important case because it is  the first Board of Inquiry to deal with a  woman attempting to enter a traditionally  male area of work. The odds against a woman  being successful in crossing traditional lines  are high. This Board of Inquiry decision does  not. assist those women who are courageous  enough to try it.  What is most disturbing is that the evidence of  sex discrimination is clearly set out in the  written reasons for the decision, but the majority of the Board has chosen not to credit  that evidence.  Billie Linton worked as a packer at Nabob  Foods from April 1973 to March 1976. All  packers at Nabob Foods are women.  In March 1976, Ms. Linton bid for a job as an  order-selector and was awarded the position  on the basis of seniority. She was the second  woman in the plant to work as an order-  selector. Apart from Billie Linton and her  predecessor (who chose to go back to her job  as a packer after only four days in the warehouse) order-selectors are, and have  apparently always been, men.  Ms. Linton worked about twenty days as an  order-selector and was demoted. She alleged  that her demotion was the result of sex  discrimination.  As well as the circumstantial evidence that  there was virtually complete job segregation  by sex throughout the plant, there was also  uncontradicted evidence that Sanderson, the  Warehouse Supervisor, had stated to the  investigating Human Rights Officer and to a  union representative that "the warehouse was  not a place for a woman as it was too cold  and dusty" and that "a boxcar was no place  for a woman."  There was also evidence that during the time  Ms. Linton was an order-selector, the  Company and the Union and the Workers'  Compensation Board signed an agreement  which identified certain general warehousemen's duties as being too strenuous to be  performed safely by women.  One of these designated duties, working in the  boxcars, was a duty of order-selectors and  Billie Linton's presumed inability to load and  unload boxcars was relied on as a justification  for her demotion. Ms. Linton was never  assigned to work in the boxcars so there was  no opportunity to assess her ability to do so.  The agreement designating certain duties as  too strenuous for women does not conform  to the requirements made by other Board of  Inquiry decisions that employees' abilities be  assessed individually, not on the basis of a  group factor.  This Board, however, does not seem to take  this discriminatory agreement very seriously  in spite of the fact that it was entered into  not just by the Company and the Union but  also by the Workers' Compensation Board, a  government agency.  Despite this evidence of discriminatory attitudes and discriminatory behaviour, the  majority of the Board adopted the company's  position that though these things existed,  they had no bearing on the decision to  demote Billie Linton.  The company's position was that Ms. Linton's  productivity was lower than average and that  this was the reason for her demotion. The  majority of the Board agreed with this,  although they admitted that the measures of .  productivity were not entirely reliable and  that Ms. Linton was being compared to  workers more experienced than herself.  Marguerite Jackson in her dissenting decision  states:  The Respondent has argued that it was Billie  Linton's failure to achieve an acceptable level  of production that was the cause of the deci-.  sion to demote. I do not disagree that this  may have been one of the motivating  considerations. However, I agree with the  Board of Inquiry in the Bremer decision that:  "a contravention will occur if the prohibited  consideration is only one of the motivating  factors."  In my opinion, when the factor of sex is  present to any degree in an employment  decision, the burden is extremely heavy to  overcome the presumption that sex played a  part in the decision.  In my opinion, that burden has not been discharged. I find that one of the reasons for the  decision to demote Billie Linton was the fact  that she was a woman.  For these reasons I would have allowed the  complaint made by Billie Linton.  In our view, Ms. Jackson provided the intelligent and legally proper decision in this case.  But a good dissenting decision is a hollow  victory for Billie Linton and for all of us.  MMMM----  EPt/cfirioNfiuy  _£XCtTlNd,  _ But tv£ /«<?£■  I^**^2  1 <f  K V.UNWN6 rt  \     school y<k  ~^\ mow  X3-  u  SEXIST BIAS IN VANCOUVER HIGH  SCHOOLS INVESTIGATED BY  B.C. HUMAN RIGHTS BRANCH  The B.C. Human Rights Branch is inquiring  into charges of sexist discrimination within  Vancouver secondary schools.  The case concerns lack of equal access to  home economics and industrial arts courses.  Students, it is alledged, have been denied or  hindered access to courses which are considered inappropriate for their sex.  Watch Kinesis for further developments . . .  Two Quebec women who came to Alberta to  find work in the oil fields have given up and  gone home — disgusted.  The pair spent two months interviewing with  drilling and surveying companies in  Edmonton and Calgary.. Their applications  were treated with disdain, and they felt  strongly enough about their reception to complain to the Alberta Human Rights  Commission.  "We don't seem to get through here," said  Gitta Ridder, 22. She and Lucie Dextras, 29,  expect to return to Calgary in June — unless  they're called back earlier to follow up on  their complaints.  They had names of 40 companies that they  felt had discriminated against them. HRC  Investigator Penny Davis is following through  on the four that Gitta and Lucie felt were the  most obvious offenders.  According to  Penny, it takes three to five  months  on  the average to resolve a  complaint. Her work involves contacting and  meeting with the respondent and coming to  a solution acceptable to both parties.  If no resolution can be reached, the case goes  to a board of inquiry , a public, quasi-judicial  board which can recommend, but not enforce action.  Most of the companies told Gitta and Lucie  that they had no facilities for women in the  north. "Lack of facilities isn't an acceptable  reason for not hiring women," Penny says.  The young women were laughed at by prospective employers, told they could not be  hired because of their sex, and informed that  their applications were being taken only to  comply with regulations.  Gitta and Lucie are hoping that other women  in Alberta who get similar responses from  company interviewers will complain to the  HRC.  Gitta says that they've started something and  want other women here to pick up on it.  "We've opened the door. It's not just for us —  it's for all women."  Both Gitta and Lucie have experience and  training in construction and surveying. Lucie  was a chemist, but she prefers out-of-doors  work. They also want the higher salaries that  come with work in the oil fields.  They'd like to hear from women attempting  to be hired for similar positions. Until June,  their forwarding address is 67 W. St. Joseph  Blvd., Montreal.  (from Calgary Women's Newsletter) INDIAN WOMCN cont  WOMEN STRIKE FOR EQUAL PAY  by Esther Shannon  Ottawa (Upstream) — Twenty-five members  of Local 31 of the Steel Plate Engravers  Union went on strike Oct. 27 at the British  American Banknote Company in Ottawa.  The all-women local said that it is fighting the  strike on the basis of what they see as discrimination by the Company against its women  employees.  Shirley Cooligan, President of Local 31, said  that "we feel we are being very modest since  we are only asking wage parity with the  lowest paid male worker in the plant."  According to Maureen McKenney, another  union member on the picket line, the work  that the women do requires a two-year  apprenticeship and consequently is highly  skilled and demanding work.  McKenny said that "after five years of talking  to management about this issue the women  have finally gotten fed up."  When asked what reason management has  given for the difference in wage rates  McKenny stated that "they say it's just  tradition."  Upstream talked to the president of the  British American Banknote Company, Ken  Sargarent, about McKenny's statement on  tradition.     Sargarent     wouldn't     comment  directly but said that "wage rates in the  graphic arts field are very complex."  Sargarent also said that the company was  concerned that it will lose its competitiveness in the marketplace since the Steel  Plate Engravers at the Canadian Banknote  Company had just accepted an agreement  limiting their wage increase to 10 percent, the  same increase that the British American  Banknote Company is offering its employees.  Cooligan said that the workers at the Canadian Banknote Company were "pressured into  signing because of job security and threats  that they would lose their back pay." She  said that unlike the Canadian Banknote  Company, the presses at the American  Banknote Company cannot run without the  members of Local 31.  At press time the women of Local 31 were  still on the picket line and though management has met wih them, they have made no  real efforts to negotiate with the union since  the beginning of the strike. When asked how  long they could hold out the women said,  "as long as we can afford to."  Local President Cooligan feels that the  company can afford to wait. She stated that  "the British American Banknote Company  had half a million dollar profit in the first six  months of this year, they can afford to try  and teach us a lesson."  PRICE OF A LIFE  Philadelphia (OOB) — Janet Sloan's life was  worth $810.  Sloan, 22, was killed last summer while  working at the Sun Shipbuilding yard outside  Philadelphia. A welder, she was working on a  double-hulled ship when she fell 52 feet to  her death. She was signed to the unsafe job  alone, out of hearing distance from any other  workers. It is believed she bled to death.  Workers at the shipyard demanded that the  company be indicted for murder — Sloan's  death was the second there in a year. In addition, co-workers charged that Sloan, a member of the Communist Party (M-L), was given  the unsafe job because of her militancy.  Instead, the Occupational Safety and Health  Administration fined Sun Shipbuilding $810,  charging there was an inadequate back-railing  where Sloan was working. Workers claim  there was no railing. (from The Guardian)  ONTARIO TRANSITION HOUSES CONFER  Representatives from 13 interval and transition houses met recently in Kingston,  Ontario. The object of the conference was to  develop concensus for a provincial working  committee.  A committee was struck to establish effective  communication links between the houses and  to work towards the growth of a coalition  which would permit unified action but also  ensure autonomy.  This conference comes at the same time as  a similar one in B.C. which was also aimed at  forging a province-wide communication  network. (inf0 from Upstream)  IT COMES AS NO SURPRISE  that average income of families headed by  women increased at a slower rate between  1965 and 1973 than that of families headed  by men, reported the Economic Council of  Canada recently. (CP Info)  2. Indians who have lost their status because  of marriage should have their rights restored  under the revised act.  3. Native women who marry off the reserve  in Alberta should be allowed to retain their  oil and mineral rights.  4. Indians with one quarter native ancestry  should qualify for Indian status.  5. The non-Indian spouse of any native  should be allowed to live on the reserve and  all children of a mixed marriage should retain  Indian status.  On Monday, Oct. 24, members of Indian  Rights for Indian Women went to Parliament  Hill to present their concerns to the government and opposition parties. They talked  about the revision of the Indian Act and the  fact that Indian women have no direct input  into the consultations now underway between the NIB and the government. They  asked that funds be made avavilable to Indian  Rights for Indian Women to research and  document the situation of Indian women.  Indian Rights for Indian Women received no  commitment on their demand for input on  the joint NIB Cabinet committee and commitment on their request for funds for research.  Tommy Douglas, of the NDP, at least seemed  to grasp the issues presented to the NDP caucus and promised his party's support for the  demands of the group.  Margretts said she was "disappointed". When  asked what the organization planned to do  next, she stated, "native women have to continue putting on pressure on every level to  get recognition and to regain the rights that  we have lost."  Indian Rights for Indian Women has about  two years before the Revised Indian Act  comes before Parliament, only two years in  which to gain a voice that, will enable them to  reclaim their past and ensure their future and  their children's future. That's not very much  time and still nobody is listening.  CHANGE OF NAME  Every day at VSW we deal with calls about  Change of Name. There is no law against  using any name so long as it isn't for fraudulent purposes.  Take Kathy, for example. When she was  divorced four years ago, she started using her  birth name again. (The divorce lawyer did  not acquaint her with the simple procedure  of applying for a reversion to her birth  name.)  Recently, Kathy entered hospital using her  own name as usual, and gave birth to a son.  When she went to register the birth, she  filled out her usual name. Under the Vital  Statistics Act, an unmarried mother is entitled to register her childn in her own name.  However, she denoted her status as divorced,  not single. Whereupon the Vital Statisticians  went hunting through their files and gave the  baby her ex-husband's name!  Here are the main points about change of  name:  1. A married woman presently using her  husband's name can apply to get her birth  (maiden name) back. Applications are made  to The Department of Vital Statistics,  Change of Name Branch, in Victoria.  2. A woman, at marriage, indicates on the  marriage certificate whether she will  continue to use her name or will change to  her husband's name. STORASKA  page 5  P.E.M.C. SAYS NO TO STORASKA AND  YES TO RAPE RELIEF  Fred Storaska's film on rape: "How to Say  No to a Rapist and Survive" has been  removed from the shelves of the Provincial  Educational Media Centre (PEMC).  PEMC has been supplying the film to many  B.C. school districts. Its director, Byron  Black, agreed to withdraw the film from circulation after meeting in December with a  deputation from Vancouver Rape Relief.  The Rape Relief representatives went armed  with a brief which appraised the film from a  feminist perspective. (See October's Kinesis  for that brief.)  They also informed PEMC that all rape crisis  centres in North America, myriad women's  groups and many social service professional  groups had condemned the film.  Storaska tells women that we can't defend  ourselves physically against rape. He tells us  that we must try to escape while going along  with the rapist, deceiving him with our  feminine wiles. His version of rape is as  inaccurate as it is insulting.  ALTERNATIVES TO STROASKA  At the meeting with PEMC, Rape Relief  women discussed the need for an alternative  to Storaska. The obvious alternative in Vancouver is "This Film is about Rape". This is  being made right now by Rape Relief and the  B.C. Police Commission. They also stressed  that it's far better to show nothing than  Storaska's film.  STOPPING STORASKA  The National Action Committee on the Status  of Women has been'asked to approach the  Council of Ministers of Education at its meeting on January 16, 1978, to pass a resolution  removing the film "How to Say No to a  Rapist and Survive" from use in provincial  educational institutions. N.A.C, whose  member organizations represent +5 million  Canadian women, passed a resolution condemning the film at its last annual general  meeting.  Please support N.A.C's action by:  1. Lobbying your provincial minister of  education before the January 16th meeting.  2. Encouraging local educators, citizens,  community groups, legal and police people,  and M.P.P.'s to lobby the provincial  minister also.  3. Get letters of support for withdrawing  the film from these sources and sending  copies to:  (a) National Action Committee on the  Status of Women  40 St. Clair Avenue East  Suite 300  Toronto, Ontario  M4T 1M9  (b) c/o Yvette Perreault  Van. Rape Relief  4-45 Kingsway  Vancouver  .     V5T 3H7  (We'll send information on  to Ottawa)  STORASKA LEADS TO ASSAULT  Ottawa (CP) — At least one area woman was  nearly assaulted because she followed the  advice of a controversial rape film which  instructs women not to resist rape, says a  spokesman from a local women's group.  Rosemary Billings, committee member of a  group affiliated with the Ottawa-Hull Rape  Crisis Centre, said the woman was accosted by  a man in a car and tried to use the methods  she had seen in the film.  She tried to play up to him, to tease him,  but she found that utterly ineffective. Then  she actively resisted him and got away, narrowly escaping being badly hurt.  The film, How to Say No to a Rapist and  Survive, is shown by police to various  women's meetings and school groups. It  advises women to react reassuringly towards a  potential rapist, suggesting that a woman  place the rapist's hand on her breast, press  her body close to his or give him a "little  peck on the cheek."  Ms. Billings says the advice is bunk. The best  defence against rape is active resistance,  "anything from saying no to screaming and  kicking."  * At least four women in Greater Vancouver  have been assaulted or raped because they  followed Storaska's advice.  * Toronto city police have agreed to stop  showing the film.  * Ontario Status of Women Council has hired  lawyers to assess the legal implications of  being assaulted and raped when having  followed Storaska's advice.  Bill 63, the Ombudsman Act, passed in the  last session of the provincial legislature. The  Act allows for the appointment of an  ombudsman to investigate complaints about  the unjust treatment by government agencies,  including crown corporations, municipalities,  schools, hospitals, colleges, universities and  professional associations established by an  Act of the legislative assembly.  An all-party committee of twelve MLAs has  been appointed to find the first ombudsman.  In the line-up are: Gordon Gibson, Liberal  Leader; Labour Minister Allan Williams and  Health Minister Bob McLelland. Other  Socreds include: George Mussalmen, Walter  Davidson, Howard Lloyd and Frank Calder.  NDPers are: Bill King, Eileen Dailly and Don  Lockstead. Committee chairperson is Socred  Harvey Schroder.  The ombudsman will have power to initiate  investigations in response to complaints, on  his own initiative, or at the request of the  government. He will have the power to request that the appropriate authorities mend  their ways. He will have, however, no power  to enforce his recommendations. His only  recourse will be to publicise their sins, if  they refuse to follow his recommendations.  The Ombudsman is, or can be, the watchdog  to ensure those given administrative power by  the government perform their duties in a  proper and a fair manner. The authority  granted under this Act to investigate a  complaint is in addition to any other redress  provided under a specific statute — and in  most cases the complainant must have attempted to resolve her or his dispute with the  government agency through the procedures  established under the appropriate legislation.  WHO WILL BE B.C.'S OMBUDSMAN?  For all the inequities of governmental bureaucracy in B.C. : one ombudsman (sic).  ^^  p^fi&UUf U0ERH1ON NEW> SEfcVKE.  The Act does not limit the Ombudsman to  investigating individual complaints, which  must be in writing, but the Ombudsman  MAY, on a complaint or on his own initiative,  investigate  "a  decision or recommendation;  or an act done, or not done or a procedure  used by an administrative authority that  aggrieves or may aggrieve a person." The  Ombudsman must investigate a matter if  requested to by the government.  He must notify the authority affected by the  investigation and allow them the opportunity  to consult during or respond to a finding if it  appears that the report may adversely affect  the authority. The complainant has NO right  to a hearing and the complaint may be dismissed at any stage of the investigation.  However, the Ombudsman must inform the.  complainant of the decision and provide  written reasons for it. He may also indicate  any other recourse the complainant may  have.  The Act provides the Ombudsman with the  authority to demand records etc. to facilitate  his investigations.  Time will tell if he has been given broad  enough powers to compel government officials hiding behind the myriad of cloaks of  confidentiality and privilege to respond to his  questions.  DEPENDS ON THE PERSON  B.C. is the last province in Canada to introduce an Ombudsman Act. While it is not the  panacea that it is often made out to be, it is a  useful vehicle to question government practices. How effective itis as a vehicle depends  entirely on the person named to the most  senior positon. She or he must be seen to be  credible and effective and powerful in the  eyes of the senior civil servants, all levels of  establishment and she or he must be able to  effectively use the press. Too often in the past  the office of the Ombudsman has, in other  jurisdictions, produced damning reports and  no action has been taken. INTIMATE STRANGERS: A REVIEW  AND CRITIQUE  by Jillian Riddington  Wife battering has become a "Hot topic" for  the media. Like rape and other forms of  woman abuse, it was rarely discussed before  the women's movement; women attempting  to found transition houses only five years ago  had great difficulty proving that there really  was a problem, since no one dealt with it, it  didn 't exist.  Because these houses now do exist — and  because they turn away far more women than  they can serve — there is now "proof"- that  men really do beat "their" women. And perhaps because wife battering combines violence  with a smattering of voyeurism, the mass  media are now finding it an exciting topic.  However, the viewpoint and the analysis  presented by the media are not feminist.  In "pop culture" the fact that woman abuse is  rooted in hierarchical, patriarchal relationships becomes distorted or ignored. Our  knowledge of our oppression in a society  governed by such relationships is taken away,  denied to us. A United Way report discussing  "interspousal violence" and expressing  concern over children spending time in houses  with "an anti-male bias" is expensively  printed, well-bound, and widely distributed,  while feminist analyses go dusty in drawers  for lack of funds to print and distribute  them. When television devotes itself to wife  battering, what we understand as a woman's  problem is diluted, and becomes an individual  problem that occurs in a few unfortunate  families. A case in point is the recent  for-TV movie, Intimate Strangers.  Feminist-produced movies or video-tapes on  woman-abuse have been done on a shoestring;  their audience has been limited to lecture  halls or small auditoriums. In contrast,  Intimate Strangers, in full colour, starred two  big names — Sally Struthers, of All in the  Family and Dennis ("Gentle Ben") Weaver.  It was given two hours of prime-time on a  major U.S. network and on BCTV.  I was asked by a lower echelon BCTV  producer (female) to screen the film and participate in a panel discussion ("We're hoping  to get Vander Zalm") to be shown on the  news hour immediately following the network  showing. Eager to have a feminist perspective  represented, I agreed. Vander Zalm didn't  show; the panel was to consist of an RCMP  officer (who had never heard of transition  houses and thought women should be told  not to press charger), Margaret Campbell,  senior probation officer at family court, and  me.  During the screening I took copious notes,  scrawling in the dark to make sure I got all  the pertinent points, wondering how I could  develop a comprehensive critique and present  it in a short space of time. I needn't have  bothered. When the panel was shown, at the  end of the news hour, 60 minutes after the  end of the film, we each received about 30  seconds of exposure. So much for feminist  analysis.  Even here, I have not sufficient space to do a  substantive critique of the film, and the immediacy is lost. But because it is important  that women understand how control and  authority is taken away from them, a brief  discussion seems in order.  EXCUSES FOR THE BATTERER  Much of the film was devoted to constructing  a network of explanations and excuses for the  batterer. He was under financial pressure and  strain at work; he was having sexual problems;  his father had beaten his mother and whipped  him (he believed he was "a better man for  it"); his wife nagged him, tried to usurp his  authority, made him jealous, wanted to leave  the house and start her own little business (he  had a good put down for that — "Why don't  you take up open heart surgery instead?")  and insisted on seeing her old friend, a "Loudmouthed interfering broad." She even crumpled the fender on the car he bought her. So  when the daughter asks the victim if Daddy  hits Mommy because she is bad, she can only  answer in the affirmative.  All this could have been understood as exemplifying a male caught in a system that  oppresses both men and women by creating  unfulfillable desires and confines both sexes  to stereotypic roles, had the victim been  allowed to find her own strength. As has now  been proven over a four or five year period,  the way to do this is by sharing experience  with other women," and being supported by  them.  NOT A FEMINIST EXPERIENCE  The victim did turn to a "transition house"  type of facility (strangely, one run by the  YWCA). She did get help from a female  assistant district attorney (even better for  affirmative action, the lawyer is black, to  boot). But her understanding of her experience was not allowed to come through  sharing that with other women. Nor was she  allowed to find her own strength through  seeing other women performing competently  and sharing their knowledge and strength with  her. Though both these processes are fundamental in a feminist-based transition house,  they were not for Sally Struthers.  She learned not to be a victim by having a  male doctor — a classic, paternalistic authority figure — tell her that the problem is hers  as well as her husband's. She learns that a  woman who allows herself to be beaten is  using that  as an excuse not to accomplish  anything. Such classic "blaming the victim"  totally ignores the real economic and emotional dependency which a woman married  at seventeen, socialized to see divorce as  failure, untrained, and with two small  children must deal with. Nor does it address  the lack of community support for single  mothers. It perpetuates the myth of the  masochistic victim — if a woman is beaten,  she must like and/or deserve it.  No wonder no resolution is possible. After a  rape — which is not a rape, because it occurs  in marriage — a child abuse scene, and  numerous beatings, our victim is last seen  looking longingly at her batterer as he leaves  for counselling, having forced from her a  promise to wait until he is "better". In the  end, she is still denied the right to make her  own decisions about her life.  T.V. CONTROLLED BY MEN  Television, like newspapers, radio and book  publishing, is almost totally controlled by  men. Advertisers are almost inevitably conservative males. The power of the purse ensures  that no feminist perspectives on even those  issues which women have revealed and  attempted to resolve will be permitted to  reach a large audience.  The question then remains whether we should  be glad that some information on these subjects is being aired, or whether we should  actively oppose non-feminist interpretations.  The film did bring attention to the problem,  and, by depicting a white, middle-class  couple, showed that it was not just a poor  people's problem, or one existing only in  certain ethnic groups. BCTV did show the  phone numbers of all transition houses in  the province, and an appeal was made to  victims to contact them. (Though the  numbers were flashed so quickly it was almost impossible to write them down, six  women who did contact Vancouver transition house mentioned the film; Ishtar also  received several calls.)  At a time when the energy of many active  feminists is depleted and dispursed, perhaps  we do not have time or will to challenge the  mass media, and to find ways to have "our own  reality depicted. But if we fail to do so, we  may find even those issues on which we have  been granted a little authority — if only by  default — taken from us.  VICTORY FOR BATTERED WOMEN  Francine Hughes Acquitted  (from BMR)  Francine Hughes has been acquitted for the  alleged murder of her ex-husband in Michigan.  She had been accused of pouring gasoline on  the floor near him and then burning him to  death while he slept. He had beaten her for  years and there was a restraining order against  him at the time. She was acquitted on  grounds of temporary insanity.  The jury accepted the defense argument that  her temporary insanity was caused by 13  years of abuse, threats on her life and domination by her (ex) husband. She had divorced  him and he had returned after a serious car  accident.  After subsequent psychiatric testing ordered  by the court, Hughes has been found to be  sane. Now she is planning on going back to  school and helping other battered women.  This is an important case because it proves  that battered wives may fight back even  though at the exact time of the incident their  husbands may not have been beating them. page 7  FICTION:  Scarlet ribbons  by Melodie J. Corrigall  The heavy smell of hot, wet clothing; winter  dressed people in a crowded bus. Lucky she'd  got a seat. That would have been too much.  Standing for an hour after trudging around all  day.  Her feet were tired. She ached right up to her  thighs. Never did have strong legs. Born on a  farm, born to farm work, ought to have  strong legs. Never did.  The worst had been when she was a waitress.  They really used to' ache, especially carrying  Rebecca. How long ago that seemed. Rebecca  twelve already. "Oh Christ, Rebecca's ribbons" she thought. "I forgot the ribbons."  Maybe she could get some at the shopping  centre where she changed buses. How can I  think about ribbons. "They have to be dark  red to match the other kids' costumes." Too  much. After she had spent all rainy day wandering around from one cheeky receptionist  to another. "Sorry but," smile "you're too  old, too slow, we'll phone you, kick in the  ass, no." "No thank you, madam," "Shall I  call you Miss, Mrs or Ms?" "No thank you."  "We'll be in touch." Smile. Lovely,  fresh laquered smile.  "Move to the back of the bus, please." The  driver was sounding on his last. That'd be a  helluva job. They sure tried to cram them in.  Lucky she got a seat.  Michel stared at the lady's neck in front of  hef. Short blond wisps of hair. So blond it  was almost white. A silk scarf around her  neck. Rich colours. It looked so soft. The hair  was short, so clean. Not quite natural, blond  hair like that always seemed unreal. Not fake  like a wig but other worldly.  "Oh yes, " she thought "yes, dear gone grandmother I want to be a secretary, a cook, a  chambermaid. I want to be anything, anywhere, any hours, just to have it, something,  a regular pay.  The woman turned to look out the window  into the dark night. Her long silver earrings  jangled. Michel was fascinated by the head,  the earrings — the face and colouring so unlike her own or those she knew.  Once she had had a lover, no she corrected  herself a friend, lover sounded too romantic, a  boyfriend who was blond like that.  Something in the hair, the fair skin,  something ethereal compared to her brown  hair. Blonds were weaker though she thought.  Some anyhow. The woman put her hand up  and adjusted her scarf. She had on coral nail  polish. The fingers were long and pale, like a  flute player Michel had once seen. She closed  her own hands inside the green woolen  gloves. They were rough, heavy work hands.  Michel studied the woman, her soft camel hair  coat — maybe not real how would she  know — but so cosy looking, so warm; the  clean line of her cheek as she turned, the  composure.  "Probably only a secretary," her grandmother  had said once of another girl they had seen on  a bus. "you don't want to be a secretary,"  grandmother had continued in disgust.  "Oh yes," she thought "yes, dear gone grandmother I want to be a secretary, a cook, a  chambermaid. I want to be anything, anywhere, any hours, just to have it, something,  a regular pay. "Grandmother why were you  so fussy, you were only a farm wife but everyone else was a .... "  The blond woman moved as if to get up, then  settled back in her seat. "I would like to  follow her" Michel thought, "to get off when  she does." It would be wonderful to be invisible. Just for an evening. To see behind the  face. I would follow her to her house. To see  the kind of place she lives, the walls, the  carpets — oh yes, she'd have carpets, plush  bright shag carpets. And it would be so orderly and serene. To be invisible and hear what  she ways. If I had been a man, that is the sort  of woman I would follow. The hair so fine, so  golden, the clothing so soft, so pretty. "Bull  shit" she thought "No, if I were a man it  would be just like now I'd follow no one. I'd  just sit here. Born to sit."  The old man on the seat beside her gave  Michel a knock. Time to get off, everyone was  pushing for the door. Raining. Raining, of  course. Vancouver, who called it Lotus Land.  "No."  "No?"  "I'm sorry but I forgot until I got to the shopping centre and then the bus ..."  "I absolutely need them for tomorrow."  "I'm sorry."  "I told you this morning."  "Rebecca I don't want to hear another word  about those ribbons or I'll ribbon you."  "Gees I told you two weeks ago."  "So why don't you go and buy them yourself.  You have nothingto do after school."  "I don't have any money."  "Sheila," Michel cried running to the high-  chair.   Too  late. Crash. No serious damage.  Michel sighed. Sheila screamed til she was red  in  the  face.   Finally  Quieted  by  a  cookie.  "Thank   god   for  cookies"  thought  Michel.  "They buy some peace."  What pervert called it Lotus Land. It was cold  and rainy. She was wet to the skin, to the  soul. Damp, wet. Oh for a cup of coffee.  Steaming coffee.  Good luck, there was the bus. The 94 to  Greenpark. She ran across the road to get it,  splashing her legs in the cold, dirty puddles.  Too late for a seat this time, oh well it was  only a few minutes now. As she moved to the  back, the bus pulled out. "The ribbons," she  groaned. "I forgot the goddam ribbons."  Oh well she sure wasn't going back now. She  would have had to wait another half hour for  the next bus. She could get them tomorrow.  It was still drizzling when Michel went to pick  up Sheila at family care. Mrs. Foulkes looked  old and tired. Relieved to see Michel at last.  "She was fine," she said "only she needs some  more clean clothes, everything is dirty, its in  the bag. And her medicine ran out." "Have a  nice evening, then." "Night." "Night."  Michel opened the door to the smell of burnt  yuk. She tossed the baby in the highchair and  ran to the stove. "It's just something spilled  . on the burner," Rebecca said. "Where are my  ribbons? Didya get my ribbons?"  The 11 o'clock news. Already. And here she  sat. Mesmorized. Everyone in bed. At last.  Everyone quiet. Asleep — who knows. Who  cares, quiet. "It's the National."  Michel stared at the application "form. "If I  had a nickle for every damn form I filled out  since January" she thought. " A dime for  every test. A quarter for every phone call. A  dollar for every almost interview. A rose for  every newspaper ad." "Number of words per  minute?" Should she lie? — a slight exager-  ation. "Why do you want to work for the  Metropolitan Insurance Company?" the form  had asked on the previous page. "Why?" she  had thought "that's rich. Nothing spiritual  that's for sure. Simply because I'm broke,  penniless, without a sou, answer L or M.  Because I want to work anywhere . . . even  for your lousy company. Even to be a robot  for you — the guys who never pay up when  some poor shmuck gets themselves smashed  to bits or has to have their insides removed.  Because sir, I would work for the Devil himself. .Work for him with no coffee breaks, no  lunch break, nothing."  turn page KINESIS 8  SCARLET RIBBONS continued  She had left that space blank in the end. She  would go back to it later. But no escaping the  old words per minute question. "Number of  words per minute?" She took the pen and  carefully wrote 65. She grimaced. "Well, 64  on a good day."  A bang down the hall. It was Sheila, the little  monster. "Sheila" she shrieked - squeezing  ( the table between her white knuckles. "Get  back in bed." Jesus Christ even at 11 o'clock  she couldn't have a moment. Fast patter of  feet, crash and silence.  Next page. It went on forever. High school.  Why did they care which high school you  went to. Why did they care? Some pissy little  job, hardly more than UIC, and they expected  you to fill out a 10 page report on everything  you ever did or knew. She turned the page.  "This is the classic," she groaned. "Any  special experience or education you have  which makes you suitable for this job."  Later lying in bed. Telling herself to go to  sleep. Tomorrow starts early. Breathing exercises. Relax. You can't do anything until  tomorrow. Great theory. Tense up to the  toes, relax. Toes were fine. She didn't have  tense toes in the first place.  Was this it then. The last page of an otherwise  tedious story. The beginning of the slide.  Slide down the greasy pole. The beginning?  Hell that was the Pollyana view, it was more  like the end.  Three kids. No more UIC. Husband buggered  off to Latin America or some other travel  folder place. Probably Latin America, that's  all he ever used to talk about. Or maybe just  across the town. Who knows. Left with three  kids and an unfortunate tendency to want to  eat several times a day. And a love of fiend  tobacco. Speaking of which. Tense the feet.  Relax. Now her head was beginning to buzz.  She sat up, turned on the light and looked in  the can of tobacco. Enough for three more  cigarettes. Small ones. Better give it up  before she got to relying on butts. She'd done  that the other day. So desperate for a  cigarette before the interview at B.C. Tel that  she'd picked up a butt from an ashtray. Some  affluent character had snuffed out his cigarette before it was half done. She felt terrible  when she did it. What if someone had seen  her. Sneaky, criminal almost. It's times like  these when you need a cigarette or a cup of  coffee, she thought. Times like these. Hands  tense. Relax.  Another scene like the one she'd had with son  John tonight and she'd go bananas. The way  he went on and on, cajoling and whining.  What could she do. If she couldn't pay for  classes, she couldn't and that was that. Aren't  kids supposed to have some reasoning power  by 14. What about those big families of 12  who live on a budget of $132 a week and all  the kids cheerfully helping out. What a  dream. And what the hell good would it do  him to play the trombone anyway.  "But I won't get into the Community Band,"  he had wailed from the landing. The last  straw, that wail. Trying to induce her to  another round in the senseless debate. Debate,  nice term. It was a wailing session, that's all.  On the bus going into town the next day  Michel decided to go over her accounts. Might  as well use the time. Two hours of the day  spent jogging back and forth between home  and the rounds. She took out her little note  pad and dug about in the purse for a pen.  She pulled out a pencil. Broken. The stuff she  had in there. She pulled out a bundle of  papers. Old shopping list, coupons — when  would she ever get organized enough to use  them. And a card from Rebecca. A birthday  card. "I wrote the verse myself." The front  was a pastel water colour, a picture of a river,  trees and a cow? Well some sort of domestic  animals. "I drew that 'cause you liked gram-  pa's farm so much," Rebecca had explained  proudly. And that was her idea of the farm.  Like everything else a bit romantic but what  the hell, she'd learn the truth too soon  anyhow.  Rebecca had come to her at the table that  morning. Her first reaction had been to say  "What now?" Instead she had put her arm  around Rebecca's slim waist and asked her  what she wanted.  Must have taken it when she was in filling out  the application form. Well it worked anyhow.  Where to start. Income — too depressing.  Start at expenditures. Wonder about those  credit companies. Were they all crooked?  They preyed on women — on people like  her. Desperate people. Friday was rent day,  no groceries, the electric bill overdue. She  remembered a woman who used to live next  door, a Mrs. Miller, borrowed $500; it was  real easy so she said at the time. No collateral  even. But it got worse and worse and she had  a breakdown in the end. Never could pay it  off. Of course that was only one case. They  used to phone her. Michel shivered.  "Cold enough for you," a man called cheerfully from across the aisle.  "Sure is," she smiled back.  She started to list the bills owing, neatly,  making all the numbers round and clear.  "Put it in order," she thought. "Looks like  a child's writing."  Maybe I's going crazy, Maybe I fail those  tests. Maybe they're just being polite and  when I leave they make faces and point to  their heads. Forty-five. Worked for years. So  I'm no great typist. Always on time. Hard  worker. Shouldn't have changed jobs last  year. Never would have been laid off at the  old job. And now of course she'd take anything going but nothing was going. Nothing.  "This isn't for you, Mrs. Cook, too basic —  better for a younger woman. Salary too low  to raise a family on."  "Never mind," she had said, smiling, "it's a  start. Better than UIC." Then she wondered if  she'd sounded cheerful enough.  "No,  Mrs.  Cook,  you just wait, something  better   will   come   along.   Something   more  suitable."  "You can't scream at them," she had thought.  "Keep it calm." Six months later, still no job,  still no scream. Calm.  And at UIC last time that kid —  19 years  old,   maybe   20   —   who   knows   they  look  younger all the time.  "Are we really looking for a job," he said.  "We?"   she   thought.   He   had   a job.  Only  me ... I'm looking.  "I want a job," she said. "I want a job very  uC kaS\  o.   tke  ^ov/est "  <V*cC .  "I'm sorry about the ribbons," said the sad,  little voice "but I just wanted them."  "I know, I'm sorry too."  "Mommy, is daddy coming back?"  "I don't think so, dear."  "I guess he isn't much help anyhow. He was  never here anyhow."  "Rebecca, I'll get the ribbons tonight. Don't  worry."  "I don't want to make you sad, mommy, it's  just that all the kids have them."  "I know, Rebecca. Everything is going to be  just fine."  "Are you going to start to work soon?"  "Sure, don't worry. Give us a hug." -  "I'm too big for that," Rebecca said stiffly.  "I'm not, be a pal."  "Okay, for you, mom."  For a moment Michel felt the small frame in  her arms. So innocent. So fragile. She wanted  to squeeze her — to hold her. To bury her  face in that soft hair. Rebecca pulled away.  "Gees, I'm going to^ be late and I want to  meet Janet on the way."  "Run then, don't forget your bathing suit."  "No, see you mom, have a good day." When  she   got   to   the   hall   she   turned   around.  "Sheila," she shrieked. "Mom, Sheila dumped  the flower pot on the floor."  "Figures," Michel had thought.  Ah a pen. "Government of British Columbia."  oeoV1  "*«*JS& *&>£S*"£ ***£  *A tl *T rt*  11°*s  V?&  ■&Y  . * ">c  i^SSsS*  £$-£»%*"•  ^  revu'  ■And at Ulc i  old,   »u,ybe  %' ting 'h<" kid - 19 v  TM^fV°ikA     h aiob°nly  tee*h, had he noticed. thr°ugh  Ht'T^-rt?07P000*e-s  rpossibiUtyofajob.  CI* ?«nbm of the r a- Dear  all  pics   LNS  much." The last part had been through  clenched teeth, had he noticed.  "Well, if you have all the proof you're still  looking you can keep collecting Unemployment Insurance," he said.  "Is there anything," she asked. "Can you  suggest anything."  "Sorry, he said glancing at the clock behind  her "that's not my department but there are  jobs." He adjusted his glasses and smiled  again "You just have to keep looking, the  papers are full of jobs." He lifted a finger as  if to scold. "You have to keep at it, you  know." Her eyes riveted to the finger.  Bony, straight finger. What if she leaned over  and snapped it off. Like a chocolate lady-  finger. Snap. That would be an end of that  patronizing expression on his punk face.  She'd land up in the loony bin afterwards.  Headlines" LADY SNAPS OFF BOYS  FINGER AT UIC. Terrific. Just the thought  made her feel better. You could do something  if you were really desperate. We'll beat you  punks, she thought. The man closed his hand  and smiled his lips again. "See you again,"  glance down "Mrs. Cook."  It was a day like all the others. Rain part of  the afternoon. Did get the ribbons. In Wool-  worths. Supper was more peaceful than most.  And all the time the figures kept grinding over  in her mind. If she hadn't got a job all these  months it would only get harder and harder.  "You haven't worked since," adjust papers,  "since last spring is that correct?"  "Yes, but I've been looking. So far no luck."  "Hm." Nod. Solicitous smile.  That said it all. "Hm." Must be something  wrong with her. They were sympathetic of  course but already wanted her out of the  office.  The phone rang. "It's for me," John cried,  knocking over a chair in an attempt to get to  "Hey," he said "yeh, just a minute." then  "Mommy it's for you."  "Sit down, Sheila" Michel said. Was it the  Eaton's account?  "Yes," she said tentatively into the phone.  "Mrs. Cook?"  "Yes." Or the Bay'  "You applied for a job in the mailroom of  Baker Brothers."  Her     mind     rushed.     Couldn't    remember  applying  at  Baker  Brothers.   It was  so  far  away. Must have.  "Yes."  "Well, we are able to offer you something. A  little less than you suggest as your minimum  but it will increase over the next few years.  The hours are 8:30 to 5."  God  how  could she do it. How could she  survive on less than the minimum she quoted.  "Good," she said, "Good."  "Would Monday be alright, Mrs. Cook."  "Yes, fine."  "Alright   then,   if  you   come   in  tomorrow  about  ten  you  can  fill out all the papers.  Then you can get right to work on Monday."  "Fine. I'll be there."  "And on Monday, bring a smock or something some of the work gets dirty and the  girls like to wear a smock."  "Fine," she said. "Fine." She hung up.  "What was that mom?"  Suddenly she felt dizzy. Her mind was racing.  She had been terrified. She had been so frightened. Was it possible. How would she get  there so early. God, was it possible. The rent,  the food, the money for carfare. After all  that. She hardly saw or heard anything. It was  like a hurricane in her head. No impossible.  She ran up the stairs.  "Mommy, what is it?"  She escaped into the bathroom and slammed  the door. The storm was pounding against  her.  "Mommy, what is it."  The terror, the terror she had felt. And now  was it possible. Monday. She felt a scream  building up inside and she began to shake.  Sobs choked her stomach, suddenly crying  like she would never stop. She crouched on  the floor, leaning her head against the door.  Si* months. How many days. At last. Now it  would be alright.  She would work so hard.  She would get there early. Whatever they did,  whatever happened she would hold onto that  job. Her sobs shook the door.  "Mommy," John wailed from the other side  "mommy are you alright? Please don't cry  mommy. I'm sorry about the lessons.  Mommy."  Then Sheila started the three children from  the other side banging the door. Michel  crawled across to the toilet and took some  paper. Still sniffing she dabbed her face.  "It's alright," she called out. "Mommy is just  being silly. It's alright."  She laid her head on the toilet lid and sighed.  "Hold  on"  she  kept saying to herself, her  hands gripping the lid.  "Hold on." WHAT HAPPENED IN HOUSTON?  Anti-feminist Phyllis Schlafly had predicted  that it would mark "the death of the women's  movement". On the contrary. The National  Women's Conference, held in Houston, Texas,  on the weekend of November 18 was a triumph. The events of that weekend received  lavish press, and everyone — left, right and  centre — admits U.S. feminism showed that  it was energetic, upsurging, diverse and (even"  unified.  Across the border, it makes inspirational  reading. Here is a pastiche of clippings about  the conference, which might convey a sense  of what went on:  MILLIONS WERE REACHED  HOUSTON — Women were to be seen everywhere here November 18-21. They streamed  from the airport, filled the sidewalks, jammed  the hotels. More than 10,000 women came  for the National Women's Conference.  For the first time millions heard and saw on  television women's issues, women's history,  and the women's movement.  Millions saw Black, Hispanic, Native American  and Asian-Pacific women asserting their specific needs and playing a significant role in the  leadership of the women's movement.  Millions watched the women's movement give  full backing to lesbian rights.  A nation-wide audience witnessed the conference go on record against the antiwoman  policies of the very government sponsoring  the event.  The anti-abortion Hyde amendment, recent  defeats in the drive to ratify the Equal Rights  Amendment, Anita Bryant's campaign against  %ay rights, the Bakke lawsuit against affirmative action — all these threats had spurred  women to come to Houston. The expected  confrontation with right-wing forces mobilizing for the conference made even more  feminists eager to come answer their  opponents.  (Shelley Kramer and Diane Wang — The  Militant)  WHO ORGANIZED IT AND WHO CAME . .  The Houston meeting was called part the  government. It was part of a follow-up to'  IWY, and U.S. Congress funded the event  with $5 million. About 2,000 delegates were  elected from women's groups across the U.S.  and there were about 8,000 observers.  "Over 32% of the delegates — elected by over  130,000 women in state and territorial  meetings — were third world and their average  income level was below the national average.  The stage was thus set for a strong push on  minority and working-class demands."  (Marian McDonald, The Guardian)  "... hundreds of delegates wore NOW,  CLUW (Coalition of Labour Union Women)  and AAUW (American Association of University Women) buttons. Leaders and members  of BPW (Business and Professional Women),  the League of Women Voters, the Girl  Scouts . . . . "  (Karen Wellisch, In These Times)  26 POINT PLAN  "Resolutions passed at state and territorial  meetings, plus recommendations contained in  the National Commission's original report,  To Form a More Perfect Union were incorporated in a proposed 'National Plan of  Action' which served as the agenda for the  conference plenary session.  HOUSTON:      OftW77  Sisterhood  lives  The 26 point plan, which reads, as one delegate put it, like 'the familiar laundry list of  feminist issues' included detailed resolutions  on arts and humanities, battered women,  business, child abuse, child care, credit, disabled women, education ..." (Karen  Wellisch) And so on, through the feminist  alphabet.  PRO-PLAN CAUCUS  "The overwhelming majority of delegates  favoured the National Plan of Action and  were organized into a 'pro-plan caucus'. This  caucus was led by Eleanor Smeal, president of  NOW (National Organization of Women),  Gloria Steinem of Ms. magazine and prominent Democrats . . .  The caucus organizers' strategy was to move  through the agenda as quickly as possible in  the name of defeating the right-wing  disruption.  This made it difficult and highly unpopular  for anyone who wanted to strengthen  resolutions, discuss current attacks on  women's rights, or criticize the role of the  Carter administration."  (Kramer and Wang)  THE BIG ISSUES. ERA, REPRODUCTIVE  FREEDOM AND SEXUAL PREFERENCE  // there was one issue at Houston, everyone  agreed it was the ERA. The Plan of Act  statement of ERA says simply that it 'should  be ratified,' and conference delegates and  observers overwhelmingly agreed. Spontaneous pro-ERA floor demonstrations erupted  again and again during debate and speeches  on numerous issues . . .  (Karen Wellisch)  When the conference considered the abortion  question, right-wing delegates pulled out  photographs of aborted fetuses. But there  were far more signs of a crossed-out  coathanger. When the vote passed, again with  an overwhelming margin, the disgruntled right  held a small demonstration. They were  quickly drowned out by thousands chanting  "Choice! Choice! Choice!"  (Marian McDonald)  Mass sentiment. . . forced the pro-plan caucus  to allow discussion and debate on the issue of  lesbian rights.  The lesbian caucus was very large, thanks to  the momentum from this summer's gay rights  protests. When the issue came to the floor,  supporters carried thousands of balloons,  proclaiming, "We are everywhere!"  Eleanor Smeal of NOW, and Betty Friedan,  who has long opposed including lesbian  feminists in the women's movement, urged  all women to back lesbian sisters.  The response to the lesbian rights victory  topped all others. Thousands of ballons went  up; women holding a giant "lesbian rights"  banner shouted in unison: "Thank you,  sisters!"  Women surged out of that session, it seemed  feeling they could take on the world.  (Kramer and Wang)  MINORITY WOMEN  "Perhaps most significant, . . . were the  resolutions supporting the special demands of  poor and third world women. In general,  these were resolutions proposed from the  conference floor and were not part of the  National Plan of Action proposed by conference organizers ....  The 'Minority Women' section was sponsored  by a coalition of minority women's caucus.  They produced a 2 - part substitute motion  that laid out their general situation along with  specific concerns. Initiated by the Black  Women's Caucus, it united Black, Chicana,  Asian-American, Puerto Rican, Native  American and Alaskan Native women. 'This  is a signal,' said a Chicana, 'We can't afford  to be divided. Viva la mujer!'  The resolution, besides decrying the burden  of 'double discrimination', denounced forced  sterilization, deportation of Hispanic mothers,  nonimplementation of affirmative action,  monolingualism and failure to recognize  Indian tribal and treaty rights.  Another significant substitute resolution that  passed was a measure on welfare which  strongly rejects Carter's proposed welfare  reform and denounces workfare. (Workfare is  the plan to force eligible women on welfare  to work or lose their benefits.)"  (Marian McDonald)  WHAT HAPPENED TO THE RIGHT?  The 'pro-life, pro-family coalition', as these  ielegates called themselves, succeeded in  some attempts at parliamentary delay, and  made a substantial amount of noise during  debate on ERA, abortion, child care and  lesbian rights, but generally failed to influence  proceedings in any substantive way.  (Karen Wellisch) HOUSTON  MAKING HERSTORY  The NWC (National Women's Conference)  was linked again and again to the first  national women's rights convention, held in  Seneca Falls, N. Y. in 1848. Many were anxious to draw parallels between the first,  suffragist wave of American feminism and the  current rebirth of women's struggle.  Houston was historic, at the very least as the  first congressionally mandated and publicly  funded national women's conference. With  national attention focussed on them, the  largest and most diverse group of women ever  to meet together on their concerns as women  reached consensus on a broad range of policy  issues.  (Karen Wellisch)  CRITICISMS  concerned mainly the close connections  between the conference organizers and the  government. Rosalynn Carter, Lady Bird  Johnson and Betty Ford, for example, joined  hands on the podium amidst rousing applause.  Some say that this gave the conference  'enormous prestige'; others that it indicates  ruling class concern that the women's  movement be kept within the boundaries  acceptable to monopoly capital.  Another major criticism focuses on the way  pro-plan caucus members controlled the  microphones. Critics point especially to the  abortion debate, where two speakers had two  minutes each to explain the importance of  women exercising our right to choose.  "Women needed more than the conference's  four minutes to answer the right wing showing. " (Kramer and Wang) For example,  immediately after a right wing allegation that  abortion is genocide, the pro-plan caucus  member next at the mike called for the vote.  The lack of substantive debate meant that the  anti-choice point of view went unanswered.  AFTER HOUSTON, WHAT NEXT?  is the question U.S. feminists will now be  taking up.  "The Houston conference showed the broad  support that exists for women's rights. Now  the task is to mobilize that support into a  powerful, independent women's movement."   '  (Kramer and Wang)  "Sisterhood triumphed in Houston, and  women's consciousness and spirit are wonderful indeed. But by themselves they are not  enough. History is made by those who have  power."  (Karen Wellisch)  "The results of the conference, called a 'progressive sweep' by many, went far beyond the  plans of the government-appointed commission that organized the meeting. Aside  from a few smaller discussions, however, there  was no attempt to deal with the question of  women's oppression outside the context of  capitalism. Socialism and class struggle were  unmentioned on the conference floor."  (Marian McDonald)  Ed. note: These quotes were taken from three ■  sources, each of whom we thank: The  Militant (Shelley Kramer and Diane Wang),  The Guardian (Marian McDonald), In These  Times (Karen Wellisch).  As reports from the U.S. feminist press come  in, we will update this commentary.  Gayla Reid  INTCRNATIONAL NCWS  zoi  &CD TOLD   Mf   HE  HATES   &M   BIR.&S.  /--"^    -r«t7 cajsS  I, WAZVS   AMb  SEARTflCX;W£S/  i    a_\   j ORttKe crop  -^ajN-WM^MLO^s. swspors,  //A.      M     IHSROWM TOENAILS,  ■CKftBSRftSS,  'URBAN SU&HT.,,  //-A^RlUfe-APOOUH-mE CQU-AP  ^\d> HURRICANES, bANkRUFF,  £7./£jjEWN& socialism, flat tires  Soui? milk, traffic 3Mis tooth  tfcOVV    DUTCI-U—-^£L/AT>tfEASe,  TeWUIs'EL&OlAi' (HAKfcW/feRS,,,  0£  £  FALLEM A.RCHES, AMTS  AT PICNICS. FUES IK  _, THE BUTT£t?N\IL<,  POST-MA SAL W?\P,  RECEDlMfc HAIPUME!  S0&61 FRENCW FRIES,  T M__  HOMOPHOBIA  Keep on boycotting Florida orange juice!  Anita Bryant has been rehired by the Florida  Citrus Commission for $100,000 a year for  another two years. (from BMR)  INVINCIBLE  An eleven-old-girl successfully fought off two  would-be child molesters, it was reported in  KARATE NEWS. As she was walking home,  a car with two men stopped, and one man  opened his door and grabbed her by the arm.  She flipped him onto his back on the  sidewalk, chopped him on the neck with the  . edge of her hand, and jabbed him in both eyes  with her fingers. The driver jumped out,  screaming, "that's murder!" Neighbors,  alerted by the noise, called the police, and  both men were apprehended. The child is the  daughter of a woman who studied judo and a  man who holds a brown belt in karate. She  was unharmed, except for a slight bruise on  her arm where the man grabbed her.  (from Plexus/Big Mamma Rag)  MARCH 8  This year's international women's day —  March 8 — will be a major event in the local  women's movement. Already, organizing is  under way.  To become involved, contact Diana at VSW,  736 - 3746 or Sarah at Press Gang,  253-2537.  JOANN LITTLE FIGHTS EXTRADITION  New York (LNS) — Joann Little, who  escaped from the Raleigh, North Carolina  prison where she was serving a seven to ten  year sentence for breaking and entering, is  currently fighting extradition back to North  Carolina from New York City. Little was  arrested in New York City on December 7  after a former friend tipped off the police.  A month before her escape last October 15,  Little was turned down for parole by North  Carolina prison officials. The officials claimed  that Little had twice failed to show up at her  release time job. However, Little and her  employer said that she was sick both times.  And her supporters charge that the prison  authorities were deliberately harassing her for  having won acquittal in the killing of a prison  guard who tried to rape her at another North  Carolina jail.  "We are fighting extradition back to North  Carolina because she doesn't have a chance  there," William Kunstler, one of Little's  lawyers told LNS in a conversation after her  arrest. Kunstler also said that proof of the  prison authorities' harassment of Little would  be presented at the extradition hearing.  The hearing will be held at the State Supreme  Court in Brooklyn on January 6. Little is  currently imprisoned at Rikers Island.  UPDATE ON NOREEN WINCHESTER  November's Kinesis carried a report on  Noreen Winchester, a 20 years old Irish  woman serving a seven year sentence in  Armagh Women's Prison in Northern Ireland  for killing her father. In response to requests  from readers, we are printing further details  about her case.  Ms. Winchester had been subjected to sexual  assaults by her father since her mother's death  when she was 13. The oldest of eight children,  Noreen was born on 19 November 1956. Her  father also raped her younger sisters and  threatened to kill her and her four sisters  and three brothers if she told anyone about  it.  One evening in the spring of 1976 after being  raped again by her drunken father, Noreen  and one of her sisters drove a knife into the  father's neck, killing him instantly in a desperate attempt to end their nightmare. Terrified at what they had done, they then dragged  the body, with the help of one of their brothers, to a nearby trench, hoping it would  appear to be a sectarian assassination. But the  police soon found out what had happened,  and Noreen was charged with murder/manslaughter.  At her trial early this year, she was found  guilty of manslaughter and sentenced to  seven years imprisonment. On that occasion  the judge said that "she had been a willing  partner for years" and "she had had plenty  of occasion to tell the police about the incest". This shows a complete kck of understanding of the pressures of the family,  backed up by threats, which make it impossible for a young girl to even contemplate  exposing her father in the case of incestuous  rape.  Moreover, the trial judge instructed reporters  to give only the bare details of the case in the  press. This is a more restrictive ruling than  normal and means that reporters are unwilling  to go into the issue too deeply for fear of  jeopardizing their press privileges.  During the last few years in the USA, rape  victims who have retaliated against their  attackers and have been harshly sentenced at  their trials, have been acquitted by higher  courts following publicity campaigns by feminists. In the case of Noreen Winchester, a  committee has been set up to publicize her  case and to petition for her release. This is  based in the Netherlands and is operating  internationally. International support and  solidarity is requested for Noreen by:  1. writing to Home Secretary Rees, Home  Office, London SW1, England and demand  that she be pardoned and freed.  2. sending a card of support to Noreen Ann  Winchester, Al Wing, Armagh Prison,  Armagh, Northern Ireland.  3. publicizing her case in newspapers,  women's centers, magazines, etc.  Further information may be obtained from  the Noreen Winchester Committee, Gerolaan  52, Zeist, the Netherlands. page 12  TUMBLEHOME - WOMEN ON THE LAND  Tumblehome Co-op (Tumblehome is a boat-  builder's term) on Saltspring Island was  formed three years ago in order to find and  acquire land on which to establish a self-  sufficient, isolated community.  Tumblehome is comprised currently of all  women, although men may become  members. The women consider themselves  country women, and are striving to establish  direct control in the essentials of life — food,  housing, community — by dissociating themselves from the urban environment. In their  eyes, "the modern urban scene is the end  product of a masculine construct involving  the competitive acquisition of status, and as  such ... is totally hostile to the basic needs  of women and children." They assert that a  new way must be found in which women  and men can relate and cooperate, while  maintaining integrity for both sexes.  There has been a high turnover in the group  during its 3-year existence, largely due to  stresses involved in remaining financially  viable as a group while waiting for government approval of their land application, and  to the problems parents with small children  have faced in existing "on the land". The  group sees the current absence of men at  Tumblehome as definitely a secondary  problem, to be dealt with after more urgent  business has been taken care of.  The economic base of Tumblehome is a  fledgling wooden boat building operation.  The women are learning the trade by  building a 26-foot pilot boat in Fulford  Harbour. Since they work on strictly a cash  basis, interruptions in order to earn money  at regular jobs have become part of the  process.  Recently, their land application for 25 acres  of crown land in the Homathko Valley (at  the head of Bute Inlet) was approved. The  cash they receive from the sale of their first  boat will enable them, after due preparation,  to make the move north. Once the  settlement is established, it may be possible  to lease up to 1,000 acres of forest land for  conservation purposes.  WOMANSONG  Womansong is a project within Tumblehome  which was put together by its feminist  members, as a way to retain that vital link  with the women's movement. Through  Womansong, the women intend to offer  other women apprenticeships in the skills of  country living, retreats to their beautiful  Bute land, hiking and climbing trips, and  workshops on women's issues. The first of  these workshops were held this month and  last on Saltspring.  There's work to be done at Tumblehome.  Plans are to move up the Bute this coming  spring. Before that happens, an enormous  quantity of details must be looked after —  tools, supplies, means of transportation and  communication, maintenance and financial  support. Their first apprenticeship program  in country skills is tentatively scheduled for  next summer, and that requires planning in  itself.  Tumblehome is looking for women to join  them — someone to manage Womansong,  someone to coordinate the planned move  north, 3 to 4 people to become boat  building apprentices, people for fundraising  and special projects. They look for the inspiration and support that comes from  contact with sisters.  Support their workshops, donate money if  you can, donate special skills, tools or  supplies. Right now, Tumblehome is  working towards a radio-telephone and a  typewriter. Fortunately, one of their larger  needs, that of a boat to provide access to the  Bute land, has been filled with acquisition of  a 20-foot fibreglass speedboat.  The women of Tumblehome would welcome  your interest. Write them — or better yet,  visit them — on Saltspring. Their mailing  address is WOMANSONG, Fulford Harbour,  B.C. VOS ICO.  SCREAM QUIETLY  SCREAM QUIETLY OR THE NEIGHBORS  WILL HEAR, the book by Erin Pizzey, the  Englishwoman who founded Chiswick, the  world's first refuge for battered women, has  just been published in Canada and the United  States (Ridley Enslow Publishers, Box 301,  Short Hills, N.J. 07078, $7.95).  SCREAM QUIETLY tells the stories of many  battered women and includes unedited letters  from victims. The terror and despair of these  women seem to become a direct experience  of the reader as well.  Here Tia Strachan, co-chair of the BCFW subcommittee on Transition Houses, gives her  response to the book.  All in all, I liked this book. It is easy to read  and articulate.  However, Pizzey's psychological theories  about why men are violent and women risk  beatings are inconsistent and confusing. This  is surprising, given her acute awareness and  insight into the plight of the battered woman  and the roadblocks she faces when she tries to  escape the situation. I wish she had, instead,  pointed out how woman beating is much  more than a personal problem, but a social  disease which has been with us throughout  his and herstory, and which continues to be  perpetuated in our social conditioning so that  it is practically sanctioned by society.  On the other hand, I loved how she astutely  assessed England's social service institutions  (which are not very different from Canada's,  incidently) and how she would like to see  some of them abolished, others changed and  still others expanded. She does this with great  style and I wish she had included in her  critiques Women's Aid, of which, she is the  co-ordinator, and pointed out how it's providing a genuine and practical service. Such  service should be provided by government  agencies.  Anyone who wants, or needs, a finer understanding of the life a battered woman faces  and the "Catch 22" situation she encounters  when she tries to escape that life to build a  more ordered existence, would be well  advised to read this book. page 13  BRITISH PROPERTIES: FAILS TO  CONFRONT CONTRADICTIONS  by Wendy Davis  The audience at City Stage appeared to be  more sophisticated and established than most  small theatres usually attract. They had come  to see British Properties, a new Canadian play  currently premiering in Vancouver, written by  Richard Ouzounian and directed by Robert  Graham.  The topic which looks at the upper-class  WASP segment of Canadian society was the  drawing card, and something that Canadians  have needed to address for a long time. But  the good idea only went that far.  The British Properties is one of the wealthiest residential areas of Vancouver, creeping  over the years higher and higher up the North  Shore mountains that overlook the city and  inlet. This area embodies aloofness, upper-  class and neo-upper-class respectability, and  self-imposed isolation from the rest of the  city. For the people who live there, their lives  are locked into a certain set of circumstances  economically rewarding and greatly oppressive to the rest of society. How do those  people live out the contradictions of their  lives?  With neither honesty nor resolve the  playwright uses slapstick, supposed comedy,  to  evade  reality  to the point of stupidity.  r«       'How little we really own, Tom, when  ^        you consider all there is to own.'  The main feeling of the play is of distance.  Yet it is not so much the distance between  the characters, as a lack of resolve of the  issues being dealt with. The major issues:  those of economic oppression and classism,  are used to seduce and manipulate the  audience. The corporation big-wig, in whose  house the play is set, receives  signed Christmas cards from Trudeau, yet has  only $680 in the bank. The doctor, a young -  upstart, and his wife are earning $40,000 a  year, yet can't make ends meet. These people  are apparently almost impoverished by the  current economic decline. All become lustful  for the stolen money — supposedly out of  desperate need. And to top all of this, the  characters are presented with such increasing  vulnerability that their bigotry looks pathetic  and harmless; nothing to be confronted. The  play produces such a falsely sympathetic  portrayal of this upper-class segment of  society that when they bid for the money the  audience is behind them cheering, along with  all the oppressive attitudes and patterns they  live out.  This play is an example of how a lot of Canadian material is presented: making fun of  and abusing the country as a whole, the individuals and the issues. None are taken  seriously. The problems are absorbed, and can  be bounced off again as another reason to add  blame to American influence. Although it is  true that Canada is oppressed by the United  States, that is not to avoid or muddle over the  situation within Canada itself, which the Quebecois are demanding we address. It is not  enough to look sympathetically at the individuals, or attempt to blame the break-up of  the family. If the problem is really to be cut  through with a mind to change, an objective  view of the real situation must always be  kept in mind.  BEYOND  GOD  THE   FATHER,  by Mary  Daly. Beacon Press (Fitzhenry & Whiteside,  Toronto), 1974.  Reviewed by Mercia Stickney  Reading beyond god the father was like  seeing my thoughts in a familiar mirror. I  have a philosophical bent and am set in  motion by explorations of ontology, transcendence, social dynamics, and I love this  sister who speaks out loud my intuitive  responses to the touted wisdom of the  "great men" that we inherit in our cultural  b aggage. D aly writes:  ...within the context of the prevailing social  climate it has been possible for scholars to  be aware of the most crudely dehumanizing  texts concerning women in the writings of  religious "authorities" and theologians —  from Augustine to Aquinas, to Luther, to  Knox, to Barth — and at the same time to  treat their unverified opinions on far more  imponderable matters with utmost reverence  and respect: That is, the blatant misogynism  of these men has not been the occasion of a  serious credibility gap even for those who ,  have disagreed on this 'point'.  And this is what this book is about: the  limited vision and false consciousness of  patriarchally-named reality.  Daly points out that the reality conceived  and named in patriarchal transcendence is  one of being: God is a Noun. God is the  Father, to whom is then attached a host of  descriptive characteristics in the attempt to  grasp the reality of human transcendence.  Apart from the role God has played in patriarchal religion in justifying and preserving a  social order, God as the conception of ultimate reality has been viewed through the  eyes of men grounded in a patriarchal  society. The inadequacy of this perspective  exploded in the last century with the pronouncement of the death of God. Since  then men, still blind to the sexist nature of  their perceived reality, have struggled to  make acceptable sense of their world.  Because it is their world. Women, says Daly,  have had the power of naming stolen from  us. What is interpreted as women's experience is nothing more than men's view of  that experience. And men in patriarchal  society have been virulent misogynists.  Woman-hating is such an integral part of the  institutions of patriarchal society (and these  are the institutions of today, no matter how  more subtle is their sexism or their neutered  facade) that it is impossible for any man to  perceive a reality that is capable of evolutionary human transcendence. But women  are marginal to those institutions. In patriarchal society, women live on the boundaries. We are, therefore, able to move  beyond God the Father in the continuing  human search for liberating transcendence.  The feminist revolution contains the thrust  towards this liberation: God is a Verb; the  personal is the political and oppression is  real; identity is the existential courage to  continue uncovering our past with intimations of an androgynous future in actions  that are now.  Men have cut human consciousness from any  connection with the processes of the universe. Their reversal of the universal process  of women giving birth to men, to a creation  of woman out of man has left their reality  adrift. Feminists recognize their lie and the  false consciousness it has created. Thus  there is no aspect of patriarchal reality that  can be used by feminists and no understanding derived from members of patriarchal  culture that is not suspect and to be measured for validity against the feminist exper-  By exposing the male bias that permeates  the transcendence of patriarchal mankind,  Daly opens ultimate meaning and reality to  feminist exploration.  Women are not merely 're-thinking' philosophy and theology but are participating in  new creation. The process implies beautiful,  self-actualizing anger, love, and hope.  This is an heroic work.  Portion of a relief from the Tomb of Artemesia in Halicarnassus,  Turkey,  showing Amazon women (right) battling Greek warriors.     One of 16 pages of  illustrations from WHEN GOD WAS A WOMAN by Merlin Stone.  WOMEN IN ANTIQUITY: An Annotated  Bibliography, by Leanna Goodwater. Published by Scarecrow Press, New Jersey,  1975.  Reviewed by Bobbie Ford  This is a good bibliography if you are near a  large library and have the time to look up  some of the 534 references. As Goodwater  states, "the material collected here is intended for use in an academic library. It can  serve as an introduction to the literature for'  college undergraduates in either women's  studies or ancient history classes, or as a  starting point for more advance research by  graduate students and professors".  The first 16 pages of the Introduction were .  great. I was disappointed only in the fact  that I didn't know Women in Antiquity was  a bibliography until I received the book. I  had hoped it would be a book I could use  in teaching. VSW  EVENTS  VANCOUVER STATUS OF WOMEN  2029 West 4th Avenue, Vancouver  IT'S TAX TIME AGAIN  VSW will be organizing do-it-yourself workshop on TAX RETURNS this April. If you  are interested, call us at 736 - 3746.  QUARTERLY MEETING - Our quarterly  meeting will be held at Kits House, 2305  West 7th (at Vine) on Wednesday, January  18 at 7:30pm.  DONATIONS NOW TAX-DEDUCTIBLE!  Vancouver Status of Women has finally  obtained 'Charitable Organization' tax  status. This means your donations are  deductible from your income when computing income tax.  We will be using all donations received to  continue the service and education aspects  of our work. We offer programs to schools  and other organizations on how sexism  pervades all aspects of life. We organize  consciousness-raising groups, assertiveness-  training groups, and self-help advocacy  groups to assist women in self-growth and in  learning to take control of their own lives.  These arc the only free feminist services of  this kind offered in Vancouver.  But, we need money to support this. There  is the rent — salaries — stationery — child  care — postage — telephone — etc. This is  your organization, and we cannot operate  without your support!  Our registration number is 0494658-59-27.  #■  WOMEN'S SELF-ADVOCACY - Learn the  skills you need to take care of your legal  procedures. At VSW, we now hold regular  workshops where women can work together  on their own separations, divorces and  family court matters. Times are Sundays,  1:00-3:00; Mondays & Tuesdays, 7:30-9:30.  Call Mercia or Carol at 736-3746 for more  details.  ASSERTIVENESS TRAINING  and  CONSCIOUSNESS  RAISING  - VSW  runs regular sessions in both. Call Susan at  736-3746 to sign up  KINESIS — If you want to find out how a  newspaper gets put together and distributed,  volunteer your labour to Kinesis. Call Gayla  at 736-3746 afternoons.  REFERENCE   LIBRARY   -  VSW has an  extensive reference library on feminist  topics. If you are a student, and are working  on research in areas related to the women's  movement, drop by the office 9 to 5 weekdays (except Tuesday afternoon).  COMMUNITY   ACTION   -   VSW   is   now  organizing community feminist groups in  Marpole and South Vancouver. If you live  in either area and want to become involved,  call 736-3746.  "7V  CR FACILITATORS SOUGHT  At VSW, we are looking for facilitators for  Consciousness Raising Groups. If you are  interested, give us a call: 736 - 3746 and ask  for Susan.  FULL CIRCLE COFFEEHOUSE  152 East 8th Avenue, Vancouver (874 - 7119)  JANUAR Y CALENDAR  Opens at 8:30 — performance at 9:30  Admission $2.00  WEDNESDA YS (open to women and men) —  January   18:   HOLLY   SMITH   (flute)   and  ARTEMIS MOUNTAIN-EAGLE  —singer/songwriter.  January 25: HELEN POTREBENKO  — author of "Taxi".  FRIDA YS (Women Only) -  January 20: HOLLY SMITH and ARTEMIS  MOUNTAIN-EAGLE (see Jan 18).  January 27: MARY KENDELL - slide/tape  of her recent trip to China; tape of a  discussion with Chinese women's groups.  SPECIAL EVENTS (Women Only) -  1.    Workshop  — "Women Emerging" with  SARA DAVID. 5 day workshop,  Saturday Jan. 21 - Wednesday Jan. 25.  10   a.m.   -   5   p.m.   $75.00   For   more  info,   call   463   -6420 or  874  -  3865.  2. Workshop — "Healing with Touch"  6 Tuesdays starting Jan. 17 at 7:30.  $30.00  3. SUNDA Y NIGHT DROP-INS. Free 8 p.m.  — 12 midnight.  JAM SESSIONS — every second Thursday  (Jan 12). Free. 8:30.  WATCH          FOR          FULL CIRCLE  COFFEEHOUSE          PIONO BENEFIT  FEBRUARY   18   -   featuring FERRON**  CAROL           STREET**SAVAGE and  FOGELQUIST** and others**  Scottish    Auditorium.    $4.00. Watch    for  posters and advance ticket sales.  WOMANVISION  A Feminist Radio Program  January 17: BIMINI'S — an up to date and  in depth report of the strike.  January 24: EILEEN O'LAURA and BELLS  THUNDERCLOUD - women's music  for the travelling Caravan of Rainbow  Women.  January 31: LEON A GOM - a poet from the  Prairies recorded live at the Full Circle  Coffeehouse.  TUESDAYS  AT  6:30  - Vancouver  Co-op  Radio     CFRO 102.7 FM.  WOMEN'S FILMS IN FEBRUARY  During February of 1978, Thursday evenings  at the National Film Board cinemas, 1161 W.  Georgia will be devoted to women's films.  This series has been organised by WOMEN IN  FOCUS, and the films are being distributed  by Pacific Cinematheque Pacifique.  The series will consist of films made by and  about women. They will be films that do not  have a wide or commercial distribution, films  that are often made on extremely limited  budgets.  The topics represent a wide range of women's  interest from satirical comedy to the condition of women in prison. Hopefully, these  films will allow us all the opportunity to see  our situations in the world in a combination  of both political and emotional terms.  Times: 7 p.m. and 9:15 p.m. every Thursday  in February. Admission: $1.50.  Here's the program:  Feb 2 "Woman's Happy Time Commune"  (60 mins); "Fear" (15 mins); "Just  Looking" (6 mins); "Life and Death  of Frida Kahlo" (40 mins).  Feb 9   "Like   a   Rose"   (23   mins);   "Ain't  Nobody's    Business"    (54   mins);  "Voices   from   Within"   (20   mins);  "Karen: Women in Sports (15 mins).  Feb 16 "The Amazing Equal Pay Show" (50  mins); "Take Off" (10 mins); "China  Moon"   (15    mins);    "Maxine"  (13 mins).  Feb 23 "Some American Feminists, New  York 1976" (55 mins); "Emancipation of Women" — Pts 1 and 2;  "Lavender" (13 mins).  PROGRAMS FOR WOMEN IN  WHITE ROCK AND SURREY  WOMEN: GETTING IN TOUCH - Sponsored  by Surrey-White Rock Family Development  Ass'n., 7128 King George Hwy, Surrey, B.C.,  591 - 5 301. A discussion group designed  around the interests of those attending, with  an emphasis on getting to know oneself and  each other better and discovering the resources everyone has for growth and change.  Group babysitting can be arranged for participants upon request. There will be a group  contribution towards the babysitting instead  of a course fee.  For registration for the above courses please  contact Agnes Carlson at 591 - 5301.  ON BEING SINGLE AGAIN - Co-sponsored  with Douglas College, under the leadership of  Isobel Kiborn. Wednesday, January 25th to  March 15th, 1978 from 8 - 10 p.m. at  Douglas College, Surrey Campus, Room 106.  Pre-registration at 588 - 6404. Cost: $22.00. page 15  more EVENTS  & a WARNING  MEDIA COMMITTEE  An ad hoc group of women interested in  improved media coverage is forming a media  committee and invites all interested feminists to the next meeting on JANUARY 26,  7 p.m. at Rm. 4 - 5 Kingsway (Rape Relief  headquarters).  The basic aim of the committee is to establish  more specific and consistent contact with  media representatives.  Tentative objectives include: 1. a media  contact list; 2. a women's movement contact  list; 3. a workshop on how feminists can  effectively deal with press releases, press  contacts and women's issues of interest to  the media; 4. a possible presentation of media  policy to the 1978 BCFW convention; 5. a  consistent monitority of sexist comments in  articles, editorials and advertisements.  We are also forming a contact list of feminists  from throughout the province who are knowledgeable in any or all aspects of women's  issues, e.g. rape, abortion, law, education,  media, childcare.  Please submit names of persons from your  group or centre and the issues of central  concern to them for our contact lists.  Our address is: Ad Hoc Media Committee  c/o BCFW  Box 24687  Station C  Vancouver, B.C.  V5T 4E2  Come to the next meeting!  NORTH SHORE FAMILY SERVICES  ARE PLANNING SEVERAL PROGRAMS  FOR WOMEN  All groups are small, casual and friendly.  For information and registration, call Mary  Bowling, Co-ordinator, Educational Program,  North Shore Family Services, 988 - 7128.  WOMEN EMERGING - WORKSHOP  This workshop is open to women only and  will be held at the Full Circle Coffeehouse,  152 E. 8th Ave., Tel. 874 - 7119. It will run  for five days beginning Saturday Jan. 21st,  from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. The fee is $75. If  you would like more information, please call  Sara at 463 - 6420 or Wendy at 874 - 3865  or sign up at the coffeehouse.  *  MESSAGE FROM RAPE RELIEF  Rape Relief is looking for new/used furniture for their office. They desperately need  a couch, two arm chairs, desks, little tables,  etc.  Anyone who is moving or cleaning out her  attic etc. should keep Rape Relief in mind.  Please! Contact them at their business  number: 872-8212.  -LEARNING OPPORTUNITIES -   FOR WOMEN   UBC Centre for Continuing Education  Programs offered by Daytime Programs (for  information call 228 - 2181, local 273)  DISCOVERY COURSE IN BASIC MATH -  10 sessions. Begins Feb. 2. $40. Instructor  is Thomas O'Shea.  DREAM OF A SHARED LIFE - 6 sessions.  Begins Feb. 14. $30. Instructor is Greta  Mithel.  LOVE AND INDEPENDENCE: A WORKSHOP FOR COUPLES - 6 sessions. Begins  Feb. 13. $80 per couple. Instructors are  Marvin Lazerson and Judith Lazerson.  NUTRITION: SORTING OUT FACTS,  FADS, AND FALLACIES - 8 sessions.Begins  Feb. 21. $35. Instructor is Jean Pietarinen.  ON LONELINESS - 6 sessions . Begins  Feb. 16. $38. Instructors are Clare Buckland  and Ruth Sigal.  WORKSHOP IN TAKING CHARGE OF  YOUR LIFE - 6 sessions. Begins Feb. 13.  $35. Instructor is Jirina Knoblock.  WRITING AND ILLUSTRATING  CHILDREN'S LITERATURE - 1 session.  March 4. $21. Co-ordinator is Jennifer  Crawford.  Programs offered by Women's Resources  Centre (for information call 228 - 2181,  local 218)  BEGINNING AGAIN - 6 sessions. Begins  Feb. 13. $30. Instructors are Ruth Sigal and  Cathie Miller.  DEVELOPING POTENTIAL FOR GROWTH  AND CHANGE: RELATIONSHIPS - 6 sessions. Begins Feb. 14. $40. Instructor is Clare  Buckland.  GO HIRE YOURSELF AN EMPLOYER - 3  sessions. Begins March 6. $15. Instructor is  Maryke Gilmore.  HUSBANDS AND WIVES - 2 sessions.  Begins Feb 25. $80. Instructors are Ruth Sigal  and Ron Slosky.  LEARNING TO RELAX - 6 sessions. Begins  Feb. 14. $20. Instructor is Cynthia Renwick.  MONEY MATTERS - 4 sessions. Begins Feb.  20. $20. Instructor is Jeanne Kaufman.  Programs offered by Women in Management  Programs (information call 228 - 2181, local  240)  ASSERTIVENESS TRAINING FOR WOMEN  — 2 sessions. Begins Feb. 4. $25. Instructor to  be announced.  BEHAVIORS OF SUCCESS - 6 sessions.  Begins Feb. 23. $45. Instructor is Diane  Waterman.  CHANGING JOB - 1 session, February 11.  $30. Instructors are Suzanne Bolton and Jeff  Mooney.  DEVELOPING YOUR LEADERSHIP  STRENGTH - 6 sessions. Begins Feb. 18.  $75. Instructor is Diana Scoretz.  RAPIST AT LARGE  WARNING  TO ALL WOMEN & GIRLS  Issued November 30, 1977  A rapist has been operating in the UBC  district, near 16th and Discovery, and  Musqueam Park.  DESCRIPTION  -white male, 57" to 5*1-1", 150 lbs.  —light reddish-tinged blond hair, long  —mustache  —hippie-type  —denim outfits  —wears either platform shoes or North Star  runners  METHOD OF OPERATION  —attacks women walking past wooded areas  —approaches suddenly behind a woman and  says, "I have a gun pointed at your head,  don't look back", or some similar threat,  —pretending to want money, he forces victims  into bushes  —he wraps victim's clothing around her eyes  and' leads her deep into bushes, where he  sexually assaults her  FURTHER INFORMATION  —A few women claim that they were  approached by him, but ignored his threats  and nothing further happened to them.  —Do not confuse this rapist with other rapists  who are currently reported to be highly  active in the Greater Vancouver streets.  Their methods differ. Another of these  rapists is known to be very dangerous and  has violently assaulted women in their  apartments.  *  THE NEXT B.C.F.W. LOWER MAINLAND  REGIONAL MEETING - Takes place  Thursday, January 19 at 7:30 p.m. at  517 East Broadway.  RIGHTS OF LESBIANS SUB-COMMITTEE  NEWSLETTER PLANNED  When a Rights of Lesbians Sub-Committee  newsletter was first discussed, it was thought  of as being an ideal vehicle for a forum of  political analysis on issues which involve and  concern us as lesbian feminists in B.C. The  newsletter would enable us to communicate  on issues, happenings and non-happenings,  and develop links with each other across the  province. We can never hope to do this without input from lesbians across B.C. We want  and need articles, prose, poetry, graphics,  dates of local meetings, etc. which will reflect  lesbian living in B.C. For women in  the Lower Mainland wanting to become involved with the Sub-Committee, you could  leave a message at the Vancouver Status of  Women at 736-3746.  B.C.F.W. HAS A NEW ADDRESS  B.C.F.W. now has a box number in  Vancouver. It is:  B.C.F.W.  Box 24687  Station C  Vancouver, B.C.  V5T 4E2  WORKERS   ON  THIS  ISSUE:   Janet  Beebe,   Lyn  Buckle,   Portland  Frank,   Gayla  Reid.  Thanks   to   DERA   for  centre-fold  statistics   on   unemployment!