 November 1992      Why women said 'No'  CMPA$2.25 Inside  KINESIS  #301-1720 Grant Street  Vancouver, BC V5L 2Y6  Tel: (604)255-5499  Fax:(604)255-5511  Kinesis welcomes volunteers to work  on all aspects of the paper.  Our next Writer's Meeting is Nov 3 for  the Dec/Jan issue at 7 pm at Kinesis.  All women welcome even if you don't  have experience.  EDITORIAL BOARD  Ria Bluemer, Lissa J. Geller, Agnes  Huang, Fatima Jaffer, Anne Jew, Kelly  O'Brien, Kathleen Oliver, Gladys We  STAFF  Advertising: Birgit Schinke  Circulation and Distribution:  Cat L'Hirondelle, Jennifer Johnstone,  Tory Johnstone, Birgit Schinke  Production Co-ordinator: Anne Jew  Typesetter: Dee Baptiste  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE  Fatima Jaffer, Anne Jew, Diana  Baptiste, Esther, Tien, Carolyn Delheij-  Joyce, Faith Jones, Winnifred Tovey,  Lissa Geller, Gladys We, Cynthia Low,  Elizabeth Kendall, Charmaine Saulnier,  Kathleen Oliver, Carla Maftechuk, Kelly  O'Brien, Lana Hope, Kim Sorenson.  FRONT COVER  Stephanie Morgenstern and Lynne  Adams in Forbidden Love, directed by  Aerlyn Weissman and Lynne Fernie.  Photo courtesy National Film Board.  PRESS DATE  October28, 1992  Kinesis is published ten times a year by  the Vancouver Status of Women. Its  objectives are to be a non-sectarian  feminist voice for women and to work  actively for social change, specifically  combatting sexism, racism.homophobia,  ableism. and imperialism. Views  expressed in Kinesis are those of the  writer and do not necessarily reflect '  VSW policy. All unsigned material is the  responsibility of the Kinesis Editorial  SUBSCRIPTIONS  lndividual:$20 per year (+$1.40 GST)  or what you can afford.  lnstutions/Groups:$45 per year  (+$3.15 GST)  VSW Membership (includes 1 year  Kinesis subscription): $30 per year  (+$1.40 GST)  SUBMISSIONS  Women and girls are welcome to make  submissions. We reserve the right to  edit and submission does not gaurantee  publication. If possible, submissions  should be typed, double spaced and  must be signed and include ah address,  phone number and SASE. Kinesis  does not accept poetry orfiction.Editorial  guidelines are available upon request.  DEADLINES  All submissions must be received in the  month preceding publication.  Note: Jul/Aug and Nov/Dec are double  issues.  Features and reviews: 10th  News: 15th  Letters and Bulletin Board: 18th  Display advertising  (camera ready): 18th  (design required): 16th  Kinesis is produced on an IBM PC using  WordPerfect 5.1, PageMaker 4.0 and an  NEC laser printer. Camera work by The  Peak. Printing by Web Press i  Kinesis is indexed in the Canadian  Women's Periodicals Index, the  Alternative Press Index and is amember  of the Canadian Magazine  PublishersAssociation.  ISSN 0317-9095  Second class mail #6426  News  Post-referendum constitutional coverage 3  by Fatima Jaffer  Family allowance benefits scrapped....:. 4  by Susan Briscoe  Women in Focus out of focus 5  by Agnes Huang  Training dollars and social assistance 5  by Christina Wiens  Features  Native Women's Association of Canada 7  speech by Sharon Mclvor  NWAC update 7  by Kinesis staff writer  The No vote and Quebec 8     No t0 the constitution  speech by Monique Simard  Talkin' 'bout the constitution and social programs 8     |^~"■"■"■■"~"■  by Pam Fleming  Commentary  A country gal's life 9  by Luanne Armstrong  The anti-psychiatry movement and drugs 10  by Elf Stainsby  Palestinian and Jewish women dialogue 11  by Karen Sloan  Centrespread  A look at NAFTA: What does it mean for women? 12  by Ellen Woodsworth, Lynn Bueckert, Denise Nabeau, Heather  Jahrig, Barbara Binns  Maquiladores and NAFTA 12  by Maude Barlow  NAFTA and its affects on women in the Philippines 13  by Cecelia Dioscon  Arts  Heavenly alarming females in review 14  by Archana Gandhi  Some kiss and tell: a review 14  by Kathleen Oliver  Reviewing a tale of forbidden love 15  by Kathleen Oliver  Women in the Shadows in review ..15  by Kerrie Charnley  A few film fest reviews 16  by Celeste Insell  None to Give Away, a review 17  by Heather Gray  Life-Size: a review 18  by Wendy Breen-Needham  Some itsy bitsy teeny weeny book reviews 18  by Kathleen Oliver, Susan Briscoe, Tracey Dietrich, and Gladys  We  Cynthia Flood's My Father Took a Cake to France 19  by Margaret Bricker  Regulars  As Kinesis Goes to Press 2  Inside Kinesis 2  What's News 6  by Erin Mullan and Lissa Geller  Movement Matters 6  by Ria Bleumer  Paging Women 17  by Christine Cosby  Letters 20  Bulletin Board 21  compiled by Lissa Geller  NOVEMBER 1992 As  Kinesis I   n   s   i   d   e  goes  to press \K i n e s  i s  It has to happen as we're going to press-lesbian comedian Kate Clinton is performing  at the Van East Cultural Centre, the country is voting Yes and No in the referendum/the  DisAbled Women's Network and N ACare having a post-referendum party down the road,  ... and we were looking for a story on Sheila Baxter we were supposed to run on page 19.  We never found it, but then someone turned the radio in the production room on and we  heard more people in Quebec, BC, Alberta, Nova Scotia, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and the  Yukon had said No to the Charlottetown constitutional accord than yes...  And the first thing that flashed through our minds was, oh no, what a waste of five-and-  a-half pages of Yes ads in the pre-referendum Saturday editions of most of the dailies in the  country, not to mention over $300 million the feds spent trying to sell the deal to us! Yeah,  the second thought that went through our heads was that Cafe Roma still charges $1 for a  coffee, the globe didn't stop spinning, the economy still hurts, and we still have to make our  deadline. And the rumour that feminists were having closet Blue Jays celebration parties on  Saturday night is still a rumour.  Anyway, so we got on the phone and talked to a few women on post-referendum  scenarios [see our story on page 3]. The story's a little short on feedback from union women-  -they were all in Victoria for the debate on BC's labour laws. We'll have more on that in the  next issue.  Speaking of contracting out, we wonder if Outrigh ts, the national conference on gay and  lesbian rights that took place in October, contracted out the people who showed up at the  conference's opening night reception at the Law Courts in Vancouver. Everyone was in suits  and ties and looked like lawyers. NDP-candidate-for-the-federal-riding-of-Vancouver-  Centre Betty Baxter showed up in ripped jeans, leather jacket and cowboy boots, and still  looked like a lawyer. (She isn't one.)  Speaking of conferences, the CRIAW's Making the Links: Anti-racism and Feminism  conference in Toronto mid-November is attracting a number of Aboriginal and women-of-  colour activists. Nobel Peace Prize winner and Guatemalan activist Rigoberta Menchu is  among key note speakers for the conference. Another highlight will be a panel on feminist  publishing-okay, we think it'll be great because Kinesis has been asked to sit on it and we're  excited. We'll let you know who was there and who said what and...  Another conference coming soon is women and unions on November 15 at the Heritage  Hall on Main Street in Vancouver. It's being put on by SORWUC and AUCE, two feminist  unions that have been around for 20 years.  And we have received a call for support from women in Campbell River out on strike  for a first contract with the multinational corporation K-Mart. Read our centrespread on  NAFTA for more on multinational corporations and the 'wonderful' things they bring in their wake.  There's a reform of BC's health care system under way and our sneak preview story wa s  too sneaky (life at an underfunded feminist newspaper has its moments) to run this month.  We'll have a story on how women fit into the NDP's plans and the NDP fits into women's  plans for a more community based health care system next month.  Maybe we shouldn't be letting you in on what's coming up in our next issue because,  sometimes, we can't deliver. Remember last month's As Kinesis Goes to Press, where we  promised a story on the new immigration bill C-86 and reviews of Deepa Dhanraj's  documentary film, Something Like A War (which incidentally is showing, at La Quena in  November [see Bulletin Board]...well, we goofed. We'll be running these stories and more in  the next exciting issue of Kinesis.  We were about to print up this column when the radio—a relatively cheap, accessible and  entertaining way to find out what's happening outside the production room-told us: "the  Federal Court of Canada has ruled that the Canadian military's policy of barring lesbians and  gays violates the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. The Department of National  Defense says they will remove discriminatory barriers against lesbians and gays."  Well...er...yippee, yahoo.  What we are thrilled about is, it's only 4 am and there's a couple of hours before our  deadline. We're going to make it—unless someone turns that radio on again as Kinesis goes  to press...  ...oh, golly gee darn, stop the presses! We forgot to apologise for the lack of accents on  words throughout this issue-we haven't figured it out on PageMaker yet. Help! Someone.  Anyone.  Writers'  Meeting  November 3  AND  January 5  Guaranteed  to BE FUN  AND  INFORMATIVE  AT THE SAME  TIME  WHAT MORE  CAN YOU ASK  FOR  Volunteer needed  to assemble  Bulletin Board  listings each month  before publication.  We're lots of fun  and we'll be really  nice to you.  Six month obligation  preferred.  Call 255*5499  for more info.  Welcome to the redesigned Kinesis. It's  newer. It's better. And we didn't go all the  wa y, either—there's more to come. We hope  you like what we've done so far. We've  used PageMaker throughout in this issue.  We've changed the font of the body copy to  one that spreads out a little more—it's the  same size as our old type, but it is easier to  read. Our running heads (the strip up top  that identifies News, Arts and Features) are  also new. We'll try out our other version in  the next issue—that'll give you an idea of  what we're looking at, so you'll be able to  comment better on what you like and don't.  We welcome your feedback and are open to  changing some of our changes if enough of  our readers say "yeuch."  Credit for the redesign goes to many  volunteers and, especially, to Anne Jew, our  production coordinator, for taking care of  the details and implementing the spiffy design. Also, the'contest'to redesign the flag/  masthead of Kinesis is still on. Everyone's  a winner. Call Anne Jew at 255-5499 for  more information or mail your design to  Kinesis, 301-1720 Grant Street, Vancouver,  BC, V5L 2Y7.  We're sorry to say goodbye adieu  farewell to Christine Cosby. She's been an  editorial board member for the longest  time and was production coordinator before that. Christine is going back to school  full-time and can't afford the time to help  us plan endless subscription drives and attend ed board meetings. Christine, you are  a wiz at editorial management, not to mention with an exacto- knife, and you'll  be missed tew^ibly—oh yes, and we'll  miss your proof-raeding skills too. Christine  hasn't left us altogether, though. We  have it in writing that she'll still be co  ordinating Paging Women, our fall subscription drive, exchange ads and...Christine, are  you sure you're leaving?  We are also sorry to say goodbye to  Cathy Griffin, super-organizer of Bulletin  Board. After over a year of putting the BB  calender together, Cathy is exhausted. She's  leaving us for a helluva busy schedule that  just got busier. It's been fun, Cathy. Thank  you from the ed board. And if anyone is  interested in taking over the mammoth task  of compiling Bulletin Board, don't listen to  Cathy's stories of sleepless nights and broken pencils at 2 am...call Fatima at 255-5499.  New to the. editorial board are Lissa  Geller and Kathleen Oliver.  Lissa became hooked on Kinesis in  Regina, Saskatchewan, and when she moved  to Vancouver this year, she was drawn to  find out just who those humourless women  whoputKiHesfstogetherreallyare. She found  out, and she sta yed. Welcome aboard, Lissa.  Kathleen is another eastern import who's  made herself indispensable around Kinesis—  her backrubs and muffins have gotten us  through several production weekends, as  well as our recent Kinesis retreat.  Kathleen is also volunteer coordinator  for the Writer's Festival, was active at last  year's Fringe Festandworksat Women in View.  We sometimes wonder when she sleeps.  Quite a few hellos this issue to new writers  on the scene: Susan Briscoe, Karen Sloan,  Elf Stainsby, Margaret Bricker, Heather  Gray, Tracey Dietrich and Wendy  Breen-Needham. Oh yes, we got some  great responses to the new column we  launched last month. "As Kinesis Goes To  Press" passes thegradeand we will continue  using this column to bring you late-breaking  news bites.  ^Thanks  Our thanks to Vancouver Status of Women members who support us year 'round with  memberships and donations. Our appreciation to the following supporters who became  members, renewed their memberships or donated to VSW in October: Carol Anderson ■  Rita Bealy • Rita Chudnovsky • Gillian Creese ■ Frances Darling ■ Joanne Drake - Nancy Duff  ■ Catharine Esson • Marilyn Fuchs • Margaret Fulton • Darby Honeyman • Agnes Huang •  Angela Kelly • Leslie Komori • Barbara Lebrasseur • Celine Leonard • Karen Lewis • Judith  Lynne • Alex Maas • Diane Mercy • Bev Mill • Chris Morrissey • Clare O'Reilly ■  Margaret Ostrowski • Janet Patterson • Chantal Phillips ■ Neil Power • Diane Prince  Marguerite Scandiffio • Carolyn Schettler • Esther Shannon • Shoreline Security Patrol •  Jeanne St. Pierre • Sheilah Thompson • Judith Walker • Peggy Ward ■ Katharine Young  We would also like to express our appreciation to the following donors who have  responded so generously and so quickly to our recent fundraising appeal: Laureen Anderson  • Liz Bennett • Steve Bentley • Marlene Coulthard • Marian Dodds • Deborrah Dunne • Mary  Frey • Jeanette Frost • Margaret Fulton ■ Lynn Giraud • Diane Jacobs • Olive Johnson • Janet  Kellough-Pollock • Angela Kelly • Karen Kilbride • Inger Kronseth • Andrea Lebowitz •  Heather Leighton • Beatrice MacAloney • Patricia Marchak • Fraidie Martz • Valerie Mathews  • Chris McDowell • Patty & Katie Moore • Prudence Moore • Margaret Newton ■ Patricia Pi'ller  • Jerilyn Prior ■ Maya Russell ■ Patricia Russell • Mary Schendlinger • Shelly Schnee •  Esther Shannon ■ Anita Skihar • Margaret Slight ■ Carrie Smith • Penny Thompson • Karen  Unger • Carol Anne Wishart • Pamela Withers • Maria Zazilia Dettwiler  A huge thank you as well to the volunteers who stuffed, sealed and stamped literally  thousandsof envelopes for our fundraising appeal: Olivia Anderson MicheHill-Elizabeth  Kendall Tory Johnstone • Shamsah Mohamed- Chris Rahim Finally, a belated butheartfelt  thank you to the following sponsors and donors who helped make our summer  Volunteer Appreciation Picnic a big success: Que Pasa Mexican Foods • Purdy's Chocolates  • Murchies Tea & Coffee • Uprising Breads Bakery • CRS Food Distributors • Fletchers   .  can you illustrate on demand with barely any notice  and only vague story summaries from the production  co-ordinator?  then you're the one we've been looking for all our  Kinesis lives!  but if you just like to draw give us a call anyway at  255-5499  NOVEMBER 1992 News  Referendum on accord:  What's up next?  as told to Fatima Jaffer  No.  The October 26 referendum lias been an-  sivered and it's businessas usual in thewomen's  movement. Almost. A lot happened on the way to  the No-outcome. Around referendum day,  Kinesis spoke with women active on No and Yes  sides during the referendum. While we made  many efforts to reach representatives from the  organized and grassroots women's movement  [mostly No], the labour movement [mostly Yes]  and the New Democratic Party [Yes], some  voices are missing. The following are responses  to two basic questions: Looking beyond the referendum, what are your thoughts on what comes  next? Has anything positive and/or negative  residtedfrom the referendum process—for example, new allies or a rift among women in the  women's movement, labour organizations and  the NDP?  Sharon Mclvor, Native Women's  Association of Canada (NWAC)  As far as the constitution is concerned,  we're not sure where we're going to go with  it. We have been working on this whole issue  for many years. I'm quite pleased to say I  think we've made some inroads—if and when  the constitution does come up for discussion  again, we may get a better reception when  we try to have some input [into the process].  We feel we should work with the other  Aboriginal organizations on some issues—  maybe not the constitutional issue, because  we have differences that are probably insurmountable. But in the areas of violence and  justice, we believe that we can set up a  working relationship with the other [Aboriginal] organizations.  [As for allies,] it's a dangerous thing to  look at people as allies in a political sphere,  when they are allies only on one issue.  We've had a fairly good relationship  with the National Action Committee on the  Status of Women [NAC] for quite a while.  [Being on the same side] has helped our  relationship because we have the same concerns in certain areas. We seem to be taking  a leadership role in some of the issues.  I have noticed and the feedback we've  received tells us the Canadian public listened to our concerns, and they're concerned  as well, and many of them [voted] No because of it. I'm really pleased about that. We  thought, because we're such a small organization, and because Aboriginal women make  up such a small portion of the population,  we could be forgotten. The Canadian public  has let us know that that's not true. Many of  them are behind us.  Sunera Thobani, SAWAN (South  Asian Women's Action Network)  The referendum clearly shows there's a  total lack of confidence in the government of  this country. It's a complete crisis of confidence. People are saying No to this kind of  undemocratic process, that whatever happens in the future, there is no way that the  government is going to get away with excluding people.  The government's agenda has been completely derailed and [prime minister Brian]  Mulroney should resign. It was a grassroots  revolt against the elite—and that elite includes male leaders of the labour movement  and the NDP.  The women's movement is going to  keep pressing for more democratic representation and processes at every level in  Canadian society. The progressive forces  have been incredibly strengthened by the  No-result and the women's movement is  going to build on that.  And not just the women's movement.  NWAC and Native women have been pushing for democratic representation and it's  been a long historical process—it didn't start  when they came up with this new accord.  This [vote] has been a big victory. Now we'll  get moving. It's strengthened, it's consolidated, it's built alliances which are really  going to make all the social movements  much stronger in the future.  The good thing that came out of the  process was our support for each other.  As for NWAC, there was so much  loaded against it. Even though NAC didn't  have many resources, it still had more than  tion. It's quite clear [the women's movement and the NDP] are going to have to work  together again.  Marg Bezug, Canadian Union of  Postal Workers (CUPW)  The answer to the referendum question  hasn't put us back anywhere nor has it put us  forward. The struggles continue. I think this  accord was the corporate agenda and I'm  really happy Canadians let the elite know  they reject it.  If there's any indication of a rift after the  No-outcome, I would say it's between the  leadership and membership of unions. It  was the leadership of many unions that  recommended a Yes-position. CUPW's de-  NWAC. There was real privilege there but  NAC chose to use their privilege to support  [First Nations women]. I think that's a sign  of the maturity of the white women's political understanding, that they are gaining  some at last. Partly it's a sign of how much  Native women and women of colour working within NAC have been able to push and  bring it to this point where now they're  supporting NWAC.  Within so-called progressive movements—one would have thought that the  leadership of the NDP was progressive—it  completely reveals the limitations of so-  called progressive leadership or groups—  they are not willing to go beyond a certain  level. It showed who was really progressive  and who wasn't.  We have to keep pushing the NDP to  become much more representational, which  is a lesson the NDP has to learn. We need to  make them accountable and we need loud  voices saying that.  Miche Hill, Vancouver Status of  Women  I think women in the women's community and certainly feminists in feminist organizations, will once again be prepared to  roll up our sleeves and get back to work.  Now, whether that's going to happen from  the other [politicians'] side, we'll see.  I'm concerned there may be some resentment from the women's community towards provincial governments, political parties like the NDP, and labour movements,  who quite clearly have left us out in the cold  on this one. It isn't the first time we've been  ignored and marginalized and treated like a  special-interest group when we're 52 percent of the population. It makes me furious.  It's another indication of how much they  still have to learn.  It's going to be difficult to start the  process of working together again. I think  it's going to be crucial for us because we're  coming up to a federal election. If we don't  get it together and this split continues, we're  not going to be able to fight this next elec-  cision to recommend a No-vote is nothing  new-our leadership has often taken positions different from the rest of labour. The  question is how does the leadership regain  the confidence of the membership?  Betty Baxter, NDP candidate for  Vancouver Centre federal riding  One thing we have to do is start addressing the kinds of separations and divisions this whole process has led us to. I don't  think we should forget how much those  divisions feed into a right-wing agenda of  separating people who care about issues  affecting those who have traditionally not  had the power.  Another thing we could do is call for  some action on the whole Aboriginal question very soon. I hope the NDP, as a party,  will take some leadership in getting this  process back on the table, in calling for a  constituent assembly and a process that will  address concerns raised by the progressive  No's-NAC, NWAC and others.  In terms of accountability, yes, we  should be accountable to our communities.  I'm not the only woman who said I'm a  qualified yes. We have to figure out who  represents our communities. Who am I accountable to? Am I accountable to the party,  to women, to the constituents of Vancouver  Centre, to my own community in Kitsilano?  It's all over the place and there were as many  women on the Yes-side as on the No-side.  I had to go by my conscience in the  long run.  I want to be accountable to the women's community in terms of women's issues, in terms of women's strategies in lots  of ways. I know many people who thoroughly disagree with my decision around  the strategy of a Yes-vote. I hope we can  overcome that disagreement around strategy because we have solidarity on some of  the issues.  We can debate whether the NDP was in  error around this strategy. We can debate  whether I'm in error around my strategy in  this one. In some ways it depends on what  the long-range outcome of this is and what  were we able to get.  I think the NDP has to look very closely  at how to mend rifts that have happened as  a result. I would hope what we get is a very  quick call for an election. I hope what we get  out of this process is absolute refusal to  continue with a conservative government  any longer.  Penny Priddy, Minister of Women's  Equality, BC  While the government has found itself  taking a different position from some of our  natural allies—in this case women's groups,  though not all women's groups-I have  worked very hard to ensure discussions stay  at a respectful level.  My vision has always been that there is  still a lot of work to be done. We share many  common values as women, as feminists and  as people who are concerned about moving  towards child care, support for working  people in this province, pay equity, intervention and prevention against violence  against women.  There are some messages that are clear  in this [No-outcome], We need to acknowledge and be respectful of them as we move  on. One is to make sure we talk again about  our common goals and values. Secondly,  there has been a really strong message about  participatory democracy, not only from  women but from others in this country. I  think that message has to be clearly heard by  people who usually begin those initiatives in  government.  People who elect politicians and those  politicians have a responsibility to ensure  that, at the political level, we work towards  a common goal of having broader representation in our elected officials. People in BC  don't always see themselves as physically  represented in the legislature. The participatory democracy message has been very clear.  We need to work really hard to ensure  there are more politicians who are women,  people with disabilities, women of colour,  Aboriginal people, lesbian, gay, so that, when  those things are initiated, there is a different  kind of representation that people can see  and feel more connected to.  I think there is a real reaching out to be  done and there are bridges [between the  women's movement and the NDP], not to  build but to keep intact, as we move forward  in our work.  I will be talking, as I throughout, with  women in the feminist community to best  find out how that can happen. I will be  talking to women in the feminist community  about ways I can take the initiative in ensuring it happens or at least ensuring that it  happens for my part. There are strong bridges  already, and if there is a need to make them  stronger, I will work to do that. There is a  messageofhealingthatneedstogotowomen,  to all of us and I want to take whatever part  I can in making that successful.  Jackie Larkin, National Action  Committee on the Status of Women  (NAC)  The most important thing is for the first  ministers to continue to work out the guarantee for Aboriginal self-government at a  pace acceptable to Aboriginal peoples.  There's a strong majority in this country in  support of thataspect of theaccord and we'll  continue to organize and fight to make that  happen.  See CONSTITUTION page 4 =  NOVEMBER 1992 News  Federal child tax benefits program:  Bye bye  bonus  by Susan Briscoe  In September, while the nation's attention was diverted by the impending  constitutional referendum, the federal  government abolished Canada's oldest universal social program, the family allowance.  Bill C-80 eliminates the family allowance  program along with child taxcreditsand child  income tax deductions, replacing all  three with the child tax benefits program beginning January 1st, 1993.  Welfare and children's rights activists  have strongly condemned the new child ben-  efits program, citing it as a profound  federa 1 government attack on the principle of  universality of social programs.  Anti-poverty advocates also argue the  child benefits program sets up two classes  of poor families in Canada providing  different access to federal support depending  on whether a family is working poor or on  social assistanceorunemploymentinsurance.  According to the federal government,  the new child benefits program targets support to lower income families by tying eligibility for benefits to income. Families with  incomes exceeding $70,981, who under the  previous system received family allowance  but had it taxed back, will get nothing. Those  with incomes of 550,000 will receive about  $70 a month. All lower-income families will  receive the basic benefit of $85 a month for  each child.  But the new program also incorporates a  work-incentive feature in the form of a supplement of up to $500 a year for low-  income families not receiving welfare or unemployment. Such working-poor families  are also eligible for an additional $75 for each  child after the first two. This "baby bonus" is  not available to those on social assistance.  In effect, the working poor are entitled to  bonuses and benefits which will be denied to  those families who need them most:  the unemployed. While the government argues the program is intended to address the  critical problem of child poverty, the people  who will most suffer under the new program  are the children in Canada's poorest families.  As a spokesperson for the Society for  Children's Rights to Adequate Parental Support (SCRAPS) notes, "The new child benefit  scheme doesn't give the children living in  poverty much of a break.  Only 15 percent  of children living in poverty with their mothers will receive the full increase of $42  per month and 63 percent will receive nothing because their parents receive social  assistance payments."  Florence Hackett, a representative of Indian Homemakers, is particularly concerned  for single Na ti ve mothers confronted with the  loss of the family allowance.  Hackett predicts that"... without family  allowance mothers will have to depend on  food banks to feed their children. This bill  is causing hard ship rather than providing for  need."  She adds that the bill works against efforts to keep Native children in Native families, pointing out that it is "...already difficult  for Native mothers to compete with working,  whitefosterfamilies,andBillC-80only serves  to widen that economic and social gap."  End Legislated Poverty (ELP), a BC coalition of 28 low-income advocacy groups, also  urges rejection of the new program.  ELP believes the new child benefits program is "...part of a larger Tory government  strategy to undermineCanada's commitment  to universal social programs. The child benefits program lays the groundwork for a big  business version of a guaranteed annual  income that will guarantee poverty and low  wages."  The coalition is also gravely concerned  that some provinces—which face increasing  welfare costs due to cuts in federal  transfer payments—maycutchildbenefitpay-  ments from social assistance  cheques. ELP also criticizes the federal  government's advertisingcampaign promoting the new program, describing it as "sleazy  and misleading."  Betty McPhee, a worker at the YWCA's  Crabtree Corner da ycare in Vancouver Downtown Eastside, discussed Bill C-80 with  someofthesinglemotherswhouseCrabtree's  services. These women believe the new program stigmatises the poor and fear that it  is yet "...another program that can be easily  slashed in the future."  "They should put more energy into taxing the rich," was one single mother's suggested alternative to the government's  current approach.  Susan Briscoe, a first-time writer for  Kinesis, works for a transition house in the  Vancouver Lower Mainland.  EastsscIe DataGrapIhcs  1460 Commercial Drive  i teI: 255-9559 Fax: 255'5075  OfficE SuppliEs  Now in Stock!  Art SuppliEs  1993 Date Books  Quo Vadis, Dayrunner, Brownline  *p-Ui\iioiN Shop  CaU or Fax ano1 we'U sencj you our MONihly flyER  of qREAT officE supply speci'aIs.  Free NEXT'dAy dElivERy.  Did you know...  Despite the pouring rain about 120 people attended a NAC "NO TO THE DEAL"  rally in front of the Vancouver Art Gallery on Oct 23. After standing on all four  corners surrounding the Gallery for three long hours the damp and drippy No/  non folks assembled for one last anti-constitutional demo. The crowd cheered on  speakers from the South Asian Women's Network (SAWAN), Native Women's  Association of Canada (NWAC), Vancouver Status of Women (VSW), BC Coalition  for People with Disabilities, West Coast Domestic Worker's , and other No  groups. Pictured above is No supporter Loucette Hansen.  CONSTITUTION from page 3  I would look next at recognition for  Quebec. The third element of what NAC  thinks should happen next is a constituent  assembly—the election of delegates from the  three com m unities in Canada: Quebec, Aboriginal peoples, and the rest of Canada.  Many of us were surprised about the  NDP's position, federally and in BC. I think  the party has to be accountable. We continue  to have very real concerns about the fact that  none of the ministers of women's equality  were prepared to debate us directly, and I  believe those ministers are in their positions  because of the women's movement.  I have no doubt there will be lots of  issues around which women from NAC and  the labour movement and the NDP will be  able to unite in the next year or two, including free trade, the upcoming federal election, and campaigns against violence against  women and for daycare, for example.  Launching a national daycare program, is  certainly one of the demands we'll be making on all of the governments—if they're so  convinced there's no danger to new national  social programs, let's have them implement  a national daycare strategy.  The best healer of political wounds is  action around common issues. Maybe we'll  all need a little space, and a little rest for a  while. But throughout, even though there  have been some tensions, the dialogue  among women on the progressive side,  whatever their position has been, has been  quite respectful and so we'll continue to  work together.  I would expect there to be some important soul-searching among all the progressive forces, definitely including the NDP,  about how we can actually democratize the  political process. The amount of anger and  frustration in the rejection of the accord  expresses a very deep disenchantment with  the process, and all the political parties have  to look at that, especially those who believe  in social change.  Libby Davies,  Vancouver city councillor  First of all, I think it's very important for  progressive women who have been divided  over this question to go through a process of  examining what happened and trying to  work out whatever differences there might  be. It's very important we review the impact  of the No vote, what happened, why it was  No.  Beyond that, I think what we need to do  is begin breaking down the issues.  A fundamental flaw of the accord was it  was totally an all-or-nothing proposition.  You only had one choice and that was a huge  mistake. If any of this is to help us to go  forward, it has to be done one issue at a time.  For many women, there were particular  things we agree on, for example, Aboriginal  self-government.  I hope these politicians have learned  they have to start picking up the pieces.  There is no reason why we can't sit down  now and start negotiating with Quebec and  making that a separate issue from the rest of  the constitution—social charter, economic union, division of powers, senate, and on and  on.  I think NAC's role in this has been  incredible. [NAC president] Judy Rebickand  others were absolutely outstanding—they  articulated arguments and presented a very  credible agenda in terms of issues for people  to debate. If it hadn't been for NAC, this  would have been a very right-wing debate.  We saw big labour and mainstream  politics and big business all hang out together. It was ordinary people who said No.  I was originally very opposed to the idea of  a referendum, but as the campaign progressed, Judy Rebick said—and she was  right—it will turn out to be very powerful in  terms of the democratic expression from  people across the country.  Many thanks to Faith ]ones and Lissa  Geller for the fastest and cheeriest transcribing in town.  NOVEMBER 1992 News  Racism and art:  Women out of focus  by Agnes Huang  A controversy over an art show a t one of  Canada's few feminist arts centres has once  again caused divisions among women close  to the organization. The dispute at the  Women In Focus (WIF) Gallery in Vancouver, surrounding an exhibit by Diana Kemble,  has led to the resignation of its gallery committee and two of its board members.  Members of the gallery committee say  they are offended by the images in Kemble's  paintings and masks, and are unanimous in  expressing their concern about cultural appropriation and racism.  This is not the first time WIF has had to  answer to charges of racism. The organization is still reeling from a series of legal  battles with In Visible Colours (IVC), a  woman of colour film and video group. In  June 1991, WIF seized money raised by IVC  through its film festival, and challenged IVC  in court over the ownership of the funds [see  Kinesis June 1991 and February 1992]. At the  time, WIF was severely in debt and on the  brink of shutting down.  Diana Kemble's show, Memory's Body,  which opened October 2, was the first WIF-  curated show since the In Visible Colours  incident was settled. In fact, her show had  been scheduled to open at the WIF gallery  last year just as the WIF-1VC affair was  breaking out. In support of IVC, Kemble  refused to allow her show to be hung.  Kemble's exhibition consists of seven  acrylic paintings and eleven masks. She says  her work is based on her readings of world  literature and her understanding of cultural  groups. "I'm working out of my dreams, my  notions of how the world isv" says Kemble.  Two paintings in particular, representing women of colour, caught the eye of co-  curator, Sur Mehat.  One, called "Frog Child", is a painting  of a brown-skinned woman lying on her  back with a brown-skinned child perched on  her chest. The woman's head and face are  distorted. The child has legs like a frog and  long, long arms which are crossed over the  woman's throat.  The other, "Bone Flower," also depicts  a brown-skinned woman lying on her back  with her legs spread open. A white umbilical cord leads from her white vagina and to  a white flower. She is headless and a white  hand attached to a brown arm is positioned  over the place where her head would be.  In their resignation letter to the board of  WIF dated October 10, the seven members  of the gallery committee stated their objections to the show which they say "offends  the basic commitments to anti-racism, inclusion, and accountability we discussed  and set out as our preliminary mandate."  Mehat, who resigned both as co-curator  and a memberof the gallery committee, says  Kemble's paintings are disturbing because  "she's not just representing our images, she's  also borrowing our mythology—it doesn't  matter what culture she's drawing from.  This fascination with borrowing from other  cultures and mythologies indiscriminately  hurts."  "What gets to me is that she is in a  position where most women of colour will  not be for a long time-representing women  of colour, representing ourselves," says  Mehat.  Kemble, a white woman, does not understand the objections to her paintings. "I  don't think the paintings are disrespectful to  people with other coloured-skin."  There is some confusion over the process which resulted in Kemble's show being  put on the current programming slate.  Members of the now defunct gallery  committee say that board member Corry  Wyngaarden, who was also a member of the  gallery committee when the year's programming was selected, brought forward Diana  Kemble's work. Kemble has told Kinesis she  had given Wyngaarden slides of her show.  Ex-gallery committee member, Shelina  Velji, adds that Wyngaarden told the committee that it was imperative to give Kemble  a show because of all the politics around  IVC. "Corry told us that we owe it to Diana,"  says Velji.  Wyngaarden denies ha ving brought the  work forward, and says she had not seen  Kemble's show or slides. Other gallery committee members say they had not seen the  slides prior to the opening.  Kemble has also confirmed that co-curator Mehat visited her house two weeks  prior to the opening and saw the paintings,  including one of the two Mehat eventually  asked to have removed from the gallery.  Mehat did not raise objections to Kemble's  show until the pieces were being hung.  Jill -Baird, who resigned from both the  gallery committee and the board, says that  the committee made some key assumptions  when they included Kemble's show as part  of the programming slate.  "We assumed that someone else with  WIF had previously seen Diana Kemble's  work since it had been approved for showing last year," says Baird.  A number of factors contributed to the  situation WIF finds itself in: the inexperience  of the gallery committee, time pressure to  meet grant deadlines, lack of procedural  guidance from the board, and a lack of continuity between the gallery committee and  previous committees.  Along with their resignation letter, the  gallery committee members submitted eight  recommendations to the WIF board, including: that the board immediately re-evaluate  the society's goals, objectives, and structure;  acknowledge the racist legacy of WIF; arrange and participate in an anti-racism workshop; and stop all programming and day-today functions of the society that prevent WIF  from addressing all of these issues.  The gallery committee offered to participate in activities that would fulfil the  recommendations, but most of the former  members refuse to sit in the gallery as long as  Memory's Body is showing.  The board met on October 20 and was  presented with the gallery committee's recommendations, but has yet to contact any of  the committee's former members about their  proposals. Another board meeting is scheduled to happen just as Kinesis goes to press.  Board member Lorna Boschman says  the board agrees with all the points brought  up by the gallery committee. But Corry  Wyngaarden dismisses their recommendations as being too general and accusatory.  "They are hard recommendations to  follow up on because there are no substantive directions to follow," says Wyngaarden.  Board members are having problems  agreeing on what direction to take from  here.  The gallery committee hasadmitted that  they made mistakes throughout the selection process, but says that the board must  also take responsibility for the situation WIF  finds itself in.  Gwethalyn Gauvreau attended the October 20 board meeting and said she did not  leave with a feeling that the board was ready  to deal with the controversy. "It is not clear  that the board was willing to acknowledge  their responsibility in the situation," says  Gauvreau. She resigned from the board following the meeting.  The current board of WIF has five active  members: Wyngaarden, Boschman, Kim  Blain, Ali Mcllwaine, and Andrea Fatona,  and two members on leave.  "I can't believe the lack of responsibility  on [the board's] part. I'm very angry," says  Shelina Velji.  "It's okay to make mistakes, but to totally disregard what has happened, to not  take the initiative in looking into the situation, and to place the responsibility solely on  the gallery committee is insulting."  Fa tona, the only woman of colour active  on the WIF board, could not be reached for  comment.  The board feels it has a responsibility to  the artist, Diana Kemble, to keep the gallery  open now that the show is up. They have  decided to try to open the gallery at least on  Saturdays until November 30, when the show  is scheduled to close.  Board members have yet to reach consensus as to how best to deal with this situation. "The show should never have been  hung in the first place," says Ali Mcllwaine,  "but now the question is, "what should be  done?'"  Agnes Huang is a legend in her own time-  BC social services initiative:  Training bucks for single moms  by Christiana Wiens  Single mothers on welfare in BC could  have an easier time accessing educational  and vocational training under a new  provincial initiative.  In early October the Ministry of Social  Services announced new funding of over  $17 million to the job creation and training  budget for people on social assistance.  The new funding brings the total job  creation and training budget to $56.5 million. But anti-poverty groups say that the  additional funds are not being used to address root problems faced by women  on welfare in any meaningful way.  The job creation plan overall is shortsighted, says Pam Fleming of End Legislated Poverty (ELP). "Ifgovernmentwanted  to effectively put money in the hands of the •  poor, the Ministry of Social Services could  have raised both welfare rates and the minimum wage in BC," she says.  The majority of people receiving social  assistance in BC are women, especially, sin  gle mothers. Fleming, who is spokesperson  for ELP, a coalition of 28 anti-poverty groups,  . says that under the initiative, women  will have somewhat better access to  educational or vocational training because  single parents will be allowed to go to school  part-time while they work. "Before it was  either all or nothing. You could work full  time or train full time but not both."  But Fleming cautions that the initiative's  reference to "jobs in forests" really means tree  planting. "So people will go off welfare,  work for six months, go on unemployment  insurance until it runs out, then go back on  welfare. Ineffect,thegovernment has simply  added to the seasonal workforce." And, she  says, since most forestry jobs are outside of  the lower mainland, they are not accessible to  single mothers.  Fleming also notes that the $17 million  in new funding represents a realization on  the government's part that the current  system isn't working.  "The ministry is currently acting as the  ministry of last resort.  It is forced to make  initiativesand economic concessions because  of free trade, the GST, and cuts in both  unemployment benefits and full time jobs,"  she says.  In a press release announcing the new  monies, Social Services Minister Joan  Smallwood says the funds are intended to  help an additional 25,000 people on income  assistance"gaingreaterindependence"dur-  ing economic hard times. "British  Columbians on social assistance want to  work and we're making sure they're given  greater opportunities to find work," says  Smallwood.  Smallwood also notes that the funding  is in response to a 15 percent increase in  ministry caseloads this year, for which  she blames federal government policies.  "We're seeing [this increase] because of  the Mulroney government's misguided fiscal policies and cuts to unemployment  insurance. That's putting more barriers in  front of people on income assistance who  are looking for a way out of the poverty  cycle."  About $10 million of the new funding  will go to the government's "partnership  with communities and private industries"  job- creation program. Included is a wage-  subsidy program that will allow employers  to claim up to $3.50 an hour in subsidy over  and above their required minimum wage  payment.  Another $6 million is for education and  training initiatives that include such things  as helping participants prepare resumes  and develop job-search and interview techniques.  Roughly $1 million is slated for a "bridging to jobs" program, to provide transportation and childcare subsidies, and to pay for  medical and dental coverage for up to one  year after social assistance is ended. Those  receiving handicapped benefits will receive  medical and dental coverage indefinitely.  As well, participants may beentitled to clothing allowances if they have confirmed job  interviews, or are just starting work.  Cliristiana Wiens is a new writer for  •Kinesis and a student at UBC.  NOVEMBER 1992 What's News  By Lissa Geller  Rigoberta  Menchu  Rigoberta Menchu is the Nobel Peace  Prize winner for 1992. It is the first time the  award has been granted to an Indigenous  woman.  Calling her a "vivid symbol of peace  and reconciliation," the Nobel committee  awarded the prize to Menchu for her work  as an activist for the rights of women and  Indigenous people in her native Guatemala,  and for her work with the Campesino Unity  Committee (CUC), a human rights organization founded by peasants in the highlands  of Guatemala.  More recently, Menchu has been very  active in the Campaign of 500 Years of Indigenous and Popular Resistance, commemorating the arrival of Columbus  in North America and the subsequent  oppression and genocide of Indigenous peoples, and celebrating the resistance to that  oppression.  Menchu lives in exile in Mexico, since  the brutal murders of her activist father,  mother and brother at the hands of the Guatemalan army in 1980. She has also actively  criticized the government of Guatemala for  many years for its treatment of women and  Aboriginal people as well as for the violence  of poverty. In an interview in Kinesis in  March 1992, Menchu points out that, "during the last four or five decades in Latin  America, it's always been said that, first, we  have to achieve social, political and  economic power, then comes the women's  struggle. The indigenous movement is challenging this and showing that our struggle  and the class struggle cannot be separated."  Menchu's nomination for the Nobel  Peace Prize was supported in Canada by the  CUC Support Committee. Says Vancouver  activist Sharon Moran, "it is a very important struggle to achieve respect for the human rights of Indigenous and non-Indigenous peoples in the Americas, and we hope  that we can continue working together in  this struggle."  Gov't sidesteps  lesbian rights  As an attempt to avoid the court challenge launched by lesbian activist  Christine Morrisey of Vancouver, the federal department of immigration has granted  Morrisey's partner of 15 years, Bridget Coll,  independent landed immigrant status.  Morrisey challenged the federal government's sponsorship policy on the basis  that it discriminates against lesbian and  gay relationships.Heterosexualsareallowed  to sponsor family members, including  spouses, for immigration, while lesbians and  gays are not, aslesbian relationships have no  legal recognition.  Morrisey's lawyer, Rob Hughes, considers this move by the federal government  as a partial victory. "Christine's suit has  focused national attention on the fact that  lesbians and gays face discrimination in this  area, and the federal government is running  scared."  Morrisey has vowed to continue with  her law suit. "It is because of our attempts  to fight a precedent-setting case that  Bridget has been granted landed immigrant  status...the issue will not go away, because  we will not go away."  Doug Sanders, co-chair with Morrisey  of the Lesbian and Gay Task Force on Immigration, adds that it won't be easy for the  government to sidestep this issue for long.  This month, 12 more lesbian and  gay couples will be filing cases with Immigration to fight for their right to sponsor  same-sex partners for immigration to  Canada.  by Erin Mullan  Ireland abortion  referendum  The government in Ireland has finally  announced its plans for a referendum on  abortion.  The referendum, to be held on December 3, will contain three separate yes-or-no  questions. Voters will be asked whether  they believe Irish women should have the  right to travel abroad for an abortion;  whether women should be given access to  abortion information;andwhetherIreland's  existing anti-abortion legislation should be  modified.  At present, abortion is illegal in both  the South of Ireland and the six counties  of the North. In the South, an anti-  abortion referendum was passed in 1983,  which entrenched in the constitution the  right to life of the fetus as equal to that of  the mother.  Since that time, anti-choice forces in  Ireland, spear-headed by the Society for  the Protection of the Unborn Child (SPUC),  have tried to cut off all access to abortion  information. This means the vast majority  of the thousands of Irish women who  travel to Britain for abortions each year do  so in secrecy, with no information or counselling.  The abortion situation in Ireland gained  worldwide attention last March when the  Dublin High Court banned a suicidal 14-  year-old rape victim from having an abortion in Britain.  Followinga massive public outcry from  both within and outside of Ireland,  the Irish Supreme Court overruled the decision, arguing that the girl's life was threatened, and stating that abortion should be  allowed in certain limited circumstances.  The case forced the Irish government to reexamine the abortion issue, resulting in the  upcoming referendum [see Kinesis, April,  and May, 92].  The outcome of the vote is far from  certain. Irish pro-choice activists warn that  the strength of the anti-abortion movement  in Ireland can never be under-estimated.  Organizations like SPUC have huge assets,  and receive support from the country's  powerful Catholic church.  Pro-choicers in Ireland are unhappy  with the decision to have three questions,  instead of one, in the upcoming referendum.  They are especially concerned with the  wording of one of the questions. It asks  voters to endorse a change in legislation  which would allow an abortion to be performed in Ireland if the woman's life is  at risk.  However, this proposal specifically  rules out, as insufficient grounds for abortion, women who are suicidal. The Irish  government is facing increasing pressure to  change the wording of this question.  Regardless of the outcome of the referendum, Irish women will probably continue  to make that long journey across the water  to Britain, to obtain abortions. But if the  rights to travel and to information were  entrenched in law, then fear and ignorance  would no longer have to be companions on  that journey.  Movement Matters  listings information  Movement Matters is designed to be  a network of news, updates and information of special interest to the women's movement.  Submissions to Movement Matters  should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double spaced and may be  edited for length. Deadline is the 18th  of the month preceding publication.  Getting  there  In-Sight  '92 '  Creating  a shelter  In-Sight '92 organizers in Edmonton encourage women from across Canada to represent this year's theme "The Body of Women"  on video for the Festival of Women's Film &  Video. The recording should be a one minute  home video which reflects a woman's own  experience. The theme should reflect our individual bodies in action, reaction or silence.  These short glimpses of Canadian women's lives will be presented on the big screen  throughout the In-Sight festival among the  other films and videos made by women. As  well, the clips will be compiled on tapes that  will run continuously on monitors in festival  venues. Later, the tapes will be made available for exhibition at other film festivals,  conferences and women's centres across the  country.  fri-Sight '92 will be held November 20-22.  Contact address: In-Sight '92,2nd Floor, 9722-  102 Street, Edmonton, Alberta, T5K 0X4, Tel.:  (403) 448-0703, Fax: (403) 495-6412.  Womenof Colour Collectiveannounces  the publication of "Getting There: Minority  experiences in the Corporate Sector", a study  on the employment experiences of women,  people of colour, Aboriginal people, and  people with disabilities employed in major  corporations in Calgary.  Women of Colour Collective believes  that information dissemination and increased awareness of issues affecting women  and minorities in the employment arena a re  an essential part of the struggle towards  workplace equality. To order contact: WCC-  EE PROJECT, 319,223-12 Avenue SW, Calgary, Alberta, T2R OG9, Tel.: (403) 281-  7460.  Bad  Atitude  Bad Attitude, a new radical women's  newspaper from Britain is expected to come  out in December 1992. Bad Attitude aims to  concentrate on international news of interest  to women. They need individual women  and progressive/revolutionary organizations to send articles, news clippings and  information about happenings in their area.  The paper will cover issues dealing with  reproductive rights, labour struggles, violence against women, religious fundamentalism and imperialism. Bad Attitude hopes  to build greater links between women  around the world. Address: Bad Attitude,  121 Railton Road, London SE24 OLR, Brit-  The first international conference on  Judaism, Feminism and Psychology "Creating a Shelter in the Wilderness" will be held in  Seattle from October 29 - November 1.  Over50workshops,discussionsandpan-  elswilladdressthepsychological significance  of being Jewish and female. Topics include:  Jewish identity development, ritual as heal-  ingassimilation,reclaimingourJewishmoth-  ers body image, Jewish lesbians, female Holocaust survivors, Sephardic culture African-  American/Jewish relations, and more.  The goals of the conference, sponsored  by the Jewish Women's Caucus of the Asso-  ciation for Women in Psychology, are to help  integrate the identitiesof Jewish, feministand  mental health professionals; to raise awareness of Jewish issues among mental health  practitioners, academics and community  workers and to examine the reality of Jewish  women living in a predominantly male-  centered non-Jewish world.  Women and men from all religious  and ethnic backgrounds and all sexual  orientations are welcome. •  Accommodations for special needs as  well as a sliding scale and financial aid are  available.  For information and /or donations contact: Kayla Weiner, Conference Coordinator,  600FirstAvenue,Suite530,Seattle,WA98104-  2221, U.S.A., Tel: (206) 343-0828.   Starting January 1993 CCEC Credit Union will be  Open six days a week!  GCEC offers: • Personal & business loans & lines of credit  • Lower interest on loans to co-ops & societies  • Term deposits       • RRSPs  • Mortgages       • ATM cards  A jull-servtce • LoW service charges &  credit union dedicated to many more services  community economic development  NOVEMBER 1992 Feature  Native Women's Association of Canada:  Mclvor lays it out  by Sharon Mclvor   The following was written for presentation  at a panel on Women and the Constitution in  Vancouver on October 12. Sharon Mclvor is a  member of the executive of the Native Women's  Association of Canada (NWAC) and a member  of the Lower Nicola Indian Band in Merritt, BC.  Mclvor is also a lawyer in the province ofBC, a  member of the BCNative Women's Society, and  holds executive positions with the BC Native  Courtworkers' Association, BC Legal Services  Society and the Legal Aid Society of Merritt.  On behalf of the Native Women's Association of Canada [NWAC], I want to thank  you for giving me this opportunity to ex:  press our concerns with the Charlottetown  package [the 1992 constitutional accord].  I want to address the representation  issue first.  The Native Women's Association of  Canada is the bona-fide organization representing Native women's voices in Canada.  It is not for Chief Wendy Grant or other  women chiefs to say they speak for Aboriginal women. NWAC is a democratic organization representing the voices of 120,000  Native women. These women have made  individual choices to belong to one of the 13  provincial and territorial organizations  which make up NWAC.  It is true we do not have unanimity  within our organization on the constitutional  issues. Nevertheless, in a majority decision  vote, NWAC decided to form the Aboriginal  Women's No Committee, and to proceed  with our court case against Canada for discrimination against Native women in the  constitutional process.  I want to say the constitutional renewal  process has been flawed from the very beginning because Native women were denied their right to freedom of expression  guaranteed to all Canadians under the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. Sincejunel991,  NWAC has made direct pleas to all parties to  allow Native women to speak for themselves in this process.  When we were denied this opportunity, we hired one of the top female litigators  in Canada—Mary Eberts of Toronto—and  took our case to the Federal Court Trial  Division. This was March 16,1992. We lost  our bid in a record three days! NWAC  appealed almost immediately to the Federal  Court of Appeal, which ruled in our favour.  The Court declared unanimously that  NWAC's and Native women's freedom of  political expression rights had been infringed  upon in the current constitutional process  [See Kinesis, April, May, and June, 1992].  Sharon Mclvor  On August 21-22,1992, the federal government ignored this declaration of the Federal Court of Appeal and held a Multilateral  Ministerial Meeting on theConstitution without the involvement of Native women. The  NWAC was also omitted from the historic  meeting on the constitution held in  Charlottetown on August 27 and 28, 1992  [See Kinesis, Sept, 1992].  As a consequence of this omission,  NWAC [was] again in the Federal Court  Trial Division on October 13 and 14,1992 in  Ottawa. Our counsel, Mary Eberts, [argued]  that the Charlottetown Accord is illegal [and  therefore] null and void, because Canada  did not respect the Federal Court [and] grant  us an injunction to stop the referendum of  October 26th, which is based on an illegal  document [see story this page].  Asa back-up strategy, the NWAC Board  of Directors has put together the Aboriginal  Women's No Committee to encourage Canadians to vote No in the national referendum [on] October 26,1992.  NWAC is opposed to changes to sections 3 to 5 of the Canadian Charter of Rights  and Freedoms because they are designed to  deprive all Aboriginal peoples of their right  to exercise democratic rights under Aboriginal self-government. No Native will have  the right to vote under a self-government  The Charlottetown  accord does nothing to  add to Native self-  sufficiency— it simply  means Aboriginal  peoples can administer  their own poverty.  regime; Natives will retain the right to vote  for the legislatures and parliament.  NWAC is opposed to changes to section  6 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and  Freedoms. Changes proposed by [Grand  Chiefof the Assembly of First Nations (AFN),  Ovide Mercredi and [Native Council of  Canada president] Ron George will deny  First Nations women the opportunity to return to theircommunitiesif theymarrynon-  native men.  Native women and Canadians thought  sex discrimination in law had ended against  Native women with Bill C-31. .[This act],  passed in June 1985, repealed sex-discriminatory sections of the Indian Act and restored status and band membership to  women, who lost it for intermarrying outside their Band.  In fact, sex discrimination did not end.  Of 70,000 Bil 1 C-31 Indians, only two percent  were allowed to return to their home communities. One Band, Saddle Lake in northern Alberta, wrote the Bill C-31 women,  informing them that the Band did not recognize the legislation and refused to allow the  treaty women to return home.  Another Alberta treaty band is in court  trying to overturn [this legislation] as unconstitutional because it offends the inherent right to self government. Bands, such as  Sawridge, and leaders like Senator Walter  Twinn, say their inherent right to determine  band membership means they may discriminate against women on the basis of sex. Such  views are opposed by NWAC The changes  It ain't over till it's over  to section 6 are supported by leaders like  these NWACopposesamendmentstosection6.  NWAC opposes amendments to the  Canada Clause put forward by the AFN as  long as there is no amendment specifically  protecting Native women's sexual equality  rights. To endorsetheCanadaClauseamend-  ment would mean subjecting Native women's sexual equality rights to custom, culture  and tradition in the courts. We have seen, in  the courts today, a tendency by our men to  use "tradition" as justification for crimes  committed against women and children.  Native men have used "cultural beliefs  and traditions" to argue in court that they  have the right to commit incest free of punishment, or to sexually abuse Native children. Native males accused of crimes on  Vancouver Island have used "tradition and  spiritual practices" to avoid incarceration  for violent rapes of girls, boys, and women.  Without checks and balances, and [a guarantee of] a stronger role for Native women in  criminal justice administration, NWAC cannot support the Canada Clause amendment.  NWAC is opposed to the imposition of  peace, order and good government to aboriginal laws [Amendment number 47 in the  Charlottetown accord]. We remember all  too well the calling of 4,000 Canadian troops  against the Mohawks in the Summer of 1990.  Federal and provincial ministers preached  to us about the "rule of law". Yet, Canada  breached the rule of law by failing to respect  the court declaration of August 20, 1992  [recognizing NWAC's exclusion from constitutional   talks].  Canada breached the rule by calling in  the Armed Forces when there was clearly no  national emergency—Parliament was not  recalled, no law was drafted, and yet, the  civil and human rights of Kanaesatake and  Kahnawake residents were breached daily  by the Surete du Quebec, the RCMP and the  Canadian Armed Forces.  In conclusion, I want to say that there  are many flaws with the constitutional deal  which cameoutof Charlottetown, including  discrimination against Native women [in  the process]. The self-government arrangement adds nothing to what we have today.  The self-government negotiation process put  in place by the Charlottetown accord was  there already.  TheCharlottetown accord does not guarantee Native self-government—it simply  puts in place a process for negotiation. The  Charlottetown accord does nothing to add  to Native self-sufficiency—it simply means  Aboriginal peoples can administer their own  poverty.  by Kinesis staff writer  The Native Women's Association of Canada (NWAC) will be in court three weeks after  the referendum to demand a stop to all further constitutional discussions until the voices  of Aboriginal women are adequately represented at the table.  On November 13, a federal court of appeal will hear NWAC's demandfor an end to any  further constitutional discussions that excludeorganizations tha t represent Native women,  such as the NWAC, which represents 120,000 women nationally.  The NWAC is also demanding $5 million in government funding, to enable them to  participate equally in future talks. This would alsoput them on par with the four male-  dominated Native organizations,that participated in negotiations for the Charlottetown  accord.  Winning this case "may open the door to a whole new realm of some kind of  participatory democracy," says Sharon Mclvor of NWAC. "We're looking for that, not only  for ourselves, but also for other women, non-Aboriginal women, and other groups who are  totally cut out because they don't have the numbers and they don't have the power."  NWAC's decision to appeal follows a federal court decision on October 16, rejecting  NWAC's bid for an injunction to stop the referendum. NWAC's counsel Mary Eberts  argued that because the NWAC was improperly excluded from the process leading up to  the Charlottetown accord, the referendum was based on an illegal document.  Justice Barry Strayer ruled NWAC's case was "an abuse of process" because it is not  the function of judges to make up an "invitation list for a constitutional conference," nor do  the courts have the right to tell the federal and provincial governments who they should  invite.  Says NWAC spokesperson Gail Stacy-Moore, "does the rule of law apply only to the  citizens of this country or does it apply to the politicians as well? That's the question."  In another case, to be heard by the Supreme Court of Canada, the Native Women's  Association of Canada (NWAC) is appealing a federal appeal court decision in August that  found the federal government had violated Aboriginal women's and NWAC's rights by  refusing them a seat at the table and funding equal to four other Native  organizations.  However, the court stopped short of ordering the government fund the NWAC, but  said that, if talks were held with Aboriginal groups, the NWAC should be included. Later  that month, when talks did resume on the question of Aboriginal self government, the  government defied the court ruling by refusing to include NWAC.  The Supreme Court has not yet said when it will hear this case.  NOVEMBER 1992 Feature  Monique Simard:  On the no in Quebec  by Monique Simard  Over 55 percent of people in Quebec voted  No to the Charlottetown constitutional accord  on October26. The following excerpts of a speech  by Monique Simard on October 12 examinehow,  in Quebec, a Canada-wide rejection of the accord  may be looked at as a progressive move. Simard  is a vice-president of National Action Committee for the Status of Women (NAC), and was a  vice president of the CSN, the largest labour  federation in Quebec. She is now the host of a  radio talk show in Montreal.  I think taking the initiative to speak to  each other from different parts of the country is an example of the healthy debate the  women's movement has been initiating in  this country.  I believe it takes much more courage for  women outside of Quebec to say No to the  Charlottetown accord than the ones that are  in Quebec, and I want to salute NAC [for  taking the No position] because I know it's  not easy to be associated every day with  [Reform Party leader] Preston Manning and  other people like that, or to be cut off from  what are our traditional allies—our labour  movements, for example. I don't think this  really changes the content and the integrity  of our position [on the constitutional agreement].  I want to say I feel very much at ease  about voting No. Nobody in Quebec, especially progressive people, thinks you're voting against Quebec. That is the main message I would like you to get from my presence here.  The 'Yesses' are [Quebec premier]  Bourassa, essentially, and big business, and  Guy LaFleur, the hockey player. This is only  a small exaggeration. But there aren't any  progressive groups, credible intellectuals or  artists [on the Yes side]. The Yesses are essentially traditional business, big business,  the Liberal Party, the head-the members of  parliament—of the Equality Party, which is a  small anglophone party, and yes, Alliance  Quebec, which is the pressure group for  minority language rights in Quebec.  The No-side is composed of the  Parti Quebecois, Le Bloc Quebecois— all  sovereignistsare against the deal. People say  sovereignists will be against all deals. That's  not true—they favoured the Meech Lake  accord [in 1987]. And the No-camp also has  the federalists, the Liberals, which I think is  important for us to know, politically.  The 'Yesses'are  Bourassa... big  business and Guy  Lafleur, the hockey  player.  Furthermore and with no exceptions,  all labour organizations, allpopular groups,  anti-poverty groups, and churchgroups have  taken positions on the No-side, as well as all  women's groups, artists and intellectuals.  So if you look at the Yesses and the Nos,  the progressive people feel very at ease with  a No-vote by [women outside Quebec].  You're voting on the same side as progressive people in Quebec. Sodon't let politicians tell you a No-vote is No to Quebec. The  Native Women's Association of Canada  (NWAC) in Quebec is a strong No and very  high-profile No.  What I think is important for us in Quebec is that you [in English Canada] understand that the process by which this deal was  negotiated was awful. I agree with [former  prime minister] Pierre Trudeau when he  says it's a mess. It is a mess, and for Quebec  especially. Not only do you not find in there  the historical demands of Quebec, but you  find demands Quebec has never made-es-  pecially that 25 percent guarantee of seats in  parliament for Quebec. Nobody had ever  heard of that in Quebec before this.  It came from [Quebec premier]  Bourassa—he was tired one night, you know,  trying to deal with the 'senate thing', and  well, he says, what can I exchange with  [Ontario premier] Bob Rae-how about something which has never been a demand in  Quebec? [A guarantee of 25 percent of the  seats in parliament and the Senate issue]  bothers a lot of progressive people in Quebec because it changes the principle of equitable representation and it's an unhealthy  relationship with the rest of Canada. That's  the proof of the mess, I think.  The pressure is going to be there for  progressive people to say this No-vote is  awful. You'll get the economic threats that  this country is going to fall apart, that you're  voting against Quebec.  No, it's not true. Quebecers are going to  vote against it and the best thing that can  happen is more than just Quebecers vote No.  If there is a No elsewhere in Canada, it'll be  a way to change the dynamics of these constitutional discussions.  A constitution is not a labour contract—  you don't change it every year or every  second year. That's what they are trying to  say, and it's not true. A constitution is here to  stay and that is why it's so important for  women, for Quebecers in Canada, or for a  sovereign Quebec. It is an important thing,  and so when we do it, we have to do it right.  Thanks to KeUy O'Brien for hours of  transcribing—in between sneezes.  Charlottetoiyp accord:  A poor deal for  the poor  by Pam Fleming  In September, the Royal Bank and the  Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce told  business leaders "A yes vote in the October  26 referendum could lay the foundation for  a competitive economy."  The Business Council on National Issues, the largest corporate lobby group in  Canada, also wants this deal. These are the  rich and powerful men who are making  record profits while average Canadians are  experiencing record job losses and poverty.  These are the people who lobbied for Free  Trade, the GST and the end to social programs.  Why do they want the Charlottetown  accord? Here is almost everything I know  about the proposed deal and what it would  have done to the future of Canada's social  programs and low income people:  Poor people had the least rights in this  agreement. Poor people aren't even in the  Canada Clause. Their rights are mixed in  with an unenforceable social and economic  union, the framework for which will be  established by the first ministers.  This means we are. being asked to vote Yes  on a framework that does not even exist yet.  That's like buying a house before it's been  built.  This deal gives power to premiers to  decide important issues behind closed doors  without public debate. The deal would give  them the right to establish guidelines for  social programs, reasonable standard of.living and full employment. Do we trust these  guys to outline these things?  <Y**4Mufcto-  ^^PnaERSPECTlVES   j  ^gr «—^.w^.h^..^TM  l|p^      jBM&                 ^§P  TIE DIALOGUE CP THE COMGN WOMAN  1716 Charles Street Vancouver BC V5L2T5 & («04) 253-3142  Po.try      Utter.       E,»y.  smoke free cappuccino bar    dr   light vegetarian meat  Crloons,   tr.PM«.   hu»ur  (^ art&crafb  <£ gifts & music A   pool tabic  Ts 4^5-«0<"ln.t"1»"so"S  Open Tuesday ■* Sunday  S-pl. co"   " $8-°°  Womyn's Open Stage       0.  November 20th'92        W  Book your Special Event with Us  Box 2047,   Squ*ml.h,   BC On.  VON 3G0  What is a "reasonable" standard of living? We do not have "reasonable" welfare  rates now, with welfare 40 to 60 percent of  the poverty line. Minimum wage is well  below the poverty line and should be $9.05  to be 122 percent of the poverty line. Will  "reasonable" be lower or the lowest common denominator? How will they define  full employment? We have full employment  now, if you include women working in their  homes for no wages and unpaid workers  doing volunteer work. We need more guarantees of a standard of living that is above  the poverty line, and full employment at  decent wages. There was no mention of  either of these factors in the deal.  There is no guarantee of future federal  spending. Provinces will be able to opt out  of national programs for "compensation"  and create their own "compatible" programs.  What is federal money?  Cash for one year's program? What  kinds of programs will we get without federal money? Will provinces contract welfare  programs to the lowest bidder? Will our  health care system be further eroded? Will  education become totally privatized and affordable only to the rich? We are supposed  to trust the premiers and the Conservative  government to decide all this for us.  This deal will give exclusive jurisdiction to the provinces for housing. What will  happen to theCanadianMortgageand Housing Corporation? Will social housing be  privatised and sold off like it has been in  Britain? Will BC become the homeless capital of Canada?  The deal not only erodes present programs but creates barriers to building national programs. Even if we ever manage to  get a progressive federal government, this  deal will make it impossible to implement  any national programs, like daycare. This  deal will increase poverty. It will make  provinces compete for programs and create  gaping holes in the social safety net. It will  create welfare poor and welfare poorer provinces.  The new deal will entrench the "free  movement of persons, goods, services and  capital" between provinces and reduce internal trade tariffs and barriers. Present  trade tariffs protect local industry and production. This deal will make Canada one big  free trade zone, where workers and communities will have even less control over corporations than we do now. This internal free  trade agenda will fit in with the Free Trade  Agreement, NAFTA and GATT, all of which  worsen conditions for citizens and increase  profits for multi-nationals.  The deal is a piece of the corporate  agenda that will work with other legislation  thatattacks Canada's social safety net. Other  pieces of the corporate-agenda pie are: free  trade; federal bills like Bill C-69, the axe to  national funding of health care; and Bill C-  80, which is the end of universal family  allowances; cutbacks to UI; and privatisation of national companies.  Saying no to this deal meant standing  against the corporate agenda. A lot of people with privilege supported this deal. Most  low income and progressive people did not.  These complex issues cannot be answered  simply with a Yes or No, but the No-vote  was the only way to stop the deal. A No vote  means a crisis for the Tories and makes them  unelectable.   A No vote will give us more  options to look at ways to protect the rights  and lives of low income people and workers  in the constitution of Canada.  Pam Fleming is an organizer with ELP in  Vancouver.  ELP is a coalition of 28 anti-  poverty groups in BC.  NOVEMBER 1992 Commentary  Rural living:  Life in the country lane  by Luanne Armstrong   I am a rural woman. Most of my life,  I've been a farmer. I am also a lesbian, a  feminist, a writer, a teacher, and a community organizer.  The most essential tool for my survival  is my car. I spend a lot of my scarce money  on it and a lot of my time in it. Many of the  women I deeply love and care about live  somewhere else—in a city or close to one. I  spend time in the winter on lousy roads,  driving to see them, driving to go to conferences, to workshops, to meetings. I work  hard to learn what I need to know. Just  getting and keeping my. supply lines in  place—books, magazines, letters, information—is a major undertaking. There is no  women's centre near me to find them, no  feminist books in the tiny local bookstore, no  feminist women in my community.  I became a feminist when and because I  was poor, on welfare and a single parent,  recovering from an abusive alcoholic marriage. I lived on the farm I was born on, ina  trailer, where the water froze every winter  and thawed again in the spring. The women  living inour small rural area formed a women's group. We thought it was an original  idea. We needed each other. Once a month,  we packed our kids, food and diapers and  got together at someone's house.  Invariably the 'meeting' would go on  most of the day—in between dressing_and  undressing and feeding the kids and ourselves. We read and told each other what  we'd read, and changed our lives, and then  left.  We discovered 'the environment' and  formed an environmental group and a peace  group. We fought off BC Hydro and organized peace rallies and went on reading and  talking and growing gardens and raising  kids. We survived, like women everywhere:  we survived the government and welfare  and lousy jobs and always-breaking-down  cars and got on with our lives.  I recently completed a women's community needs assessment in another rural  community, not my own. The numerous  women who wrote their comments on  the surveys I handed out wrote clearly and  repeatedly about what they needed—"support" and "information, "were the words  they used again and again.  The women did not say they felt isolated. Most of them have family, friends,  and live in a place with strong sense of  We survived like women everywhere: we survived  the government and welfare and lousy jobs and  always breaking down cars...  community. But, chances are, no one but  they realize the burden they're carrying—  going to school, working, trying to keep a  relationship together, and driving a million  miles to make sure the kids get everything.  In this particular community, there is  no daycare, almost no available rental housing, high unemployment, no safe house, and  high levels of battering and sexual assault.  But it's also beautiful, clean, small and  friendly. It looks nice. From the outside.  When women of the community need services and assistance, they go elsewhere—to  larger communitiesatleasta two-hour round  trip away.  Cii*g DawjlJ^ Foods  r ' ■ f -'--". W'i  f 1  [The B.C. Organic Harvest is in!I  naMbSsisVi^sVBsss v , i ^^mmmmmmsaammmmJi  Best Organic Product b in Vancouver!  Organic Bulk/  & Soaps!  Organic/Juice & -Coffee bar.  Orgariic Vegan' Restaurant!  Open-pdflinatec! Fall Seeds are in!  Hi'f--k '"LL'LL X? :-7  Live Music \) & Friday nights.  Kids' Play Area  We work with  consensus.  tel. 255-2326  I move away from my community to  find work, and then I go back because I'm  homesick. A few times I've tried to describe  the difficulties I'm faced with living here.  One woman said in an exasperated response  to my complaints, "Well, why on earth do  you live there then?"  Well, yes. I do ask myself that question.  I live here because it's my home. I live  here because I feel a part of it. I live here  because what I do, and what I bring here, is  important, to me and my community. Experience working on various environmental  issues has taught me that protecting the  environment is not an intellectual exercise.  It's gut level, heart wrenching work. I got  into it when BC Hydro was threatening to  destroy the lake where I live.  I have stayed in it because I believe  people who live in a bioregion are shareholders in its well being. It is people who are  still learning to be a part of the land they  walk on everyday, who have their souls  invested in the well being of that land and  who do what is necessary to protect and  sustain it. I have some gifts—the ability to  write, speak and organize—that I can share  and use in the protection of my area.  The interior of BC is a colonized country. The resources, water, trees and minerals, go elsewhere. Most employment is resource-based. Those of us who live in a  particular region have little or no control  over the resources of that region. There are  so many of us, women like me, who go back  and forth—for information, for workshops,  to try to stay connected, to stay in touch. We  usually don't say we're rural. We are poor.  We have a hard time getting to the city. I talk  about it, but no one knows how to respond.  It's my choice, after all, to live there.  I end up feeling somehow, quaint and  foolish, when I try to talk about it. After all,  farmers are stereotyped rednecks, aren't  they? When I was a child, I sold fruit to the  tourists. I was picturesque, got my picture  taken and my head patted. I still hate tourists.  When I go home, taking information  and ideas and energy back, no one at home  is sure how to respond either. Each time I  return, I'm a threat, an outsider, a stranger  until I become familiar again.  It's not that I particularly mind going  back and forth. That's the price I pay for  living in two worlds. But it is a price, right  now, that only seems real to me. I wish,  sometime, somewhere, someone would recognize how difficult it is, how frustrating it  is, and how valuable it is that I do this, that  we make these bridges, do this work. And  that both rural and urban places benefit  from our time, our energy, our commitment.  What's ironic is that this going back and  forth excludes us from both communities.  I'm not in the city enough to be part of any  network. Yet, the more I go away from my  home community and the more I learn, the  more 1 leave it behind as well. What most  deeply concerns me is difficult to make vis-  ble.  To non-rural women, it is difficult to  explain why I live where I live, away from  books, concerts, meetings, networks, conferences, other women, away from our created feminist culture where I would like to  feel I belong. With rural women, I must  walk carefully.  The label 'feminist' in my community,  is a stereotyped one. If I want them to hear  me, I talk about what concerns the women in  the community. They have a deep awareness of the difficulties in their lives, and their  anger about such issues as battering, child  abuse, poverty, and the need for access to  service is powerful. There is a rare moment  of relief when I get to be somewhere lam  welcome and visible as a lesbian.  The women's movement is working  hard at becoming more inclusive, less exclusively white and middle class. There are so  many gaps that need to be filled. I think the  lack of recognition and understanding of  rural issues is one more gap. This is essentially a class issue, but the culture of a rural,  white, working-class womanisdifferent,I think,  from being an urban, white, working-class one.  Recognizing the difference is, for me, a  big step. I am starting finally, to stubbornly  insist on my identity as a rural person and as  a white, working class farmer—a person  whose identification with the land I live on is  an integral part of my being. Recognizing  that what I bring to both the cultures I inhabit is valuable to the cultures, whether  people accept it or not, is a new piece of  understanding.  For years, I have kept hidden and locked  away my embarrassment for feeling so inexplicably different—my sense of exclusion,  my sadness and frustration at my own 'stupidity'—in wanting to be in two places at  once. Reclaiming and turning these feelings  around, is essential and long overdue. lam ,  reclaiming my identity and sense of self  worth.  Luanne Armstrong occasionally writes for  Kinesis and lives in rural BC.  NOVEMBER 1992 Commentary  Drugs and psychiatry:  Reasons not to quit  by Elf Stainsby   Psychiatry is often seen as male-dominated and male-identified, using medical  treatments and drugs to make women conform to their expected social role. I would  like to draw a sharp distinction between two  ways psychiatry and mood-altering medication are used.  Tranquillizers, mood levellers, anti-depressants, and anti-psychotic drugs are prescribed to women who are perceived to be  bored, uncontrollable, unruly, 'unfeminine'  and so on, as well as to people who actually  benefit from their use.  As Phyllis Chesler points out in Women  and Madness, only a minority of women who  undergo psychiatric treatment of any kind  experience genuine sta tes of madness, and it  is only that small minority who potentially  benefit from mind-altering drugs.  There are many 'women's illnesses' that  have a long and negative history of treatment within psychiatry, including anxiety,  depression, and even hysteria and lesbianism. There is also a long list of unnecessary  and often punitive treatments for these 'disorders'—over-prescription of tranquillizers  (often until a woman is addicted), unnecessary hospitalizations and abusive treatment  such as straightjacketing, insulin therapy  and shock treatments.  As we know, women are taught to conform or be made passive with tranquillizers.  The feminist movement has given v  Alkking  caring women  everywhere.  Discover Ms. as it was meant  to be: reader supported, reader responsive, and international in scope.  With 100 pages of fresh, frank  editorial in every issue, it's a Ms. of  substance, sustenance and spirit-  devoted to supporting you! Join us as  a Supporting Subscriber—and see.  ■ INTRODUCTORY OFFER"  1 YEAR (£*) $35  Regular subscription price $45.  Cily/State/Zip  O Payment enclosed.   □ Bill me.  Charge my   □ Visa   D MasterCard  Canada: $42. Foreign: □ Surface mail $42  □ Airmail $73. Payment must be in U.S. currency.  Mail to Ms., P.O. Box 57132,  Boulder, fJO 80322-7132.  The no-advertising,  editorially free magabook.  L_.lVlS.Jld  tools for critiquing the psychiatric institution. These tools are extremely valuable  contributions to both feminist and psychiatric discourse.  My concern is with the women who  experience "genuine statesof madness," who  cannot function without medical intervention. One way to describe it is that some  women need to be 'chemically rebalanced.'  The feminist community will continue to  give advice to these women. But we must  first listen to their experiences. Feminist  concern means hearing women describe their  experiences, listening to women whether or  not one agrees with a political stance.  Motors'  Ouide.  The third edition of the  Single Mothers'  Resource Guide  has been published by the  Vancouver Status of Women.  The guide is free to single mothers, but  WE are encouraging community  ORGANIZATIONS TO PURCHASE THEM FOR  $1.00 A COPY.  for more information contact  Chris Rahim at 255-5511.  The psychiatric treatment of women  and the use of various types of psychiatric  medication make the issue of curtailing the  use of drugs a very cloudy one. There is a  great distance between doctors over-prescribing "Mother's Little Helper" and the  needs of the truly psychotic woman.  As a result, the answer to the question  "should a woman stop taking anti-psychotic  medication?" is a qualified 'maybe.'  The crucial factor is a woman's own  perception of life both with and without  drugs, and her informed decision or choice.  Examples of issues of concern when contemplating changing or going off medications include which drug she is taking and  why—minor tranquillizers are obviously  different from mood levellers which are different again from anti-psychotic drugs.  It also depends on how fast she plans to  withdraw from the drug, whether or not she  has a stable living arrangement and a support group, the kinds of resources and support she has access to. This could include  support from traditional doctors, feminist  therapists, friends, lovers—is she going to  tell her family? What about work? When the  possible consequences of withdrawing medications can include destroying a woman's  ability to function for life, the need for caution cannot be overemphasized.  It also means planning, both financially  and personally: where is she going to be for  the next year or two? It means planning for  the possibility of psychotic breakdown and  deciding at what point she can or should be  hospitalized, and how she and her support  group will decide this. To my knowledge,  the feminist community does not yet have  the resources to maintain a safe environment a for hallucinating woman for any  length of time, nor should we try, especially  if her condition is deteriorating.  There is a difference between seriously  believing you would live a better life without a particular drug, and just wishing that  it were so. If a woman believes she would be  betteroffwithoutaparticulardrug, perhaps  it would be a positive step for her to try life  without it, as long as she has the support she  requires. However, a diabetic does not stop  taking her insulin just because she wishes  she didn't have diabetes.  ...I'd rather have a  medicated mind and live  well, than be 'correct'  according to feminist  thought, and suffer from  paranoid hallucinations.  If withdrawing horn medication results  in a reduced ability to function, it is not  preferable to life under medication. This  point cannot be made too strongly. It is not  necessarily better to be off medication if the  medication successfully improves the quality of life. And the only person who knows  that for sure is the woman herself—the drug  taker.  In the end, if we take an anti-psychotic  drug, we must decide whether or not it  works for ourselves. Given the intensity of  the experience of "genuine madness," we  must use extreme caution when we alter the  drugs we take. My argument is that while  abuse of prescription drugs exists, there are  people whose lives are saved by these same  mind-altering prescriptions. And I think the  feminist community tends to overlook that  fact sometimes.  Personally, I'd rather have a medicated  mind and live well, than be 'correct' according to feminist thought and suffer from paranoid hallucinations. Some of us need to  make these choices carefully, and we need  feminist and community support to do so.  Elf Stainsby has tried going off drugs.  RECLAIMING WOMEN'S HISTORY  POSTER SERIES  Agnes McPhail  The first woman  elected to  parliament.  The Famous Five  who won for  woman the right  to be persons.  Nellie McClung  who, with her sister  suffragists, won  the vote for women.  These women deserve their place in the schools, offices, homes and official  corridors of the nation.  An ideal gift.  Posters are 16 x 20, in sepia tones,  particularly attractive when framed.  $10.00 each or package of all three for $25.00,  plus $3.00 (postage/packaging) for 1 poster ($0.50 for each additional poster).  Laminated copies are an additional $6.00 each.  Women of Vision Series, Box 1402, Station C, St. John's Nfld. A1C 5N5  L"  NOVEMBER 1992 Commentary  Palestinian and Jewish Women for Peace:  Unlearning our distrust  by Karen Sloan   Meeting over coffee is often an innocuous enough ritual. Butwhen the Palestinian  and Jewish Women for Peace (PJWP),  a newly formed Vancouver group, gets together for coffee, it's not.  Every three weeks, we come together  at the home of one of our members for a  ritual of hospitality common to both our  cultures, to share our thoughts and experiences. The women in PJWP have decided to  take on looking at our prejudices and attempting to gain a better understanding of  each other. Sometimes, the ta Ik flows easily,  as when a common female or cultural experience is found. Othertimes, theairischarged  with tension as we are confronted by the  more difficult, painful issues.  This is hard and important work. It is  frustrating and draining, and at the same  time, exhilarating. I often come away  from meetings feeling that we have really  broken through some impasse, thatwehave  changed something.  ...the air is charged with  tension as we are  confronted by the more  difficult, painful issues  And something has to change. The  Israeli-Palestinian stalemate, whichhasbeen  dragging on for decades, continues to drag  onand theviolenceonlyescalates. The problem, contrary to what many on both sides  would like to believe, is not going to go  away.  Our group does not claim to have all the  answers to this Middle East crisis. Instead,  we aim to promote understanding through  dialogue, and to dispel the myth that Arabs  and Jews are natural enemies. We believe  that, as women, we have a tradition of non-  confrontation and can lead the way to peace  by building trust and respect. We have no  leader, no hierarchy and make our decisions  by consensus.  PJWP was formed in February, after  Vancouverite Rhea Lazar saw an article about  an Arab-Jewish women's dialogue in Edmonton. Lazar sent letters to various  community and women's groups in  Vancouver, proposing a similar project. Most  of the 15 or so women of various ages and  occupations who attended the first meeting  are still in the group. Of those who attend  regularly,fourarePalestinian, seven Jewish.  Soon after we began, we contacted the Edmonton women, only to hear that their group  was flagging. They were encouraged to hear  about us and decided to continue meeting.  ernments. We are still in the planning stages  of political action, and are limited, typically,  by lack of funds.  The two groups, the only two Arab-  Jewish women's dialogue groups in the  country, gathered recently for what we are  now calling our first annual Canadian conference. We compared notes and anecdotes,  recorded our mistakes and triumphs. We  envisioned Jewish and Arab women from  all over Canada coming together for the  cause of peace.  In fact, Arab and Jewish women's peace  groups across Canada and the world have  increased in number since the start of  the Intifada (the Palestinian uprising) nearly  five years ago. Perhaps one of the most  famous of these is Women in Black.  9  ubv  Q  Calling themselves the Arab Jewish  Women's Peace Coalition (AJWPC), the  Edmonton group came together during the  Persian Gulf War. An Arab and a Jewish  woman attending a meeting of Women's  Action for Peace in the Gulf comforted each  other about the war and agreed to meet later  to exchange views. Some friends, family  and acquaintances joined them at weekly  sessions.  AJWPC differs from our group in that it  includes Arab women of all nationalities,  not just Palestinian. AJWPC member  Evelyne Hamon, a third-generation Lebanese-Canadian, tells me that this makes ours  an even greater challenge. Still, she adds,  she sees in our progress a mirror of their  group's development.  Following the example of AJWPC, we  have drafted a mandate stating our beliefs  and our goals, including education, support  of like- minded groups, and lobbying gov-  \     i  For women who are stretching boundaries  \             li  And think broadest maybe describes them best  W 7  And wonder if women's clothes in size 0  Isn't really some very bad jest  rOfwomen out there who are larger  1^* 1  And realize this is their fate  ir^ \  I carry clothes that are bigger  L»  I know, isn't that that great!  i    Quality consignment  \  clothing  Is  1 Size 14... plus  r  I    Amplesize Park  ,1     5766 Fraser Street  w      Vancouver, BC  s  J         V5W2Z5  \  Sarah-Jane (604)322-0107  Every Friday at 1 pm, Women in Black  stand at French Square, a busy Jerusalem  intersection joining five main arteries. For  one hour, they stand there dressed in stark  black, each carrying a black cardboard cutout hand, imprinted in white letters  with: "Stop the Occupation", or "Talk to the  PLO." Over 100 women turn out weekly,  and the demonstrations have spread from  Tel Aviv and Haifa to Washington and Toronto.  Other women's peace groups in Israel  and the Territories include Shani (Israeli  Women's Alliance Against the Occupation),  Women's Organization for Women Political Prisoners, and Tandi (Movement  of Democratic Women), an Israeli-Arab  group associated with the Israeli communist party.  As women, as members of cultures of-  tenstigmatizedand misunderstood,weshare  a common heritage of disenfranchisement.  We share concerns about cultural assimilation. The depth of our cultural and emotional similarities often takes us by surprise.  We call ourselves cousins, and share a common Semitic heritage.  But most abiding are our common experiences as exiles, and our yearning for  "The Land." Some of us are exiles by choice,  others by force. I have learned that our  attempts to discredit each other's rights to  live on the same land are merely attempts at  dodging the problem, which ignores very  real feelings and aspirations. We have to  legitimise those feelings, not disguise them.  And that is why we also come together  to talk about differences. It is tempting to  hide behind agreements and platitudes.  As comfortable as I may feel with Palestinian women, there is another part of me that  is on guard and cautious. Sometimes I feel  caught ina double-bind: either I alienate my  Palestinian sisters, or I estrange myself from  my own community.  "Listen to them, but don't trust them," a  well-intentioned Jewish man told me, and  he was by no means an extremist. And much  as I believe in equality, in Palestinian self-  determination, I feel a fear in me like a reflex. "What if I'm being duped...?" I sense  the Palestinian women feel the same way  about me, about the other Jewish women in  our group.  These are some of the fears we try to  understand and conquer, fears which force  us to dwell on the past. Sometimes, we fall  into the trap. We try to show we have been  hurt more, that we are the 'righteous' victims. But we know this is futile. There is no  point in playing the almost instinctual game  of "one-up," which leads only to war.  Even so, the honesty of anger can be  productive. I for one want to know what my  Palestinian sister thinks and feels. I want  her to describe her experiences to me without self-censure, without worrying that I  will judge her too harshly.  I feel a fear in me like a  reflex. "What if I'm  being duped?"  And the hard questions are asked. Can  the Palestinian Liberation Organization's  (PLO) claims to have disavowed 'terrorism'  be trusted? What about Israeli expansion-  ism?If Palestinians achieve statehood, would  the "green line" boundaries be enough? Is  Israel in danger of becoming a fascist state?  Why do Israeli soldiers shoot at children  throwing rocks? Why do Arab parents allow their children to throw rocks at soldiers?  Zionism is for many Jews a word of  hope, a word of describing national liberation, an opportunity to no longer be forced  to trust the fickleness of other nations. To  many Palestinians, Zionism is a word  equated with the destruction of their homes  and their journey into diaspora.  And this is only one word. The lexicon  of misperceptions is vast. We have all been  indoctrinated with views that conveniently  deny each other's credibility. Some are blatantly outrageous and our reactions run  the gamut from  sorrow to laughter.  "All Palestinians are fanatics"; "all Jews are  money-hungry." These generalizations we  thought we were beyond continue to surface  again and again. We realize that, while we  have done much, we still have a long way  to go-  But at least, among our group, we deal  with our accusations and contentions  through explanation, understanding, reassessment, and not bottles, rocks, guns, imprisonment.    We wish that this spirit  of goodwill were present in our communi-  ties at large—we hope it's catching.  Karen Sloan is a Vancouver writer and a  participant in Palestinian and Jewish  Women for Peace.  NOVEMBER 1992 Bad deal for  women  by Ellen Woodsworth, Lynn Bueckert, Denise Nadeau, Heather Jahrig,  and Barbara Binns   This past summer, the prime minister of Canada, the president of the USA and the  president of Mexico initiated the proposed North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)  which, if these men have their way, will become law by the spring of 1993.  Like the Canada-US Free Trade Agreement (FTA), NAFTA will have a devastating effect  on women. It is a 2,000-page document on the rights for multinational corporations. It strips  the rights of federal, provincial and municipal governments in the three countries and spells  the end of democracy as we know it—people will no longer have our say through our elected  governments.  As an example of the effect of the FTA, governments cannot ban Nestle ads which  promote baby formula over breast feeding because, under the FTA, only the least restrictive  advertising is allowed.  Another example of the effects of the FTA is the case of auto insurance in Ontario, where  rates are extremely high. The new NDP government, under premier Bob Rae, made a  promise to establish a government auto insurance plan. However, under the FTA, govern-  MULTINATIONAL CORPORATIONS HAVE PITTED  WOMEN WORKERS AROUND THE WORLD AGAINST  EACH OTHER.   BUT WOMEN EVERYWHERE ARE  ORGANIZING AND FIGHTING BACK AGAINST THIS  CORPORATE AGENDA.  ments who set up a crown or public corporation may be sued by foreign companies who  stand to lose revenue from lost business potential.  The auto insurance companies targeted Bob Rae and the Ontario NDP. The companies  told the NDP that if they brought in a government auto insurance plan, they could be sued  for over $1 billion. As a result, the NDP did not set up the plan because of these costly threats.  Both the FTA and NAFTA fit into the political and economic context of what's been  happening globally for some time now.  For the past 20 years, multinational corporations have been setting up operations in free-  trade zones in about 50 countries around the world. These corporations produce goods such  as computers, baseball gloves, Nike runners, Levi jeans, and Barbie dolls. Eighty to 90  percent of the workers producing these goods are women between the ages of 15 and 24,  earning the equivalent of as little as 50 cents an hour.  Since the early 1980s, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank have .  demanded underdeveloped countries implement a free-enterprise economics in exchange  for loans. This usually includes making changes to their constitutions, changes that get rid  of restrictions on trade and foreign investment, allow lucrative incentives for multinational  corporate investment, push governments to make drastic cuts to spending on social  programs such as health, education, and housing, and privatize the public sector. These  scenarios inevitably see a lowering of human rights standards, for example, those that  protect women, lesbians and workers. They also lead to a lowering of or no environmental,  health or safety regulations.  For women workers around the world this economic strategy has had a double-edged  impact. For women in Asia, the Caribbean, Africa, Mexico, Central and South America, it  has created an abundance of jobs in factories located in free-trade zones for very low wages  and under the West 19th century sweatshop conditions. It has also meant an erosion of jobs  in their own domestic economy. For women in North America, Japan, and Europe it has  meant lost jobs as multinational corporations leave those countries in search of cheaper  labour, lower costs and higher profits.  Multinational corporations have pitted women workers around the world against each  other. But women everywhere are organizing and fighting back against this corporate  agenda. We believe women should demand the Canadian government abrogate the Free  Trade Agreement, and demand they say no to the NAFTA. It's not too late. Federal,  provincial and municipal governments could stop the agreement from being signed if we  continue to pressure them to do so.  Watch for future. Kinesis articles for more on NAFTA and women organizing to fight  corporate free-trade across the world. A video is also available on the effects of NAFTA on  women. It includes speakers Jean Swanson, Mirium Palacios and Lois Weninsir. For more  information, contact Woman to Woman Global Strategies, c/o 4785 Gladstone Street,  Vancouver, BC, or call 430-0458. Also, see Bulletin Board for details on upcoming events.  Ellen Woodsworth, Lynn Bueckert, Denise Nadeau, Heather Jahrig and Barabara Binns are  members of Woman to Woman Global Strategies.  The dream is  BUILT ON  American  technology  and money,  Canadian  rescources,  Central and  South  American  cheap labour,  AND THE  POLITICAL  ACCEPTANCE OF  ALL COUNTRIES  TO ONE  ECONOMIC  VISION A  VISION  CONTROLLED BY  THE ONE  SUPERPOWER OF  THE REGION...  Three times  a loser  by Maude Barlow  While Canadians have been agonizing in a very public way about the nature of our  constitutional future, the federal government has been deeply locked in negotiations to  write a new economic constitution for North America in which Canada can only be a net  loser.  The North American Free Trade Agreement is the second phase of the Reagan/Bush  dream to build one economic union from the Arctic to the Southern tip of South America—  a huge free trade zone without labour or environmental standards, where transnational  can move production to suit themselves.  Phase one was the Canada-US Free Trade Agreement. It badly eroded our political  sovereignty, as well as Canadian control over our energy industry, and destroyed over one-  quarter of our manufacturingjobs in just three years. Trade minister Michael Wilson insists  that these losses are due only to the same recession that hit the US, but is unable to explain  why the job loss in Canada has been four times greater than in the US in the same period,  and why the Canadian recession hit before the one in the US.  The third world phase has already started; to add the other countries of the Americas,  probably starting with Chile. The goal is to build a trade bloc in the Americas to allow the  US to counter the emerging might of Europe and Japan.  The dream is built on American technology and money, Canadian resources, Central  and South American cheap labour, and the political acceptance of all countries to one  economic vision—a vision controlled by the one superpower of the region, whose economy  is larger than the combined economies of all 34 of its prospective partners.  This is an issue of real importance to women in all three countries. In Mexico, the work  force of the Maquiladores [low-wage, mass production factories is largely female, very  young—Mexican laws prohibit employment of anyone under the age of 18, but factories  regularly hire women as young as 14 and 15—and very badly treated. If the women  organize, they a re fired. If they become pregnant, the sa me. If they become ill from the long  hours of work in appalling conditions, including working with toxic chemicals, they have  no claim to compensation or sick leave, and this applies equally for children who are born  deformed from the chemical poisons their mothers breath during pregnancy.  Workers in Maquiladores are among the lowest paid in the world. The transnationals  put nothing back into the system—not training, not health care, not sanitation, not sewage  treatment, nothing. Entire families live beside chemical dumps, some that have been found  to contain toxic poisons in concentrations many thousand times greater than allowed by the  law in Canada of the US. Mothers feed their babies Coke and Pepsi from baby bottles  because they cannot afford juice or milk, and there is no clean water left.  Brownsville is right across the river from Matamoros, Mexico, one of the worst havens  for corporate environmental crime in the country, and the toxic waste was carried across  on the water.  While the story for women in Canada and United States is, of course, nowhere as  horrific, there are real problems in those northerly countries. As we create a free trade zone  based on growing deregulation the lowest common denominator will become norm. Once  corporations are entirely free from national considerations or rules, they will be able to  move production to the areas where environmental, wage, social and labour standards are  the lowest and not have to pay any price for this behaviour. Canada has joined in a race to  the bottom - competitive poverty -and this bodes badly for Canadian women.  As well, free trade and deregulation create winners and losers. In fact, this is a system  which accepts that, to have winners like the billionaires Donald Trump and Conrad Black,  a country must accept a high rate of unemployment and poverty. These are the sad but  necessary penalties for 'success' under this model of competition. The middle class is  disappearing and, because women represent a disproportionate number of the poor in our  society, deeper class divisions will hurt women first and more.  With the disappearance of our industrial base and the economic crisis we are facing,  our social programs are in danger. Again, women, who are poorer than men, are more  dependent on the universal nature of Canada's shared-cost social programs. Without them,  many Canadian women will fall between the cracks like their American sisters.  If you wish to join the fight against it, please join the Council of Canadians, 1006-251  Laurier Ave. W., Ottawa, Ont, KIP 5J6. We are non-partisan, and non-profit, and seek to  preserve and enhance Canada's political sovereignty and true democracy in the face of a  corporate culture trying to change the very nature of our country.  Maude Barlow is the voluntary national Chairperson of the Council of Canadians, and the  author of two books, Parcel of Rogues, How Free Trade is Failing Canada, and Take  Back the Nation.   This article also appears in the Fall issue ofThe Womanist.  In the  Philippines  by Cecelia Diocson  Since the 1970s, multinational companies like Nike have set up factories in free-  trade zones in the Philippines. The government, under deposed president Ferdinand  Marcos, had agreed to implement the IMF  and World Bank economic development  plan of export industrialization. The companies hired young girls to work in electronic processing and in the garment industry. *  These women worked for very low  wages and in very poor working conditions  and without the right to any union activity.  In spite of the repression, a militant trade  union movement developed.  IntheBataanExportProcessingZone,a  free-trade zone, the women workers did  organize and demand higher wages and  better working conditions. To some extent,  the women won their demands but after a  while the multinationals left for Taiwan  where they could get even cheaper labour.  The women in the Bataan Zone lost their  jobs and, because the Philippine domestic  economy was undercut by this export model  of development, there weren't other jobs for  these women to go to.  Consequently, many of the women have  been forced to leave the Philippines to work  as domestics in other countries, such as  Canada. It is likely that this will also happen to the Mexican women under NAFTA.  Already, many Mexican women are going  to the US to work as domestics.  What is hopeful in all this is that Third  World women workers have linked with  each other—if they have solidarity, Mexican and Canadian women together could  demand better conditions.  Cecelia Diocson is with the Philippine  Women's Centre.  NOVEMBER 1992  NOVEMBER 1992 Heavenly Alarming Female:  Of mirth  and dance  by Archana Gandhi  HEAVENLY ALARMING FEMALE:  A performance by Heavenly Alarming  Female  Presented by Basic Inquiry Studio's  The Body Project at the  Vancouver East Cultural Centre  October 9 & 10  Uzume, the Goddess of Mirth and  Dance, slipped her latex gloves, suit, tie and  trousers off. My hands clutched the armrests of my seat. I waited eagerly to see what  would come next. Would Uzume lure  Amatherasu, the Sun-Goddess, out from  her cave? Would we get to see them have  sex on stage?  Heavenly Alarming Female is a group of  six Chinese and Japanese women, five of  whom are Vancouver-based artists  and musicians—taiko drummer Tamai  Kobayashi is from Toronto. The group  performed their 20-minute performance  piece by the same name before a packed  audience on both nights. The show is about  Asian lesbian sexuality that uses taikodrum-  ming, myth, drama, and dance.  An earlier version premiered at the International Lesbian Week's Sexpertease at the  Lotus, a Vancouver club, in February. While  the piece remains essentially unchanged, an  additional skit and a newcharacterweredevel-  oped for the Body Project show.  The show begins with an energetic set of  taiko drumming, with Ha-Chan, Tamai  Kobayashi, and Linda Uyehara Hoffman at  the drums. Uyehara Hoffman narrated this  contemporary version of an ancient myth,  prevalent in Japanese and Chinese cultures,  of Amatherasu, the Sun-Goddess, and her  fight with her husband Susano-o the Thunder God.  Amatherasu, performed by Cynthia  Low, retreats to her cave after leaving her  husband. The sun leaves the land and there  is great sadness. In comes Uzume, performed by River Sui. Uzume is the Goddess  of Mirth and Dance, bent on enticing  Amatherasu out from hiding. The two goddesses fall in love, or lust. The villagers  rejoice and there is a great celebration in the  land. The sun is returned to the earth. I like  to believe they live happily ever after. The  piece comes to a close with another great set  of taiko drumming.  The additional element in the show—a  skit between Amatherasu and Susano-o, performed by Ana Chang—seems awkward,  and unnecessary to the performance as a  whole. But it helps flesh out the story of the  myth, and provides a more gradual  lead in to the centre-piece of the performance—the seduction between Uzume and  Amatherasu.  Uzume kept the audience at the edge of  our seats with her sensuous dance and striptease.   She slowly and teasingly peels off  River Sui as the Goddess of Mirth and Dance  layers of clothing, until she is left with a lacy  black bra and silk boxer shorts. How can  Amatherasu possibly resist?  Amatherasu follows Uzume, picking  up and folding pieces of clothing until she  gets the nerve to touch her, and then caress  her. In a twist, it is Amatherasu who literally  sweeps Uzume off her feet and carries her  back to the cave. Half of the fun is watching  Amatherasu'sexpressions shift from simple  curiosity, to growing interest, and finally to  full-fledged desire for Uzume.  This scene challenges traditional notions of Asian female sexuality—that Asian  women are submissive or exotic.  "I realized she wasn't stripping for a  white woman—she was stripping for another Asian woman, the Sun-Goddess," said  Jenna, an Asian lesbian from Calgary who  attended the performance the following  night. "It was very reaffirming to see lesbians of colour touching each other—I thought  it was very sexy."  1 found myself unable to fully enjoy  myself, however, because I was aware of  the presence of men and white lesbians in  the audience—only a few women-of-  colour attended the opening night perform-  My mind kept wandering to these white  women: how were they viewing the performance? Were they exoticizing the Asian  women on stage? I wondered why the men—  also mainly white—were there: were they  voyeurs gazing at the lesbian bodies? Or  were they there to get off on the sexualization  of Asian lesbians?  Heavenly Alarming Female's River Sui  says she "chose to ignore the white lesbian  and male gaze. By doing this, I refused to  give them the space to oppress and define  the expression of our art."  Still, my reaction to the piece as a lesbian of colour made me feel less safe and  comfortable in that audience. I would prefer to have seen the show at a women-of-  colouronly event. However,] acknowledge  the need to break the stereotypes and assume control of the representation of our  bodies.  Nevertheless, Heavenly Alarming Female  is a sexy, challenging and fun show. And  lesbians of colour 1 spoke with after the  show seemed to agree with me. Maybe the  group will perform again sometime. If they  do, I'll be back for more.  Archana Gandhi is a first-time writer for  Kinesis.  Kiss and Tell:  Coming  to mom  out  by Kathleen Oliver  TRUE INVERSIONS:  A performance by Kiss and Tell  Presented by Basic Inquiry Studio's  The Body Project at the  Vancouver East Cultural Centre  October 9 & 10  "We are people who will risk being  killed in order to fuck each other." That's  Persimmon Blackridge writing a letter to her  mom, and she's quoting Lizard Jones, one of  her Kiss and Tell collaborators. The "we"  refers to lesbians, and Kiss and Tell refers to  the Vancouver-based lesbian art collective.  True Inversions, their most recent performance, is about the various sorts of risks and  challenges involved in lesbian sexual expression.  "Challenging" is the first word that  comes to mind when I try to describe True  Inversions  Challenge has been a big part of Kiss and  Tell's work since the group—Blackridge,  Jones, and Susan Stewart—started working  with issues of lesbian sexual representation.  Their ground-breaking photo exhibit, Draw  ing the Line, has drawn intense reactions  throughout North America and abroad. A  book based on the exhibit—in which viewers were invited to write their responses to  the artwork on the walls—was published by  the Canadian feminist collective, Press Gang  Publishers, last fall.  True Inversions picks up where Drawing  the Line left off, further challenging stereotypes and insisting that viewers engage  directly with the work. We are challenged to  examine our feelings about lesbian sexual  representation. The list of topics addressed  in the performance is almost as overwhelming as the multi-media presentation, impossible to take in all at once—invisibility; censorship by self, community and state; fiction  and reality; pleasure and politics; safe sex;  sadomasochism; love, lust, and coming out  to mom.  True Inversions is a politically engaging  and entertainingcombinationof slides, video,  music and live performances. The show was  presented in a younger version this past  spring in Vancouver at the York Theatre, a  venue more in keeping with the subversive  nature of the project. In this new version,  True Inversions appears as part of a double  Susan Stewart in performance  bill with the Asianlesbian performance piece,  Heavenly .Alarming Female. Also, parts of  this version have been tightened and are,  one might say, slicker.  True Inversions opens with a series of  overlapping monologues in which each of  the women recounts a particular sexual encounter. As the monologues are performed,  soft nudes of the performers dissolve into  one another on a screen behind them, and an  audio tape of moaning and cooing plays in  the background.  Blackbridge's story is passionate and  violent, Stewart's is confrontational, but tl ie  most entertaining is Jones's droll and deadpan account of lusting after a co-worker:  "She's tall, she wears glasses, she's a very  hard worker. When she's not here, I can't  think of any thing, and when she is here, I can  only think of one thing, and that's fucking,  fucking, fucking."  The stories represent a range of lesbian  sexual experience and are clearly not designed to be comfortable for everyone. Audience members are further forced to examine our ideas about censorship in the next  sequence, in which a woman dressed as a  man wearing a trench coat, platform shoes  and a pig snout sings a song about censorship while the three women arrange themselves into a police lineup.  Kiss and Tell bring the censorship issue  home by reading some of the comments  written on the walls at various Drawing the  Line shows. Some of the comments are  chilling: "I feel the need to rape some girls,"  says one man in response to the photos.  Lizard talks about self-censorship and the  risks involved in presenting work to an audience over which one has no control. She  directly addresses the men in the audience  and throws out questions about their reasons for being there. This is one of the  weaker spots in the show. Although  the questions are valid, the script is  over determinedand feels somewhat stilted.  The middle section of the show is comprised of a video segment, in which censorship continually and overtly disrupts the  progress of the narrative. The video follows  two pairs of lovers—a real-life pair and a for-  the-camera-only pair—and questions  whether one pair looks "more real" than the  -^■^^ -^M See KISS page 18  14  NOVEMBER 1992 Arts  Vancouver International Film Festival:  A forbidden love no more  by Kathleen Oliver  FORBIDDEN LOVE  Directed by Aerlyn Weissman and  Lynne Fernie  A National Film Board of Canada  Production, 1992  Vancouver premiere at the Vancouver  International Film Festival, October 1992  The sun was setting as Kathleen took her  place in line outside the Ridge Theatre that warm  Sunday evening. In the twilight, she glanced  furtively at the shadowy faces of the women  around her. As her eyes darted from one to  another—-for she didn 't dare make eye con tact—  she wondered: were these women—like that?  She trembled as the lineup began to snake  its way into the theatre.  There were questions that had been plaguing her for years, questions she didn't dare ask,  questions she hadn't found answers for. She  knew what she was about to see might changeher  life forever, but she didn't care. She had to find  out for herself—were there other women locked  in the world of Forbidden Love?  It's true, it did change my life, and I have  to admit I'm a bit stumped abouthow best to  review this wonderful, wonderful film without simply writing a love letter to the directors, the women who appear in the film, and  all the other amazing women who are part of  my world as a lesbian.  Forbidden Love is a gem from the National Film Board's women's films division  Studio D. As a portrayal of women's lives  and a celebration of our experiences, the film  rightly claims its place alongside national  treasures like The Company of Strangers.  Co-directed by Aerlyn Weissman (one  of the directors of 1989's Winter Tan) and  Lynne Fernie, the film documents the lesbian scene in Canadian cities in the 1950s  and 60s. In major Canadian cities, lesbians  shared the demi-monde of bars and clubs with  other outcasts. There were countless trashy  novels with lurid covers, all about women  with unnatural passions. And there were  women who underwent tremendous risks  to live as lesbians.  The film intersperses archival footage,  interviews with a number of women from  'the scene,' and a 'dramatization' of the sort  of lesbian pulp novel popular and available—at newsstands!—at the time.  How could you see this  film and not love  lesbians?  The film juxtaposes the story of fictional  "Mitch" and "Laura," who meet in the big  city and come to know each other and themselves more profoundly, with their real-life  counterparts, the women who read about  Mitch and Laura.  The lesbians interviewed in the film  challengestereotypesandassumptionsabout  the far-from-homogeneous 'scene.' Ruth  Christine talks about coming out as a femme  in the Vancouver bar scene while married  with two small children; Nairobi Nelson  recalls being the only woman of colour in the  Montreal Clubs; Amanda White, a First Nations woman, reflects on the acceptance she  found in skidrow bars; and rancher Keeley  Moll talksabout her isolation from the urban  community. Butch-femme roles, coming out  stories, and the essential 'whiteness' of the  scene are addressed with insight andcandour.  Stephanie Morgenstern and Lynne  Adams in Forbidden Love  What comes through loud and clear in  this document of a very repressive time is a  tremendous sense of fun. Lesbians may  have lived in a 'twilight world' in the 50s and  60s, but they certainly made the most of the  twilight. Weissman credits the "survivor  senseof humour" that her interview subjects  share for giving the film much of its life.  Fernie agrees, noting that the directors  wanted to have all the issues on the table at  the outset so that they could play a little with  the documentary format. The result of that  sense of play is one of the most uplifting,  festive and downright fun looks at women's  lives I've seen.  The Vancouver premiere had both directors—and their moms!—in attendance,  and was almost the feel-good event of the  year. The one blemish on the evening was an  unfortunate—to put it mildly—programming choice by the festival's Canadian Images programmer, Anne Vermee for the short  preceding the feature.  Quebecois director Jeanne Crepeau's  Claire et I'obscurite is an arty, extremely disturbing look at male violence against  women—something we were not prepared  to see that night, and do not need to be  reminded of when we come to celebrate. The  film was eventually stopped in response to  protests from the audience, and it is a credit  to Forbidden Love's buoyant artistry that the  evening's sense of fun was quickly restored.  Weissmanand Fernie havealready been  approached by more than one major Hollywood distributor and, though the distributors' intentions may be less than honourable—"I think they smell money," says  Weissman—a major release could prove a  powerfully subversive tool to educate against  homophobia. As one of my friends said  during our post-premiere gush-in later that  evening," How could you see this film and  not love lesbians?"  Forbidden Love also received runner-up  honours at the Vancouver film fest for Most  Popular Canadian Film.  Thanks are due to all the women involved in this project for preserving a remarkable slice of our lesbian history. The  love may have been forbidden, but the film  is a must-see.  Kathleen Oliver, a regular contributor to  Kinesis, is feeling exceptionally gushy this  month.  Women in the shadows  by Kerrie Charnley  WOMEN IN THE SHADOWS  Written and produced by Christine Welsh  National Film Board of Canada, 1992  Vancouver International Film Festival,  October 1992  "I think my search for my native grandmothers has been a search for a place of my  own, a place where I felt I belonged. And in  a very real sense, this journey has brought  me home," says Christine Welsh in the documentary, Women in the Shadows.  The film was written and produced by  Christine Welsh as a way for making real for  us—and herself—the history of her Metis  and Native ancestors. It has received a lot of  attention across the country and won the  NFB award for "Best Documentary Under  60 Minutes" at this year's Vancouver International Film Fest.  This factual yet emotional documentary paints a picture of an oppression and a  need to reconcile past and present. It also  tells, through its women's stories, how Native and Metis women enabled their descendants to survive.  Christine Welsh is one of these descendants, but when she was growing up, her  Metis and Native heritage was kept a secret  from her. She says in the film, "I know now  that the past is gone.   I've grieved for a  •'  Still from Women in the Shadows by Christine Welsh  culture I never had and never will have, but  I'm not looking for anybody to blame  anymore. My grandmothers chose to deny  who they were but they did it in order to  survive in a world where being Native has  always been a struggle. Al 1 they wanted was  a decent life for themselves and their children. And they looked forward, not back.  They were survivors.  "And I'm here because they survived.  But my challenge is to find a way to survive  as a whole and healthy person, without  having to reject a part of what I am. That's  what I want to pass on to my children."  In the film, Welsh documents her family history through interviews with Canadian and Metis historians such as Emma  La roque, Sylvia Van Kirk and Lily Macauley.  She also interviews her mother, father and  aunt, and documents her travels to the sites  where her ancestors lived.  The names and thoughts of these Native  and Metis women of fur-trade times were  not written in documents or on the signature  rocks of Hudson's Bay but their contributions served not only to help their families  survive economically and physically, but to  be remembered for themselves.  As we see in the documented trials and  survival of Margaret,an ancestor of Welsh's,  it took a strong spirit for these women to  continue to survive despite theharsh climate  and disease that wiped out whole families  during the 1800s.  Margaret's governor-general husband  went on leave to England for a year, leaving  her to await his return. When he returned, it  was with a new English wife. He promptly  married Margaret off to another man.  Margaret's story includes a time when, while  pregnant with her second son, and in the  course of her wifely duties, she snow-shoed  across the Rockies.  The most poignant scenes in the film  come towards the end, in conversations between Christine and her parents. They talk  about their courtship and the obstacles they  faced. It is clear how deeply the blade of  racism can cut through the heart, and how  the power of love between parent and child  can rise to close the wound.  In all, for me, Women in the Shadoivs  paints a more complete history and  identity for us all, whether we identify as  Canadian, Native or both.   Kerrie Cliarmley is a Native freelance writer.  NOVEMBER 1992 Arts  Vancouver International Film Festival:  How to be  fit  by Celeste Insell  FIT: EPISODES IN THE HISTORY  OF THE BODY  Directed and produced by Laurie Block  USA: Straight Ahead Pictures  Vancouver International Film Festival,  October 1992  Within the first minutes of the film, a  written statement flashes on screen: "fitness  doesn't ha ve a scientific definition. The body  has a history." By the end of the film, I  understood that to mean concepts of fitness  are shaped by what we see our bodies' potential to be.  Fit documents a history of how fitness  programs came into existence in the USA  and the sociological factors that brought  them into being. The documentary traces  each new aesthetic of fitness and new methods of teaching fitness.  And whilethere isa lotthat's interesting  about Fit, it traces history from a strictly  white, feminist perspective—there is little  attempt to document anything that includes  women of colour or even the black body,  and certainly no mention that these are episodes in the history of the European body.  The core of this film focuses on definitions of who is fit and who isn't. The film  shows us how, over time, these definitions  have been evaluated and re-evaluated.  Sometime in the late 1800s, fitness went  from being an individual to a nationally  controlled perceptionand definition. Women  and various racial groups were categorized  as having different and, by inference, lower  standards of mental and physical fitness  than men of European descent.  The film points out that fitness doctrines, such as Social Hygiene Eugenics, were  openly racist and sexist. This school of thinking also continues to have an effect on the  way the differently abled are perceived. An  unattributed statement flashes on the screen:  "the unfit were segregated and prevented  from breaking the one standard of strength  and beauty."  Spanning approximately 100 years, the  film goes on to show that, while the 1920s  were a seemingly progressive period—predominantly white, middle-class women  broke into the world of competitive sports,  forming sports teams for the first time—the  1930s saw fitness programs as a way of  increasing the productivity of the worker.  During the Second World War, fitness standards for women were again revised. Women  were 'elevated' to a parity of sorts with men  in the work place, while still subordinate to  them on the social level.  Fif then takes us through the 1950s, a  ]  particularly bleak time for women. The film .  shows us the role of the medical profession .  as it emerges as custodian of the fitness  ethic—taking over both mind and body. The  film concludes with the Kennedy era, usher- |  ing in a new presidential program for the  nation. Here, for the first time, fitness programs brought men and women together—  footage of previous eras showed segregated  male and female fitness programs.  Since fitness standards continue to be  set by men and not much appears to have  changed since the 1960s, I am curious as to  why Block stops her 'history' at the 1960s. Is  an analysis of current fitness standards next  on the agenda for this film maker? Or does  Fit intend to leave us to continue the analysis  for ourselves and to reflect on what is happening in the 1990s? I was unable to get  answers to thesequestionsbecause,although  the director was present at the screening, she  was not available at the end of the film to  take questions from the audience.  HOW TO BE A WOMAN AND NOT  DIE IN THE ATTEMPT  Directed by Ana Belen  Spain: 1991  Vancouver International Film Festival,  October 1992  The woman is Carmen. A full-time journalist working on her third marriage, she is a  survivor of a war-torn minefield called  'marriage.'  A film about the trials of marriage may  sound bleak, but How to be a Woman, as  directed by Ana Belen, is anything but. Carmen Maura as Carmen is funny and insightful and, Antonio Resines, as Carmen's self-  centred partner, Antonio, is perfect. The  screenplay by Carmen Rico Godoy captures  well the struggles played out in male-female  fid&s  %**'    Art Emporium  Western Canada's  Lesbian & Gay  Bookseller  Open daily  10am to 11pm  Don't       IS/liss     Boomer-  Linda Niemann will  read from Boomer  and speak about her  experiences in writing  autobiography and  writing about sexuality  and recovery.  Sunday,  at Josephine's,  Boomer .-Railroad Memoirs is a lively  autobiography recounting a lesbian's  ride into male territory - into violence  and into alcohol. Boomer is a gritty  dyke's story of working on the rails  and finding the tough track to  recovery. This certainly isn't your  standard railroad tale!  November 8th, 7:30 pm  1716 Charles St(at Commercial)  Little Sister's, 1221 Thurlow(at Davie), Vancouver, B.C.   Tel:(6Q4)669-1753 or Fax:(604)685-0252   From Fit "Vulcana", circa 1905  relationships on a daily basis—even those  hard-to-pin-down 'subtle' ones.  Carmen and Antonio are a conservative, middle class, heterosexual couple. They  both have interesting and challenging jobs,  and live in comfortable surroundings. However, turmoil ensues over fundamental issues. Carmen has two children from her  previous marriages, which means she has to  contend wi th those past relationships to some  extent. Antonio has a young teenage son, of  whom Carmen also takes care.  The major source of contention in Carmen and Antonio's marriage centres on their  careers, or rather the issue of just whose  work is more important. Carmen battles it  Out at work with an editor who exploits  and undermines her contribution in the  workplace. She manages to fight back but,  later at home, as she is trying to meet a  deadline for an assignment, someone from  Antonio's office calls her to say Antonio  would like her to stop writing so she can run  some urgent errands for him. And she does.  It is clear society sees nothing wrong with  this one-sided arrangement, where Carmen  takes care of Antonio's needs as well as her  own and gets no support for herself from the  men in her home or in her workplace.  In the film, men do not grow up and  women, no matter how strong and independent, tend to cave in to their demands.  There's a funny scene in a restaurant where  Antonio, who is constantly on a diet, asks  Carmen to order for him because, he says,  she knows better what he can eat on his diet.  In another scene, a co-worker complains to  Carmen that he doesn't understand why his  wife left him over his affair with another  woman which meant "nothing". None of  the men surrounding Carmen ever attempt  to take on any responsibility for their actions.  Also, the more independent the w  become, the more they are seen as threats to  the men. Eventually however, when the  women refuse to put up with the immature  men in their lives anymore, they leave. At  one point, Antonio's sister gives up trying to  live with her husband and asks Carmen how  she should go about leaving him. A positive  contrast is Antonio's mother, now a widow.  She's full of life and ecstatic in her newfound freedom (from marriage and men).  Carmen's marriage with Antonio is  filled with jealousy, mistrust and fighting. It  is an astute account of a marriage begging  for a drastic change. The film raises the  questions: what are the choices for independent heterosexual women in society today? Do we spend our lives compromising  our basic needs and desires or do we live  alone? Is it worth the struggle? Where is our  real support? How can we be women and  have lives that are fulfilling, yet include  men?  Eventually, Carmen too leaves Antonio.  It's a trial separation and Carmen is working  it out without much help from her partner.  The last scene has Carmen and Antonio  meeting in a restaurant because Antonio  wants her back. She responds that she is not  ready to come back. It is apparent that  Antonio is still the little boy he always was.  However, as Carmen points out, he does  succeed in ordering a meal suitable for his  dietary needs all on his own.  How to be a Woman is a notable debut for  director Ana Belen because it casts a sardonic and humourous eye on the current  dilemmas heterosexual women face without dying in the attempt.  Celeste Insell is a performer and writer who  resides in Vancouver.  WOMEN'S WORK  SCREEN PRINT.  We give to the Community  that supports u\  • Women Positive  • Earth Friendly  • Community Economl  Development  • Equality Right  Women Owned and Operated Sinte W84  KINESIS  NOVEMBER 1992 Arts  Book review: None to Give Away;  Single-mom missionary  by Heather Gray  NONE TO GIVE AWAY  by Elsie Doig Towsend  Nebraska: Nebraska University Press, 1992  Elsie Doig Towsend's autobiographical account of her life as a single mother in wartime American ranch country is heartwarming. Left alone to raise five young children  after her husband's death, she struggles to  survive.with dignity.  Elsie's strong Christian faith helps her  through one crisis after another. This moral  perspective is always expressed as a personal strength rather than as a political view.  The tone of the book is gentle, not preachy.  While her circumstances could legitimate  some bitterness or self-pity, Elsie never comes  across as a martyr or a victim.  This said, one does get the sense that  Elsie deliberately glosses over the hardships  she encounters with a somewhat idealized  view of herself asa'missionary'inher role as  a single mother. As a protective device, it  serves her well throughout her life. As a  narrative device, it renders her character  rather flat.  Elsie seems to lead a charmed life—.  neighbours and family are always available  to help her in emergencies, she always has  enough money, jobs are easily come by, she  can even afford to buy a house and hire a full  time nanny/housekeeper. Urban single  mothers, in these days of wide-spread unemployment, high rents, and absence of extended families, may find Elsie's story hard  to relate to because they lack her advantages.  It is Elsie's good fortune tha t she has the  resources necessarv to survive independently and with dignity, to survive without  the isolation and dehumanizing reliance on  impersonal government assistance which characterizes the lives of so many single mothers.  Elsie does speak briefly of some emotional hardship. Sometimes she finds herself  on the verge of giving up: "...tears came to  my eyes—tears of self-pity, of hopelessness,  of despair, of loneliness. It was not fair...,"  but Elsie never develops these feelings into a  critique of the social and political systems  which leave women relatively alone with  the responsibility of raising a family after the  departure of a partner. Nor does Elsie explore alternative living arrangements, such  as communal living with other single mothers—she lives as a 'chaste'widow, and eventually remarries.  "When Jim died, I looked death squarely  in the face and found myself wanting to die.  It was much harder to live. Death is not an  unhappy experience. It is those who remain  here who have the real struggle. Life is not  easy. How many times I have resented my  children because they held me here on ea rth—  made me live to take care of them."  The book often seems to be a catalogue  of traditional women's labour: childrearing,  housework, farmwork, teaching. El:  smooth-flowing prose, which she manaj^  as even-handedly and confidently as she did  her life, makes the ordinary take on a life of  its own.  The title None to Give Away refers to  Elsie's determination to keep all five of her  children, knowing that her tremendous  workload would be lessened if she gave up  some of her children for adoption. Instead,  she gives away other things. Like all single  mothers, what Elsie gives away is her time  and her energy. She doesn't have the time or  money to go out with friends, has very little  time to herself, and is certainly not free to  take a holiday when she reallv needs one.  These restrictions leave her feeling isolated, as does her awareness of the fact that  she often cannot reciprocate the gifts she  receives from her friends and family. She  ges      Rural Home with Mother and Child (detail) from cover of None to Give Away  does not want to be viewed as a charity case.  Yet no matter how hard she works, she  cannot keep up with the demands of a society that is structurally and morally based on  a heterosexual two-parent family unit. She  forces herself to ask for help—and somewhat unbelievably always gets it—but in  doing so, feels guilty and selfish.  Selfish for what reason? If one could  find a model example of 'a good Christian  woman' and a heroic human being, Elsie  would be it. So why does she feel guilty?  Where exactlv does this euilt come from?  Whom does it come from?  Unfortunately, Elsie never attempts to  answer this question in the book: she doesn't  even ask it. She reveals, "I did not trust  myself to say more. No one wants to hear of  others' sorrows. I had learned that the hard  way, those first hurting months of grief."  True enough. But things will never change if  people cannot work together towards creative solutions. Elsie writes her story with the  same self-censorship she practiced in her  everyday life. Is the combined weight of  guilt, isolation, and overwork the only source  of the silence that perpetuates the martyrdom of single mothers?  None to Give A way is an uplifting story of  one woman's courage, but lacks the emotional and intellectual analysis that would  make this a better read.  Heather Gray is a volunteer writer.  Paging  zv  o  m  e  n  by Christine Cosby  Looking for a new read? Paging Women is a regular feature in Kinesis designed to give you  a brief rundown of the recent books we've received for review. In addition to whetting the  appetite of any serious bookworms out there, we hope you'll be encouraged to pick up a few  of the following titles. Of course, nothing is without a selfish motivation, and Paging Women  hopes to entice some of you readers into writing — book reviews that is. Whether you're a  seasoned book review pro or a budding enthusiast, we'd love for you to write reviews in  Kinesis. Fiction and poetry books are yours to keep after review, non-fiction and reference  materials will be passed on to the Vancouver Status of Women's resource library. So don't  be shy, call 255-5499. Here's a short list of recent titles.  The Company of Strangers by Mary Meigs. Renowned author Mary Meigs spent two years  writing this extraordinary narrative. It begins as herstory of being in the National Film Board film  The Company of Strangers and unfolds into a gentle, intricate meditation on the experience of time,  old age, magic and binding. Interzvoven with her reflections on time, aging and the phenomenon of  film, are her portraits of each cast member on and off-camera. The eight women are strangers who first  become company, then friends. (Talonbooks, Vancouver 1991)  The Cracks by Anne Dandurand, translated by Luise von Flotow. This is a funny, poignant,  erotic novel about a Montreal woman at odds with society and herself. In first person, the heroine  recounts with alarming candour the pain of a recent abortion, struggles with her own writing,  encounters with lovers, and friendships with women. (The Mercury Press, Stratford, Ontario  1992)  Come Spring: Journey of a Sansei by Haruko Okano. The latest in Gallerie's Women Artists'  Monographs series, Haruko Okano's art and words combine in telling a story of Okano's battles  against racism and internalized racism to uncover her personal history and reclaim Iter Japanese-  Canadian culture and heritage. Come Spring is a powerful story of a child's survival through themost  painful conditions human beings inflict on one another. And it is the story of the role of art in healing  the revealing the most important aspects of human life. (Gallerie: Women Artists' Monographs,  North Vancouver 1992)  Mother, Not Mother by di brandt. Poet di brandt explores the most enduring and complex of all  relationships, the ever-changing affinity of mother and daughter. These poems explore the curious  balance of being forever first a daughter, and then a mother. Fierce and passionate, it is a book that  celebrates the feminine. (The Mercury Press, Stratford, Ontario 1992)  Consider The Hollyhocks by Marg Wilson. In this collection of short stories, Marg Wilson  demonstrates her ability to show the complex effects of what might appear to be simple events, giving  the stories a luminous power and authenticity. As well, Wilson reveals a sensitive understanding  of how children see themselves and the often indirect betrayal by adults. (The Mercury Press,  Stratford, Ontario 1992)  The Deconstruction of Wesley Smithson by Sarah Murphy. This collection of three compelling  stories leads the reader through the characters' quests for themselves. A journalist, the daughter of  an advertising executive, and the survivors of torture are all piecing together the story to make sense  of and to bring an order to the madness of the worldaround and within us. In a non-traditional format,  the section Paramilitary Parafictions offers a set of footnotes in search of their text. (The Mercury  Press, Stratford, Ontario 1992)    .  Beyond The Lighthouse by Winona Baker. This latest collection from Winona Baker is an eclectic  gathering of traditional, modern, feminist haiku and humorous poetry. The rainforest landscape is  a pervasive presence throughout. Baker's poetry bridges the separation ive experience in relationships  with a voice that delights in the coniic and celebrates the ordinary. (Oolichan Books, Lantsville, BC  1992)  Moss-Hung Trees: Haiku of the West Coast by Winona Baker.   Baker's haiku poems are  reprinted in this special collection which also features the calligraphy of Christine McKim.  (Reflections, Gabriola, BC 1992)  Children's Books  World-Active: Facts & Puzzles About Our World by Deborah Manley with Oxfam. This  little book is packed with facts, games and activities for children, and adults too. With topics such  as 'women's work,' tree planting, food production and literacy, Oxfam s book travels from Jamaica  to Ethiopia to Nicaragua in its effort to challenge "First World" children into thinking about life  outside of their own personal experience. (Pan Macmillan Children's Books, London 1992)  You're My Nikki by Phyllis Rose Eisenberg, illustrations by Jill Kastner. In this story, Nikki's  mother is about to start a new job and Nikki is worried her mother won't remember her. After a long  day, Nikki is finally satisfied that her mother will always know her. As well, Nikki comes to realize  that mothers also need to know that they won't be forgotten. (Dial Books for Young Readers, New  York 1992)  November 1992  17 Arts  Arts  Book review: Life-Size;  Cynthia Flood:  Striving for perfection  My father and cakes  by Wendy Breen-Needham  LIFE-SIZE  by Jenefer Shute  New York: Houghton Miffin, 1992  Sometimes, when I'm in a room with  women I'm unacquainted with, I find that  telling diet anecdotes breaks the ice.  Concern about our weight is a common  thread among many women in this society.  Almostevery Western woman isorhasbeen  affected by the diet treadmill in some way.  Some of us know, first hand, about the fine  line that runs between diet and anorexia,  between beauty and death.  Jenefer Shute's first novel, Life-Size, is a  stunning book about a young woman who  crosses that line and, on the brink of death  by starvation, is placed in an eating disorder  treatment centre.  The entire novel takes place in the hospital. Josie, the67-pound protagonist, slowly  regains the ability to eat as she learns  again the necessity of food for the human  body under the watchful eye of her nurse  and only friend, Suzanne.  Her 'cure' is supplemented by therapy,  supervised meals to ensure she eats, exercise, "shopping lessons" and the threat  of "hyperalimentation" or force-feeding.  But, it is only through Josie's new-found  ability to connect with Suzanne that we see  the first signs of real progress in Josie's condition.  As Josie floats in and out of consciousness, we are taken back in time through  Josie's memory, glimpses of a past shed  light on the source of her illness.  Josie is a 25-year-old graduate  student in pursuit of the perfection of  body and mind. Raised on the ideals  of consumerism, materialism and the  objectification of the self—the all-too-familiar standbys of white, middle-class North  American family life—she, naturally, falls  for the promise of visual perfection.  Josie "studied the magazines," in her  search for the ideal image, and felt theallure  of a department store's magic. "Time  was suspended there, and an overwhelming appetite possessed you: not to buy but  to become, tobecome as perfect, as immaculate, as the objects displayed jewel-like in  their glass cases."  She begins an obsessive cycle of calorie  counting and exercise, followed by the inevitable binging when she is unable to  maintain the rigid goals she has set for herself.  Yet it is Josie's soul that is really malnourished. She has a dysfunctional relation-  KISS from page 14  other. The video also has the women talking  about their sexual histories and about the  difference between censorship and getting  angry, particularly relevant in view of the  current mainstream backlash against "political correctness."  The video concludes with an image of  two women kissing and cuddling disrupted  by the words, "Censored: by gay bashers,"  reminding us that silencing can take many  forms.  It is unfortunate that Kiss and Tell do little  more than allude to another form of silencing,  namely racism. While there are occasional  references to racism, including a comment on  the performers'relative visibility/invisibility  as white/lesbian, and an interview with a  lesbian of colour in the video, the issue is not  examined in any detail.  White lesbians may riskourlivesinorder  to fuck each other, but we must recognize our  privilege—visibility for lesbians of colour carries additional risks.  The final sequence of the performance  has each of the women in turn reading a  coming-out letter to her mother. The letters  will never be sent, as the relationship imagined with the mother in each of the letters is  not possibleforvariousreasons. Lizard keeps  her lesbianism a sec ret, Persimmon is uncomfortable with her mother's too-ready acceptance, and Susan's mother is dead. The letters—and the stylish "live credits" that follow—constitute a very moving conclusion to  a powerful, thought-provoking show.  Given the lack of lesbian-produced representations of lesbian sexuality available, it  is remarkable that three artists of such obvious talent can come together to create works  that continue to provide both pleasure and  political challenges long after the houselights  have come up.  Kathleen Oliver is a very tired, regular  Kinesis writer.  __   FOR  FEMINIST  THE0RY&  ITERATURE  par-racus  BOOKS  311 W. HASTINGS ST. VANCOUVER  V6B1H6 TEL. 688-6138  new and  gently used books  Feminist  Philosophy - Poetry  Native - General  Open daily 11am -7pn  Coffee Bar  1020 Commercial. Drive  Vancouver BC V5L 3W9  (604) 253-1099  Bonnie Murray  Cynthi* Brooke  ship with her family: she is contemptuous  of her mother's traditional role, her father's  incestuous abuse and her brother's  unquestioning complacency. She is distant  with female friends, valuing only their looks.  Attempts to relate to lovers are even more  disastrous, from a basic lack of communication to feelings of isolation and despair,  resulting in more binges and guilt.  Josie never seeks solutions beyond her  personal circumstances. She never ties her  emaciation to anything beyond a test of will.  She says, "I'm not a feminist," and "I've  never suffered because I'm a woman."  Although Josie's story is told in the first  person, there a re times when she is too a wa re  of her condition as an outsider, a third-  person perspective. For instance, she sees  her "stick legs, which pucker purple and  ivory" and her wrists as "frail and pitiful,"  not as the beautiful body an anorexic is more  likely to see. It raises the question: if she  can see the harm she is doing to her  body, wouldn't she want to stop it?  Shute has done her research well. Almost too well. Often it appears as if all the  traits and experiences of every person with  an eating disorder come up in the character  of Josie, like so many split personalities.  Shute's descriptive powers are undeniable, however, and help to smooth out these  rough spots. Throughout the book, her images of food—"a corpse and a tree; a fluid  secreted by bovine mammary glands. Gobs  of congealed grease"—and of people eating—"sinking their teeth into muscle and  gristle and blood"—are enough to turn one  off food, at least for the duration of the read.  On the whole, Shute creates a sadly  believable, sometimes confused, sometimes  wise, portrait of a woman—one who suffers  catatonia, and is moved to tears and rage at  the sight of a meal tray.  Looking back in my life, after reading  Life-Size, I see my cousin and me as teenagers walking down a sidewalk on a late  summer afternoon admiring our long, thin  shadows. Three days into one of our.many  fasts, we encircled our wrists easily between  thumband forefinger,proudlyranourhands  over protruding pelvic bones, prominent  cheek bones and deep hollows above our  collar bones.  And today, when I watch my tall-for-  her-age, slim 11-year-old jump from the  scales in horror or pinch the taut skin on her  stomach exclaiming how fat she is, I cringe.  Reading Life-Size, one is reminded howclose  to the nightmare side the quest for the  ideal body really is.  Wendy Breen-Needlwm is a member of the  Gabriola Women's Writing Group  by Margaret Bricker  MY FATHER TOOK A CAKE TO  FRANCE  By Cynthia Flood  Vancouver: Talonbooks, 1992  Vancouver writer Cynthia Flood's latest  collection of short fiction is a haphazard mix  of the brilliant and the mundane. Of the  thirteen writings that make upMy Father Took  A Cake To France, only a few delight. The rest  are disappointingly mediocre. This polarity— where a few stories are powerful for  their depth of insight and technical strength  while mostare forgettable—is disturbing and  accentuates the mediocrity of the many, rather  than the brilliance of the few.  However, this does not mean My Fattier  is to be dismissed altogether—it does merit  reading. The brilliance that comes across in  the title piece, "My Father Took a Cake to  France," for which Flood won the Journey  prize for fiction in 1990, alone makes buying  the book worthwhile.  But the collection's finest story for me,  however, is "The Meaning of the Marriage."  A woman journeys through history in search  of the stories that make her be. The storyteller  gathers the disjointed moments of living and  weaves them together like old Mrs. Perrin's  "splendid crazy quilt." This is a tale about  stories and storytellers, about memory and  time. The storyteller continually bumps into  the walls of her own creation, unable to tell the  story she must.  Cynthia Flood  In direct contrast to the work's title,  Flood implies an absence of meaning, erecting in its place a scattering of unremembered  stories that are as ambiguous as the storytellers themselves.  Certainly in thematic terms, Flood seems  most at home in her fiction when addressing  socio-political issues and examining their  effect upon the individual. Flood's feminist  commentary is committed to unveiling the  inequalities and idiosyncracies of both the  physical and spiritual worlds—a quest for  real democracy. In "The Meaning of the  Marriage," Flood mocks marriage as an institution and the patriarchal heritage of a  hard and impenetrable language. She explores the alienation of women in the work  force in "The Miner's Messenger/'abortion  in "Winter into Spring", divorce and the  family unit in "Bodies of Water", and the  horrors of child abuse and mental deterioration in "A Life".  In each of her works, the immediacy of  the issue is finely woven into the tapestry of  the story. The author's political voice is  never so aggressive as to alienate or intrude  upon the technical writing itself.  And on the whole, Flood's writing style  is refreshingly sparse and unadorned. A  precisearrangement of words complements  her thematic focus on social consciousness.  One exception is the final story, "The Skein,"  which follows a woman's attempts through  analysis to understand herself through dreams.  Perhaps the weakest story in the book,  "The Skein" could have been written with  more subtlety. Instead, it over-analyzes the  obvious. Even as Flood attempts to portray  the character's journey through her unconscious into the ethereal world of imagination, one gets no feel for her psyche. A more  poetic, fluid style could have captured the  illusion of the workings of the woman's  mind. Most disappointing, at the end of the  story, is an unconvincing "so this is who I am  and why" in twenty words and more.  Also, where the author's sparse style  succeeds, her dialogue falters—it's a stutter  in the ear, lacking the rhythm and spontaneity of real speech. The bumbling banter  between analyst and patient, patient and  self, is painful reading in "The Skein." And  dialogue comprises nearly the entirety of  "Design and Spontaneity," a story of human  Itsy bitsy teeny   weeny book reviews  by Kathleen Oliver  WRITTEN ON THE BODY  By Jeannette Winterson  New York: Alfred A. Knopf, $24.50  Jeannette Win terson's latest offers more  of the lush prose and breathtaking sensual  description we've come to expect from the  author of Oranges Are Not the Only Fruit and  The Passion.  Through the eyes of a narrator of unsaid gender, Winterson explores a  dying lover's body in microscope detail.  Winterson's flights of fancy are more restrained here, with an undertone of sadness  and resignation to the idea that love's greatest companion is inevitably loss.  by Susan Briscoe  LIFE SKILLS  By Marlis Wesseler  Regina: Coteau Books, 1992, 93 pages,  $8.95  Life Skills is a new collection of short  stories by Saskatchewan-based writer Marlis  Wesseler. The 13 stories are written from  the perspectives of various heterosexual,  white, Canadian women exploringboth their  intimate and social relationships.  The stories cover a wide range of situations, from daily life in northern Canada  and travel experiences around the world, to  dying in a hospital bed. Voices in the stories  are authentic, sometimes cheerfully cynical  or bored, sometimes full of pain and uncertainty. The variety of visions presented in  the stories is held together by Wesseler's  insight, which makes the mundane as interesting as the rare spiritual moment.  by Tracey Dietrich  WILD CARD  By Assumpta Margenat, translated from  Catalan by SheilaMcIntosh  Seattle: Women in Translation, 1992,  178 pages, $8.95  Assumpta's first novel is set in Andorra,  a tiny kingdom between Spain and France, a  tourist's and smuggler's paradise.  feminist  ~ARTS NEWS  Wouldn't ii be wonderful to find a magazine that challenges  stereotypes and confronts our ideas? —'well, such a magazine  Subscribe to Feminist Arts News and keep in touch with the  variety of cultural strategies women use to keep our voices  being heard....and have FAN delivered to your door.  Address    Postcode    Individual £9 Organisation f 14  Overseas: Individual £14 Organisation £16  I enclose a cheque for payable to  Feminist Arts News  All payments to be made in pounds sterling  FAN Unit 26,30-38 Dodc Street  Leeds LS10UF.U,K  (0532)429964  25 Badt sues of FAN are available — Disability Arts. The Lesbian issue.  Working Qass women working it exit!. Censorship and lots lots more.  And Books  Celebrating Menopause  The Change'Coming Into Our  Fullness'Women of the Fourteenth  Moon»The Menopause Self Help  Book»The Silent Passage  all available now  1988 West 4th & Maple  Vancouver, BC V611M5 (604)733-3511  k  VANCOUVER  WOMEN'S  BOOKSTORE  315 Cambie Street  Vancouver, B.C. V6B 2N4  (604) 684-0523  Hours: Monday - Saturday  7*  11:00-5i30pm  J  1146 Commercial § Phone: 253-0913  The main character is Rocio, a courageous and innovative young woman from  Barcelona who works as a supermarket  clerk.  Bored with her job and her sexist boss,  Rocio schemes with her sister to dupe him  of his monthly take and, together with two  cocktail waitresses, outsmarts several corrupt men at their own fraudulent games.  by Gladys We  WOMEN'S GLIBBER: STATE-OF-  THE-ART WOMEN'S HUMOR  Edited by Roz Warren Freedom, CA:  The Crossing Press, 1992 US $12.95  I've been showing this book to my  friends since I brought it home to review,  and I can't rave enough about it.  Roz Warren has assembled a collection of jokes that will have most feminists  howling when they read it. It's hard to do  'feminist' humour well, but this book succeeds quite nicely.  Of course, with over a hundred contributors, including Lynda Barry (Ernie  Pook's Comeek), Alison Bechdel (Dykes to  Watch Out For), Nicole Hollander (Sylvia),  and Nina Paley (Nina's Adventures), it's  hard to fail.  My only disappointment is that it has  only one cartoon by Trina Robbins, but  then again, it does contain many cartoons  and jokes from many women I've never  heard of, but will now look out for.  There's also a 1993 Women's Glibber  calendar which contains many of these  jokes. Either book is worth buying as a  gift—for someone else, or for yourself.  UNDER OBSERVATION  By Amalie Skram, translated from the  Norwegian by Katherine Hanson and  Judith Messick  Seattle: Women in Translation, 1992,  US $15.95  Originally published in 1895, this book  sparked a series of reforms in the psychiatric institutions in Norway.  It's the fictionalized story of Amalie  Skram, who putherselfintoanasylum when  she was going through an emotional breakdown because of a difficult marriage.-  She found herself under the power of a  doctor who saw her independence and creativity as symptoms of insanity, and cut her  off from the outside world.  The rather effusive (I'm tempted to call  .it romantic) writing style is clearly 19th-  century and takes some getting used to.  Skram's story may bore some of us, but is  worth reading because it looks at how the  male medical establishment disempowered  women.  It's worth noting, too, that many of the  horrible events in the book could sound  rather familiar to some of us today.  ANGRY WOMEN  Edited by Andrea Juno and V. Vale  San Francisco: Re/Search Publications,  1991, $24.75  This book has been around for about a  year, but it's still current and worth reviewing. The 16 performance artists and writers  in Angry Women were exploring unspeakable sexual barriers way before Madonna  made a similar claim about her book Sex.  And these 16 women are far more articulate  about it.  interaction in which guests converse philosophically over dinner. The effect is strictly  pedantic, however. Only the young boy's  sporadic interjections—which go curiously  unheard by the others—work to echo a mealtime symphony.  Characterization is both Flood's strength  and weakness. At times her characters lack  vitality and dimension. Consequently, certain stories fail to induce the necessary bond  between reader and character. Characters too  often crawl about the pages half clad, like  sketches with only a thin first wash of colour.  There are some fascinating exceptions.  Corinne is the recalcitrant femme fatale of  "Watching," a multi-dimensional seductress  and sexual aggressor. And the father in "My  Father Took A Cake To France" is an insightful study in the fluidity and inconsistency of  self. Flood has gotten this character down so  precisely that the pages smell of the defecation on his slippers and tremble with his  rasping voice.  There are brilliant moments scattered  throughout Flood's fiction. While characters  and dialogue often stick flatly to the page,  most noteworthy are the "My Father Took a  Cake to France" and "The Meaning of the  Marriage," in which Flood's vision resonates  with passion and clarity. I can only hope that  Flood's fluctuation between styles and haphazard adornment of narrative voices are  indicative of a journey toward finding the  voice that fits.  Margaret Bricker is a first time writer for  Kinesis and new to Vancouver.  Annie Sprinkle inspects her cervix and  gives blow jobs on stage. Susie Bright (editor of On Our Backs) talks about pornogra-  phy,lesbian erotica,and censorship. Carolee  Schneemann's theatre pieces mix blood, fish,  chicken parts, raw sausages, and naked bodies.  Other women discuss S&M and lesbianism, being active in ACT-UP, and a host  of other controversial subjects. These are  women who have taken control of their  images without making themselves into  "boytoys." If you're looking forhonest, sometimes shocking, discussions about sex, look  here, not in Sex.  IN OUR BACKYARD:  A GREATER VANCOUVER  ENVIRONMENTAL GUIDE  By Peggy Trendell Whittaker  Vancouver: Whitecap Books, 1992, $8.95  The subtitle of this book says it all: "A  Greater Vancouver environmental guide that  makes sense of issues and problems of the  Lower Mainland, giving us the basics about  where our water comes from, where our  sewage goes, what is happening to the air we  breathe."  The book is chatty and full of practical  advice on 'going green'in Vancouver. If your  habits are already'green,'you probably won't  need this—most of the advice can be found in  almost every other environmental book.  If your habits are not green: turn out your  lights and be 'Power Smart'; recycle cans and  bottles; try biking instead of driving to work.  What I found most useful were the local  addresses—foreverythingfromcompostdem-  ons tra tion gardens to where to get rid of your  hazardous waste to 'green' vacation spots  around British Columbia.  NOVEMBER 1992  NOVEMBER 1992 Letters  dear     reader  KYnes/sloves receiving mail. Please  get your letter to us by the 18th of the  month.  If you can, keep the length of to  about 500 words.    (If you go way  over, we might edit for space.)  Hope to hear from you very soon.  Love,  Kinesis  A not so  funny mistake  Kinesis:  I refer to Lissa Geller's review on the  Vancouver International Comedy Festival,  "Lines without the punch" in the September  92 issue of Kinesis.  I was happy to read that one of your  writers, Lissa J. Geller, liked "the brash in-  your-face, dyke humour of Jan Derbyshire."  According to Lissa, "she also stood out as the  only woman doing lesbian jokes." Lissa's  review then stated that the other comedians,  "with the exception of Jan Derbyshire, were  apparently straight/'  It's wonderful to get a nice review but,  because I am Jan Derbyshire, I feel compelled to point out Lissa's mistake: Lissa  has assumed that certain comedic attributes  (brash, in-your-face) are the sole property of  gay women. She has also assumed that only  a lesbian can tell a joke about another lesbian. I believe that a good comedian's style  has little to do with who they make it with.'  A comedian'shumour reflects their perceptions of the world and, to be successful in  comedy, this perception should make almost everybody laugh—not just those that  share the comedian's specific background.  I'm glad Lissa liked the show, but she did  make some dangerous leaps in logic.  I hope I do not offend her humorous  sensibility when she discovers I am straight.  Hopefully, she will see that this has little to  do with the comedy I perform. The proof, of  course, being that she enjoyed my show. I  guess my greatest wish is to be knownas just  a good comedian, regardless of who I do or  don't fuck.  Sincerely,  Jan Derbyshire  Vancouver, BC  (Ed note: Lissa Geller apologises for having  made the assumption that Jan Derbyshire is a  lesbian.)  A case  for drugs  Kinesis:  I read with interest the commentary in  your September 1992 issue by Terry Gibson,  "A Tale of Survival."I am delighted that she,  along with many others, has been able to  wean herself off intensivedrug treatment by  our Mental Health system.  I, however, have shared a very different  perspective with my best friend. Jill is  diagnosed as paranoid schizophrenic. Hospitalized on a sporadic basis since the age of  23, she was eventually prescribed a drug  that not only allows her to function but to  take a full part in and enjoy her life. She was  on this drug when I first met her, and I was  not awa re of her diagnosis or her need for the  drug, until she chose to tell me.  In 1985, after reading much about the  anti-psychiatry theory of the feminist movement, Jill chose, with the assistance of a feminist therapist, to stop taking the drug. Within  four weeks, she was notable to function without direction. Within six weeks, she needed  24-hour care to makesurethatshe took careof  thebasicsoflife—shestoppedeating,stopped  working, wa s incapable of remembering why  she began a sentence before she reached the  end, and abused her caregivers.  We, exhausted, were not supported by  other feminists when we asked them, individuals and groups, for help. Her feminist  therapist refused to deal with her, except in  group or private counselling—which Terry  points outisdetermined by one's incomeand,  therefore, frequently unavailable.  Jill has a disease caused by a proven  chemical imbalance. Luckily, the drug IMAP  is able to restore this balance, allowing her to  lead a normal life.  Please do not indiscriminately counsel  all women in the mental health system  to stop their treatment regardless of their  diagnosis. Please do not isolate women who  cannot cope without drugs from the feminist  community.  Having a mental illness is isolating  enough. Being discriminated against by the  feministcommunity because you accept treatment from mainstream society is a form of  abuse that needs to be addressed.  Sincerely,  Susan Moore,  Mission, BC  Being  drug free  Kinesis:  While Sue Moore's letter is supportive  of myself and others like me, and does not  direct anger at us, I need to state my position  on some of the points she raised.  First, I do not claim to be an expert on  psychiatric diagnosis and openly acknowledge my ignorance. Also, my anti-psychiatric stance does not naturally follow from  my being a feminist. My feelings and limited knowledge come from my own series  of labels, drug treatment and reactions to it.  Being anti-drug is a personal choice.  On September 1,1 accepted full responsibility for that and am now drug-free. Knowing  how difficult that process has been—even  as I am filled with pain watching some of  my friends'lives shrinking before my eyes—  I would never blindly encourage anyone to  throw away their pills. Nor would I reject  those who don't.  In spite of my own feelings about drugs  in general, I firmly believe that, if medication improves the quality of one's life and  removes one from immediate danger, then  psychoactive drugs fill a real need. Who has  the right to make judgements about that?  That is not what writing my story was  about. I needed to do it to help me gain a  sense of completion and to have that information accessible to all. 1 am as respectful of  Jill's situation as I am of my own.  Sincerely,  Terry Gibson,  Vancouver, BC  the world as if women counted  LU  o  o  o  Wednesday, November 4, 1992  (Langara Campus, A130)  On Our Own Terms  in the world  Shelagh Day;  National Action Committeee on the Status of  Women;  After the Referendum; What Now?  Marjorie Cohen;  SFU, Women's Studies and Political Science:  Women's Economies in the World  Miriam Palacios;  Women to Women, and Oxfam:  NAFTA: Historical and International  Perspective  Pat Willson, Haisla Nation;  S00 years of Resistance  Moderator: Theresa Tait,  Native Programs Br., LSS  Performance by singer/  songwriter Sandy Scofield  Wednesday, November 18, 1992  (Langara Campus, Room L001*)  On Our Own Terms  in the workplace  Mary Rowles;  B.C. Federation of Labour:  Affirmative Action;  Opportunity Versus Result  Joan Meister, DisAbled Women's Network  (Canada);  Employment Equity and the Disabled  Gail Sparrow;  Musqueem Nation:  First Nations Women in the Workplace  Gwen Brodsky, B.C. Public Interest Advocacy  Lesbian Rights in the Workplace  Sunera Thobani;  South Asian Women's Action Network:  Immigration Policy and Women at Work  Moderator: Kate Braid,  SFU, Labour Studies  Performance by story teller  Nora Randall, Random Acts  Wednesday, November 25, 1992  (Langara Campus, ABO)  On Our Own Terms  in the home  Jean Swanson;  End Legislated Poverty, NAFTA:  Women and Poverty from a  Tri-National Perspective  Cecilia Dioscin,  Philippine Women's Centre:  Domestic Worker's issues  Barbara Binns: Langara;  Valuing Women's Work in Community  and Home  Angie Todd-Dennis; Carrier Nation:  First Nation's Perspectives  Moderator: Patty Moore,  Langara  Performance by singer  Penny Singh  VANCOUVER  COMMUNITY  COLLEGE  Langara Campus  In three evening presentations, panelists will discuss women's issues & experiences at work, at home, in the economy,  communities and from our past realities and into the future...  Co-Sponsored by Vancouver Status of Women • Women and Work Research and Education Society • Women's Studies, VCC Langara  Women to Women Global Strategies Group • Native Program Branch, Legal Services Society  Department of Interdisciplinary Studies, VCC Langara  November 4, 18 & 25, 1992 • 7:30 PM Admission is FREE  Vancouver Community College Langara Campus • 100 West 49th Avenue • Vancouver  * Nov. 4 and 25th sessions will be held in room A130, the Nov.l8th session will be held in Room L001 (Basement of the Library).  Please call 324-5511 for more information, or to arrange childcare.  KINESIS  NOVEMBER 1992 Bulletin Board  READ THIS  Bulletin Board listings have a maximum  of 50 words. Groups, organizations and  individuals eligible for free space in the  Bulletin Board must be, or have, nonprofit objectives. Other free notices will  be items of general public interest and  will appear at the discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $8(+$0.56 GST) for the  f i rst 50 words or portion thereof, $4(+$0.28  GST) for each additional 25 words or  portion thereofand must be prepaid.  Deadlinefor all submissions isthe 18th of  the month preceding publication.  Note: Kinesis is published ten times a  year. Jul/Aug and Dec/Jan are double  issues.  All submissions should include a  contact name and telephone number for  any clarification that may be required.  Listings will not be accepted over the  telephone. No submissions will be  accepted over the telephone.  Kinesis encourages readers to  research the goods and services  advertised in the Bulletin Board. Kinesis  cannot guarantee the accuracy of the  information provided nor the safety and  effectiveness of the servicesand products  listed.  Send submissions to Bulletin  Board, Kinesis, #301-1720 Grant Street,  Vancouver, BC, V5L 2Y6. For more  information call 255-5499.  We have very  reasonable ad rates  Call 255*5499 for  more info  EVENTS  EVENTS  EVENTS  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis! We want to get involved with  you too. Help plan our next issue. Come to  the Writers' meeting on Nov 3 at 7 pm at our  office, #301-1720 Grant St. If you can't  make the meeting, call 255-5499. No experience necessary, all women welcome.  NOT JUST ANOTHER PAGE  The Not Just Another Page Collective welcomes all First Nations women and women  of colour who are past, present and possibly  future Kinesis volunteers to our next meeting on Thur, Nov 26 at 7:30 pm. For info on  location and to arrange childcare subsidies,  please contact Agnes Huang at 875-1640.  VSW WANTS YOU!  Want to get more involved but not sure  where to begin? Join us—become a volunteer at Vancouver Status of Women. VSW  volunteers plan events, lead groups, raise  funds, answer the phone lines and help to  connect women with the community resources they need, organize the library and  other exciting tasks! Come to Committee  meetings: Resource Centre Mon, Nov 16,6  pm;Finance/Fundraising,Tues,Nov17,5:30  pm: Publicity, Wed, Nov 18, 5:30 pm; Programming, Thurs, Nov 19, 5:30 pm. The  next volunteer potluck and orientation will be  on Thurs, Nov 19, 7 pm at VSW #301 -1720  Grant Street. For more info, call Jennifer at  255-5511.  VISITING ARTIST  The 7th in a Video Criticism series with  visiting video artist Marilyn Burgess of Montreal. Burgess presents a visual history of  the image of the cowgirl in Canada and the  US. At Video In, 1102 Homer St, Nov 26 at  8 pm. Tix $3 members, $4 non-members.  Call 688-4336 for more info.  SADIE BENNING  Video artist Sadie Benning presents her  most recent work, heralded at gay and  lesbian festivals all over, "The Works of  Sadie Benning." This video examines adolescent dykedom with honesty, immediacy  and wit. At Video In, 1102 Homer St, Nov  27 at 9 pm. Tix $3 members, $4 non-  members. Call 688-4336 for more info.  ART A LA CARTE  An affordable art auction featuring plates  presented by the Tamahnous Theatre including works by BC artists Nancy Bryant,  Susan Gransby, Teri Snelgrove and Shirley  Inouye among others. Held at the Petley  Jones Gallery, 2245 Granville St, Nov 22.  Brunch and viewing 1 -2 pm, auction 2-4 pm.  Admission free. RSVP by Nov 13 at 688-  CULTURAL APPROPRIATION  Two panel discussions on contemporary  cultural issues will be held on Nov 28 and 29  from 4-6 pm at Tamahnous Theatre, 101  Powell St. The panels will focus on "issues  of cultural appropriation" and "appropriation  of Native Spirituality". For   more info call  INSTALLATION  An installation by Sher-Azad Jamal that  explores the ways in which the artist's body  is defined by gender, class, race and sexu  ality will be showing at Basic Inquiry at 901  Main Nov6-28. For more infocall 873-6905.  LIL CHRZAN EXHIBITION  An exhibition of oil paintings at the Ferry  Bldg, 1414 Argyle Ave, W. Vancouver. Opening Nov 17 at 8 pm. Show runs Nov 17-29.  CRIAW CONFERENCE  The 16th Annual Canadian Research Institute for the Advancement of Women Conference, entitled "Making Links: Anti-Racism and Feminism," focuses on issues of  age, class, ability, and sexuality within the  framework of anti-racist feminism. Contact  Rita Kholi, 512 Bathurst St #03, Toronto,  M5S2P9, (416)962-6469.  ABORTION RIGHTS  The U of Vic Students' Society Lecture  Series features Dr. Henry Morgentaler  speaking on "Humanism & Right to Abortion", a fundraiser for the Morgentaler  Defense Fund. At University Centre Auditorium, U of Vic, Nov 10 at 8 pm. Tix $10  members, $12 other students, $16 general  public. Call 721-8972 for more info.  TOWARDS EQUALITY  CONFERENCE  The Canadian Teacher's Federation  presents a conference on "Women, Education and Quality of Life." Conference offers  workshops on classroom strategies for  equality, gender, race and equity, classroom harassment etc. and speakers include Audrey McLaughlin and Judge Andree  Ruffo. Nov 26-28 in St. John's Nfld. For  more info call (613) 232-1505 or write 110  Argyle Ave, Ottawa, K2P 1B4.  NOVEMBER 1992 Bulletin Board  EVENTS  EVENTS  EVENTS  MAHARANI & THE MAPLE LEAF  Written by Jan Derbyshire andstarring Veena  Sood, this performance runs from Oct 15-  Nov 8. Tix $8-15 at the Firehall Arts Centre,  280 E. Cordova. Call 689-0926 for more  info.  NAWL CONFERENCE  The Tenth Biennial National Association of  Women and the Law Conference, with over  25 panels, plenaries and workshops, will  explore topics such as anti-racism and feminism, women's prisons, lesbian strategies,  pay equity and much more on Feb 19-21 at  the Sheraton Landmark Hotel, Vancouver.  For more info call 255-1811 or write Box  21548, 1850 Commercial Dr, Vancouver,  V5N 4A0.  JAZZ SINGING  The Coastal Jazz & Blues Society presents  an evening with jazz singer Sheila Jordan  and bassist HarvieSwartz atthe Vancouver  East Cultural Centre, Nov8at 8pm. Tix$22.  For more info call 254-9578.  FOLK SINGING  The Vancouver Folk Music Festival presents  Ani diFranco, original singer/songwriter and  the hit of last summer's festival, at the  Vancouver East Cultural Centre, Nov 22 at  8 pm. Tix $18. For more info call 254-9578.  COMEDY PERFORMANCE  If you missed Christine Taylor's play, "Man  on the Moon, Women on the Pill" at the  Women in View and Comedy Festivals you  can catch it at the Vancouver East Cultural  Centre Nov 3-7 at 8:30 pm. Tix $10-15. For  more info call 254-9578.  JOSEPHINE'S  Canadian prairie's folk/jazz/blues singer  Tracey Riley performs at Josephine's Nov 6  at 8 pm. Tix on sliding scale $5-10. For more  info call 253-3142.  WOMEN'S OPEN STAGE  All entertainers welcome and performers  are encouraged to sign up. Doors open at  Josephine's Nov 27 at 7 pm. Tix on sliding  scale from $1-3. For more info call 253-  3142.  LEAGUE FOR PEACE & FREEDOM  The Women's International League for Peace  and Freedom is sponsoring a one day  conference called "Women of the 90's —  From Backlash to Empowerment". Speakers include Patricia Graham and Frances  Wasserlein. Registration $15-25. Nov 7,  9:30 am to 4 pm. Call Shawna at 874-4585  or Marjorie at 734-7852.  ART OPENING  Vancouver artist Sima Elizabeth Shefrin  presents her exhibition "Places of Hope,  Places of Pride: Towards Peace in the Middle East," Oct 27-Nov 24 at the Gateway  Theatre Gallery, 6500 Gilbert Rd, Richmond.  VSW RESOURCE CENTRE  Vancouver Status of Women's resource  centre is open Wed nights 5-8 pm and Mon-  Thurs 10-5 pm. Help other volunteers catalogue books and update resource files. All  women welcome to browse through our  resources. #301-1720 Grant St, Vancou-  ver. For info call 255-5511.  INTERNATIONAL LESBIAN WEEK  Planning marches, dances, workshops and  more is now underway for the 7th Annual  International Lesbian Week. Any lesbian or  group of lesbians is welcome to the next  meetingonNov22,7pm, at the GLC, 1170  Bute St. Call Mary at 254-2553f or more info.  WOMEN IN VIEW  The fifth Annual Women in View festival  begins Jan 22-31,1993 and tix go on sale  Dec 7. Held at various venues, this festival  showcases women in the performing arts.  Info 685-VIEW.  REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY  NFB film and discussion on twofilms "Making Babies" and "Making Perfect Babies"  probes the links between patriarchy, science and industry in this growing business.  Free admission, Nov2, SFU, 515 W. Hastings, 7 pm. For more info call 666-3838.  DESSERT AUCTION  The Divine 5th Annual Dessert Auction sponsored by the Women in View Festival featuring a sumptuous dinner followed by the  desserts of local celebs Svend Robinson,  Betty Baxter, Veda Hille and others. Door  prizes include a night at the Pacific Palisades Hotel. Held Nov 7 at Isadora's, 1540  Old Bridge Rd, Granville Island. Tix $30  single, $50 double.  BOOMER  Linda Neimann will read from Boomer, an  autobiographical recounting of a lesbian's  ride into male territory—into violence and  alcohol. Nov 8 at 7:30pm at Josephine's,  1716 Charles Street..  SEE JANE FLY  A Word Cabaret for The Women's Movement Project, takes place at the Glass Slipper Nov 9. Performance artist Sheri-D  Wilson, comedian Jan Derbyshire and Kate  Braid of the Vancouver Industrial Writers  Union are among 10 local women who will  weave their word magic to help raise funds  to build a monument dedicated to women  murdered by men. Tickets $8 ($4 unwaged).  For info call 873-3308.  COUNTRY AND WESTERN NIGHT  Gazebo Connection presents Vancouver's  first all-women country and western night on  Nov14attheWestEndCommunity Centre.  Dancing lessons by Seattle's dynamic Don na  E from 7-9 pm and dancing from 9-12 am.  Come on down and enjoy your favourite  female country artist. $5 cover charge.  MUSICAL WOMEN  Take a day away and play, listen, walk and  talk with your island sisters on Nov 21,  Galiano Island. Amateurs and professionals, players and listeners all welcome! Spon  sored by WIM. For more info contact in  Vancouver (Ina at 520-3395), Galiano  (Carolyn at 539-5261) or in Salt Spring  (Betsy at 537-2681).  BOOK LAUNCH CELEBRATION  Book launch: Reading and Celebration.  Press Gang Publishers invites you to a  reading and performance evening celebrating three new books on Nov 6, 8-10:30 pm,  Native Education Centre, 282 E. 5th Ave  (near Main). Being launched are Collateral  Damage: The Tragedy of Medea by Jackie  Crossland; Paper, Scissors, Rock by Ann  Decter; and Sing Me No More by Lynette  Dueck. For more info call 253-2537.  COSATU BENEFIT  Bringing it back home is the theme of a  benefit dance on Nov 21 at the Maritime  Labour Centre, 1880 Triumph St., Van. All  proceeds go to the Yellowknife Strikers  Women's Support Committee, and to the  Congress of South African Trade Unions  Women's Project. Music by Aya and Groupe  de Jour. Tix are $15 waged, $10 unwaged,  and the doors open at 8 pm. Co-sponsored  by the COSATU (formerly SACTU) Support  Committee, Vancouver Co-op Radio and  the Vancouver Folk Music Festival. For further info call 874-0550.  VSW COMMITTEE MEETINGS  Resource Committee, Mon, Nov 16, 6 pm;  Finance/Fundraising, Tue, Nov 17, 5:30  pm; Publicity, Wed, Nov 18, 5:30 pm; Programming, Thurs, Nov 19, 5:30 pm. All at  #301-1720 Grant.  GROUPS  VLC  The Vancouver Lesbian Connection is open  Tues and Thurs, 12-7 pm and Sat 12-5 pm.  VLC offers lay counseling, job and housing  info and a lending library. Childhood sexual  abuse for lesbian survivors meetings are  Sun 1-4pm—experiencedfacilitatorneeded.  Free professional counselling Wed 12-3 pm  by appt. Other services available. For more  info call 254-8458.  VANCOUVER RAPE RELIEF  All women are needed in the fight to end  violence against women.Your own experience of class, race, and sexual orientation is  essential in ending sexist attacks against us.  Any women interested in volunteering on  the Rape Relief crisis line, in the transition  house, in fundraising events, and any other  aspect are invited to make an appointment  for a training interview. For info call 872-  8212.  FREE LEGAL ADVICE  The Women's Legal Clinic is offering free  legal advice to women in need. Established  (X^^W I&ZfovwSwis   lv\» L0<WWk/vuj2s TJ,  Vt       INTO  HEALTH  women's healthxonferenee  sponsored by  Vancouver Women's Health Collective  Nov. 13th-15th  atthe Native Education Centre  for more Info: 255-8245  GROUPS  by the Law Student's Legal Advice  Program, the clinic assists women with welfare, UIC and Criminal Injury appeals, low-  cost divorces, criminal and small claims  cases. Lesbian law students available on  request. To make an appt. or for more info,  call 822-5791.  LESBIAN BATTERING  Battered Women's Support Services is offering a support group for women who are  survivors of emotional, verbal, physical and/  or sexual abuse in present or past lesbian  relationships. The group begins in Nov,  runs once a week for ten weeks, and is  facilitated by lesbian peer counsellors. No  cost, subsidy for child care available. Call  687-1867 for more info.  WOMEN VISIONS  Do you listen to WomenVisions on Co-op  radio? Interested in the show? The women  working on the show are looking for more  women to become involved in a public affairs program that has a feminist perspective and a dash of humour too. Interested?  Call Co-op radio at 684-8494.  YOUTH CONFERENCE  Join BC's young women and men to talk  about date rape, sexual harassment, teen  pregnancy, family violence, sexism, and  racism at "Youth Conference: Equality '92."  Sponsored by West Coast LEAF, Nov 13-15  in Vancouver. Youth delegates, 16-21 yrs  welcome. For info call 684-8772.  WORKSHOP  The Vancouver Women's Health Collective  is sponsoring a workshop on "Cultural  Skitzophrenia and Multiple Personality Disorder ... In Exile?: Sickness or Liberation or  Both?" on Nov 2, 7 pm at #302-1720 Grant  St., Van. Join B. Ozdemir in a workshop that  combines storytelling, poetry and skits.  EASTSIDE WOMEN'S CENTRE  The Downtown Eastside Women's Centre is  in continual need of the following items;  plastic bags, hand soap, shampoo and conditioner, sanitary pads and tampons, toothbrushes and paste, laundry soap, towels,  hand towels, bedding, plants, a fax machine, and other household items. If you  can help, please call 681-8480.  Womenf  of the 90s1  From Backlash to Empowerment  Saturday, November 7th  2851 Heather Street  (Student Nurses' Residence at VGH)  9:30am-4:00pm  $25/$15 Includes lunch  peakersmclude Patricia Graham, Frances Wasserlein, Margarc  Fultonwithperformanceby Jennifer Martm  ,  Hi wt^ 9^\ e-AT/MG rorcoiLH an^^H  ;^B#?  (   <7r[  \watc-himg  "STA-g-^Hj  ftSt^N   ^^\%fa  L°o°         -Hi  <?'&'",^ -l3P KP  -<'   ;C"'-    11 lili  *v .!  ■Ptii  ijH  22  NOVEMBER 1992 Bulletin Board  SUBMISSIONS CLASSIFIEDS  LESBIANS WORLDWIDE  Hello Lesbians!!! You don't know any lesbians from Germany? Why not get a pen pal?  Free—just write a few words to: M. Schmitt,  Postfrach 10 49 25, W-6900 Heidelberg,  Germany.  LESBIAN EROTICA  Submissions of visual art, fiction, poetry,  Haiku, creative non-fiction, interviews, performance art, and recipes are now being  accepted for "Graphic Details." This anthology explores the different ways women of  colour create, think and act on erotic fantasies. Deadline Dec 30. Send entries to:  Makeda Silvera or LeletiTamu, Sister Vision  Press, PO Box 217, Station E, Toronto,  M6H 4E2.  MIXED RACE WOMEN  How has being of mixed race affected who  you are? What race/ethnicity/culture do you  identify with? Send stories, poetry, interviews, photos, essays and letters along with  info on your bi- or multi- racial heritage to:  Mixed Race Anthology, Sister Vision Press,  PO Box 217, Station E, Toronto, M6H 4E2.  Deadline is Dec 30.  FICTION CONTEST  The Potterfield Portfolio, an atlantic literary  magazine, will award three $100 prizes for  fiction on the theme of "Healing — spiritual,  emotional, physical, political." Entries should  be 750-5000 words. Name and address are  not to appear on entries but must be included on a separate sheet. All entries must  be double spaced and on 81 /2" X11" paper.  Deadline is Nov 15. Entry fee $10. Send to:  Healing, 151 Ryan Court, Fredericton, NB,  E3A2Y9.  CLASSIFIEDS  A WOMAN'S PLACE  Emotional Fitness Centre: Newcounselling,  educational and consulting service on the  North Shore. Offers feminist and lesbian  affirmative counselling, workshops, support  groups and information. Areas of specialization: low self-esteem, depression, anxiety,  communication, relationship difficulties, addiction, sexual abuse recovery, coming out.  Lou Moreau, registered counsellor, 922-  7930.  EXHAUSTED? TENSE?  Jin Shin Do body/mind acupressure. Receive gentle deep release of physical and  emotional stress, fully clothed in a safe  healing environment, offering respect and  honour to women with regard to any issues  our healing may involve. Our bodies remember our experiences. Feminist-mom-  survivor and certified practitioner. Call Lisa  at 685-7714.  MIDWIFERY    SEEVICEc  . Ch&Vinh ■ZJucacum Jibn ;%Ao  • CM&*nk C'.l  • ¥rrruita£ OwL.2*- Kffcrrai  • -Brum 7i*£ng Infarmacum  .■Pv^munC  • MU-MifayStwitf Qrou  VILLA DE HERMANAS  All-women's Caribbean beachfront guest  house: beautiful, spacious LF-owned guesthouse on long, secluded beach in the Dominican Republic. Tropical gardens, pool,  large private guestrooms, sumptuous meals,  massages & crystal healings. Room rates:  $330 single; $440 double per week. Call our  Toronto friend, Susan at(416) 463-6138  between 9 am-10 pm.  TURKEY LINE TAPE  Yes! if this caught your eye then we've found  you!! Great to hear from you and thanks for  the thoughtful comments. Glad to hear you   j?  made it. We all miss you lots and hope you'll   £  be excited by the changes. See you after the   .|  leg back. "  BYE BYE GINGER j  The staff andcollective of the VLC would like *■  toextendtheir appreciation toGinger Plumb,  the resigning coordinator of the VLC. We  wish her the best of luck wherever the road  may take her and appreciate the tremendous amount of work she has done for us  during her time here. We would also like to  extend a welcome to the new coordinator of  the VLC, Brenda Kondo. We look forward to  working with her in the coming months.  CAREER WORKSHOPS  The Douglas College Women's Centre is  sponsoring free workshops designed for  women interested in attending the College  and wanting to upgrade their skills. The two  workshops are; "Introduction to Job Search  Skills" on Tues. Nov 17, 2-4 pm and "Introduction to Communication Skills" on Thurs,  Nov26,10am-12noon.Topre-registercall  527-5148.  GENDER & THE LAW  NAWL's most recent publication titled "Gender and the Law: An Introductory Handbook  for Law Students" is now available. This  collection of short articles is $6 for members, $7.50 for non-members plus shipping  and handling. Send cheques to: NAWL  Charitable Trust for Research and Education , 604-1 Nicholas St, Ottawa, K1N 7B7 or  call (613) 238-1544 for more info.  WOMEN & HUMAN RIGHTS  The Center for Women's Global Leadership  has published a new report titled "Women,  Violence and Human Rights." This report  builds on the pamphlet series "Gender Violence: A Human Rights Development Issue"  Both publications are available for $5 US  from the Center for Women's Global Leadership, 27 Clifton Av, Douglass College,  Rutgers Univ, New Brunswick, New Jersey,  08903.  WORKSHOP  Visiting artist Marilyn Burgess is conducting  a two day workshop exploring work that  documents social and personal histories in  experimental ways. Titled "Personal Histories: Radical Transformations of the Documentary Format" this workshop runs Nov  28&29, 1-4 pm. Tix $15-30. For more info  call 688-4336.  JAN/FEB SUBLET  Large two bedroom main floor of house in  Kits. One block from beach, sunny, fireplace, washer/dryer. $1100/month. Call731 -  0246.  PATRICIA DUBBERLEY  B.A., M.A. Candidate  Counsellor  Telephone: (604) 733-4523  #201 -2515 Burrard Street  Vancouver, B.C.  V6J 3J6  Healing Issues  ol Dyslunctional  Families and Abuse  Enhancing  Relationships and  Sell-Esteem  Individual, Couples  Family and Group  Therapy  Come help celebrate the moving of the Women Artist's Registry  to the Seymour Art Gallery at the Deep Cove Cultural Centre,  4360 Gallant Ave, N. Vancouver on Nov 7. Refreshments 1 pm,  artist's talk by Haruko Okano 2 pm and roundtable 2-4 pm.  RSVP 929-8706.  CLASSIFIEDS CLASSIFIEDS  COUNTRY RETREAT  Interested in buying a country retreat? Two  women selling a beautiful, landscaped 1/2  acre with 2 BR home and unique studio  guest house. Near Qualicum Beach/  Coombs. For further details call 752-2583 or  in Vancouver 662-3026.  HOUSING  How much do you need to buy your own?  What will your monthly payments be? How  much of a downpayment is necessary?  Where can you afford to'buy? Today interest  rates are the lowest they have been in 25  years. If you are thinking about buying or  selling, let me put 15 years experience to  work with you: Linda McNeill (298-0795);  Rennie and Assoc. Rlty. 298-8777.  "LOVE" ADDICTIONS  Untangling the "love" addictions: sex, romance and relationships. Meeting our intimacy needs in healthy ways. Do you find  yourself struggling in repetitive, harmful relationships? In this group, you will identify  your intimacy needs and begin to realize  how they are not being met. Free yourself  from obsessions with sex, romance and  dysfunctional relationships! Call Eleanor  Brockenshire, BHEc, MSW, 669-0197. Eight  sessions beginning Jan. $ 25/session: Sliding scale.  COUNSELLING NOW  Experiencing difficulties? Feminist counselling in a supportive, confidential atmosphere. For crises, personal growth, parent/  teen issues, coming out and life passages.  Individuals, couples, families. Sliding scale  fees. For free consultation call Eleanor  Brokenshire, BHEc, MSW at 669-0197.  DESKTOP PUBLISHING SERVICES  We provide quality service from initial concept to design to finished product for newsletters, brochures, flyers, logos, letterheads,  business forms and cards, menus and  resumes. Our rates are reasonable and all  work is done to camera ready. Call Gabrielle  Mayer at 872-8780 for a free initial consultation.  PRESS GANG PRINTERS  Press Gang Printers, a feminist worker-  controlled collective, is currently looking for  2 full-time workers to join their collective.  Salesperson/Estimator: Responsibilities  would include sales to the community, estimating on printing work and customer service as well as participation in the collective  business decision-making process. Experience in the printing industry as well as  experience with computers would be a definite asset. Applications can be picked up  from our office at 603 Powell St. A completed application form togetherwith a  resume, should be submitted by Nov 10.  The starting date is Dec 1. As part of our  affirmative action policy we particularly encourage women of colour to apply. Bookkeeper/Customer Service: Responsibilities include bookkeeping and billing on  ACCPAC Simply Accounting (BEDFORD)  system, financial analysis, and customer  service. Experience with computerised bookkeeping would be an important asset. Applications can be picked up from our office. A  completed application form, together with a  resume, should be submitted no later than  Dec 1. The staring date is Jan 4. Women of  colour are encouraged to apply.  SITKA CO-OP  Sitka Housing Co-operative is a 26 unit  housing complex which was built six years  ago. Our purpose is to provide housing for  sole-support women with environmental allergies. Located in the East End of Vancouver, we are near shopping, schools and  community centres. Participation in the operation of the co-op is required of all members, as well as share purchase. We are  presently accepting applications from women  who require two, three or four bedroom  units. For application forms please write:  Membership Committee, Sitka Housing Coop, 1550 Woodland Drive, Vancouver, BC,  V5L 5A5.  DR. PAULETTE ROSCOE  NATUROPATHIC PHYSICIAN  HOMEOPATHY  COUNSELLING  DETOXIFICATION  HYCROFT MEDICAL CENTER  108-3195 GRANVILLE ST.  VANCOUVER, B.C. V6H 3K2  731-4183  tr=Jr=Jr=Jr=Jr=Jr=Jr=Jr=Jr=Jr=Jr=Jr=Jr=  ROBIN GOLDFARB rm  Registered   Massage   Therapist  ,=]r=li=l,=J,=l,=l,=]r=lr=],=  NOVEMBER 1992 ARIES: IndulSeyourfeministurge,TaketHePlunge.Getyour  Kinesis sub today. "<,",«"«m?r  TAURUS: ~~&^ZttZZ7~  eaUed Ki»es« couU make you    ry ^ ^  GEMINI: youwM-»?^r  f^rrrirz.--.-----*--  Kinesis nou?. irreverent,  VIRGO: ww-J-^-? re*^T  W"TM«»J ATM***m^ozme-Kinesis.  JbRA: ron^n-^^-^^^"''  subscription to Kinesis to** ^  qr0RPIO: Yo« u>iH m«*e «• m«*n«»* «*" mo  SO^Kriv^- ju»       Kinesis aUyeor Io»«.  briiW yo» i° •»»««» °r Kinesis au y  22!£S2I=5ES=  "   ..  One year  □$20+ $1.40 GST  Two years  □$36 + $2.52 GST  Institutions/Groups  □$45 + $3.15GST  Name.  □Cheque enclosed If you can't afford the full amount for g  □Bill me Kinesis subscription, send what you can !j,  □New Free to prisoners oc  □Renewal Orders outside Canada add $8 |  □Gift Vancouver Status of Women Membership u  □Donation (includes Kinesis subscription) |  □$30+ $1.40 GST  Address—  Country —  Telephone .  Postal code _  Fax   Published ten times a year by the Vancouver Status of Women  #301-1720 Grant Street Vancouver, BC V5L 2Y6