Array 2535 Second Ave West <br> Vancouver July 5/26 <br> Dear Jessie <br> I want someone to talk to this evening, and who better than your always interesting self.  Would that it could be talking with rather than to - but we will do the best we can.  It seems lonely since Harold and family moved out to the camp.  Harold comes in to town nearly every day, but has only stopped in for the night once so far.  I thought he would be with us tonight, but he just ran up for a few minutes and was in a hurry to get off.  This is Robert's birthday - five years old.  I suppose Harold wanted to join the celebration if possible.  They are all well out there and having a good time. Now I have something to tell you that you will be sorry to hear.  Last Thursday afternoon Aunt Annie was in the garden at the back of Harold's house picking flowers when she tripped on something and fell and broke her left wrist - not the one broken before.  She had allowed her companion helper to go off for a while that day intending to come up here later in the afternoon, but she got into the house by herself and got the lady living in the lower flat to phone for a doctor, and also called up Mrs Patton one of her friends who came to her at once.  She would not let them send for me until her arm was all set & bound up.  Then the lady in the lower flat came to tell me and Grace and I went down at once. I may say, being Dominion day Harold was out at the camp.  Well we found Auntie fixed comfortably in bed with her friends by her, looking quite serene and even cheerful.  The doctor had not given her clorophorm, only what he called "a little gas" and she was not at all sick after it.  She really stood the whole thing wonderfully well.  We stayed with her, as Mrs Patton did too, until the doctor had been in again, and made all arrangements for the night.  I insisted upon her having a trained nurse though [she] did not think it at all necessary herself and dismissed her next morning.  The doctor who of course visits her still is Dr De Muth a specialist in such cases.  She likes him very much.  Another thing surprized us.  You remember that mole on Auntie's face.  I do not think she attached much importance to it herself, but the Doctor said it ought to be taken off, and as she consented he said he would remove it while she was under the gas which he did.  That means four stitches in her cheek, but the wound seems to be healing, and from the appearance of her hand and the way she can move her fingers I should judge the inflammation in her arm is going down.  The Doctor advised that it would be best for her to get up rather than lie in bed, so every day she has got up and dressed with help and come down stairs to lie on the chesterfield or sit in an easy chair.  She walks about from one room to another and keeps wonderfully cheerful.  Grace and I spent this afternoon with her while her helper went out to do a little business.  We were with her last evening too, when several friends dropped in to see her and bring her flowers.  Her companion help is an elderly woman who claims some experience in nursing.  She is evidently an excellent housekeeper, and Auntie says she is very kind & attentive to her.  We have been having unusually hot weather of late, but that room where Auntie lies on the chesterfield is most refreshingly cool and she appreciates it.  It may interest you to know that she has been wearing the pretty mauve boudoir jacket she says you gave her and looks quite nice in it.  It is a long story I have told you Jessie but I thought you would want to hear all about it.  I need not say how sorry we all are.  Helen came into town on Saturday to see Auntie.  I wish I was more capable but though I can walk a short distance I am rather shakey yet. However we will do our best to see that Auntie has good care.  She is certainly very patient through it all.  Grace tells me it is time I went to bed.  You will be getting such lots of real "billets doux" (don't tell Marian if that is not correct) that you will scarcely need any others.  We have not seen Bob for a week and a day.  Shall look for him any evening.  We were so glad to hear of your safe arrival.  You must have had a quick passage.  Love to Marian, and may every blessing rest upon you both.  <br> Lovingly as ever<br> Mother 