Array Fort Simpson, B.C.  Nov. 2nd 1874    My dear Mother,   The Otter came again day before yesterday (Saturday) and our letters are to be sent off by canoe tonight to catch her at a point below on her return.  I have written to my father but would like to add a little to you.  I am glad you have had so pleasant a summer.  I hope you made a visit to Thomas' friends.  They were expecting you I know.  You speak of my health.  It is I know of much importance I should keep well - but, I assure you there is no cause of uneasiness at present.  I am very well now. Much better than I used often to be in Ont.  The summer was a little trying, owing I suppose to the   travel & change of climate but I have grown much stronger since.  I had a cold, which Thomas spoke of when he wrote you but it only kept me in the house some two days.  I dress warmly - have put on my lambswool vests besides all other flannels and shall likely never go without all the year round, as long as we are here.  Thomas suffered very much some ten days ago from a boil on his hand.  For two nights he scarcely slept the pain was so acute but it is almost quite well and within a week has him making almost super-human exertions to get the house up.  We had five days of fine weather in which time the main part was put up & covered in, just in time to escape a heavy storm that came   on Saturday.  The lumber that was wanting the Otter has brought - so fires will be kept up to dry the   lumber & the work pushed on, so that we may hope to be in it some time before Christmas.  It was only by   getting some lumber out extra by the pit saw (if you know what that is - I only learned lately) that the   building could be gone on with before the Otter came - and if that one spell of good weather had been   lost likely nothing could be done till next spring.  You know my husband is a "pushing man".  We shall   be very comfortable I believe when we get settled.  I will send you a full description, all being well,   when we are in it.  The carpets I shall try to get made as soon as I can, ready to put down.  There is   so much work I want to do.  We have it in our minds to get up a Xmas tree for the children.  Quite a   number of dolls & toys have been sent us from friends in Vict. and a lot of things to be made up.  If I   can only get the time - a great part of the work & all the direction I shall have to do myself.  Mrs.   Morrison will help me though, but then she has no idea at all of such work.  My little girl does just as   well as I could expect in the house, but of course she can take no responsibility - at all - & I have   not the time I would like to teach her.  Besides I want to make her neater & tidier than she is now and   have to take time to show her how to sew all I give her.  The washing & ironing I get done well & cheap.    I scarcely trouble myself at all about that.  There is no fear of my being hurt with hard work - if I   propose anything of the kind my husband puts his foot down against it at once - and of course I have   enough else to do.  Pray, Mamma, do not trouble about snakes.  Since I came to the country I have seen   neither snake nor anything that looked like a snake.  We are right on a rocky, sandy beach where a snake   would die in a day, & even back from the shore the ground is covered not with grass much but a kind of   moss - while the nearest woods are up on the hill sides, I suppose half a mile away - perhaps more.    Indeed the timber for building was brought much of it about ten miles.  All about here has been used for   the firewood of many years. We have supplies from Vict. for the house, flour, sugar, biscuits, hams, tea, coffee, raisins,   currants, lard, butter &c. to see us I think well through the winter.  Thomas is determined that no   improvidence shall leave us without what we need.  Mr. Russ of N. Westminster sent us a huge box of   apples - hold a brl & half anyway.  The friends we stayed with in Vict. sent also a large box of pears &   another of apples which last however has as yet failed to appear.  I hope it is not lost.  Another Vict.   lady sent a large cake & as this was the last boat this year a Xmas pudding, partly cooked.  So you see   we have friends who do not forget us.  I sent to Vict. by the Capt. for a warm shawl.  He brought me a   very handsome one - more expensive much than I wanted but my husband says it is not too much - when it   is for me.  I send you a small gold nugget from the Cassiar mines up the Stickeen river.  It was given   me by a miner who had just come down and now this is the last chance I shall have to wish you a Merry   Xmas & happy New Year.  My God bless you all at home and be with us here.  We expect the Otter again   about the latter end of January.  Love to Auntie, Sallie & all, and be assured, dear Mother, you have   the true affection of your daughter & of her husband.   Emma Crosby