Array Union Pacific Railroad  Nebraska May 12th 1874    My dear Mother,   I am going to send you a few lines today though they can only be written with a pencil.  Our way still has been pleasant and prosperous.  I was really sorry we could not remain longer at Waukegan.  Uncle and Belle & Louise came to the train with us yesterday morning.  Uncle expressed his good will by giving his niece twenty dollars.  The girls talk seriously about coming out to Fort. S.  The weather has been all that could be desired - it rained enough last night to lay the dust.  The country we have   passed through is pleasant, mostly prairie.  Several fine towns and numerous villages.  We spent about   an hour and a half in Omaha this morning - such crowds of travelers, quantities of luggage, the time was all occupied in getting them arranged.  We brought quite a reinforcement of provisions  from Waukegan.  My husband tells me I am to say that I stand the journey better than he does.  I do bravely according to his opinion.  It is very easy when I have nothing to do but be made comfortable & have some one to think of everything for me.  I have slept splendidly, better than he has done. He took a cold & has had a slight sore throat since yesterday.  I have seen since leaving Omaha a new sight to me - prairie grass on fire - no very extensive burning however.  The train by which we meant to send this has just passed so I will have to keep it till tomorrow.  Pine Bluffs (75 miles from Omaha) - Wednesday near noon.  Since I wrote yesterday we have passed over boundless plains & this morning have been in a hilly region but still no trees but a few stunted pines.  Mr.C.'s throat still troubles him some.  I am well.  The further I get away from you all at home the more my heart goes out towards you - but there is one Lord over all.  If you have not written before you receive this - and if you have - please do write immediately again.  We shall likely reach Victoria by the twenty-fifth.  Love to all from us both, especially to my father & yourself    dear Mother,    Emma