Array Fort Simpson, B.C.  Aug. 5th 1875    My dear Mother,   The str. has come again, but brought no letters from any of you.  However I hope there may therefore be the more next time.  I will write to you as usual.  I was hoping to hear by this boat where you were living - your plans & Georgie's were not decided when you wrote your last.  I think about you all very much and wonder how things are with you.  I think of all kinds of things, whether you are comfortably settled & well or feel the heat very much.  With regard to heat I think Fort S. would suit you exactly.  For a month or more we have had fine clear weather but not at all too warm - indeed excepting a very few mornings I have always had a little fire to wash baby by.  I am glad of fine weather for Jessie's sake.  I have her out as much as I can and she grows so fast.  It seems to me I can feel the difference in her weight every day.  I never attempt to carry her very far myself.  If Thomas cannot go with me when I go for a walk I take one of the girls.  But I often sit with her where she can see the men at work on the church and of course every one that passes us has a word for Jessie - while she laughs & coos at them all, quite irrespective of either character or appearance.  She is so good and is such a splendid little sleeper - not one bit of trouble, only a comfort to me at night.  I believe this is partly owing to her never having been accustomed to rocking.  She generally goes to sleep - almost always - without any walking or special effort about it.  Just settling herself down in the cradle or bed and closing her eyes as though she understood all about it.  She is very lively and playful.  What she always reaches out her little hands most eagerly for is the tassels attached to the window blinds as then she can shake the blinds which are new & stiff & make a great noise.  If her father takes her the first thing is always to fasten a little hand in his beard & there she holds on while he frolics with her - rather a drawback to his pleasure.  Her cheeks are pink as the dress you sent her and she is just the sunshine of the house.  The Indians are going away now, many of them, for a month or so to their salmon fishing.  Many strangers have been here lately, trading, Hydah's from Queen Charlotte's Is. & Sitkas from the north.  They most of them come up to see us and attend church and of course Thomas takes these opportunities of casting in the seed.  Chinook jargon affords a means, though a poor one, of communication with all these tribes.  It is understood more or less on all parts of the coast, and all seem interested in what they see & hear.  The work at the church has gone on well.  The roof is shingled & the spire near finished & all is closed in but the tower & front end, but much inconvenience comes from having to send so far for what is needed, while the management in Victoria has not been the best.  However I will say nothing about that.   We got a high chair for Jessie & some other things from Victoria this trip Some rhubarb & raspberries the Capt. brought and we are sending for fruit by next boat.  I think it would be better for us all if we had more fresh things for the table - but we get on pretty well.  We are sending by this boat for all the groceries &c. we think we shall need for the coming winter for there will likely be only two boats more this fall.  It is astonishing what a difference it makes having two men boarding with us.  However, the carpenter will likely be gone in about two months & the teacher I think means to put up some kind of a cabin where he can live by himself.  Cheaper, I suppose, he thinks than boarding.  He is a strange man.  I believe he will be happier alone - though I don't think he will be very happy anywhere - till he gets to heaven.  He seems to have no "faculty" for getting on & always to be dissatisfied, though I believe he is a good man & has some ability in his way.  I have parted with the oldest of my girls - the married one - I saw one must go & thought she would be safer away than either of the others.  I find now the work is done quite as well & with much more comfort than it was before.   Now I must close soon.  Remember our last mail will likely be in October some time.  My love to Auntie & Sallie.  I suppose I had better send this to Barrie.  I don't know where else to send it.  My husband & baby join in kindest love to you & my father.  O if you could only see this little grand-daughter of yours!  We are all well and trustful.  I have not written to any of the girls this time.  Love to Georgie.   Dear Mother,    Yours affectionate daughter     Emma P.S. I see by the Globe there was a great fire in Barrie in June but the particulars are not given fully.  I hope Mr. Harrison is not one of the sufferers this time.     E.