Array 1200 Barclay St. Vancouver Aug. 3/20<br> Dear Grace<br> I am sending you herewith sixty dollars on account.  One more remittance ought to bring you home as you have the tickets extended.  The days go so quickly it will not seem long till we are looking for your coming home.  The Harris family all left last Friday for Sechelt.  Bob came back Sunday night but means to spend a week up there later.  Jessie & Marian will probably stay three weeks as it seems they find things very nice & comfortable.  They are in the hotel but there are a number of cottages and they find a few people whom they know.  Marian will have plenty of companions.  Harold & his family are talking of taking a motor trip on Van. Is. before the end of the month.  Grace & her father would go with them.  I think it would be good for them all.  Helen is pretty well tired out, what with getting settled and all that went before.  Sunday Aunt Annie & I were with them for dinner & supper.  They brought us back in the motor.  We have an unusual number of mosquitoes this summer.  We cannot use the verandah as much as we would like on that account.  Baby Helen is considerably bitten up.  However they give no trouble in doors and we ought to be thankful we are not on the Fraser.  Capt. Oliver is down.  They are thinking to buy Mr Schooley's yacht for Mission use on the coast, and tomorrow there is to be a trial trip on Howe Sound to which Bob says he is going to take Auntie & me.  I think we shall enjoy it.  For me it will be quite an excursion. We saw downtown yesterday morning.  I had promised Jessie to have my hear fixed and I also indulged in a pair of new shoes, also in Spencer's roof garden we had each an ice cream soda, so you see we are having quite a gay time.  I am not sure that Miss M. need come back before the end of the month.  When we all get together more or less like "giants refreshed" I think we can get into running order without difficulty.  I begin to think we ought every summer to get away somewhere if possible - keep us from getting into a rut.  With much love, dear, as ever <br> Mother.  