Array Victoria March 29th 1877    My dear Mother,   You will see by the date of this that I am from home.  We left home three weeks ago - had a   comparatively pleasant trip down.  There was but one other passenger - the weather was good - and though   the "Otter" is not fitted up in first-class style - yet the Capt. gave us the use of his room all day   and we were very comfortable.  In less than three days we reached Nanaimo where we had decided to remain   over for a few days.  It was Sunday morning during service time that we arrived.  Mr. Crosby went up at   once to the church and soon was back with several friends to take us up to the Parsonage.  Mr. Bryant,   the minister, and his wife were exceedingly kind but I cannot say I enjoyed my visit very much.  The   weather was wet and disagreeable.  We all had colds and such a constant round of here for dinner, there   for tea gave us no peace and made the children very restless.  The following Friday we came down here -   and have had a very pleasant time.  The weather has been delightful - though not too warm for winter   clothing or nearly that.  The gardens are in bloom - that is, the early flowers are out in great   abundance and the trees are in blossom.  I have had a great many visitors and every day we are out.  We   have a pretty little carriage for Jessie.  She can not walk very far yet nor very fast - and a little   girl I brought down with me carries baby.  This little nurse is of but little use to me but is better   than no one.  She is one we got on purpose to help me while away.  The girls I had had in the house were   all gone - three married and one we sent home.  I believe this change will be a real benefit to me and   to the children too.  We are at the Parsonage with Mr. and Mrs. Russ who are kindness itself.  There are   two daughters in the family, the elder about fifteen, the other eight - and all seem to study the   comfort of the children.  Mrs. R. specially strives to secure regular hours for them and every comfort.    She insists upon my going out to the evening services while she stays home with the children.  I generally have them both asleep by about seven o'clock but I never leave them unless with some   responsible person.  Mr. R. and Jessie are the best of friends.  Indeed our pets receive great favor   wherever we are.  Jessie is a funny, lively little thing, that attracts quite as much attention as is   good for her, while baby is such a sweet-tempered little pet anyone could love her.  We have had their   photos taken.  If I can get them in time tomorrow I will enclose one of each.  We intend to have another   of Jessie, which I will try to send you also. Good Friday - 30th  A week ago today Mr. Crosby went up the Fraser river to see his old friends there.    I should have liked to have gone with him but for the sake of rest and quiet for the children I thought   it best to stay here.  I expect him back tomorrow.  Then next Thursday the District meetings is to be   held here.  The first trip of the "Otter" after that must take Thomas home, I suppose, and I think I   shall be ready to go then too, though I am urged to remain longer.  It will likely be three or four   weeks however before we can get back as the "Otter" left for the north two days since and will not be   going again probably within that time.   I am afraid Miss Knott will feel being alone a good deal, though we left her in good spirits.    We left an Indian woman, one who had lived with me before, and her husband in the house so that she   should not feel nervous at night.  The people were most of them leaving for their first fishing and will   likely be away until after we get back.  I think I shall not be able to write to the girls by this mail,   but shall try to do so soon.   I received a letter from my father a few days ago which I shall give to Thomas when he comes.    Many thanks to Papa for his trouble.  We are glad to get the papers.  Tell me what you think of the   children's photographs.  With much love to both yourself and my father.   Believe me, dear Mother    Your affectionate     Emma