Array 1200 Barclay St. Vancouver Aug. 15/20<br> Dear Grace<br> It seems a good while since I heard from you for some reason, and it strikes me you will be saying the same thing about hearing from me.  In the last letter I had you said you were going with Miss M. to her sisters and would be back to Kelowna I understood about last Monday.  This is Sunday so I might have heard easily since then.  However there is probably a letter very near now, perhaps in the P.O. to be delivered tomorrow - I hope so - and I hope you have not been uneasy.  Now I will give you a sketch of the week past.  Monday I went to Dr Graham's by appointment to have my eyes tested for glasses which I am now wearing - my old ones were outworn - and arranged for them.  Nothing very unusual after that happened till Wednesday evening when Annie arrived - Bob met her at the boat.  Thursday she was off soon after breakfast to find some friend in a distant part of the city and in the afternoon we went to Helen's where we stayed for the evening, sitting out on the upstairs balcony where it is so pleasant.  Harold brought us back in the motor.  Grace and her father have settled at Helen's now, so the motor is there - that is when at home.  They were busy planning for the motor trip which was to start Saturday morning.  Going first to Victoria, they will motor round as they find convenient for probably ten days on the island.  They say there are many nice places to go to.  Harold has to be back here tomorrow for a few days, but expects to rejoin them on Thursday and in the meantime of course Grace can take them short distances.  Baby Helen will have a fine time I expect.  Friday we all had an outing.  Jessie had decided that she would come home that day so Bob Annie Auntie & I all took the boat at nine that morning for Sechelt where Jessie and Marian joined us, and we all went on with the boat to the end of the route at Buccaneer Bay, calling at various camps by the way.  It was a lovely day & the boat was no way crowded, so we had a very pleasant time indeed - getting home about eight o'clock.  There is a possibility of some or all of us going to Alta Lake on the way to Lilooet for a week, but it is not yet decided.  This is in the mountains and said to be a very pretty place.  Annie leaves by train tomorrow and goes direct to Toronto.  She sends love to you and regrets not seeing you.  I will send money soon.  Will seventy dollars see you home all right?  We are all well - Marian looks ever so much better.  With love as ever <br> Mother  