Array Fort Simpson  July 10th 1878    My dear Mother,   There is a chance tomorrow to send off a letter to meet a str. that is to call in about thirty   miles from here, and Thomas says I ought to take the opportunity of writing to you.  He thinks you will   be anxious to know how we are getting on with all our little ones.   I am thankful that it is a favorable report I have still to send.  Jessie and Gracie are very   well, and enjoying the privilege of running in the garden when the weather permits.  Jessie says she   wants to go to Canada.  She is awaiting with much anxiety the arrival of the "Otter" when she expects to   get a little dust pan that Miss Knott was to buy for her.  Gracie is a funny little body, and very good   natured.  But this new baby I expect to surpass them both.  She grows so fast - she is by far the finest   child we have had physically.  I wish you could see her large clear eyes and nicely formed features.    She will resemble Jessie, I think.  In general she is very good and has never failed yet of a steady   night's sleep.  I find my hands pretty full with three such little children and find it difficult to   give the house as much attention as I should like but I am well, though, of course, I am not very   strong.   Thomas returned a few days ago from his trip down the coast.  He was away between two and three   weeks, and encountered much unfavorable weather - nine days of heavy rains and head winds, six of which   days were spent mostly or altogether in canoe, besides two night of travelling.  The furthest point he   visited was about 230 miles away.  This distance they accomplished on the return in a trifle over three   days by travelling all one night and by coming in tow of a str. that was coming up the coast, for about   sixty miles.  This towing was at great risk - the wind was so high - but it was the only way to reach   home Saturday night.  It was an American str. not to call here, so that was all the help to be got from   her.  Thomas considered the visits he made successful, and does not seem to think much of these difficulties - but he is exposed to many dangers from which only a Kind Providence can preserve him.  He   had a good, though not very numerous crew with him, and his canoe is an excellent one and well rigged.    Mr. Green was here for a week after Thomas had gone - then he left to catch a str. some thirty miles   away by which he wished to reach Victoria.   I think Thomas will not be away again at least not for more than a few days, before Miss Knott   is back.  The str. that took Mr. Green away brought a mail with a letter from you.  Many thanks for the   pretty lace collar that was enclosed.  The toys you sent by Jennie Morrow will likely come up with the   Otter.  We are anxious to hear about the Conference.  Baby wants me so I must close.  Our kindest love   to my father and yourself, dear Mother,   Yours as ever    Emma