Array Fort Simpson  Nov. 5th 1879    My dear Mother,   I was surprised to receive no letter from you by our last mail which came in yesterday, though it was with much pleasure that we both read my father's kind letter.  You must try and not give up writing, for, you know, you are my most reliable correspondent.  I hope, dear Mother, that the weakness in your arm may be only temporary.  And if you cannot walk much, why not have the use of a horse and drive.  It would do you good to get out.  We are very glad to know that Papa is so well and comfortable.  We are much obliged to him for looking after business matters, Mr. Crosby will leave his insurance in his hands to attend to.  The "Mail" comes regularly, and the Guardian.  As to the Globe it is not of much consequence when we receive the other.  I received a parcel form Susie including a pair of stockings from you.  They will be just the things for our little Gracie.  By previous mail I received a parcel from Auntie, large piece blue flannel, and pair stockings for myself.  Were the latter your work also?  Dear Mother you do a great deal for our comfort in these things.  Please give Auntie my best thanks.  I sent her a small box of shells and moss - the latter some Mr. Crosby brought from the Naas - by last mail.  I hope she got it.  I fear I shall not be able to write her now, indeed it is difficult for me to write at all.  We have had a good deal of sickness among the children lately.  Jessie has been poorly several times, though not seriously, and she seems very well now.  Gracie had another attack of fever a few weeks ago.  She was quite ill, but seems to be herself again now.  Just as she was getting better little Polly was taken ill.  She is very poorly yet - frequently vomiting, and very dull and heavy.  I scarcely know what it can be that ails her.  It was brought on I think by a cold.  I have to nurse her almost constantly, and find it very difficult to attend to other things.  There are now nine girls in the "Home."  I find it quite impossible to give them the attention they need.  I think we shall have to get some elderly Indian woman to superintend them until we can do better.  Miss Knott was married here and went down by the last steamer.  We are very sorry to lose her.  A young man from Victoria is taking the school at present.  Of course he lives with us - until some other provision can be made.  I hope there may be a good lady teacher here before long.   A lady in Victoria has sent me two large boxes of preserved & potted fruit this season, so with a little I put up myself we are well supplied.  I have some pears also that I want to pickle & can if I can get time.   This is likely to be the last mail for this season, so do not look for letters from us again till spring.  My best love to Auntie & Sallie & all the family.  Dear Mother it is a comfort to know that you and my father and others are praying for us.  Pray you have a happy winter.  I trust I shall have a good letter from you by first spring boat.   Your affectionate daughter,    Emma