Array Fort Simpson  June 3rd 1879    My dear Mother,   It is high time I wrote to you, is it not!  I have found it almost impossible to get any writing done lately.  I was glad to get your answer to my last a few days ago.  So you are about to move to Barrie - or, I suppose, you are there before now.  I hope you are comfortable and enjoying yourselves.  I am glad you are free from the burden of housekeeping, for however small a house and family you may have there are a great many steps to take.   I have just got fairly into my household duties again.  We reached home six days ago, after being away about eight weeks.  This was a longer visit than we intended, but the steamers do not run regularly, and it is difficult to calculate.  Then we had a good deal to do in Victoria.  We spent about ten days with Mrs. Pollard.  She has a fine large house.  Then after the District meeting was over we spent about two weeks in a visit up the Fraser River.  This was in the country, and the children enjoyed themselves very much.  I was very sorry we had not longer time to stay.  Being inland, too, it was more of a change for them than Victoria where the winds are almost as bleak and cold as they are at Fort Simpson.  When we returned to Victoria we remained at the Parsonage.  I had four teeth extracted and one filled.  I meant to have more than this done but I was feeling so tired out with so much traveling with the children that I could not undertake more.  We had a good trip home and I feel as though I should never want to go away again.  I think the next time I visit Victoria must be when I am on that much-thought-of visit home, but we cannot tell.   Jessie and Gracie, I believe, are much improved by the change.  They were very happy wherever we went and made many friends.  My little Polly is quite poorly.  I hardly know what is [the] matter with her, but it is likely the result of her teething.  I will send you their photographs.  Poor little Polly strongly objected to the operation.  She is so shy of strangers and had been crying - which gives her that unhappy look.  She looks merry enough sometimes and has many funny little ways.   Mr. Crosby intends leaving for Naas tomorrow - to be gone, I suppose, about a week.  Then he has several long trips in view for the summer, besides building &c.  The "Home" is not completed yet, and the back part of our house is to be rebuilt, and, if possible, a school house to be put up.  We shall be very glad to receive subscriptions towards the "Home".   The people gave us a very hearty welcome on our return.  Miss Knott had a lonely time while we were away, but she has good courage and is most devoted to the work.  I have two pretty good girls in the house.  Baby takes most of my time - she needs a great deal of care.  Thomas joins me in kindest love to both you and my father.   Your affectionate daughter,    Emma