 u  SfKiM. COUFCTfONS  KINCSIS  MARCH 77  vol 6 no 4  Vancouver status of women  atVS^       kjnesis means change INT€RNATIONAL>NOM€N$ DAY  CM GJBa3^OT,-BB3SSPflE fflfiffiHIfflf^siMQ^  C€l£BRAT€!    MARCH 8  what were  doing  MARCH 8 WAS DECLARED INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S DAY AND WAS  CELEBRATED FOR THE FIRST TIME IN 1911, AFTER YEARS OF  MILITANT STRIKES BY WOMEN FOR SUCH BASICS AS AN END TO  SWEATSHOPS, FOR DECENT WAGES AND FOR UNION RECOGNITION.  IN 1977, WE ARE CONTINUING TO PROTEST OUR CONDITIONS.  WE ARE PICKETING AT VARIOUS PLACES TO PROTEST AND TO  EXPRESS OUR SOLIDARITY.  We will be using March 8 to educate the public about women's issues. Informational pickets will be set up outside  key institutions of the ruling class, in order to explain  how each particular instituion reinforces and practises  sexism. Pick your number one oppressor! From 11.30 to  1.00pm on the 8th, feminists will be picketing the following places:  MANPOWER, Howe Street, Commercial Drive and Hastings,  East 10th Ave. DAYCARE INFORMATION CENTRE, 45th West  8th Ave. UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE COMMISSION, 1145 Rob-  son. CITY HALL, Cambie and 12th. ANTI-INFLATION BOARD,  701 West George. DEPARTMENT OF LABOUR/HUMAN RIGHTS  COMMISSION, 4211 Kingsway, Burnaby. COURTHOUSE,  Georgia and Howe Street.  There will be a rally at 1.30 at the COURTHOUSE, at  Georgia and Cambie. There will also be a celebration in  the evening at THE NEW SCHOOL, 3070 Commercial Drive.  For more information, contact the International Women's  Day Committee at 736 3746. You can also take part in  the action by helping to distribute leaflets before the  Day itself. These leaflets, which are being published  in French, Chinese, Italian, Punjabi and English, will  address the discrimination of women in the eight major  areas of working women, control of our bodies, native  women, education, women prisoners, rights of lesbians  and women working in the home.  f  how it  began  The idea for such a day developed at the Second International Conference of Socialist Women, in Copenhagen in  1910, which was attended by about 100 women from 17  countries. Clara Zetkin (1857-1933), a German Socialist  was the person who made the proposal. She chose March 8  because that was the day when women in the New York  City garment industry had come out on strike two years  before, in 1908. The whole period was a time of much  militant activity by women in industry.  A women's day had been organised for the first time in  the U.S. on February 27th, 1909. On this day, women held  meetings across the country. For example, 3,000 women  met in New York city under the yellow flag of the U.S,  feminists. They passed resolutions protesting the non-  recognition of women's right to vote.  In Europe, too, the issue of the day was women's suffrage. The theme of the Second International Conference  of Socialist Women was, 'the vote for women will unite  our strength in the struggle for socialism.'  International Women's Day was to be a day of world-wide  solidarity and action among women. In 1911, March 8 was  celebrated for the first time in Austria, Denmark,  Germany and Switzerland. Quickly, it became apparent  that the right to vote wasn't the only issue. Alexandra  Kollontai (1872-1952), a Bolshevik feminist and member  of the Party's Central Committee, recounted how "Germany... and Austria were one seething, trembling sea  of women. Meetings were organised everywhere. Halls  were packed so full that they had to ask workers to  give up their places to the women. This was certainly  the first show of militancy by the working women.  Men stayed at home with the children for a change, and  their wives, the captive housewives, went to meetings."  In Austria alone, 30,000 women and men marched and  demonstrated in the streets. INSTITUTIONAL SUB: $10 a year  RENEWAL  VSW MEMBERSHIP  SUBSCRIBER ONLY  kinesis is sent to all members in  good standing of the Vancouver  Status of Women and to all subscribers. In determining your donation  for either membership or subscrip-  ion, please remember that kinesis  costs approximately $5.00 per  person to print and mail each  year.  kinesis costs 35 cents a copy in  bookstores.  kinesis is published monthly by the  Vancouver Status of Women,  ective is to promote understanding  about the changing position of  women in society today.  Views expressed in kinesis are those of  the writer. Unless specifically stated,  they do not reflect VSW policy. The  editorial committee accepts full responsibility for all unsigned material  in the paper. The Committee does reserve the right to edit material for  clarity, brevity, taste and accuracy.  All submissions must be accompanied  by the writer's real name and address.  We do not return material unless a  SASE is enclosed. Submission of material does not guarantee' publication.  kinesis-warmly welcomes all letters  of discussion, debate and principled  criticism.  Copy deadline is the first of the previous month. Print date is the last  week of each month.  kinesis correspondence address is:  Vancouver Status of Women, 2029 W.  4th Ave, Vancouver B.C.  kinesis editorial and production workers on this issue : Janet Beebe; Holly  Devor, Linda Hourie, Gayla Reid. Many  women wrote articles for this issue, and  we thank them for their energy.  Many of the graphics in this issue are  from Liberation News Service, of which  kinesis is a member. Others: p.3 - Women's Educational Press and Canadian  Revolution,  p.12 - Makara and Canadian Revolution, p. 13 - The Women's  Survival Catalogue, pp. 16 and 17 -  The Women's Survival Catalogue, p. 18  Isis Catalogue, Barbara Ethches, artist;  p. 19 - Big Mama Rag, p. 26 - The Village Voice.  NOTE: The sexist comments upon Janet  Summerton's work, mentioned in the  last issue, came from the Vancouver  Province, not the Vancouver Sun.  KINESIS:  Now that it is publicly recognized  that "every effort should be made to  ensure that prisoners emerge no  more anti-social than when they  went inside," we can look forward  to some positive results from the  shattering revelations being exposed  by the present Parliamentary Committee, investigating the Canadian penitentiary system.  Would it not be a measure of justice  that those who initiated this enquiry  should not be punished for having  done so? The seven prisoners who  took two hostages at the B.C. Penitentiary in September 1976, re-,  leasing them entirely unharmed, did  so for only one reason—to bring the  public in to see what had become  unbearable. They now face additional years of imprisonment as punishment for their efforts.  It is to be hoped that sufficient  public pressure will induce Solicitor-General Fox to intervene on  their behalf.  For those readers who feel this letter has little or nothing to do  with the "women's movement" —  Think about all your sisters who are  wives, mothers, sisters and daughters of the men who have dedicated  themselves to changing the present  brutal Canadian prisons.  And since women prisoners form less  than 6% of the total prison population, it is obviously impossible for  them to turn things around by themselves. They welcome and need the  help of their fellow prisoners —  and of their sisters outside.  If you are concerned about your sisters lost in the horrors of the  Canadian prison system, then you  must join battle with everyone who  is fighting the good fight.  Solidarity means just that, with  no lines drawn.  Up the struggle,  Claire Culhane  Prisoners' Rights Group  Kinesis:  This is in response to Geoffrey Riddebough 's letter indicating that my  article on Women and Religion gave a  wrong impression of the Anglican  recognition of sacraments.  He was correct in quoting the 25th  Article on Religion of the Anglican  Church that stated: "there are two  Sacraments ordained of Christ our  Lord in the Gospel...Baptism and the  Supper of Our Lord." In theological  terms these are referred to as the  Dominical (of the Lord) Sacraments.  Article 25 continues: "those five  commonly called Sacraments, Confirmation, Penance, Orders, Matrimony  and Extreme Unction are not to be  counted for the Sacraments of the  Gospel." Indeed, these are not  Dominical (of the Lord/Gospel)  Sacraments, BUT they are Ecclesial  (of the Church) Sacraments.  The Dominical Sacraments, Baptism  and Holy Communion are the major  sacraments within the Anglican  Church. The other five Ecclesial  Sacraments play a minor role;  nevertheless, they are recognized  Sacraments within the tradition of  the Anglican Church.  The last sentence of his letter  states it most accurately: he can  at least quote Article XXV, but  theology is not a specialty of his.  Dulce Oikawa  Eve Smith writes in comment on an  article by Laura Sabia entitled  "Ladies Don't Move", which appeared  in The Chronicle, journal of the  Canadian Federation of Women.  Sabia remarks: "After all the  ballyhoo of the Royal Commission,  after all the tumult and the shouting of the militants, we are right  back where we started from, for  every two steps forward we take  three steps backward."  Smith comments:  I think that  Vancouver Status of Women and B.C.  organizations concerned with the  same issues have tried to activate  women to work and develop ideas and  not look to leaders - but I don't  see much hope as long as we are  funded by the government, or in any  way working under the aegis of the  government, or dependent upon the  Establishment in any way. What we  have to do is get ourselves, and  men, out from under the establishment. Kindest regards,  Eve Smith  R.R. Port Washington  South Pender Island  Kinesis  To the Editor  I'm finding Kinesis to be the most  satisfying magazine to read since  I.F.Stone's Bi-weekly. I'm on UIC  and have lots of time to read. I  have two kinds of friends : those  who are students or have degrees,  and thos who have always worked.  The first are so well informed  that I can't relate to what they  are saying. The second are not  aware of sexism because they've  never experienced an alternative  Kinesis helps me understand both...  thanks alot,  Susan Knox  #8-155 W.70th Ave  Vancouver PROTEST  CRIMES   AGAINST  WOMEN     DEMONSTRATE    ON   MARCH   0  ON MARCH 8, PROTEST CRIMES AGAINST  WOMEN. The International Women's Day  Committee has prepared a poster for  distribution several weeks before  March 8. It lists 100 crimes against  women, which include: * Sexist welfare systems * Job discrimination  *Last hired, first fired * Dangerous methods of birth control experimentation, especially on 3rd World  women * Native women face double oppression from a racist, sexist society * Pregnant women discriminated  against when applying for UIC *0ver-  representation of women in poverty  * Lesbian mothers risk losing custody of their children * Torture of  women political prisoners in many  countries ^Exploitation of immigrant  women in the labour force * Prostitution due to lack of alternatives for  making a living * Cutbacks in childcare subsidies * Women are 41% of  the labour force; only 1 in 6 is in  a union * Women's income averages  45% less than men's * Housewives are  not covered by the Canada Pension  Plan * 2/3 of elderly women without  husbands live below the poverty line  * No protective labour legislation  for agricultural and domestic workers  *Rape is the most committed, least reported crime * Native women lose status  on marrying non-status, non-native men  * Lack of access to training and education for women prisoners etc etc etc  continued from page one, col. 2  In 1913, Russia also observed March  8. Kollontai was one of the organizers of the illegal "Morning Teach  In on the Woman Question." Most of  the organizers were arrested, but  activities continued in the following years nonetheless. International  Women's Day in 1917 heralded the  beginning of the revolution in Russia. There were huge demonstrations  in the major cities. In Petrograd,  thousands of women demanded food  for their children and an end to  the imperialist war.  Today, unfortunately, International  Women's Day has sunk to the level  of a glorified mother's day in some  countries. In Canada, however, it  contrasts happily with the mickey-  mouse tokenism and cooptation of  IWY. It's an opportunity to affirm  that women's liberation must be  part of the larger, comphrehensive  movement for human liberation and  that such a larger movement must  involve the elimination of sexism.  Many thanks to our sister publication  THE OTHER WOMAN for information used  in this article, and to the librarians  at VPL, who keep marvellous clippings.  EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY:  CITY HALL NERVOUS  Equal Employment Opportunity didn't  exactly get a rousing vote of support from Vancouver City Council at  their February 8th meeting. Alder-  woman Darlene Marzari, chairperson  for the EEO Committee presented a  report briefly outlining the history  of the committee and proposing "next  steps", which basically are:  1)  that Council accept a $5,000 grant  that had been given jointly to the  Asian Canadian Association for Cultural Cooperation, VSW, and Canadian  Paraplegic Association, and in turn  offered to the committee, and 2)  that office space and back-up services be provided for a 3-month  period to enable an assistance team  to complete the necessary data gathering and analysing tasks.  Well, one would think the committee  would be composed of radical subversives of the worst kind judging  from some Council members' responses  to the report.  Alderman Warnett Kennedy got up and  mumbled something about "libbers",  McCarthyism, motherhood, and seemed  to be denying that there was any  discrimination in City Hall. Alder-  woman Bernice Gerrard stated she was  a "women's libber" and in favour of  the study. Mayor Volrich kept trying to get Alderwoman Marzari to  "admit" that the committee was out  to set "quotas", in spite of Aider-  woman Marzari's repeated explanation  that quotas mean nothing without  enforceable legislation, and therefore not appropriate to this situation. Alderman Rankin was, of course  in favour of the study, although he  didn't think it would do much good  - for one thing, the committee was  too timid! Alderwoman May Brown  spoke clear-headedly in support of  the proposal, as did Alderman Harcourt (although one wishes he would  drop the term "libber" - as applied  to anything.) Alderman Puil acted  determinedly bored throughout the  whole discussion.  In spite of the somewhat negative  comments, the proposal passed, and  the committee's work will continue.  However, this is only a first step.  The big hurdle will come when the  complete report is presented to  Council. At that point, if the  committee finds evidence that there  are discriminatory hiring and employment practices occurring at  City Hall, it will be necessary to  hire a full-time coordinator if an  effective equal opportunities program is to be instituted.  And that  will be the crunch.  Because that  will cost money. And spending money  on some things  (although certainly  not all) makes City Council very  nervous.  It is important, therefore, that you  let the Mayor and Councillors know  that you support this proposal before it again comes to Council in  about 3 months.  Note:  City department are currently  revising job titles to eliminate  possible discriminatory hiring practices and to come more in line with  Human Rights Commission guidelines.  We would suggest that City Hall take  the leadership in this area and take  immediate steps to change the title  of our elected officials to "Councillor" from the sexist term "Alderman".  Vancouver Status of Women wrote to  the alderpeople asking their support for Mazari's proposal. This  was our one reply:  Thank you for your letter concerning  the Affirmative Action programs at  City Hall.  You state that at the moment City  Hall is run by white middle class  male professionals.  I could not  agree with you more.  The problem is we will probably now  be getting white middle class female  professionals. We now have four on  Council and it is unlikely that the  handicapped and women will necessarily improve their position because  of it.  What we need are class conscious  aldermen and alderwomen who do not  deal in simplistic terms but in the  needs of people. The handicapped,  racial minorities and the poor of  our society will much more likely  receive attention when the words  "class conscious" are added to the  vocabulary of the Vancouver Status  of Women.  In the meantime, I support your position, even though I think it needs  a lot of political development.  Harry Rankin  Alderman 2 Human Rights  Victories  squash job  discrimination  Pressure from the women's movement  in B.C., together with the perseverance of individual women, is  forcing a more effective implementation of the B.C. Human Rights  legislation.  As mentioned in January's Kinesis,  this province possesses excellent  legislation about human rights.  It forbids, amongst other things,  discriminatory hiring practices.  The current government has been  extremely lethargic about setting  up Boards of Inquiry to enforce  this legislation. What we have is  fine words and no action.  Since the protest of December 10,  which was a day of mourning in B.C.  for the death of the Human Rights  Code, Labour Minister Allan Williams has been setting up more  boards. This resulted in two important victories for women in  the month of February.  Three women police clerks in Abbotsford were awarded parity and back  pay in recognition that their skills  and responsibilities were equal to  those of male guard-dispatchers.  This decision set a precedent for  equal pay for work of equal value.  In another Human Rights case, Pilgrim Inn of Penticton paid Linda  Wards $400 in potential lost wages  after she had been denied employment  on the basis of sex. The company  has agreed to institute non-sexist  hiring policies in accordance with  the Human Rights Code.  Both decisions prove that artificial  job classifications won't stand up  under the scrutiny of Boards of  Inquiry hearings.  It takes somebody  who is willing to lay a complaint and  to persevere through -the bureaucratic delays.  It takes the support of  the women's movement to see the case  through, and to push for the prompt  setting up of the Board.  The Human Rights legislation has no  power unless Boards of Inquiry are  appointed.  Employers who prefer to  discriminate because it is economically advantageous for them to do so  will continue to delay and to refuse  to respond to mediation unless faced  by a Board of Inquiry.  Women in the District of Abbotsford  will be interested to note that their  tax dollars were being spent by the  District in its attempts to avoid  paying the three female police clerks,  Feminists in the District can use the  victory of this case to push for the  implementation of affirmative actions  within the District which should be  comparable to those already set up  by the Vancouver Resources Board.  Feminists throughout B.C. will be  watching the outcome of all Boards  of Inquiry closely in order to press  for the elimination of artificial  job classifications. Such phoney  classifications have been saving the  employers dollars for too long.  ABORTION  UPDATE  The report of the federally appointed Badgley Committee on Abortion was  tabled in the House of Commons on  February 9, 1977.  It concludes that  the 1969 Canadian abortion law is  not being fairly applied.  The committee declares that there is  no national concensus on abortion and  MAKES NO RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CHANGE  IN THE LAW although half of the doctors questioned said they wanted  abotion removed from the Criminal  Code.  The report advises that abortions  could be more accessible in regional  centre than in hospitals which have  different bed and residency requirements across the country.  Abortion inequities are the result of  widely varying provincial interpretations of the law, says the report.  It also blames the provinces for  failing to educate the public about  birth control.  Two thirds of Canadians interviewed  did not know that abortion is legal  under certain circumstances. And 35.5  per cent of women, and 43.2 per cent  of men had received no formal contraception education.  Although there is no legal requirement that the father consent to  the abortion, more than two-thirds  of hospitals require this approval  for abortions.   1977: Crucial   For Abortion  JOIN VGH  Vancouver General Hospital has a  "Board of Directors which is sympathetic to abortion. But each  year, the 'pro-lifers' run candidates for the Board. If feminists  don't become members of VGH themselves, to vote in favour of the  pro-abortion candidates, we may  well see our right to abortion  taken away from us.  MARCH 16 is the deadline for becoming a VGH members with voting  privledges at the April Annual  General Meeting. THE HEALTH COLLECTIVE HAD MEMBERSHIP FORMS;  VSW HAS MEMBERSHIP FORMS. PHONE  TODAY AND HAVE YOURS SENT TO YOU.  VSW: 736 3746; HEALTH COLLECTIVE:  736 6696. do this TODAY, CALL US  before March 16  Abortions are more accessible in  large cities. Women in Quebec, and  in rural areas and smaller urban  centres have less access to abortion. Working class and lower  income women have less access to  abortion.  One out of five women aborted after 16 weeks lives In a community  with no therapeutic abortion committee. Fewer than half of Canadian hospitals eligible to do the  operation will perform abortions.  WOMEN AND  UNEMPLOYMENT  SORWUC WINS, UIC LOSES  A SORWUC (Service, Office and Retail  Workers Union of Canada) member has  successfully challenged the sexist  nature of Section 46 of the UIC Act.  This section of the Act automatically  disqualified pregnant women, or women  who have just given birth, from UIC  benefits, regardless of their availability for work.  Federal Court Judge Frank Collier  has ruled that this contravenes  the Bill of Rights, saying :"The  right to equality before the law  of those persons...is enfringed because of discrimination by reason  of sex."  With the support of her union, Stella  Bliss, the SORWUC member, had protested her disqualification from  UIC by a Board of Referees' decision.  In overturning that decision, Coll  ier did not, however, make a ruling on Section 30, which is also  sexist in nature.  According to that section, a worker who becomes pregnant must be  looking for work, or be working,  at the time of conception. All other workers qualify by having been  employed for a minimum 12-week  period. (That used to be an 8-week  period, but*with unemployment going  up, the government wishes to make  it harder for workers to qualify  for benefits. It's called restraint.)  Stella Bliss had been working for  Brown Bros. Ford when she was fired,  and had been unemployed at the time  of conception.  SORWUC Local 1 President, Pat Barter, said that the union would now  be urging other women to challenge  similarly sexist UIC decisions.  MEANWHILE, it comes as no surprise that the rate of unemployment for  Canadian women aged 25 and over was 2.1% higher than for men in November  of '76. As in other periods of crisis, the system is trying to make us  believe that one wage will do for two. They won't have much success. Women's WeeKar UBC  germaine greer  Germaine Greer was in Vancouver on  February 9. She spoke to an audience  of 900 at UBC, where she was a featured speaker of UBC's Women's Week,  organised by the UBC Women's Office.  In addition, she spoke to a smaller  group at Simon Fraser University.  Reports of what she said varied wildly: Germaine wants to have a baby  now, and after ten years on the  pill, she's sterile. Germaine thinks  that Arab men make lousy lovers  because they practise coitus inter-  ruptus. Germaine thinks that sex has  become as causal as conversation.  Germaine thinks we should develop  a morning-after contraceptive, to  keep in our bathroom cabinets.  The papers added to the mayhem. One  carried a headline, purportedly s  summing up what she had said :  'Forget Contraception - Granny Knows  Best.' What is this? Did she really  say that? What about the woman on  a low income, with four children?  Is she now supposed to go back to  having headaches? The Vancouver Sun  reported that Greer told her audience  that 'old-fashioned abstinence and  coitus interruptus are dependable  methods of birth control.'  Has Germaine Greer lost her senses?  Has she become a conservative, and  a racist to boot?  At VSW we asked a staff person to  make some personal comments about  what she heard Greer say. Readers  comments are welcome.  Germaine Greer must stand as one  of the most articulate speakers of  our time. Although her formal topic  was contraception, behind her words  were many questions that we still  have not answered effectively.  A new era definitely started with  the introduction of the pill, but  we have always assumed it to be a  progressive step rather than questioning it as objectively as possible. One of the problems which  seems to have arisen from Dr.Greer's  lecture is an assumption by both  the media and some of the audience  that she was advocating doing without birth control at all - or returning to more archaic and less foolproof methods. It seems ironic to  .me that the quality in Germaine  Greer that I admire most - her ability to admit she doesn't have the  answer - was the one that was totally ignored by the press. She was  portrayed in both The Sun and The  Province as an adamant, slightly  dogmatic personality. If there was  an error at all in her presentation,  perhaps it could be traced to the  difference in age between the majority of the audience and herself.  For me, her major agument was one  against superficiality with anything  concerning ourselves, as opposed to  the belief that there is always  a series of steps to a fixed answer. She argued that there is no  birth control which is both absolutely safe and also guaranteed to  work. She argued that women are  deceived with regards to the clinical facts about birth control. And  she argued that all we can do about  this is to pressure for better  birth control.  marxism 6  feminism  During women's week at UBC, Dr.  Dorothy Smith spoke on "Marxism  and Feminism." Her major contention was one which is very familiar  to socialist feminists : we cannot  come to any accurate understanding  of sexism without an analysis of  how sexist oppression fits into  the economic system within which  we live, which is capitalism.  Smith commented that for a marxist  feminist, the consciousness of  oppression begins at a personal  level and moves outward into an  understanding of the economically  determined social relations which  constitute that oppression. Smith  does not believe that we can move  from an awareness of our personal  oppression to some explanation which  simply says : patriarchy.  Dr.Smith moved from these general  comments into an analysis of what is  happening right now in B.C. She examined the implications for women of  the decline in real wages.  Currently, she said, what we are now facing  is a crisis within capitalism : periodic crises are a feature of this  system. The media, which exists to  perpetuate the system and to rationalize it, is reflecting this crisis by  closing down on the women's movement.  Our death is being announced because  they can no longer afford us.  Many of the concrete gains which the  women's movement made are in the process of being eroded and in the experience of witnessing this, we are  learning many things. Most importantly, we are learning that we made  our appeals on the basis that the  institutions of our society were  somehow open to persuasion. But they  never were open. In truth, they  always made a highly selective response to our demands on the basis  of what would have the least impact.  We are also in the process of learning how oppressed groups are made  to bear the brunt of these crises.  The affirmation of the family by Van  Der Zalm directly reflects the crisis. One way to alieviate the surplus labour problem endemic to capitalism is to identify certain groups which can be wiped out by competition. These groups can be channelled into the last-hired, first-  fired jobs. It helps to be able to  identify your expendable group: so  we have women and visible minorities  fill the slot. Women can be unloaded  off the labour market on to welfare  (no jobs, no daycare) and then off  of welfare on to their husbands (the  virtues of the family etc).  The second part of Dorothy Smith's  talk concentrated upon the criticisms  which are levelled by Marxists against  Marxist feminists. Apart from the  standard trashing of feminists for  being part of a middle class liberal  movement, there is the serious accusation that feminism does not promote class unity.  Smith claims that  this call for unity cannot be made  without acknowleding the particular  oppression of sexism.  Any demand for class unity which is  not based on a recognition of the  special oppressions of sexism (and  racism) is analagous to the liberal  call for "equality of opportunity".  "Equality of opportunity" in our  society means an equal chance for  the wealthy to all exploit the  poor. "Unity" amongst workers  which takes the dependence and subordination of women for granted,  is unity based upon division, with  a complicity with the ruling class  (sexism) built into it.  Tl GRAC'Ç ̈  WATCH KINESIS NEXT MONTH FOR PAT  SMITH'S INTERVIEW WITH TI-GRACE  ATKINSON. U.S.  YVONNE WANROW'S MURDER CONVICTION  OVERTURNED IN PRECEDENT SETTING  VICTORY  NEW YORK (LNS) - "In our society  women suffer from a conspicuous  lack of access to training and the  means of developing those skills  necessary to effectively repel a  male assailant without resorting  to the use of deadly weapons..."  So reads the Washington State Supreme Court's precedent-setting  opinion January 7 reversing the  1973 murder conviction of Yvonne  Wanrow.  On the night of Friday, August 11,  1972, Yvonne Wanrow, a 29-year-old  Colville Indian woman, shot and  killed William Wesler.  The 6'2" Wesler barged into the  house and approached the couch  where Wanrow's nephew was sleeping.  Wanrow, 5'4" and on crutches at the  time, testified that she then went  to the door to call her brother-in-  law to help. She turned around,  was startled to see Wesler right  behind her, and fired her gun.  Shirley Hooper, Wanrow's friend,  then called the police and Wanrow herself got on the phone,  saying that she had just  shot a man. The police  kept her on the phone  until a car arrived. They  taped the conversation,  although they did not inform her that they were  doing so.  Trial, Conviction and  Reversal.  Yvonne Wanrow's trial began,  on May 7, 1973. The jury was\  deadlocked for some time when\  they asked to listen again to  tape recording of her conversat  ion with the police on the night  of the shooting. Forty-five minutes later, having heard that tape^  the all-white jury returned a guilty^  verdict, based on the defendant's  tone of voice, which the jury found  too lacking in emotion for a person  who had just shot someone.  Her conviction was appealed and won  in August of 1975 on the grounds  that the tape recording was inad-  missable in court. The prosecution  challenged the lower court's decision, but the State Supreme Court,  in its January 7, 1977 decision,  upheld Wanrow's appeal.  The Supreme Court ordered a reversal  of the conviction on two grounds:  that the use of the tape recorded  telephone call was inadmissable as  evidence; and that the court "erred  in limiting the acts and circumstances, which the jury could consider in evaluating the nature of  the threat of harm" as Yvonne Wanrow  perceived it.  "The impression created," the opinion reads, "that a 5'4" woman with  a cast on her leg and using a crutch  must, under the law, somehow repel  an assault by a 6'2" intoxicated  man without employing weapons in  her defense...constitutes a separate  and distinct misstatement of the law  and, in the context of this case,  violates the respondent's right to  equal protection of the law.  MORE ON YVONNE WANROW...  "The respondent was entitled to have  the jury consider her actions in the  light of her own perceptions of the  situation, including those perceptions which were the product of our  nation's "long and unfortunate history of sex discrimination."  A Victory for Women's Rights of  Self-Defense  This section of the opinion could  have a broad impact on women accused  of charges relating to self-defense.  According to Beth Bochnak, a member  of Wanrow's legal team, "In the  several cases that have been publicized recently - the Joann Little  case, the Inez Garcia case, and  Yvonne's case - this is the first  time that anyone has been able to  raise the specific question: how is  a woman going to be able to defend  herself?"  SPAIN  women  round  th<  wor  ARGENTINA  The increasing repression of the Vid-  ela regime in Argentina is not reported in the establishment press. Paramilitary commandos and armed police  groups incessantly preoccupy themselves  with terrorizing the population. It  is not only politically active unionized workers who are targets of the  fascist regime, but also the professional sector which is not necessarily  politically active.  Amongst the prisoners is an ever increasing number of women who are  being subjected to the most physically degrading and psychologically  destructive torture techniques and  prison conditions. The most recent  reports from political prisoners at  Villa Devoto speak of crowded cubicles, insufficient meals, inadquate  lighting, lack of hot water, infest-  tation by diseased insects, complete  neglect of medical problems, insidious  sexual abuse and psychological torture.  Our group came together when some 50  women gathered at a picket outside the  Spanish embassy in London on the 5th  of October last year, coinciding with  the demonstation at Hendaye on the  Spanish border. We did not know each  other but we  did not stand in silence.  From our discussions we have formed  the Women's Campaign Against Fascist  Spain. We believe that fascism is based on sexism and as women we must fight  both. We must fight to ensure that the  liberation of the Spanish people means  the liberation of women, too. Our first  aim is to tell women about the situat  -ion of their sisters in Spain, and to  enlist their support.  The events of May 1968 in France had  an effect across the border in Spain,  and in 1970 the regime suffered its  first big defeat. The 'Burgos' trial of  Basque militants bought a wave of in  ternational solidarity and a rejection  of the Franco regime. Inside the country solidarity took the form of strikes, demonstrations, popular support and more generally an emerging  consciousness of the situation.  At this time, too, women, in  greater numbers, began to get  involved with men in the  struggle and for the same  aims. But only a minority of  V women - intellectuals -  were able to go further.  Their names have reached the outside  world because of  their writings - Eva  Forest, Aurelia Cap-  many, Lydia Falcon  and others. In the  working class areas  and in the factories,  those women who do  work outside the home  began to organise st  ruggles around specific  demands such as better  working conditions, improved medical facilities  and better pay. Most of the  fights were independently organised, though some women's  groups did come into existence -  "for example, the MDM - the Democratic Women's Movement of the CP. and  the UPM - the Popular Union of Women.  The necessary underground organisation of women and men under a dictatorship has meant that is is very difficult for us to have anything similar  to the women's movements we know to  exist in Europe and America. On top of  that, Spanish women suffer from lack  of information and isolation. However  in 1974 the first Feminist Congress was  to be held in our country. A programme  was introduced and circulated to other  countries so that the different movements could enrich our own practice and  analysis. The conference was cancelled  in September 1974 in solidarity with  Lydia Falcon, one of the organisers,  Eva Forest and many others who were jailed at this time.  Franco is now dead 36 years after the  end of the Civil War; yet there is no  reason to suppose that anything is going  to change. Thousands are still in jail  and still being killed. We must continue  to build solidarity amongst women until  our victory over the fascist system.  BY THE WOMEN'S CAMPAIGN AGAINST FASCIST SPAIN (from The Other Woman) Sisterhood mokgs the ncwS  women in  revolution  KINGSTON - Women attending a conference on WOMEN IN REVOLUTION here on  January 13-16 were able to make two  assumptions by the end of the weekend—they are all working for the  liberation of women, and they all  believe it cannot be achieved within the present social system.  Varda Burstyn said radical feminism  recognizes that present society cannot liberate women and provides a  profound analysis but suffers from  a lack of strategy.  It develops  ultimately into a sex war because  it says woman's role is developed  from her reproductive function,  resulting in a society divided into  two sex classes. On the other hand,  Burstyn went on, Marxism says "women's oppression is in fact rooted  in her biological capacity for reproduction but is also a question  of the way society is organized into  classes which cements and gives configuration to the way women are oppressed. . .socialism and feminism  have to be aligned." The left continues to be male-dominated, Burstyn said, and women have to fight  sexism all the time.  Burstyn spoke  for the need for an autonomous women's movement that will ensure  that the interests of women are not  subordinated. One way of doing  this, she said, is by setting up  women's caucuses in trade unions.  Kathy Beeman, a member of Organized  Working Women, discussed the need  for equality within trade unions,  and the effects which the AIB regulations and social service cutbacks  are having on us, shutting us out  of the labour force.  Charnie Guettel, author of Marxism  and Feminism, told the conference  an emphasis must be put on getting  women into the work force because  "selling your labour power is more  progressive than being dependent  on somebody else." It is necessary  to sell our labour because the only  real power we have is withdrawing  it, she said.  Before making demands for equal pay  or equal benefits, women nust first  demand the right to work, she said.  "Our equality with men pretty much  follows our equality with them in  the workforce", Guettel said.  "Regardless of what forms our organizations take—sometimes you have to  have women's caucuses, sometimes  you have to have women's organizations—the fight is to be included,  rather than separated."  (Information gleaned from UPSTREAM,  an excellent monthly publication  from 227 Laurier Avenue West, Suite  207, Ottawa KIP 5J7.  SUBSCRIBE!)  The current issue of BIG MAMA RAG,  Vol 5, #1, has a double issue on  FEMINISM AND THE LEFT. Come down  to VSW to read it, or subscribe  to Big Mama, 1724 Gaylord, Denver.  SORWUC  The Service, Office and Retail Workers Union of Canada held their national convention in Vancouver on  February 5. This is an independent  union which is organizing in traditionally non-union jobs, in the  female work ghettos. The convention  passed policy on a number of issues  including childcare. The Union is  calling for: child care to be funded by the provincial government on  a scale similar to the public school  system; child care centres to be  designed by staff in consultation  with community boards such as school  boards; wages for child care workers  to be increased to reflect more  justly the level of skill, labour  and training involved.  Union members also called for an end  to the AIB wage controls, because it  discriminates against all workers,  especially lower income workers. In  addition, SORWUC opposes inequities  in the UIC Act. Pregnant women  should be entitled to exactly the  same benefits as those received by  other members of the labour force.  Pregnant women should also receive  special extended benefits of 100%  of their wage for the four months  surrounding their expected delivery  date.  At the convention, Local 1 President  Pat Berter announced recent certification of Bimini's on West Fourth  (see story below) and of an application for certification by Church's  Fried Chicken, with three city outlets.  Local 2 President Dodie Zerr reported that the United Bank Workers (i.e.  Local 2) now has applications before  the Canada Labour Relations Board for  certification of employees at 18 bank  branches throughout B.C.  bimini's  BIMINI NEIGHBOURHOOD PUB has been  granted certification under Service,  Office and Retail Workers Union of  Canada, Local 1. The staff will  shortly begin contract negotiations.  Their demands include job security,  basic benefits such as medical,  dental and extended health, and  safer working conditions.  The staff at Bimini's chose to unionize under SORWUC because it is a  small democratic union which allows  the staff to write and negotiate  their own contract, ensuring not only  shop autonomy, but also that the contract signed will deal specifically  with the issues at Bimini's.  SORWUC will be holding a seminar on  ORGANIZING, Sunday March 27th,1977.  This seminar should be useful to  SORWUC MEMBERS AND SUPPORTERS who are  not in a position to organise on the  job, but would like to help out, either  by working in the union office or by  helping sign up members in bands (or  elsewhere). For more information, call  SORWUC at 684 2834, or call upon them  in person at 1114 - 207 West Hastings.  NDP  At the recent N.D.P. Women's Committee conference, much discussion took  place concerning the shortcomings of  the N.D.P. as a force for implementing feminist/socialist principles.  The general mood, however, seemed to  be one of optimism.  Some women, including Judy Paterson,  recent past chairwoman of the committee-, gave impassioned pleas for  a focus of energy outside electoral  politics; that it is counterproductive to drain women's energy in a  fight within a system that is so  hierarchal and male-dominated. There  didn't seem to be much disagreement  with these views. However, as one  woman put it, "That's exactly what  they want us to do! (leave the party)  I think we should stay and fight!  And that apparently, was the majority feeling. The energy level was  high; the tension level low. Women  who felt they could better expend  their energies in extra-parliamentary action were encouraged to do so  and.also encouraged to keep the  "lines of communication" open with  the Women's Committee.  Rosemary Brown warned of "the politics of despair" in liberation movements. That is, the danger that a  few people (deliberately or unconsciously) spread gloom, despair and  frustration, resulting in suspicion,  apathy and disintegration within a  movement.  The message is clear -  don't give up the fight!  Brown,  and others, added also, the need for  sensitivity toward those sisters  (and ourselves) who are genuinely  tired and need a rest.  By all means  rest. But come back stronger.  Information sessions and workshops  were held on various subjects including rural life and feminism,  the relationship of the labour  movement to women's rights, and organizing within the constituencies.  The new chairwoman is Robin Geary.  If you are interested in joining  the N.D.P. Women's Committee, you  may contact them at 979-4857.  all in the jemily  NO TROUBLE GETTING AHEAD WHEN IT'S  ALL IN THE FAMILY  Jean Pigott, the newly-elected MP  for Ottawa-Carleton, says she doesn't want to concentrate on women's  issues because she's never been one  to espouse causes.  "If we must  have someone to do it, then it  should be a man" she said, adding  that she would rather spend her  time on local Ottawa issues. Pigott  said she never had any problems  getting ahead in the business world  because she was a woman.  She just  went out and did what many said was  difficult or even impossible.  Prior to election last fall, Pigott  was president of Morrison-Lamothe  Food Ltd., a large bakery.  It just  so happens that it's owned by her  father and uncle.  (UPSTREAM) HOLLY DEVOR  photo artist  The photograph is of a person with  breasts and a mustache. She's (?)  looking out calmly, right into the  viewer's eyes, as if s/he knows something I don't. What's going on  here?  It's one of Holly Devor portraits;  you might have seen it in a recent  Makara , and its one of a group which  Holly is showing at the OPEN SPACE  GALLERY (1960 Government Street,  Victoria) from March 7-20. And  it demands a response. Several of  Holly Devor's photo-portraits are  ambiguous in this way - they pose  the question, "What sex is this person who is being photographed?" In  important ways, however, Holly Devor's  work is different from that of Diane  Arbus, for example. The persons of  ambiguous gender in Devor's work,  smile joyfully, with obvious energy  and integrity. There is no feeling  of pathos, as there can be with  Arbus, no feeling that the viewer  knows more about the nature of  oppression than do the subjects  who are being photographed. On  the contrary, Devor's work elicits  the response that if anyone's  head needs getting together, if  anyone's consciousness needs  raising, it's the viewer's, mine.  "I want to pose this question of  gender identification," explains  Holly. "I want to make people  question their own preconceptions  about gender identification.  Most of us identify people on  clues - very superficial clues.  For example, I put a mustache on  a woman and you start wondering  if she's a man. There's a lot  of ambiguity in my work. Many  people ask the question of different photographs - is this a  woman? Some that you didn't  pick up on as being ambiguous,  others did. We operate, all of  us, on different clues."  Holly Devor arranges the photographs for me in the order in which  they will appear in the show. All of  them are of people, most are frontal  portraits, with the subjects looking  me straight in the eyes. All of these  people are beautiful. Not one is a  typical "Beautiful Person", and not  one appears wealthy. All, without  exception, are people with their own  sense of self. They communicate their  integrity. A closer examination of  the portrait which I found ambiguous,  and those which others have found  ambiguous reveals that they are all  of women. At the end of the series,  there are three portraits of old  men. They look out at the viewer,  quizzical, somewhat distant. What  they seem to be saying is this: "I  know something's going on here, with  these younger women, but I just can't  figure it out. Seems like things are  changing." The men are certainly not  the enemy. Their age is beautiful,  their eyes liquid and vital.  The portraits do work as a group.  They make a single statement: woman's energy is alive and glowing.  Kinesis asked Holly to explain how  she integrated her art with her  politics:  "I approach life as a feminist so  of course I approach my art as a feminist, too. Because I live in a feminist community, I get to experience  a lot more positive energy than most  people. It's this energy I try to  capture, to show people how it can  be.  "I try to take pictures that radiate  good energy. Just about everyone I  meet who is glowing in this way is  a woman. Sometimes I plan my pictures,  sometimes they come to me. There are  several in this show that I found at  women's gatherings. One is from a  March 8 celebration in Toronto quite  a few years ago. Others are from the  March 22nd Rally in Victoria last  year. Events like that produce so  much good energy, it's no accident  that I use them in my work. Whether  I plan the moment, or catch it going  by, I'm always trying to highlight  what's there.  all art is political  "I do see my art as being political.  All art is political in that all art  makes a statement (contrary to the  claims of some art critics). Form  must serve a concept and is empty  without it. You do have to have  respect for craft. Some art that is  Photos:  Eileen Brown, above  Pat Normington, right  political tries to pass on the basis  of correct content alone. I find it  very heavy-handed. Political fine  art requires a dedication to both  form and content with form serving  content.  Much political art is negative: it's  hard at work pointing out the nature  of oppression. That's legitimate,  but it's also legitimate political  art to point out how good the changes  can be. My portraits are of women,  whose optimism and strength shows  through: they are positive statements about what change can do for  us.  "I try to work in a non-threatening (and therefore persuasive) way.  I want to get people to start questioning themselves about their own  gender identity, for example, without feeling coerced, assaulted or  nervous. Because many of the people  in my photographs are looking you  right in the eyes, viewers quite  often say, "hey, I know that person!" Actually,it's amazing how  often this does happen. And when  you are relating to a photograph  as to someone you know, you're open  to questioning yourself."  Holly Devor's work is technically  superb. Her work glows. If you can  get to her show at OPEN SPACE GALLERY you can share in the experience  yourself-. Tell your friends about  it, too.  Trying to make it as an artist in  this society, which would rather  pay a fortune to a real estate  developer than a living wage to an  artistjit'snot easy. Holly is open  to doing work for anyone who wants  portraits of their family etc.  Contact Holly Devor at 874-2564 TO THE END OF MY ROPE  AND BACK AGAIN  "I've been everything in the book:  schizoid, catatonic, psychotic,  paranoid, suicidal, depressed, fed  up with washing dishes 'Ģ  The best way for a psychiatrist to  find out about my mental illness  is to ask me.  I can tell him all  about it!  If I'm not frightened  of getting shock treatment for  doing it. Otherwise, he'll have  to outwit me and guess whether I'm  sick or not."  These are Molly Dreskell's words.  She's a founding member of the  Mental Patients Association, and  she's been in Riverview sixteen  times.  Fifteen of those sixteen  times she's been given shock treatment. And that's made her one of  the strongest fighters for mental  patient reform that you'll find in  B.C. today.  "It's going to be a  long struggle," she says, "before  the psychiatrists of this province  will be ready to listen to us.  They're very powerful and they're  very wealthy. Sometimes we feel  as if we're beating our heads a-  gainst a brick wall. But change  of that kind takes time."  Molly says that there are two reasons why people end up in Riverview:  you do things in public that other  people find crazy, or you are incapable of functioning.  "They sent  me into Riverview because of the  second reason. My marriage wasn't  working out.  I knew almost right  away that it was an incompatible  arrangement.  I tried hard to mold  myself according to the way my husband wanted me to be.  Even though  I did my best, it wasn't possible.  Then my son was born premature, and  he got a condition at birth that has  made him blind ever since.  By thf  time he was six weeks old I kiew Ue  was blind. When he was four, and  after some bad experiences, I cracked up.  If I'd just been removed  from my home for a while, I would  have recovered quickly.  Instead, I  was given shock treatment at VGH.  It made it difficult for me to think  my way out of my problems.  I was  in again a short while after, then  I was transferred to Riverview.  Shock treatment affected my memory.  Blotted me out.  It scrambles your  brain. Yes, eventually your memory  comes back, but it doesn't all come  back.  It made it difficult for me  to adjust at home.  "They just tell you when you will  have it. You see enough of what's  going on around you to know that it  wouldn't do you any good to object.  I've seen people given shock treatment forcibly.  I pride myself that  throughout the whole experience I  never lost my dignity or self respect. And it was a fight to keep  them.  "I've been in the chronic building  in Riverview - H3.  It's changed  since that time, but then it was  120 women all in one big day room.  Mostly you don't speak to each other.  There's a very small staff and they  don't speak to you either.  From H3  I used to go over to Valleyview -  that's for senile patients - and  make beds, work in the kitchen.  In the afternoons, you had ground  privileges.  I had some friends,  and that's the time when we could  get together.  Because everyone is  in the same boat, you try to give  each other kindness. People speak  softly because they're hurt, because they want to let you know  they care about you, because they  are frightened. They liked me because I have the gift of being able  to jolly people along.  "Of course I worried incredibly a-  bout my son.  Sometimes my husband  would bring him, and sometimes he  wouldn't come and he wouldn't bring  the boy. When I was in hospital it  was impossible for me to do anything for my son. When I was out I  gave him everything I could.  I  didn't worry about spoiling him.  There's no such thing as spoiling a  child who's been deprived of his  mother from the age of four.  So  when I was there, I was very, very  there.  "It's not just the shock treatment.  One time I went into a hospital and  they gave me a needle that knocked  me out for five days.  Five days.  It was as terrible as shock and  they didn't tell me what they were  doing.  I had very bad nightmares  during that time. And afterwards  they wouldn't tell me for some time  what they had done to me.  "I got involved in starting MPA in  1971 because I felt so lost in  society, unacceptable everywhere.  I felt I would be acceptable with  mental patients. There must be  something we can do for ourselves  and for each other, I thought. MPA  is certainly not the whole answer  - everyone gets a different thing  out of it, and some of us don't get  anything. We have a drop-in in  Vancouver and we also have one  right inside Riverview. MPA is  opposed to forcible shock treatment.  Some people think that it does them  some good and these people should  be allowed to have it. Nowhere in  Canada is it banned.  The only  place it's banned is in California.  I was very pleased to see that the  last BCFW convention passed a reso  lution banning forcible shock treatment.  It was a very progressive  piece of policy and even if it's  just a piece of paper, it's a start.  "Certainly forcible shock treatment  is enough'to frighten everybody  even in their sane mind. The fear  that arises as a result is sometimes more difficult to cope with  than the illness itself.  The rich hire housekeepers  The poor go to Riverview  "I think both rich and poor people  have problems with mental health.  But the poor are the ones you see.  Rich people have different places  they can go, different things they  can do about it.  If a rich woman  can't cope with her job of keeping  house and taking care of her husband and children, she can get a  housekeeper. A poor woman has to  go to Riverview.  "My problem with my head is not over  and I've come to that realization. I  have what I consider to be a progressive psychiatrist who has been a great  help to me in the struggle through  the maze of my mind.  "Right now I live with my son. I'm  the greatest student of myself. I'm  learning what my particular rythms  are and how they fit into those of  the people around me.  I write a  little, lecture a little, and work  for VSW and MPA. I try not to do  anything I don't want to, unless  not doing it will hurt someone." bcfw: lower mainland regional conference  trashing; death'of the movement  ^al Embree, our lower mainland rep. on the standing cmmtte.  The purpose of this conference is to  become familiar with our experience,  to learn individually what we have  learned collectively over the last  number of years, to see at the same  time, in the same room, the diversity of our skills and styles. Today it is important to be as clear  and as open as we can risk being and  to convey to the people we have not  worked closely with, have not talked personally with, what our confusions are, where our difficulties  lie, and also where our confidence  comes from, what we feel is strong  about what we are doing, and why it  is we do it the way we do.  Today it  is important to listen carefully;  can we suspend our preconceptions,  our beliefs for part of a day and  let our sisters tell their own story  in their own way and perhaps let  ourselves hear something new?  I became aware as the energy built  for this conference that this kind  of occasion has great risks. "Trashing" has become a familiar word; it  has come into use because it fits an  experience that had become familiar  - the division, the bitterness that  exists when the differences between  groups, between individuals, hurts.  Today is the day for finding other  ways besides trashing to deal with  those differences.  Another familiar phenomenon quite  recently arisen is the pronouncement by popular culture of the death  of the women's movement.  Some of  us who considered ourselves active  participants in what we thought was  a movement began to wonder if we  were going to suffer the embarrassment of being the last to know.  Somehow it seems like a confusing  time.  Is there a shift to the right  politically? Are things tightening  up economically, and if so, is it  transitory or long term? How does  the women's movement fit into the  history of the last ten years? What  are the implications of those things  for the shape and direction of feminist activity in the next year, or  two years, or five years? Do we  feel threatened by this sense of  being in a plateau? Can some time  spent on analysis give us the understanding to recognize our options,  and feel good about making important  choices?  The day has been structured with  these two levels in mind.  In the  morning, the agenda committee had  hoped to tap even a bit of the wealth  of experience painfully gained by  women's groups over the last number  of years, and to ask 5 groups who do  very different kinds of things to  talk about themselves. The strength  of the movement a few years ago was  reflected in the diversity of things  we found energy to go off and do,  and the variety of ways we found to  do things.  One of the results of  that has been some sense of isolation, and some resulting misunderstanding, distrust and fatigue.  Maintaining our diverse activities  and styles while minimizing our isolation will be crucial to the vitality of the women's movement. We  need to take days like today to talk  to one another, to share our experiences, to speak honestly about our  fears and our distrust.  The afternoon was set up to have  enough time to look long and hard  at the often uncomfortable issues  facing the whole movement: the issues that we make decisions about  every day by taking one action or  another. Yet we rarely take the  time to weigh the implications and  alternatives of those actions. The  lack of well thought-out guiding  principles can make every decision  slow, painful and confusing, especially if we are questioned about it  by co-workers, other groups, or  interested onlookers. Or we can be  confused by the action of someone  else if we don't understand their  goals and rationale. Many decisions  and actions will be easier and get  more support if we know ourselves  more completely why they were taken.  NDP WOMEN'S  COMMITTEE  The political aims of the N.D.P. Women's Committee are to involve women  at all levels of the party, provin-  cially and federally, from the constituency organizations to the party  executive and to elect women as MLAs  and MPs. Women must attain positions of decision making.  The ultimate aim is to achieve a  society based on socialist ideals.  To achieve this, the first step has  been to adopt a body of policy at  N.D.P. conventions over the last  years.  This policy covers almost  all areas of concern to women:  - childcare  - health care  - a non-sexist education system  - an economic system which does  not discriminate against women anck  men  - labour standards which affect  unorganized workers who serve as a  cheap pool of labour  Our aims are to coerce N.D.P. MLAs  to speak against issues and cutbacks  in social services affecting women  under the present government.  We develop resolutions to conventions  to stimulate discussion in the N.D.P.  around women's rights. We attempt  to educate N.D.P. members and the  leadership.   To col. one, p. 11  MAKARA  You should know what MAKARA is by now  but if you don't, we're a magazine  produced by a collective of women in  Vancouver, and we have readers and  fans all over the world.  Right now our financial picture is  grim; therefore, we're going through  a lot of changes. Our funding ended  December 31st, so those of us who  are left are working for minimal or  no wages. We've had to do some restructuring and re-planning.  Meanwhile, we have to get our work done,  meet deadlines, etc.  The magazine cannot support itself.  As far as we know, Maclean's and  Chatelaine are the only magazines in  the country that are financially solvent and not produced in some dedicated person's basement. And the  only reason they're making it is because 2/3 of their pages are used up  with offensive advertising.  That means that while MAKARA is our  favourite part of the business, it  can't be the only part. We also do  graphics work, like typesetting,  layout, design, camera work, and we  do editing as well. These are the  services we can sell to support our  "real" project - the magazine ?¬∞  c,,  p.11  LESBIAN CAUCUS  I. HERSTORY AND FUNCTIONING:  At the time of the first BCFW  Convention, there were numerous  lesbian groups in this province, but  none which were specifically working on formulating lesbian/feminist  theory. The caucus began with about  twenty individual feminists who came  together to write policy on rights of  lesbians for the second BCFW Convention. In trying to write policy,  it became apparent that our first  task was to analyze how and why we  were oppressed as lesbians.  At the second BCFW Convention, the  preamble and policy resolutions we  had developed were adopted, and the  Rights of Lesbians Sub-committee  was ratified to act on the policy.  The caucus-continued as a small  lesbian/feminist political theory  development collective.  We are at this point a collective  of seven, and we have come to see  that caucus represents for us a  mechanism of sharing a common  approach to our lives and our politics. One cohesive factor is a real  need for a place to develop a personal political framework, and to  shape these ideas with other women  who share that need. The trust and  respect we have for each other has  grown from more than a shared need,  and more than a long herstory of  working together. The trust andTo col   P.11  These presentations are based on papers presented at the Lower Mainland  VSW's paper will be summarised in the next issue. Rape Relief also spoke  had major policy changes since that time.   Regional Conference of BCFW.  at the conference, but has II«  NDP WOMEN  From col 1, p. 10  The N.D.P. Women's Committee does  not have a structure, nor a constitution, nor a set of officers.  We  do elect a chairperson each year.  She is then ratified by the Provincial Council of the party.  N.D.P.  Women's Committees send a representative to the steering committee  meeting which meets every second  month. Decisions are made with  input from individual committee  members.  the leadership does  not support feminists  The party establishment and the  leadership does not give women's  rights issues priority.  It does  not support feminists for nomination to the party executive.  Rather  it deliberately seeks non-feminists  for the party executive.  Feminists  have to fight for and organize to be  nominated or elected or heard.  N.D.P. women work very much within  the system in the sense of becoming  familiar with party structure and  knowing how to operate in that  structure.  In another sense, N.D.P. Women's  Committee maintains a degree of  autonomy and independence. Priorities does not receive financial  support from the party, nor does  the Women's Committee except in  exceptional circumstances.  Many feminists in the N.D.P. question structures and systems which  operate against women.  N.D.P. women become familiar with  procedure and know how to use it,  but at the same time try to work  collectively within the N.D.P. Women's Committee.  When the N.D.P. was in government,  the Women's Committee did not give  priority to one area of policy implementation over other areas.  All affect women's and children's  lives.  Therefore, we deal with a very broad  area which makes it much more difficult to see progress.  We have lobbied N.D.P. MLAs and the  Leader of the N.D.P. to speak out  in the legislature and publicly on  cutbacks in social services. We  have not heard any great noises.  Each year the Women's Committee  organizes a Women's Caucus at the  party convention.  The Women's  Caucus is not the Committee but  is organized by it.  It meets frequently during the convention to  plan strategy and to nominate a  half slate of women to stand for  election to the party executive.  Because the N.D.P. tries to be a  grass roots party it is necessary  that N.D.P. women work in the constituencies.  It is essential to  be members of a constituency executive, to seek nomination as delegates, to present resolutions at  the constituency level. There are  many demands on one's time.  Some  women direct their energies locally,  some to Priorities, some to their  unions, and others to encouraging  feminists to be more involved in  political process.  There are problems of survival. Margaret Beardsley  MAKARA  From col 2, p.10  Our priorities now are  - creating a human work environment  - being a woman-owned, woman-  controlled business  - working things out as a collective  - sharing skills to give each  other strength and confidence  - offering a place where women  can see their writing and art work  published  - giving people new ideas about  living, working, & relating to each  other  - being both political and beautiful.  These are our ideals. We don't know  whether we can afford them.  Group Functioning  There are 10 of us, and there is some  turnover, so the group changes a lot.  Also our emphasis has shifted from  totally creative work to a balance  between the administrative and creative sides, so we can keep ourselves  going. And we work as a collective.  All of this means we have to put a  lot of energy into adjusting to these  changes, as well as dealing with crises (mostly financial), and everyday  stuff (of which there is plenty).  To col 1, p.12  LCSBIAN CAUCUS  From col 3, p. 10  respect we have for each other has  grown out of the process of becoming  a collective.  Over a long time period - three  years - there has been a constant  filtering process: from twenty women  wanting and needing many different  kinds of groups, to seven who share  a common perception of the group's  function and purpose. Another very  important cohesive factor is our  shared feminist analysis: we all  come from {similar individual political viewpoints which continue to  be articulated and carried further  through the group process. We see  that the conflicts which inhibit  many groups in the women's movement  come from basic differences in  assumptions about what the movement  is, what feminism is, etc. With a  knowledge at first intuitive and by  now articulated - that we all shared  at least a basic definition of  feminism - and through the process  of working together to clarify the  relationship between lesbianism and  feminism, we have now come to a  point where we feel that we are a  collective in a very real sense.  We do, of course, go through conflicts. Theoretical and political  conflicts are dealt with on that  level - as part of the process of  working out theory, rather than as a  To col 3, p.12  SUBSCRIBE TO CANADA'S MOST  BEAUTIFUL MAGAZINE...  Name   Address..  Renew my subscription -  Name   Address   Send a gift subscription to -  Name   Address .'   Six beautiful issues for $6.00 ($7.50 outside  Canada). I enclose a cheque or money order  for $  Please indicate with which  issue you wish the subscription to begin; all  back issues are available.  SUBSCRIBE / RENEW / GIFT WHAT  LIES  AHEAD?  From col 2, p.11  The thread that runs through it all  is our dedication to our business  and our magazine. We think it is  important to a lot of people in a  lot of ways, and as our reputation  and scope of support broadens, we  become more and more determined.  Reader response has been astounding,  all over the continent.  There is a  market for our style of communication  and we are excited. The excitement  coming in gets picked up by the group  and makes us feel closer. As well,  the kind of workplace we're creating  is a bond between us.  It's good in  theory, it's good in practice.  Another cohesive factor is our reluctance to return to whatever it was  we did before:  some of us weren't  working and wanted to work;, some of  us had dehumanizing jobs in the field  with little opportunity to try anything really new; some of us were  caught in totally alientating and unsatisfactory jobs elsewhere in the  business world.  Decision Making  We're a collective, so we meet once  a week for big policy, magazine, and  business decisions. We take lots of  time to discuss things, and issues  don't usually come to a vote. Within that larger structure, there are  two magazine teams who decide on  manuscripts and art work to be used  in each issue. They also brainstorm  and chase down articles.  Each person has certain general areas  of work. One person is a layout artist and reads fiction, another does  editing and fundraising, another does  writing and distribution, another  does design and camera work.  But  the areas are loosely defined, to make  room for anyone wanting to learn new  skills.  Of course, since we're a collective  we have our communication problems.  Sometimes if you have a problem it's  hard to present it to nine people.  Also there are communication gaps  caused by the physical fact of ten  women in and out of the office all  the time. And sometimes there is  negativism - when you present an idea  to a group that large, the group is  bound to find all the weak points  in it, just because of the law of  averages. But basically it does feel  like a really supportive group, and  we don't experience any more problems  than any other collective.  Co-optation  For us the economic risks involved in  not "taking" government money seem to  be  1) People burn out quicker when  they work for free;  2) Our principles are expensive  (eg. our ad policy - we don't  take ads from big business,  liquor or tobacco companies,  or government agencies we don't  approve of); and  3) We believe people should be  paid for their work, and we  just can't pay them right now.  The political and ideological risks  are harder to pin down.  It was hard  for us to take LEAP (Manpower) money,  even though it enabled us to produce  a superior product, and even though  we know every Canadian small business  has to get started with some government funding. That LEAP money,  though, was recycled through a bureaucratic pyramid too incredible to  describe. We also spent lots of energy and time filing reports that no  one read, and justifying ourselves  to the government (as in, you girls  are doing a great job, but...). Also  by taking LEAP money we're contributing to the continuation of the LEAP  programme, which probably does more  harm than good. We've applied for  Canada Council funds, which is a  little less awkward somehow.  For  one thing, they give you the money  and then they leave you alone, trusting you to handle it.  For another,  there aren't nearly as many bureaucrats between them and us, siphoning  off the funds.  But...we really want to be free of  this funding anxiety altogether. We  don't want dependence on government  funds of any kind. We want self-  sufficiency. We've just completed a  feasibility study which shows we  could possibly pull it off, if we  really worked hard. When we were  getting the LEAP money, we didn't  have to do the extra graphic work;  it was too easy to put all our energy into the magazine and not deal  with the impending financial crisis.  We're concerned now with surviving  and retaining our principles at the  same time. We have the advantage of  possibly being able to do this. There  are services we sell that we enjoy  doing, that people want. Our problem is that economically, this is  the worst year for graphic arts since  about 1930.  MAKARA Magazine, and MAKARA Publishing & Design Co-operative, have an  important role in the larger political scene, not just concerning women,  but workers, artists and writers,  chilren, parents, Canadians. We want  to change things; our tool is the  magazine, and we want to get if off  the ground.  BY MARY J. TOD  LESBIAN CAUCUS  From col 3, p.11  problem. We are trying very hard to  come to a point of leaving our personal conflicts out of our political  work together. Inter-personal tensions have not appreciably hampered  our effectiveness as a political  collective.  II. FUNDING AND CO-OPTATION:  As far as actual funding goes, we  have no problems, because we neither  ask for nor receive funding.  The co-optation which most concerns us lies in two areas: first the  co-optation we face in our individual personal lives as a result of  the oppressive structure we must  deal with in order to survive; and  second, the risks of co-optation we  face as lesbians in our work within  the women's movement.  Attempts at co-optation occur in  several forms:  1) that our visibility discredits  the movement.  2) the illusion that acceptance of  individual lesbians has actually  made a difference in societal  attitudes.  3) that lesbianism has no relevance  to rural women.  4) that each of us is entirely  responsible for everything every  other lesbian has ever said or  done, and that we, as individuals,  are interchangeable.  etc.  We feel that these attempts at  co-optation are designed to ensure  the silence and invisibility of all  lesbians in the women's movement.  III. POLITICAL AIMS: OUR POSITION  IN THE WOMEN'S MOVEMENT  We see the women's movement as  covering a wide spectrum of beliefs,  analyses, and activities, and we see  ourselves as occupying a specific  position within that spectrum. Some  of the positions we see existing  within the movement are:  1) women who are in the movement  for a sense of identification:  for the support, enjoyment and  comfort they receive from being  involved.  2) women who fight for equal rights  within the structure, with or  without a minimum of social  reform.  3) women who see radical change in  the structure of society as  essential to ending their  oppression.  We do not see the term 'feminist'  as being synonymous with the women's  movement. To us, feminism is a perspective on the way the world  functions, and an analysis of how  and why we are oppressed. It implies  more than identifying as a woman; it  requires an analysis of women's  oppression, and it also requires a  commitment to apply this analysis to  all levels of personal existence,  and to act upon it.  We define ourselves as feminists.  We see in feminism the only potential for creating the kind of world  we want to live in. For us, feminism  implies a radical restructuring of  society in order to end the oppre-  sion of women. We feel that there is  WMU.-¬a1.  To col 1, p. 16 I was a chambermaid in a London bed and breakfast  hotel one summer.  I can remember changing a spermy  and disheveled bed one morning after a bleary late  night.  I snapped the sheets in the air and kicked  the mattress muttering "It's Sex it's Sex that's my  whole problem.  If it wasn't for Sex this bed  wouldn't have to be changed.  If it wasn't for Sex  I wouldn't be exhausted and frustrated and have a  backache from cramps.  Sex—phooey.  If it wasn't  for Sex I wouldn't even be here doing this lousy  job that only a woman would do. And if it weren't  for goddammned Sex making women d£ this stuff, the  men who had to do it would have invented less fucking awkward ways to change fucking double beds for  people to have goddamned Sex in!"—All of which is  only an anecdotal introduction to an article about  a film about women who clean office buildings, and  the attempts of feminists to unionize them: sex  again.  Nightcleaners is a film which has spawned much discussion on the nature of Left Film Documentary.  I  want to separate, for a moment, the information the  film conveys from its success as an aesthetic venture because its politics as information is to be  commended, whatever my quibbles with its artistic  politics.  In this film, made by the Berwick Street  Film Collective in Britain in 1975, we learn of the  lives of the nightcleaners: the women who clean  buildings and offices, invisible to the day world.  We see the women through windows or doorways vacuuming, wiping sinks, scrubbing toilets—the full  range of domestic chores in an anti-domestic setting. And indeed, these women are being kept from  their domestic lives. When they speak, they tell  us they took the job to be able to support their  families without abandoning their jobs as mothers.  "My kids is more important than myself." "I don't  want some strange woman looking after my kids."  They tell us they sleep two hours a night. We  see them shopping with their families on a busy  day street. We see them vacuuming an elevator in  an empty building, alone in the subway, or walking home as morning breaks to start their day with  their children.  "If I was alone, didn't have no  family, I wouldn't work like this." "The doctor  told me to pack it in; I guess I've got tired blood.  But I hafta do this for the money.  I wouldn't  trust anybody with my kids."  And just as the man next to me murmurs "Jesus.  Think about trying to organize those women!" the  film begins to show us the attempts of both traditional labour figures—men—and the campaign of  feminists to unionize these isolated workers in  London in 1971-72. One of the irrefutable criticisms  of the film is its obscuring of data.  In its avoidance of the "fact style mystification" of traditional documentary, it usually omitted or scrambled  straightforward information to the point of irritation.  It looked like there was conflict between the  workers and the feminists.  It looked like there was  doubt about the sincerity or usefulness of the men  or the unions they represented, from all of the women.  There is some point to freezing on individual faces  to make the viewer ask:  "What is_ she thinking?"  but eventually the question deserves an answer.  The  clear aural messages were reserved for statements  of personal situation, as I have quoted. Perhaps a  —deserved—distrust of statistics and facts made  the editors shy away from direct data or statements  on the political situation. However unconsciously  this came about, we do bear a speech about sexuality  as an issue in "the movement" and we are shown exchanges with the workers and feminist organizers occasionally with both voice and moving photography.  Too often, all facets of discussion were separated  so that we could not know who had said what, with  what facial expression.  Contrarily, when the filmmakers directly tackled ideology in their editing  of an employers statements about the mightcleaners:  "They choose to work for me." "They're glad to get  a job these days." "Why, without my people I'd be  penniless." they comment and reveal without any  sacrifice of aesthetics. The images are powerful.  But we are never told what does happen to the organizing attempt or what struggles its course involved  or revealed. Yes, the issues of class differences  within the women's movement are referred to, but  the reference is oblique and enigmatic in a frustrating manner.  Again, I wonder why political art is too often  trusted only in its extremes:  either objective  "realism" or first person account of private experience. The filmmakers clearly tackled this issue.  But in the course of the film I felt they too did  not trust the film as commentary. This is first  revealed in the clarity in the storytelling interviews and the obscuring of the reporting of the  union meetings. There are other aesthetic/political  issues.  The central technical procedure which makes this  film different from television documentary was  separation. Visuals were separated from sound, sections of film from one another by black leader  between shots.  Stills were isolated—usually of a  woman's face—and made grainier, or slower or both.  And behind these techniques were other separations.  nightcleaners:  Jilmpolitics  by Sandra Heindsmann  I am sure the collective was aware they were commenting, by form, on the isolation of the workers in the  many long shots particularly through windows.  Even  the problem of who to believe:  "If you could make  people strong enough—enough people strong enough,  we'd win" "I believe in everything that was said.  I  just don't think its possible" was addressed by the  sight/sound split. But I had an uneasy feeling that  this revealed a lack of control of the materials of  the film as much as it did editorial comment by editing.  The sound was too often inferior to the visuals.  It was used without any of the creative treatment the  photography was given. No attempt was made to recreate the experience of say, a vacuum in a small room  or the whine of fluorescent lights, while we saw at  least a dozen versions of the grainy face.  The vital separation seemed to be one of participation.  While Claire Johnston in Spare Rib (a fine British  feminist magazine) credits the film with "containing) within itself a reflection of its own involvement  in the history of the events being filmed" I must disagree.  The process of the making of the film is never  addressed. What we are left with is the renewed conviction that—for us as audience and for the artists—  these women are OTHER. They are held at a distance WHAT WE DEMANDED  ' 77»more and more poverty for women  march 22       WHAT WE GOT  On March 22, 1976, women from all  over B.C. rallied in Victoria to  remind politicians that women exist.  Here's some of the things we were  demanding. The only use of such  a list is to check out what's NOT  being done.  REPRESENTATION OF WOMEN WITHIN  GOVERNMENT  - Women's responsibility Centres  must be established in all departments which address themselves to  the issues of concern to women,  i.e. Depts. of Health, Labour,  Human Resouces, Education.  - The office of the Provincial  Coordinator of the Status of Women  be reestablished.  WOMEN'S CENTRE CORE FUNDING  - The Provincial Government must  assume responsibility for funding  all women's centres, and support &  encourage their efforts to end  discrimination.  FAMILY LAW  - Community of Property recommendations of the Berger Commission  be enacted.  - The concept of illegitimacy of  children be eliminated.  - The concept of maintenance upon  separation or divorce be changed  to reflect a standard of need, not  retribution.  - The Change of Name act be amended  to allow both spouses equal rights  in retaining or changing their names.  EDUCATION  - The Department of Education make  the elimination of sex discrimination  a priority issue.  - The contract position of Special  Advisor to the Minister of Education  on sex discrimination be renewed.  - The development and use throughout  B.C. of non-sexist books and materials be actively promoted.  -Re-instate the Committee on Sex  Discrimination.  - Teacher training institutions be  required to offer courses in sex-  role stereotyping.  - Women's Studies courses be made  available in the high school curriculum.  - The number of childcare services  in both urban and rural areas must  be increased.  - Childcare to be made available on  a 24 hour basis, at schools for after  3.00 pm, for children under 3 and  for homemakers who are ill.  HUMAN RIGHTS  - The human rights code must be  amended to prohibit discrimination  on economic grounds, on the basis  of sexual orientation, and by  landlords against single parents  and families with children.  - The human rights code must be  amended to read " equal pay for  work of equal value."  - The number of human rights officers must be increased, and the  jurisdiction of the board must be  extended.  MATERNITY BENEFITS  - The present Maternity Protection Act must be amended to prohibit dismissal on the grounds of  pregnancy at any time during the  pregnancy; to allow a woman to return to work as soon as she wishes;  to ensure the same pay and same or  similar work on return to work; to  ensure that leave be considered as  continuous employment for the purpose of benefits.  RAPE  - Additional courts, judges, and  prosectors be made available to  hasten the proceedings.  - Prosecutor's pay be made comparable to private practitioners', to  guarantee good representation for  the victim.  - Training on sexual offenses must  be expanded at the B.C.Police College.  - Female officers, doctors, prosecutors be available for rape cases.  - Sufficient funds be made available  to Rape Relief centres throughout  B.C.  HEALTH  - All hospitals receiving provincial money be required to set up  and operate therapeutic abortion  committees.  - Birth control information and  devices be made available free.  - More funding for the training of  paramedical workers.  - More VD and pelvic disease clinics be set up throughout B.C.  - A health ombudsperson be appointed to deal with public care complaints .  - Only a woman's signature be required for medical procedures affecting her body.  PENSIONS FOR HOMEMAKERS  - The Provincial Government must  work to include homemakers in the  Canada Pension Plan.  AFFIRMATIVE ACTION/EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY PROGRAMME IN  THE PUBLIC SERVICE  - The proposal for an Equal Employment Opportunities Programme,  as presented to the Provincial Sec-  rectary in May '75 be implemented  immediately.  FARM AND DOMESTIC WORKERS  - Provincial labour standards must  be amended to include farm and domestic workers.  TRANSITION HOUSES  - The funding of current transition  houses to be continued and expanded;  further transition houses to be set  up throughout B.C.  WOMEN IN PRISON  - An advisory council be appointed  by the Attorney-General's Department  to deal with issues of women in prison.  This group should be entitled to  monthly inspection tours.  - Genuine greivance procedures to be  implemented.  - Solitary confinement in any form  be immediately removed.  - Mothers in prison to have access  to their children  LABOUR STANDARDS LEGISLATION  - All labour standards legislation  should be codified into one piece of  legislation.  WOMEN AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT  - The Women's Economic Rights Branch  must continue to receive the support  of the government.  NATIVE WOMEN  - Native land claims to be honoured.  - Discrimination against native women  in the form of poor housing, poor  nutrition, sub-standard medical services, unemployment and lack of equal  educational opportunties to be wiped  out.  WOMEN ON WELFARE  - Equal opportunity for education,  employment, daycare, transportation &  living arrangements.  - Genuine board of grievances to be  established.  - Right to be informed of all benefits and changes  LESBIAN RIGHTS  - Lesbianism in itself should not be  considered grounds for loss of custody, lesbians should not be discriminated against for their sexual preference/living arrangement; nor should  their children.  - No discrimination in employment  or housing to be allowed on grounds  of sexual orientation or living  arrangements.  A little crumb of response to women':  demands for changes has come in the  form of Bill 3, The Change of Name  Amendment Act, 1977. Not surprisingly, this concession involves no  expense of money. One might legitimately ask if that was the reason  it was selected over all the other  needs of women?  The proposed amendments will make  some changes to the situation of  a married woman and the surname she  applies to use.  Under the proposed amendments, a  woman at the time of marriage can  elect to use either her birth surname, her present name (if different) or her husband's name. A place  is to be provided on the marriage  registration to note her selection.  The man has no such options.  The married woman will be permitted  to make an application for name  change to : (a) her birth name  (b) her name at the time of marriage or (c) the husband's surname.  The consent of the spouse is not  required for this.  A facade of equality is presented  in that the wife will be able to  make application to change the  husband's name,or his or her given  names, provided both spouses consent to the change. Previously  only husbands could make such  applications.  The wife will no longer be required to change her surname (if  she has been using the husband's  surname) when/if the husband changes his.  The Bill does not remove the right  at common law to acquire a name by  'repute', i.e. through usage. But  married women taking this route  have encountered nothing but hassles. The amendments also will do  nothing to help a married woman  desiring a name other than her  birth name or the name which she  was using at the time of marriage.  Apart from this, the Attorney General, Garde Gardom, has been  promising some family law reform for this session of the House.  We'll believe it when we see it. The only other tiny concessions  (funding of only one women's centre in the whole province; inadequate funding for a few rape relief centres and transition  houses) have been wrung from the unwilling government like blood  from a stone. Meanwhile, more and more of us are out of work.  Whot Vte Lose Under GAIN  Under the new GAIN Act and Regulations women have less incentive to  try to establish themselves and even  more bureaucratic control over their  lives.  Support for an educational program  from Human Resources is only available if the program leads directly  to employment and lasts no longer  than two years. Attempting a program not supported and approved by  Human Resources can lead to being  cut off.  Further, student loans and  grants are considered as unearned  income and some, or all will be  taken off the amount of assistance.  Daycare rates continue to go up, but  not the subsidies received by low  income people. The new regulations  exclude women on welfare from receiving subsidies unless they are  attending school or you can prove  that the child or family will be substantially damaged without it. The  choice is not left to the woman to  decide if she wishes to put her child  in daycare.  There is no incentive to find a part  time job, or sue for maintenance as  every amount over a hundred dollars a  month for a family is deducted from  the cheque. You can no longer prorate the amount of income received  over the year. Recommendations that  a straight guaranteed income or negative income tax system is needed con  tinue to be ignored.  A Guaranteed Income plan, if established on an individual basis would  reduce the vast amount of interference in the lives of women on welfare. Where we live,, how we live and  whom we choose to live with, would be  of our concern only.  The new GAIN Act provides that single  parent families who go off welfare  may be able to obtain medical benefits for a period of twelve months.  While this is beneficial to women who  are able to find jobs, there is no  assurance that they will be informed  of this or any other assistance that  might be available to them.  Rates for single women still remain  at $160 a month.  There has not been  an increase in this rate for three  years. They are not entitled to a  shelter coverage.  The Vancouver Resources Board has  printed a flyer detailing the basic  rights and obligations under the new  regulations.  Every person receiving  assistance or applying for assistance  should receive a copy of this flyer.  While there is an appeal process for  individual cases, there remains no  process for the consumers of the  service to regularly provide the department with their perspective. An  advisory board on policy and its implementation is necessary. From col 3, p.12  a very clear link between lesbian  oppression and feminism, and this  makes an analysis of lesbian oppression integral to a total feminist  analysis. We believe that analysis  and theory are essential tools in  building a movement, and that strategies and priorities must be built  on a theoretical base. We believe  that a lesbian/feminist analysis is  a crucial part of such theoretical  base. The lesbian caucus is therefore working to ensure that lesbian/  feminist theory is articulated and  understood throughout the movement.  RIGHTS OF LESBIANS  The Rights of Lesbians Subcommittee  is a ratified sub-committee of BCFW.  Subcommittees are BCFW's main action  areas; their objective being to initiate, develop, promote and implement policy on issues concerning  women in this province. BCFW has  strong policy in the area of rights  of lesbians and this sub-committee  continues to implement it. Though  some legal reforms are necessary,  the majors changes needed to  eliminate lesbian oppression are  those of attitude. This sub-committee is open to all lesbians in B.C.  who are tired of struggling alone  against a society that fears and  oppresses us. It is also open to  all BCFW members. Working through  our personal responses to lesbianism is just the first step toward  changing societal attitudes to  end lesbian oppression. We need to  go further. It is not enough to  disbelieve myths about lesbians -  we must constantly examine our  thoughts and actions and arrive at  a clear political analysis of lesbianism/feminism. This way feminists can confidently and articulately confront the negative attitudes  and myths so prevalent in our society.  WHAT IS ALREADY HAPPENING?  The Rights of Lesbians subcommittee  held its 2nd general meeting in  Vancouver. Several 'sub subcommittees ' are in full swing and are  reaching out for new members to  work in many areas. If you want to  find out more about a specific interest area, please call, or attend  a 'sub subcommittee' meeting.  1. Lesbian-Feminist Workshop group  provides an introduction to the relationship between lesbianism and feminism. The workshops are designed to:  (a) explore myths and fears surrounding lesbians; (b) present and discuss  lesbian feminist theory; (c) share  political strategies for dealing with  the topic of lesbianism in groups,  families and communities.  We have been invited to do 2 such  workshops in Campbell River. If your  group is interested in sponsoring a  workshop, or in becoming involved  in presenting workshops, please  contact us!  There will be a WORKSHOP March 26th  (Sunday 10 am, call 872 2156 for  the location) designed specifically  for lesbians who are familiar with  the oppression that surrounds being  labelled "lesbian", who support the  concepts of feminism, who want to  know more,or to become more involved  Rights of Lesbians Sub-committee  c/o 2029 W. 4th  Vancouver, B.C.  WHERE'S THE  HEALTH  COLLECTIVE  GOING?  The political position of the Health  Collective is the embodiment of every  member's individual position - ranging from political naivete to political sophistication. Most of us are  aware of our oppression as women and  the shortcomings of the medical system in a personal and basic way. We  are committed to acting collectively  as a means of sharing responsibility  and power. Collectivity necessitates  more time and more internal struggle  than hierarchical organizations. However, it gives each of us more room  to grow and develop our discussion  skills and feelings of personal capabilities, as well as often resulting in more thoughtful, well-rounded  decisions. We are totally in support  of women learning to help themselves.  There is the constant question at  the health collective of internal  or external political action. The  questions take various forms:  1. Should we concentrate on providing good services in the areas  where the medical system is deficient or should we be educating women to understand why it is deficient? Sometimes we get caught up  in providing service and forget  why it is necessary to do so.  2. Should we resign ourselves to  being an increasingly acceptable  addition to the medical system or  should we be pressuring it to change?  One way we are attempting to change  the medical system is by teaching  3rd year medical students to do decent pelvic exams, breast exams, and  diaphragm fittings. We feel good about our infiltration in this area.  3. Should we be satisfied with seeing the collective as a feminist-  political training ground for the  membership or should we be acting  more for social change? All of us  seem to have personally benefited  from out health collective contact  but this is not our focus or purpose.  We often feel frustrated because we  don't know what steps to take to further our political beliefs.  It is generally agreed that we should  be a stronger political force. The  question is, how? There seems to be  two courses of action:  1. More grassroots politics - for  example, doing political consciousness raising in our various services  such as counselling, clinic, diaphragm fittings etc. Instead of saying only, "It's O.K., everything  will be allright," we might add, "  ..and do you know why you couldn't  get an abortion before?" With that  goes the emphasis on self-help and  responsibility.  The other side of this polarity is:  2. Direct actions - for example,  putting someone on VGH's board of  directors, providing feedback to  medical professionals on their  care, lobbying for sessional bill  for our clinic, abortion on demand,  etc.  We've gone through different phases  when we've had different focuses,  Direct action seems more effective  in raising political energy because  results are more immediate and attainable. In doing so, we often come  into contact with political allies  from whom strength can be gained.  A problem lies in sustaining energy  for direct action over a long period.  Groassroots work is often frustrating  since it is done on an individual  basis where progress is not visible.  The task of politicizing women is  not linear with a beginning and an  end, but a slow, hard process. However, we see this method as worthwhile in a more basic and long-term  sense.  Our history has shown us that political awareness and action in both of  these ways has risen and fallen in  a somewhat cyclical fashion. Right  now we're into an upsurge.  We cannot ignore that we are essentially a white middle-class hippie  organization and that we have been  making some efforts to change this  by encouraging women of different  ages and backgrounds to become involved. We have not been overly  successful in this regard since we  tend to be a social organization with  a definite set of cultural assumptions. Not everyone feels comfortable  within our group, but at least we are  aware of our narrow contact with women at large, and we make an attempt  to incorporate differences.  Compared to other women's groups,  we have been quite affluent. For the  last few years we have been funded  by the Federal Dept.of Health and  Welfare so that we could be researched as a model of lay-participation  in health care. This has provided  seven salaries. Last summer that  grant ended and we received a half Sol  >^^^Tj  ^ET  provincial and half federal grant  until the end of March 1977. Now  we are again faced with the prospect  of begging for money from the government, a plague which is known to  all community groups funded only  for short term periods. Unlike  health collectives in the States  we do not have the option of becoming self-supporting because  most women would not pay to see us  if they did not have to pay to see  a doctor.  Trying to assess the impact funding has had on our political nature is difficult. The women's  self-help movement has become an  income producing job for seven  women, whereas previous to funding  it ran solely on the convictions of  those wome who could 'afford' the  time. It seems that over the years  there has been a definite change in  the amount of overt anger we hold  towards the system. This makes  some of us think we have been co-  opted by money. Others think that  we have simply become sophisticated  in our ways of attacking the  system. For sure, the worst thing  that money has done is to attract  women who are not primarily interested  in working for feminism, but in the  money itself. This drains everyone  and weakens our ideological structure. We have also spent a tremendous amount of time and energy getting funding, keeping it, and making policy associated with it.  This takes time away from our vital  activities relevant to advancing  the women's self-help movement.  However, it is certain that the  money has enabled us to devote  more time in the long run to the  collective which has more than compensated for the time spent on funding. Unquestionably, we have benefiting more from the work of many  women who without money could not  afford to work at the health collective.  It is a sticky question whether government funding has compromised  our political actions. We are not  engaging in direct confrontation  with the system with the same fervour as we may have been doing  years ago, but this cannot be directly related to funding. It is possible that a simple lack of initiative, re-directed energies, or maybe middle age could be equally responsible. The issue is still unresolved. We will continue applauding appropriate political  actions and continue securing funding from whatever sources.  One of the ways in which we have  engaged in direct confrontation in  the past was to join with other women's  groups, for example, in the Women  Rally for Action held in March of 1976,  However, in a realistic light, the Health Collective probably feels closer  ties with feminist self help health  groups in other cities and countries  than with the other women's groups in  Vancouver. It seems that other groups  feel a similar alienation and probably  this is a factor of each of group's  specialized focus on different feminist issues, and the level of intensity with which we see health concerns  as contrasted with our ignorance of  other vital interests to women represented here in the movement. We are  first and foremost a women's group  and we tend to forget that in a variety of ways we all help women to  take back their power.  Unity required  for  Effective Action  The women's groups in BC are weakened by    fragmentation and must become aware of each other so that we  can act for change in a unified manner,  In this way the Health Collective supports the BCFW and sees it as a good  means for consolidating women's strengths to effect social change.  The Health Collective has been undergoing a process of change for the last  five years, during which time hundreds  of women havecome and gone, contributing their share and taking what they  could. I don't know if there ever was  a time when we were more aware of  our political positions both internally and externally. Right now we  face difficulties which force us to  analyse ourselves. It is a constant  struggle, one which is difficut, but  one that it is important not to give  up. It is a personal as well as a political struggle, which we hope to win.  Nightcleaners  by technique so that it might as well  have been a National Geographic Anthropological Expose whatever its Marxist concerns. (What makes this style  so distasteful is its sentimental attitude to the "cute natives" rather  than direct involvement in their  emotional and political situation.)  Too many of the "experimental films"  I have seen recently seem to be preoccupied with form - particularly  sheerly visual form - in a way which  makes the experience of the artist  more separate from her/his subject  and cojointly and causally the experience of the audience more alienated.  I do not quarrel with experiment or  argue for "social realism". No. But  art, tackled at this level, must be  responsible for the results of its  methods, and the extant problems of  its politics, not just the intent of  the artists. We are left with the  same problem : who is the film for?  what is the relationship of the artist  and what of the audience to the subject (s)? By straddling the fences  of "Filmart" and "Leftunion", the Berwick Street Film Collective seems to  me to have accomplished an impressive gymnastic. But the splits can't  break the fences or make a human  bridge.  Again, I applaud the effort. I have  been moved by the story of these women.  I am impressed and intrigued by the  artistic struggle the film presents.  But it is sad that artists still seem  to obscure the voice of their subjects.  Finally, these women - the workers -  would never have made a film of their  story for me. I would not have this  record of their dignity and militance.  Nor would many of us read a stodgy  article about their fight to escape  exploitation. So, a film which is  both art and politics i_s useful. But  the film echoes the problems : of class,  of definition and limitation by work  or by trade, of art as expression  versus art as reporting, of belong-  ingness, of contradiction. It does  not resolve them.  One outcome of the BCFW Lower Mainland  conference was an expressed need for a  shared, working analysis of feminism.  Two study groups have already been set  up. If you are interested in being a  member of a study group, call Diana  at 732 1716. &  women's studies  ATTEND the Women's Studies Conference  at SFU on March 12. Phone 736 3746  for information about times, etc.  At Cariboo  JEANNINE BICCUM  In September of 1975, I enrolled in  the Fine Arts Diploma Program at  Cariboo College. During the first  week, I met a woman in my class who  was taking Sociology 215/225 and  persuaded me to come along. At  that time, I was aware of sexism  which surrounded me, but was effectively ignoring it.  I had read a  great deal about feminism in the  past three years, and I preferred  books and music by other women, but  I wasn't sure why I felt that way.  In short, I was a feminist, but I  had chosen to ignore it. Life was  easier that way, or so I thought.  However, I can truly say that taking the women's studies course  changed my life.  There were two academic studies  which had a great impact on me.  These were the study of the historical background of the women's movement, and the study of feminism as  a political movement.  Throughout  the readings and lectures, it became clear to me that feminist  ideals are not new.  It was surprising, and somewhat frightening,  to find that women have reached this  awareness before, and then most  reverted back to the old, familiar,  oppressive ways. And who could  blame them? I had done it for  three years and there are still  days when it seems a lot safer to  be protected in a cocoon. Also,  in the same readings, feminism and  political revolution seemed always  to go together.  I began to realize  that, in declaring myself a feminist,  I was making a political statement.  I felt a bit of shock at this revelation because I had previously professed distaste for "political  meanderings" and believed myself to  be beyond such an interest.  I have  become aware of the profound effect  that politics has on my life, and I  find my interest increasing steadily.  Before taking this class, I was unable to collect my thoughts about  feminism into any reasonable order.  They were a group of related feelings  which I found great difficulty in  articulating without becoming very  emotional.  I had no facts upon which  to base my discussion and therefore  became frustrated in my attempts.  During this course, we covered many  different areas concerning women.  These included: women in relation to  the law, housework, the labour force,  their bodies and health, art, other  women and men. There was classroom  discussion, during which we all had  an opportunity to practise speaking  in front of people who were sympathetic to our feelings of nervousness.  These discussions clarified many  ideas which I hadn't been able to put  into words previously.  I now feel  more capable of speaking and articulating my ideas, and therefore more  competent in talking about feminism.  The most valuable lesson I learned  in this class was to trust myself and  to believe in my own worth.  It has  helped me to transcend many difficult  situations.  All the areas of study which we discussed in our class have helped to  form a foundation on which I am better  able to re-define my values. As a  woman, I am more comfortable with myself and other women.  I am not afraid  to change things in my life which are  making me unhappy.  I feel bolder and  more experimental because I am in control of myself. External forces do  not shape me as much as they used to.  I no longer define myself in relation  to a man or men. I have, however,  become more wary of the opposite sex.  I hope that is just a defense mechanism to filter out those who are destructive to my new beginnings, because  I would really like to be able to relate to men as other people who have  problems too. There was, and still  is, a great deal of support and friendship between the women who took this  course together. With the help of  this friendship, I found the strength  to break off a destructive relationship  with a man.  Since then, I have discovered a personal strength which I  had always known I possessed, but  which had t^en channeled in the wrong  direction. Now, as an artist, I am  finding courage to experiment and try  my limits. A new freedom is beginning to find expression in my art, my  music, and in my relationships with  people around me.  I am becoming more  demanding, yet more tolerant of myself.  I have an increasing understanding of other women, our shared  problems and triumphs, pain and joy.  Mature Students  JOYCC DALLANTYNC  What is the mature student anyway?  Perhaps some people think of white  haired ladies and gentlemen filling  in their golden years, or perhaps  some think of studious professionals  back at school for refresher courses  or on sabbaticals. The word mature  conjures up images of anything from  those of good wines, mellowed with  age, to those of old cranks, gone  sour with the struggle of everyday  living.  In actuality, the mature  student is one who has been out of  school for at least two years. Today's applicants for further schooling range in age from twenty up.  The students fall into several categories.  A large number are younger  students who have interrupted their  studies to work or to travel and are  returning to find meaningful careers  through better education. A smaller  number are older people, who, having  spent their working years, find studying a stimulating and rewarding experience. A large group in between these  two are women aged thirty or over.  For the purpose of this paper, the  students referred to from here on are  those who fall into this category.  The group of mature women students is  generally made up of 1) those women  who need to work and are upgrading  their skills, 2) those who are taking  additional education to further their  ongoing careers, and 3) those who have  raised their families and suddenly  find themselves alone, a non-person  who has neglected her own inner needs.  My own experience is with the third  group.  Very little thus far has been documented about the mature woman student.  This is not just the opinion of this  writer, who when researching this  paper could find little in the way of  publications, but one mentioned by  writers Chatelaine, MS magazine, etc.  Barbara Powell O'Neill in the preface  of Careers for Women After Marriage  and Children states, "Although a great  deal has been said and written about  the dilemma of the educated American  woman, there is very little practical  information available for the woman  seeking a solution." One practical  step women can take is to head for  the community college which usually is  convenient to her home, and within her  reach both in terms of expense and  educational standards.  Having re-entered school, women often  find themselves with a whole new set  of problems. One problem may be with  her role as a student and how she  views herself in this environment.  After being a housewife, secure and  somewhat isolated from community and  business affairs, she is suddenly  "that woman who's back at school.  This is uttered in tones ranging from  outright admiration to downright sarcasm by friends, relatives, and contemporaries.  She may be described by  some as a "women's libber", a nebulous  and in this case negative term which  nakes the woman feel less rather than  more equal.  In returning to school the mature student does face very real conflicts.  Her family may or may not approve of  her attending courses.  Either way she  must adjust her household duties to  fit a schedule within which she must  have time to attend lectures, research  for papers, study for exams. Once she  has dealt with these, she may find  other less obvious conflicts, such as  alienation from friends, who may feel  she is placing herself above others  intellectually or avoiding the "real  world", i.e. working for pay.  She  may not be able to shake the guilt  over being away from home more, placing more household duties on her family,  or locking herself in the bedroom to  study. Change brings new problems and  new fears. Women need support at this  time and the mature student will find  today that other women can and do support her, in fact are often her only  support. Yft  COOP  VANCOUVER CO-OPERATIVE RADIO  CFRO - 102.7 FM  Vancouver Co-operative Radio is a  non-profit, non-commercial radio  station run by volunteers and provides an alternative to commercial  radio or Toronto-oriented CBC. It's  a good way to keep in touch with  what's happening here in Vancouver  as well as providing a forum for  community groups, organizations  (such as Status of Women) and individuals to make their voices heard.  Future  Our license comes up for renewal in  1978.  There doesn't seem to be any  reason why we shouldn't get it. Our  membership has continued to grow  since we started in 1973. True to  our nature we will also continually  change and remain responsive to the  needs of the community and more  particularly, our members.  Membership  Vancouver Co-operative Radio is a  co-operative which means that when  you buy a $2 share of the station,  you belong to the co-operative and  part of the co-operative belongs to  you. On top of the $2, we also ask  our members for an annual assessment  fee of $12 (payable in one shot or  in two installments). This $12 is  essential for the continuation of  the station - it means that our  members are helping us pay the rent.  Becoming a member and paying your  $12 also entitles you to become involved in programming, using the  equipment at the station to do so.  You also receive our monthly programme guide in the mail which tells  you what programmes are on and when.  Women's Programming  Co-pp Radio has had a lot of women's  programming: women in prisons,  women on the job, women and kids in  China, women and the law, etc. At  the moment the women's committee is  in the process of re-organizing itself, integrating new members and  planning programming for the spring.  If you wish to participate in women's  programming, call the station at  684-8498 and leave a message for the  women's committee.  /(fcjftv  Where Did It All Begin  A group of people calling themselves  "Neighbourhood Radio" were trying to  teach themselves and others how to  use radio. Another group was learning to research issues and develop  an analysis of what was happening  around us. They read and clipped a  lot of newspapers and called themselves "Muckrakers".  Neighbourhood Radio soon learned the  difficulties of trying to do shows  the way they felt they should be  done and still meet the criteria  necessary to get the show broadcast  and so the Co-op Radio idea was born.  The organization was formed by these  two groups in the fall of 1973 and  then the work really began. A campaign to build membership, an application to the Canadian Radio and  Television Commission (CRTC),  $150,000 to buy a transmitter and  set up studios and training the  amateurs who wanted to do radio.  The license was granted in May 1974  (and comes up for renewal in 1978).  The original target on-air date of  September proved over-optimistic  but finally all the equipment and  bureaucratic hurdles were overcome  (well not all, but enough), and our  first broadcast went out on April  14, 1975.  We've grown a lot in our year and a  half on the air; a lot of people  have come and gone, but our basic  direction remains the same.  The Programming  Our programming is a reflection of  our community. We emphasize live  coverage of events - political,  cultural, musical, etc. Our priority is to give voice to groups and  individuals who do not get access  to other media. All of the programming is produced by volunteers with  the support of our small staff: an  administrator, an engineer, and a  programme coordinator. Training is  available whether you wish to work  with an existing show or start your  own.  MEMBERSHIP FORM    YES. I would like to purchase a share of V.C.R.  Enclosed is $2.00.  There is also a 12.00 Dollar yearly assessment, payable  all at once or in installments:    Here is my $12.00.  .   Here is $6.00. I'll pay the rest later.  Name  Address Phone #  Citizenship (CRTC regulation)  RENEW YOUR MEMBERSHIP  k A  RADIO  Financing  We have no commercials so we attempt  to sustain ourselves from our public  either directly or indirectly. We  attempt to diversify our sources of  funds as much as possible to ensure  independence in running the station.  Different sources include individual  donations, membership fees, benefits,  contests and lotteries, government  grants, agency or industry contributions, government advertising, sale  of programmes, tapes, and just about  anything else we can think of.  Financing is of course a constant  problem we must face together. At  present, we are debt-free, quite unusual for a broadcast outlet.  In  1980 we face a large new capital  investment because we want to increase our power, and must move our  transmitter (estimated cost $100,000).  If you have some ideas on helping us  raise more money, contact our station administrator; he'll be glad to  hear from you.  AS IN 1907, SO IN 1977  WOMEN ARE ORGANIZING THEMSELVES  ii] '.1*¬a>  BOOK-KlLTlR  uwun/ir/iuu  .(OMNtt UNI  1264.*:  THE UNITED BANK WORKERS  NEEDS LEAFLETTERS  NOW!  The U.B.W., Local #2 of SORWUC  is in the midst of an organizing  drive to unionize bank employees.  We desperately need people to  leaflet banks, credit unions &  trust companies anywhere in B.C.  We'll even give you the bank of  your choice!  For more info:  United Bank Workers  #1116 207 West Hastings  Vancouver.  681 2811  coming up on Coop  MARCH PROGRAMS OF INTEREST TO FEMINISTS  Every Wednesday evening at 7.30 : PARENTING  - deals with resources available to single  mothers, e.g.  March 19 at 2.30 pm. In the B.C.AUTHORS  program, Ruth Nichols is featured.  March 27 at 9.00 pm. Feminist Songs. This  program is repeated on the following Friday  at 5.30 pm. R£SOURC€FUL  KH3  The following print materials are  now, or soon will be housed in the  VSW reference library, where they  are available for research weekdays  in the office. Files are not allowed out but paperback books can  be loaned.  We do not have extra copies of the  materials listed below.  They can  be ordered from the addresses listed under each title.  I would include more Canadian materials if I  could find them.  Donations of  materials to the reference library  are welcome.  I would appreciate hearing from  readers of this column to find out  how many are reading it and ordering materials. Thanks.  - Karen Richardson  NON-SEXIST EDUCATION  AND THEN THERE WERE NONE: examines  Grade 4, 5, and 6 readers approved  by the Ontario Ministry of Education.  List of non-sixest teaching materials included. Free from Status of  Women Council, Federation of Women  Teachers of Ontario,  JANE'S PREROGATIVE: MEDIOCRITY is the  title of a recent article in the English Quarterly (No. 8, 1975, pages  31-42) by University of Alberta Psychology Professor C.J. Ladan, and D.  Hodgins Miller.  After an examination  of texts used in primary grades in  Alberta, they found "that school readers do not protray a realistic and  contemporary view of adult roles, but  rather provide a male-dominated view."  Those interested in further information  may write Prof. Ladan at the Department  of Psychology, University of Alberta,  Edmonton, Alberta.  BREAKING THE MOULD, British Columbia  Teachers Federation, 105-2235 Burrard  Street, Vancouver, B.C. Under the  auspices of the BCTF and the B.C. Provincial Government they prepared a kit  for elementary school teachers in B0C.  to help in the identification and rectification of sexism in elementary  schools. The kit includes lists of  resource materials for both teachers  and students available from various  sources.  Contact Pearl Roberts, BCTF.  HUMAN VALUES IN CHILDREN'S BOOKS:  new guidelines for parents, teachers,  educators, librarians as content  rating instrument.  $7.95 from Council on Interracial Books for Children, 1841 Boradway, New York, NY  USA 10023.  HUMANIZING ENGLISH, NOTES ON NEUTRAL  PRONOUN: small paper on non-sexist  language.  By Mary Orovan.  50c plus  self-addressed stamped envelope from  130 East 18th Street, NY USA 10003.  BIBLIOGRAPHY OF RESOURCES INVOLVING  FEMALE STUDENTS: 212 page list of  theses and dissertations from 93  colleges with graduate programs in  physical education including sports  psychology, health, recreation-leisure as it affects women.  $5.25  from Louise Kyle, Publications Sales,  American Alliance for Health, Phys-  Ed and Recreation, 1201-16 Street,  VRB EQUAL OPPORTUNITY SURVEY: 10-  page interim report on affirmative  action at VancouverResources Board.  Free from Mary Seagull, VSB, 1675  West 10th Avenue, Vancouver, B.C.  AFFIRMATIVE ACTION FOR WOMEN: free  pamphlet from Human Rights Commission, P.O. Box 2221, 1599 Hollis  Street, Halifax, Nova Scotia.  WHAT IS AFFIRMATIVE ACTION?: free  from National Education Association,  1156-15 Street NW, Washington, DC  USA 20005.  MODEL WOMEN'S COMPONENT FOR AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PROGRAM: aimed at local  government.  $1.55 from Cal. Comm,  on Status of Women, P.O. Box 20191,  Sacramento, California, USA 95820.  BRIEF ON STATUS OF WOMEN IN DEPT. OF  HUMAN RESOURCES: 12-page report on  women employed by B.C. government  as social workers and treatment of  women on social assistance.  Free  from Mary Russell, Task Force on  Sexism in Social Work,  CAREER AWARENESS PROJECT: 50-page  binder of how to set up career  counselling programs, info centres,  job placement programs with list  of resources and references. $2.50  from Business and Professional Women's Foundation, 2012 Massachusetts  Ave. NW, Washington, DC USA 20036.  1001 JOB IDEAS FOR TODAY'S WOMAN:  guide to getting a job, plus education needed, costs involved, step-  by-step suggestions.  $2.50 from  Doubleday, 245 Park Avenue, New  York, NY USA 10017.  WOMEN IN MANAGEMENT, THREAT OR  OPPORTUNITY?: film on sexist attitudes in corporations and reactions  to equal employment opportunity.  Free from Violet Tassie, Resource  Centre, Women's Bureau, Dept. of  Labour, Toronto, Ontario.  GUIDELINES FOR CONTEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT INTERVIEWING: advice for the  employer and employee.  13 pages on  how to guard against bias in hiring  women.  Suggested responses to sexist questions.  $1.00 from Affirmative Action Office, University of  Wisconsin-Stout, Menomenie, Wise.  USA 54751.  SEX-ROLE STEREOTYPING IN THE SCHOOLS:  $2.50 from NEA Order Dept., Academic  Building, Saw Mill Road, West Haven,  CT USA 06516.  POSITIVE IMAGES, NON-SEXIST FILMS  FOR YOUNG PEOPLE: guide to 40 films,  videotapes, slide shows and film-,  strips that challenge sexism. Age  suitability given for each entry.  Teachers' guide included.  $5.50  from Booklegger Press, 555-29 St.,  San Francisco, CA USA 94131.  WOMEN EXECUTIVES: 26-page selected  annotated bibliography on women in  management.  50c from Business and  Professional Women's Foundation,  2012 Massachusetts Ave. NW, Washington, DC USA 20036.  CARREER COUNSELLING: NEW PERSPECTIVES FOR WOMEN AND GIRLS: 44-page  selected annotated bibliography.  50c from Business and Professional  Women's Foundation, 2012 Massachusetts Ave. NW, Washington, DC USA  20036.  WOMEN IN MANITOBA CIVIL SERVICE:  report on discrimination against  women employed by provincial government.  Free from Planning Secretariat of Cabinet, Legislative Buildings, Room 346, Winnipeg, Manitoba.  FEMINIST FAMILY LAW  The following materials are available from the federal Law Reform  Commission of Canada at 130 Albert  Street, Ottawa, Ontario.  THE FAMILY COURT, 55 pp., January  74, free  FAMILY PROPERTY, 45 pp., March 75,  free  DIVORCE, 48 pp., July 75, free  FAMILY LAW, 73 pp., May 76, free  STUDIES ON FAMILY PROPERTY LAW, 356  pp., $6.75,  STUDIES ON DIVORCE, 203 pp., $5.75  The following materials are available from the Legal Services Commission of B.C., #200-744 W. Hastings  Street, Vancouver, B.C. or call  689-0741.  UNIFIED FAMILY COURT OF BC, free  SEPARATION: KIDS? BILLS? THE HOME?  KNOW YOUR LAWYERS  WHO OWNS THE PROPERTY IN YOUR FAMILY?  MARRIAGE IS A CONTRACT  CIVIC WOMEN'S ISSUES  WOMEN IN THE URBAN ENVIRONMENT:  summary of report by the National  Capital Commission, by Karen Richardson, Kinesis, Vancouver Status  of Women, June 1976.  WOMEN IN THE URBAN ENVIRONMENT:  report of national conference on  women's issues at the civic level.  Free from National Capital Commission, 48 Rideau Street, Ottawa,  Ontario.  LIFE IN THE LACE GHETTO: Women in  the Urban Environment, article by  Viviane Hotz on problems of women  living in the city. Kinesis, Vancouver Status of Women, November  1976.  4  Upexjear-3ub5crypt/orv  box. 736 nelson b.c.  $ 10°° iN£?l\TVT\OUPl,  S0^<JcHprT\(iNb-t cowichan  Dear Friends:  We understand that mail to the above  group was "returned to sender" so we  hasten to inform you we are still in  existence and our address is still  as above (Cowichan Valley Status of  Women, Box 891, Duncan, B.C.), and  the box rent is now paid!  We are holding monthly meetings the  first Tuesday of every month, and  have recently received a real 'lift*  from the Conference of all groups  on the Island held in Nanaimo on  January 29th, and also the Political  Skills workshop held in Duncan last  Saturday the 5th February.  I think perhaps if any future mail  is addressed to "The Secretary" it  will be better than a specific name,  as there are changes being made in  that department.  Irene D. Hill  Cowichan Valley Status  of Women  burns lak£  Ts'aiku Women's Centre, of Burns Lake  has made a successful application for  two additional workers, thus enabling  them to increase their programs and  services to the community.  The Ts'aiku Women's Centre serves as  a drop-in centre, with a living room,  kitchen, library and reading room, a  room for second-hand clothing, a  children's playroom, an office, a  'quiet' room for yoga, and where  mothers can nurse their infants and  a 'human' room for private meetings  and counselling. The Centre boasts  a huge old claw-footed tub, which is  a boon to those who don't have running water at home.  The Ts'aiku women offer counselling  and referral on women's legal rights,  consumer and credit problems, UIC  hassles, legal aid, nutrition, birth  control, VD, career opportunities  and upgrading classes.  The Centre has embarked on a program  of introducing speakers and workshops  to the community.  Spokesperson  Donnie Patterson says, "We hope to  provide information that will make  things suddenly 'click' for women -  which will make clear the way in  which sexism and racism affect us all"  Awareness of racism as well as sexism  is basic to the aims of the Centre.  Three of the workers are native, and  four are white. The Centre's activities are oriented towards all local  women.  (Thanks to THE NORTHERN TIMES  and to Joyce Hamilton for this information.)  cultural  exchange  The Exchange finally has a home!  The location is central as we had  hoped, a storefront at 217 E. 16th  Avenue (at Main). We are projecting an opening date of April 15th.  If you can help with carpentry (a  plumber would be helpful), resource  contacts, or promotion, contact  732-1693. Please continue to mail  correspondence to 3160 Dunbar.  were  Sisters  and  brothers  THE BORDER GANG MEN'S RESEARCH/  RESOURCE GROUP PROPOSAL  Answers are implicit in questions.  These questions have proved seminal  in our own self-development. We do  not assume that we know the answers. They can only be answered  through a collective response. We  are interested in your response,  man or woman, but especially if you  are a man.  The human person within the male is  like a sleeping dragon.  The dragon  can be a liberatory force or a  lethal power more destructive than  hitherto experienced. What men  choose to do can seriously influence the direction it takes.  For the purpose of self-definition  we pose these questions:  Why do women mistrust men's politics?  Is men's politics autonomous from  women's politics?  Is it reciprocal with women's politics? Are they two sides of a  larger process at work?  Should women, already oppressed by  working for men, work to help men  opposed to sexism?  Why has men's politics not developed  a perspective on male politics,  and why has it not created political forms?  How much is men's politics a reaction rather than a response to  the loss of male power and privilege and the rise of the women's  movement?  Why has the Left, given that it has  attempted to integrate a feminist  perspective, not produced a perspective on male socialization and  male power?  What is the relation of men's politics to Radical Therapy?  What is the relation of men's politics to spiritual disciplines of  transcendence?  What is the form and content of the  social attack on feminism?  How monolithic is male experience  and what is the nature of male  bonding?  What is the relation of male politics to everyday violence such  as rape, suicide, partner-battering?  What is the relation of male politics and men's politics to the  physical survival of men and the  species as a whole?  GROUP FUNCTIONS  1) Referral:  Referring men to existing men's  groups and facilitating the formation of requested groups.  2) Information:  Men's activities here and elsewhere .  Men's socialization and self-  development .  Media studies (audio-visual emphasis) .  Lectures and seminars (churches,  men's and women's groups, libraries,  schools, crisis centres, Co-op Radio,  food co-ops, feminist media, Synergy,  Green Peace, New Age Community Centre) .  Library of materials.  Contact: #304-2044 West 3rd Avenue  732-5807 or 733-2402  Access  Kinesis will  carry a regular feature entitled  ACCESS, which will serve as a feminist resources exchange. Please  send in your requests for information, and your offers to share  skills to KINESIS, V.S.W., 2029  West 4th Avenue, Vancouver. Or you  can phone VSW any weekday afternoon  and ask for Gayla. The service is,  of course, free.  AMAZON ACCOUNTING  A Feminist Business  Experienced accounting help available  to set up and/or maintain financial  records for women's collectives, businesses and self-employed women.  We will also prepare and file your  personal or business income tax and  provide counselling as to how the  tax act can be used to your advantage.  Arrangements can be made to set up  workshops and seminars for women and  women's groups, businesses, etc. on  such topics as basic bookkeeping,  necessary financial records, payroll,  income tax, and so on.  For further information (or to set up  an appointment), phone Yvonne or Sue  at 530-3477. SOM€ HON. M€MB€RS  FEDERAL  The second session of the thirtieth  Parliament of Canada opened on January 24, 1977. This report from  Hansard takes us up to February 15,  1977.  - Karen Richardson  WOMEN EXECUTIVES  On January 25, 1977 MP Philbrook of  Ontario asked the Minister Responsible for the Status of Women if he  would encourage more women to seek  senior positions in the federal  public service.  The Honourable Marc Lalonde replied  that a substantial number of women  were promoted to important positions  in the federal government recently  whenever those nominations were  cabinet responsibility; he said he  aims to increase the number again  this year.  FOR HARD FACTS ON WOMEN IN THE FEDERAL CIVIL SERVICE, ASK LALONDE FOR  DETAILS ON HOW MANY WOMEN WERE APPOINTED RECENTLY, WHAT THE POSITIONS  ARE, AND WHAT THEY PAY.  HOMEMAKERS PENSIONS  On February 1, 1977 MP Knowles of  Manitoba asked leave to move that  the House of Commons urge the  federal government to establish  pensions for homemakers equivalent  to that paid to women who have  worked in the labour force. The  MPs did not allow him to present  the motion. Only housewives who  have previously worked in the labour force and contributed to the  Canada Pension Plan will be covered.  ASK YOUR MP TO URGE THAT HOMEMAKERS  WHO CONTRIBUTE TO THE ECONOMY AND  MARRIAGE THROUGH THEIR WORK IN THE  HOME BE INCLUDED IN THE NATIONAL  PENSION PLAN.  ABORTION  On February 9, 1977 the Honourable  Ron Basford, Minister of Justice,  tabled the Badgley committee report  on the operation of the abortion  law.  On February 10, 1977 Basford noted  that provincial, hospital and medical regulations and practices resulted in inequities in the application of the abortion law, not by  the law itself.  MP Woolliams of Alberta asked why  one-fifth of Canada's abortions are  performed in the United States.  Basford explained that many Canadians are unaware of the abortion  law in Canada and that abortion  facilities are lacking in certain  parts of the country.  Prior to the tabling of the Badgley  report, Woolliams asked why the  study was necessary because Statistics Canada and the Department of  Health already did studies on abortion.  Basford replied that the Badgley  committee statistics went far beyond those prepared by Statistics  Canada and that the expenditure for  the report was over half a million  dollars.  READERS ARE URGED TO WRITE TO THEIR  MPs STATING THEIR VIEWS ON ABORTION.  FOR A LONGER DISCUSSION OF THE  BADGLEY COMMITTEE REPORT, SEE P. 3  OF KINESIS THIS MONTH.  PORNOGRAPHY  On January 25, 1977 MP Whiteway of  Manitoba moved that Bill C-210,  to amend the Criminal Code regarding  obscene literature, be read a  second time and referred to the  Standing Committee on Justice and  Legal Affairs.  The bill would simply prevent the  sale of restricted material in outlets frequented by children. Classification boards would be set up in  each province for this purpose.  Whiteway argued in favour of a kind  of censorship of pornography, which  he said is an attack on the family  and desensitizes people. He noted  that the aboslute freedom of one man  regarding pornography is the bondage of another man.  MP Condon of Ontario explained that  pornography comes from the Greek  word for harlot. He argued against  the bill saying that it. will not be  able to do what it proposes.  Condon  noted that the Supreme Court of  Canada is now ruling on the matter  of provincial jurisdiction over  morality and that the classification  boards would not provide proper  representation from all parties  concerned. He would prefer to see  the Customs Tariff used to prohibit  importing of pornography.  MP Ursula Appolloni of Ontario  stated that as a woman she very much  resents pornography.  "It exploits  my sisters." She noted that she  did not want male children to be  exploited by obscenity too.  MP Flynn of Ontario said the morals  of pimps regarding obscenity is  more to the point than the morals  of harlots. He stated that pornography uses and discards bodies  and that leads not to freedom but  to enslavement.  Flynn noted that  obscenity trivializes and dehumanizes that which is precious and  deeply personal.  MP Robinson of Ontario argued that  people must be protected from the  involuntary exposure to pornography - that the concept of obscenity  as a victimless crime is nonsense  and that sado-masochistic material  is bound to have a bad effect on  children and adults.  He argued in  favour of adults-only bookshops  because this method avoids censorship.  On January 31, 1977 MP McGrath of  Newfoundland asked the Attorney-  General what he would do about  pornography.  Basford replied he  had urged the provincial attorneys  general to take action against distributors of pornography, and had  reviewed the processes of the  Customs and Tariff Act regarding  inspection of such materials.  Basford advised he had discussed with  them adding more penalties and hoped  they would make some proposals in  this regard.  PROVINCIAL  ROSEMARY SAYS SOCREDS ATTACK WOMEN  B.C. Government  On January 13, 1977 the first session  of the 31st Parliament of B.C. opened.  The Lieutenant-Governor of B.C. remarked that during the last session,  56 bills were passed. He neglected  to mention that none of them were  aimed specifically at women's rights.  About one-third (45) of the Royal  Commission Report on the Status of  Women recommendations pertain to provincial jurisdiction, yet the B.C.  government has implemented only a  fraction of them over the past six  years since the report was tabled in  1971.  In addition, the provincial government has essentially ignored the  brief presented to it last March 1976  by the Women's Rally for Action,  which proposed over 100 changes in  the status of women in B.C.  The Department of Human Resources  has cut its childcare budget this  year by almost $5 million dollars.  Cuts in the Department of Economic SOM€ HON. M£MB€RS  Development may mean the loss of the  Women's Economic Rights Branch.  It  seems we have now entered the neo-  50s as far as women's rights are  concerned.  On February 1, 1977 NDP MLA Rosemary  Brown (Vancouver-Burrard) criticized  the Socred budget for 1977-78 saying  that cutbacks in social services  amount to an attack on women.  Here  is an edited excerpt of her speech  that day:  "...who constitutes the bulk of the  poor in this country? It's the  women,...senior-citizen women, single-parent women, handicapped women  ...How many women in this province  are going to benefit from the abolition of succession duties?...How many  women in this province are going to  benefit from what the budget boasts  of as the flexibility which the mining companies now have in terms of  writing off the costs of their explorations?  "...I tell you what is going to happen to the women of this province...  Well I've been going through the  estimates book and the Women's Economic Rights Branch has disappeared.  Now maybe its become a victim of the  Change of Name Act.  Maybe it's  still there but under a different  name...  "...the job .that it was doing would  have been of much more benefit to.  us (women) who constitute more than  50 per cent of the population, than  the abolition of succession duties.  "...The Minister of Economic Development Honourable Mr. Phillips sits  there reading a comic book...when  I'm trying to attract his attention.  "...What is the other thing that  happened to the women of this province? The funding to community programs...Who do you think received  the services of transition houses,  rape relief centres, women's health  collective, crisis centres?  "...The funding 'that would go into  crisis centres...has been cut by $2  million...So it's the women and children and the poor and the handicapped  who are going to have to go without,  so that those of you who can leave  estates over $200,000 can make sure  that your heirs don't have to pay any  duty.  "...What about the childcare program?  ...That Minister of Human Resources  is a great lover of the family. He  wants to counsel people before they  get married...And you know what he  does?...He turns around and cuts off  their funding...Does he support the  family or doesn't he?...with a friend  like that, who needs enemies?  women get it  in thenecl^  "...And who is hurt when the family  is undercut...The children and the  women are hurt. And so we see that  the WOMEN OF BRITISH COLUMBIA CONTINUE TO GET IT IN THE NECK FROM  THAT GOVERNMENT.  ..There are no more childcare pro-  this program we are now told,  is going to provide services for  children up to the age of 12 during  a prolonged family illness...or crisis, or to enable the parents to  attend work or an educational institution.  "How are you going to do that when  you've cut it by $4 million? How  are you going to expand something  at a period of inflation when you're  cutting it back? If that were possible...why did you have to make  funding more flexible for the mining  companies? Why didn't you allow that  kind of flexibility to the women of  this province?  "...You know, I would like to believe  that it's not necessary for you to  be a woman, to understand what it  is like.  I'm having real problems  with that, because every time your  government brings a budget down, we  hurt more.  "You say you care about people, yet  who do you deprive under your budget?  Not the corporations, not industry,  not the millionaires, not the mining  companies, but people.  "...IT SEEMS TO ME THAT THE WOMEN OF  THIS PROVINCE ARE UNDER ATTACK BY  THAT GOVERNMENT.  The $30 million  revenue which this government is  writing off when it wipes out the  succession duties could have reinstated all of these other programs.  childcare  On January 19, 25 and February 1,  1977, NDP MLA Norman Levi (Vancouver  -Burrard) criticized the Socred budget for a $5 million cutback in daycare. Levi noted that 70% of daycare in Vancouver is subsidized  for working single-parent women and  said cutbacks in daycare will create  more unemployment. He remarked that  poorly funded daycare will mean daycare workers will be poorly trained  and children will be damaged by the  daycare experiences. Levi noted  that only those who can afford it  will now have access to daycare  which he calls a preventive rather  than a welfare service.  On February 2, 1977 NDP MLA Skelly  of Alberni criticized the Socred  cutbacks in daycare. He noted that  the provincial daycare coordinator  Marolin Dahl has not spent all her  daycare funds. The current year's  budget estimate is $15.9 and next  year's budget for daycare is $11.1  million. He said she is not aware  of any cutbacks but the policy of  not developing new daycare centres  will continue.  Skelly noted that  although the Department of Human  Resources budget has increased by  48% in two years, daycare centres  have not increased. "He inferred  that the Socreds are wasting money  if they spend increased amounts of  money with no expansion in services.  Skelly reminded the house that the  NDP created one daycare centre every  16 hours in one year of their term  of office. He said daycare afforded  women dignity.  Transition Houses  On January 19, 1977 NDP MLA Emery  Barnes (Vancouver-Centre) criticized  the Social Credit government once  more for closing the Provincial  Status of Women Coordinator's office  and for denying funding to battered  women's transition houses.  On February 3, 1977 Socred MLA George  Kerster of Coquitlam chided Human  Resources Minister Bill Vander Zalm  saying that one or two small grants  to assist the Port Coquitlam Women's  Centre in establishing a battered  women's transition house would be  welcomed.  Vander Zalm turned their  grant application down.  McCarthy on Whipping Girls  On January 21, 1977 the Honourable Grace McCarthy, Provincial Secretary (Socred     O  MLA Little Mountain) said     ^-"  that the NDP government used  women as the "whipping girls"  any time they need a speech.  She  accused them of trotting out women's rights to further partisan  politics without actually doing  anything for women.  Human Rights  On February 3, 1977 Liberal MLA Gordon Gibson of North Vancouver introduced Bill M-203, An Act to Amend  the Human Rights Code of B.C.  It  was given first reading and referred  for second reading in a day. BOOKS  It takes a lot of CLASS to stay out of prison.  The following books are waiting to  be reviewed.  If you'd like to do  one, please contact me any day of  the week. Yes, they can be sent to  you in the mail if you live out-of-  town.  Reviews should be as short  as possible as we don't have a lot  of space in KINESIS, and formal or  informal as you like.  There is now  a backlog of reviews waiting to be  published so if yours is not printed as soon as you hand it in, please  don't be offended. Here they are:  Privilege of Sex, A Century of  Canadian Women  Woman At Home  Womanhood Media Supplement (annotated bibliography)  Contributions of Women to Aviation  Women Loving, Journey Towards Becoming an Independent Woman  The Wheel of Things. Biography of  Lucy Maud Montgomery  Prepared Childbirth  Contributions of Women to Sports  Working Mothers  Rights of the Pregnant Parent  Maria Martinez, Story of an American  Indian  Maria Tallchief, Story of an  American Indian  Lesbian Images  Controlled Childbirth  Birth, Facts and Legends  A Woman's Book of Money, Guide to  Financial Independence  Country Women, Handbook for the New  Farmer  The Female Eye, Photography of  Canadian Women  The Trial of Inez Garcia  Woman's Astrology  WOMEN   LOOK    AT  PSYCHIATRY  published and distributed by.;also available from:  PRESS GANG PUBLISHERS,The WOMEN'S PRESS  821 East Hastings St.,305 - 280 Bloor St. W.  Vancouver, B.C ^Toronto, Ontario  (604) 253-1224,(416) 962-3904  ISBN 0 88974 000 3 - paper $4.00  Reviewed by Victoria Palser  In  Women Look At Psychiatry,  the extent of anti-female bias among  behavior specialists - and their  clients - is poignantly revealed.  We learn early in the book that  psychiatry is the profession of men  and defined by them as well.  It is  their concept of the 'ideal' woman  which determines the treatment meted  out to women undergoing mental turmoil. The fathers of psychiatry  have portrayed the 'healthy' female  as weak, submissive, indecisive and  easily influenced - the embodiment  of an adult in need of counselling.  'Healthy' men are portrayed in a  most favourable light, having the  positive characteristics of courage,  ambition and integrity. However,  if they should start to exhibit  the traits of a 'healthy' female,  then they are termed sick and the  services of a psychiatrist are required.  This role dichotomy has  been inherited by contemporary  therapists and, according to the  authors, they are most reluctant  to discard it in favour of the more  enlightened approach. They continue to insist that a mentally healthy  adult possesses male characteristics  - which females are discouraged from  adopting.  This book chronicles the experiences  various women have had at the hands  of these professionals. They have  felt pressured to conform to the  female stereotype in order to be declared a 'healthy' female. Any deviation is sure to cause mental  depression.  But the authors feel  the true cause of female depression  is the frustration women feel at  being successful in the female  stereotype. Their personalities are  suppressed and their egos discounted  so there is nothing left save mental  breakdown.  Although it occasionally dips into  excessive psychiatric reasoning, the  book is especially valued for the  first-hand experiences it documents  in a most readable style.  WOMEN IN PRISON, by Kathryn Watterson  Burkhart. 465 pp. Doubleday, 1973  11.50 hardback  Reviewed by Janet Beebe  Kathryn Burkhart is an American  journalist who has won awards for  her reportage of the criminal justice system. She says she "fell  into" the insights that led her to  this book in much the same way as  she fell into insights about war,  racism and poverty - "only when  realities I didn't normally see  were forced in front of my eyes  through someone else's perspective."  Women in Prison attempts to dispel  the gap between the myth and the  reality of prison life. Burkhart  interviewed 900 women and nearly  300 prison administrators and employees in more than 20 jails across  the U.S. to gather the testimony  and facts she presents. What becomes most evident in reading the  book is that the prison experience is a 'normal' part of life for  poor and non-white people in a way  that most middle-class whites do not  understand and cannot conceive. The  contradiction is that those who do not  understand the destruction that  imprisonment wreaks on the lives of  the oppressed minorities are the very  people whose bourgeois values  m*  'Ä¢ gig!**,!  to,  and perceptions have created  penal institutions and dominate  society as a whole. The gap bet-  weem "experience and cognition"  is one that middle class persons  who are working for changes in the  prison system do have to take into  account.  Burkhart explains that her "purpose  is not to expose personalities but  to examine the tremendous power of  the insitutional system." Prison  is a situation in which prisoners  have no choice but to play along.  They are powerless, while in prison,  to affect one single part of their  existence; they are childlike in  the eyes of the state; and they are  forced, in a distinctly slavelike  manner, to provide cheap or free  labour to a prison industry from  which the government is reaping  vast profits. What Burkhart is  asserting is that the frustion,  dehumanization and despair that  prisoners experience as a result  is simply too high a price to pay.  Women in Prison , as Burkhart warns  us it may be, is repetitious and  sometimes contradictory. But she  felt it important, in her capacity  as reporter, to transmit prisoners*  testimony intact, untampered with,  so that for once their side of the  story might be told. I think that  the book accomplished its aim  admirably.  NEW   BOOKS  A  Plain  crhe aESBlANS CHOME  JOURNAL  Sex Variant Women  in Literature  byjc.  Brown Rapper  by Rita Mae Brown  THEEiWENHER  HERRING  Lesbian Essays from The Ladder  Barbara Grier and Coletta Reid. eds.  Thirty-seven essays by long-time  'ñ†>apet,   photo  5th st., diana  -re, Md. 21218 pfGSS BOOKS  SHE NAMED IT CANADA  by The Corrective Collective (Karen  Cameron, Andrea Lebowitz, Barbara Todd.  Pat Hoffer, Cathy Walker, Marge Holli-  baugh, Dodie Weppler and others).  Collette French was the illustrator.  The Women's Press, 305 - 280 Bloor St.  West, Toronto. $1.25. Also available  from Press Gang, Vancouver.  1971.  Reviewed by Ann Risdon  "I mixed biscuits - ninety of them and  baked 15 at a time in the iron sheet  stove. Thompson watched, saying that  if he had to get supper there wouldn't  be any. Well, I had walked as far as  he had."  This was how a day ended for a pioneer  woman, one of the few who travelled to  the gold rush.  In this book is a history of Canada from  the workers' point of view - a history  other history books never told you about.  It is told in a scattered comic-strip  style; witty and satirical pictures and  narrative outline events and the motives  behind them.  Canada is shown from the time the white  man "realized that there was money to be  made from furs, lumber and fish" to the  increasing U.S. domination after World  War II, described by Lester Pearson as  "more like seduction than rape, so why  not relax and enjoy it."  The Great Train Robbery (building of the  CPR railroad) is touted in these words  by Sir John A. MacDonald:  "It will cure all ills! he cried.  "It  will relieve economic depression, check  Canadian emigration to the south, attract  fresh capital, encourage east-west commerce, increase reciprocity with the U.S.  and cure corns, caluses, bunions and all  the minor aches and pains of arthritis  and rheumatism."  Here, also is a history of strikes from  the mid-18th century on and a very sharp  look at the depression and two world wars  Women's historical position as slave  labour confined to the edges and corners  of events is graphically illustrated by  little pictures of women's activities  of the day: scrubbing floors and washing  diapers.  "And life went on as usual in the kitchens, except that now it could go on  later because of that stupid kerosene  lamp."  In the last pages, women become central to the narrative which notes:  "...reforms alone are not enough to  give women freedom - women themselves  must define and work for changes."  A bibliography on how to find your own  Canadian history follows.  Shoulder to Shoulder, A Documentary  by Midge Mackenzie.  333 pages, Alfred A. Knopf, 1975  Reviewed by Heather Kellerhals  The author is eminently qualified to  produce a history of the suffragist  movement as she has been involved in  research and film work on this topic  since 1968. In the introduction the  author states, "it was as a documen-  An artist's impression of a suffragette window-smashing raid.  From: Shoulder -to Shoulder.  tary film-maker that I worked on this  book, combining the original experiences of the Suffragettes as expressed in their own words with the images  that were available to me from the  newspapers and magazines of this period as well as from personal photographs in the archive collections."  No doubt this approach influenced the  actual format of the book - so large  as to be almost overwhelming, but  stroking in the powerfulness of the  immense photos and in the clarity of  the text. The drama of the whole  movement, the almost unbearable tension at times is certainly conveyed  to the reader through the Suffragettes  own words. Most of them were good  writers and kept careful records. The  author's method of presentation is  particularly effective when dealing  with events such as the split which  ran through the Suffragette ranks  during the war years, a split which  deeply affected the Pankhurst family  itself.  However, the author's approach does  demand a certain historical background  in the reader; without it certain  events would appear as in a vacuum.  On the rare occasion the text lapses  into dullness and one feels there  ought to have been more rigorous  chopping. But overall it makes excellent reading - one can read it  cover to cover or refer to it for  specific events. Here the reader is  aided by careful dating throughout  and an excellent index and picture  source.  To end with a quote from the author,  "the knowledge that my grandmother's  contemporaries were not just good  wives, mothers, housekeepers and cooks  but rather a generation of potentially  revolutionary freedom fighters gives  a new dimension to their lives and a  new strength to me" - by letting the  true events be known the book certainly achieves this purpose. office page  ombuds report  SISTERS  Re V.S.W. Facilities  Vancouver Status of Women has some  services, skills and resources that  you may want to take advantage of.  We'd like to see more feminist groups  sharing our facilities.  Meeting Space  Each weeknight and sometimes on weekends, the VSW office is open for  small group meetings. Lesbian Drop-  in and B.C.F.W. now meet here regularly. Just reserve a night and a  key in advance.  Mimeo Machine  We have a Rex-Rotary machine to run  off fliers and newsletters with.  We'll supply the ink and the machine  and a typewriter if you'll bring the  stencils and mimeo paper. Richmond  Women's Centre and B.C.F.W. use it  all the time. Again, just reserve  it in advance.  Publicity  If your group wants to announce  events or get news coverage on issues, submit a press release or a  public service announcement to our  editor for Kinesis and one to our  TV show Woman Alive. Kinesis is  read by women's centres all over  the province as well as by news-  media and politicians. The TV show  reaches women in Vancouver.  Reference Library  We have lots of reference files on  just about every feminist issue from  A to Z, filled with newspaper and  magazine clippings, briefs, reports,  studies, etc. You are welcome to do  research with them any day of the  week from 9am to 5pm. Files are not  allowed out of the office, but we  have a small copier if you need to  use it. There is also a small paperback lending library.  Ombudservice  DECEMBER 10 REVISITED  If you are having difficulty with  the legal system, government or social service bureaucracy, maybe we  can help you with para-legal advice  from our own experiences.  Lobbying  We are always looking for issues to  start action on. If you want our  support, let's consult on mutual  lobbying tactics.  Skill-Sharing  If you need workshop leaders on consciousness-raising, public speaking,  para-legal services, funding, publicity, lobbying, maybe we can supply  them.  If we don't have the time or the energy at the moment you need us to  help, we can always refer you to  someone who can. The only thing we  ask is a recognition of our own very  real limitations and VSW priorities.  We've been so busy serving the needs  of the woman on the street that we'd  like to see more feminist groups in  the movement actually using us too.  Please drop in and see us. We'd  like to get to know you better.  Vancouver Status of Women's request to  other groups to put pressure on the  Minister of Labour, Allan Williams,  seems to have produced some favourable results. While he did not write  to us directly, and while he did not  mention that Boards of Inquiry would  be appointed in any of the letters he  did write, we did hear that three  boards were appointed in December.  In one case, Linda Wards vs. Pilgrim House Ltd., the owners capitulated and gave Ms. Wards $400, an  apology and an agreement to change  their hiring policy. The other two  cases have not been heard.  Mr. Williams responses appear peculiar and not particularly consistent. In one case he mentioned that  the reason cases took so long to  resolve was the emphasis which the  Human Rights Branch places upon  settling complaints through negotiations and conciliation. In another, we heard that, "It is true  that Industrial Relations Officers  are used to investigative complaints.  This is not because there are too  many cases for Human Rights Officers  to deal with, rather it is because  of their availability for work  of this kind for which they are  iminently suited." VSW received  a reply to our letter to the  Minister requesting a Board of  Inquiry, from Ms.Ruff. In her  letter she states that "because  of their workload in the Labour  Standards Branch, Industrial Relations Officers are not able to  go back a second time on a Human  Rights Case", and it was necessary to wait for a Human Rights  Officer to be appointed near that  area.  TWO FACTS  What Mr.Williams avoids or does  not understand are the following  facts:  1. Industrial Relations Officers  are trained for a specific type  of job; it does not include the  kind of long haul investigation  and mediation required in discrimination cases. They already have a  caseload that is quite heavy enough  without taking on additional responsibilities that they are not trained  for,and for which, in some cases, they  hold no love. Finally, it appears that  they continue to take their instructions from the Depart of Labour, Labour  Standards Branch. While some of them  may be doing an adequate job, clearly  it is not good enough to use people  who are not committed to the principles  of Human Rights, who are not trained  to investigate or mediate in this type  of situation and who do not take instruction from the Director of the  Human Rights Code.  2. An actual physical presence is  needed to facilitate the process of  filing a complaint. Most people will  not use the legislation unless they  know about it and unless they can go  and see somebody who is directly involved and who has the power to do  something about it.  2,   While many cases can be satisfactorily dealt with by simply explaining,  mediating or educating people about  the law, some employers will continue  to discriminate if they believe that ]  the government is not going to enforce  its legislation. By December of last  year, 25 cases had been sent to the  Minister for Boards of Inquiry; 6 had  been appointed and we understand that  3 more were appointed between December  and late February. We have heard that  one has been denied. WHAT HAS HAPPENED  TO THE REMAINING 15?  We must continue to press for more  Human Rights Officers (50% of the case  load is now being handled by the Industrial Relations Officers, and a more  effective way of ensuring that when  the direct of the Human Rights Branch  cannot settle a case, a Board of Inquiry is appointed.  M€MB€RSHIP MEETING  IF YOU ARE FED UP:  WITH THE DAYCARE CUTBACKS  WITH UIC HASSLES  WITH NON-EXISTENT JOBS  WITH WELFARE HARASSMENT  WITH THE AIB CHARADE  IF YOU SEE  COMMUNITY SERVICES BEING  WHITTLED AWAY, SLOWLY BUT  SURELY BEING RECENTRALISED  COME to the VSW quarterly membership  meeting, March 22nd, at 7.30 pm.  The place for the meeting is the  YWCA, at 580 Burrard, in the Board  Room on the Third Floor.  The meeting will assess what has  been happening to women over the  past year, and will begin preparations of future strategy. |wiw lWl|  BCFW  BCFW Standing Committee Meeting  takes place on April 4th and 5th  in Nanaimo.  March 26 is a Rights of Lesbians  workshop. See inside story for  details.  POCO  March 3: High School Gir'.s  Pearl Roberts, BCTF  March 10: Women and the Law  Rachelle Sidall, Simon  Fraser Health Unit  March 17: Women and Achievement,  Fear of Success  Rosalee Hawrylko, Dept.  of Psychology, Langara  College  March 24:  Rounding Up Runaways  Pam Sleeth, Vancouver  Resources Board,  Gastown Team  March 31:  CARAL  Nicky  ANDROGYNY  Dr. Sandra Bern discusses ANDROGYNY  as part of a series of discussions  on STEREOTYPING: CAUSES AND EFFECTS.  Time is March 10 at 8pm. Place is  Lecture Hall 2, Woodward Instructional Resources Centre, UBC.  Fee is  $3.00 general admission, $2.00 students.  Sponsored by the UBC Centre  for Continuing Education.  For details, call 228-2181.  CHILDREN  The Education Committee of the University Women's Club of Vancouver  is holding a workshop: RESPONSIBILITIES AND RIGHTS OF CHILDREN AND  ADULTS - A TWO WAY STREET I  This one-day workshop is an attempt  to explore areas of responsibilities  and rights in the relationship between children and adults. We have  chosen to deal with the topic in the  following categories: children and  parents; children and teachers;  students and community; legal rights  of children.  Date:  Saturday, March 5, 1977  Time:  9:30am - 2:00pm  Place: Hycroft, 1489 McRae Ave.  (731-4661)  ADVANCCD MATTRCSS  THE ADVANCED MATTRESS SOCIAL  CENTRE at 1520 West 6th is back in  business, with lots of events.  Drop by the coffeehouse/social  centre for their calendar. And  don't miss their MANY SHOWINGS  of THE HISTORY BOOK - the film of  the book Doug Collins made famous  with his promo, on p.6!I Times:  Friday, March 4 " Sat March 5,  Sun March 6 at 8.00pm. Saturday  matinee at 2.00pm Phone 731 6611  for details now.  MAKARA  MAKARA IS CELEBRATING the end of  funding with an ANDROGYNY DANCE,  March 11. Time: 9pm - 2am at the  Japanese Community Hall, 475 Alexander. Entertainment, full bar  etc. Tickets $5.00 at Ariel Books  2766 West 4th; Spartacus Books  311 W Hastings; Ernie's Hot Wax  1116 Denman and at Markara herself, 1011 Commerical Drive.  SFU  Continuing Studies at Simon Fraser  is offering three spring courses  for women. These are: UNDERSTANDING  FINANCIAL PLANNING AND BUDGETING;  WOMEN IN MANAGEMENT: and IMPROVING  COMMUNICATION SKILLS.  "Understanding Financial Planning and Budgeting"  costs $60.00 and takes place at the  Crown Life Insurance Company, 1050  West Pender, Vancouver. Date and  time: Six Tuesday evenings, 7-9 pm,  March 15 to April 19. Pre-registra-  tion is required by March 7.  The fee for "Women in Management" is  $140 for two workshops, $75 for one  of the two workshops. Place: Room  3172 Administration Bldg, Simon Fraser  University. Date and time: Workshop  1: Friday and Saturday, March 18-19  from 9 am to 4 pm; Workshop 2: Friday  and Saturday, March 25-26 from 9 am  to 4 pm. Pre-registration is required  by March 7.  "Improving Communication Skills" costs  $65 for two days, and will be held a  SFU. Date and time: Friday, April 1  from 9 am to 4 pm, and Saturday, April  2 from 9 am to 3 pm. Pre-registration  is required by March 24.  FOR MORE INFORMATION about all these  courses contact: Office of Continuing  Studies, Simon Fraser University, at  291-4565.  RICHMOND  March 2:  March 9:  March 16:  March 23:  March 30:  April 6:  April 13:  April 20:  April 27:  Steering Committee Meeting  Open to all women  Drop-In Night (no special  program planned)  Formal Program: SINGLE  WOMEN  Discussion Night:  COMMUNICATION  Open  Steering Committee Meeting  Open to all women  Drop-In Night (no special  program planned)  Formal Program: FEMINISM  VS. TOTAL WOMAN  Discussion Night: ROLE  PLAYING  P€OPL€'S LAW  The VANCOUVER PEOPLE'S LAW SCHOOL is  offering FREE Sunday afternoon seminars on the law. The sixth in the  series is on the proposed FEDERAL  HUMAN RIGHTS BILL, on Sunday March  6th, to be held from 1:30-4:30 pm  at the Vancouver Public Library,  750 Burrard Street.  Instructor for  this seminar will be Bill Black.  To pre-register for this seminar,  call us at 734-1126.  COFFEEHOUSC  FULL CIRCLE COFFEEHOUSE  New Location:  152 E. 8th Avenue  (just off Main and Broadway) - Every  Friday 8:30pm-l:00am.  March 4:  HILDA THOMAS (singer) and  ULRIKA RUEBSAAT (singer)  March 11:  FERRON (singer)  March 18:  GAIL BAILLY (flute) and  TAMPAHTI (fiddle)  March 25:  JEANNETTE GRITTANI (singer)  and JUDI MORTON (poet)  VSW  QUARTERLY MEMBERSHIP MEETING ON  MARCH 22nd. Details are on the  opposite page. REMEMBER: Every  Wednesday night is Lesbian Drop In  at VSW at 8.00 pm. Every second  Thursday (10th and 24th) is  ORIENTATION. Call 737 3746. contents  * INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S DAY ; Plans in B.C. .  and a herstory of the day itself.  P.l  * Affirmative Action Plans at City Hall.  Volrich and his cohorts grow pale at the  thought of spending money on women, racial  minorities and handicapped persons.  P. 3  * Women win two human rights cases as the  fight for equal pay for work of equal value  goes on.  P.4  * SORWUC wins a victory against the UIC.  P.A  * JOIN VGH BY MARCH 17!  Get your application  form from VSW or the Health Collective and  keep VGH pro-abortion by voting for the pro-  abortion slate at the. AGM.  * Women's Week at UBC. What did Germaine Greer  really say?  P. 5  * Holly Devor, Photo Artist  P.8  * Molly Dreskell and one woman's fight for  dignity within our mental "health" system.  P.9  * BCFW convention in Vancouver. Lower main-  , land women speak.  p. 10 etc.  * The Nightcleaners : Filmpolitics  p. 13  * It's a year since Women Rally for Action!  An update on the centre pages.  And all the usual stuff:  Hansard Horrors, Office  News, Events, Sisters...  ->J <  *> %  o o  o §  to R  o o  -o o  SS  i%  mi»  v»    -1  <T  * $  n  Z?  <  ^ c  £  it  o  " o  3  §$$%  3  O    H»   r*   H  n < s h.  O   (0         fa  _ i r m  <     01     r*   01  H   t*  C  1   rt  bj   CD  *<    ft    H.  £