 MAY 1998    Tamoxirennot a miracle drug ...pg 3   CMPA$2.25 Inside  KINESIS  #309-877 E. Hastings St.,  Vancouver, BC V6A 3Y1  Tel: (604)255-5499  Fax: (604)255-5511  E-mail: kinesis@web.net  Kinesis welcomes volunteers to work  on ali aspects of the paper. Our next  Story Meetings are Tues May 5 and  Tues June 2 at our new office, 309-  877 E. Hastings St. Production for the  June issue is from May 19-26. All  women welcome, even if you don't  have experience.  Kinesis is published ten times a year  by the Vancouver Status of Women.  Its objectives are to be a non-  sectarian feminist voice for women  and to work actively for social change,  specifically combatting sexism,  racism.classism, homophobia,  ableism, and imperialism. Views  expressed in Kinesis are those of the  writer and do not necessarily reflect  VSW policy. All unsigned material is  the responsibility of the Kinesis  Editorial Board.  EDITORIAL BOARD  Fatima Jaffer, Lissa Geller, Kelly  Haydon, Ellen Woodsworth, Colleen  Sheridan, Agnes Huang  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE  Ednoi Boun, Tanis Preiss  Leanne Keltie, Kelly Haydon  Ellen Woodsworth, Dorothy Elias  Colleen Sheridan, Nancy Pang  Fatima Jaffer, Laura Quilici,  Robyn Hall, Joan Bridget  Advertising: Sur Mehat  Circulation: Audrey Johnson,  Chrystal Fowler  Distribution: Yee Jim  Production Co-ordinator: marilyn lemon  Typesetter: Sur Mehat  FRONT COVER  The Garlic Girls  (From top left, clockwise:)  Ednoi Boun, Colleen Sheridan,  Kelly Haydon  Photo by Michelle McGeogh  PRESS DATE  April 29, 1998  SUBSCRIPTIONS  Individual: $20 per year (+$1.40 GST)  or what you can afford  Institutions/Groups:  $45 per year (+$3.15 GST)  VSW Membership (includes 1 year  Kinesis subscription):  $30 per year (+$1.40 GST)  SUBMISSIONS  Women and girls are welcome to  make submissions. We reserve the  right to edit and submission does not  guarantee publication. If possible,  submissions should be typed, double  spaced and must be signed and  include an address, telephone number  and SASE. Kinesis does not accept  poetry or fiction. Editorial guidelines  are available upon request.  DEADLINES  All submissions must be received in  the month preceding publication.  Note: Jul/Aug and Dec/Jan are double  issues.  Features and reviews: 10th  News: 15th  Letters and Bulletin Board: 18th  Display advertising  (camera ready): 18th  (design required): 16th  Printing by Horizon Publications.  Kinesis is indexed in the Canadian  Women's Periodicals Index,  the Alternative Press Index, and is a  member of the Canadian Magazine  Publishers Association.  ISSN 0317-9095  Publications mail registration #6426  News  The troubles with Tamoxifen 3  by Penni Mitchell  Nancy Nicol wins at York 4  by Kelly Haydon  Custody and access hearings target women 5  by Eileen Morrow and Pam MacEachern  In memory of Connie Jacobs and Tyler 6  by Agnes Huang  Features  Arkansas: another case of male violence against women 9  by Colleen Sheridan  The stats on violence against women 9  compiled by Margaret Denike  Glorious garlic takes on the yeasties 10  by Kelly Haydon  The resonating horrors of residential schools 11  by Harriet Nahanee  So who says feminists aren't fun(ny) 14  cartoons by Jacky Fleming, Colleen Sheridan, and Kelly Haydon,  and from hip Mama and the Open Training and Education Network  Eat your weeds and other lawn stories 15  by Adele McCrank  Centrespread  America's most "wanted" and "unwanted" woman ..  by Assata Shakur  Tamoxifen is not a "miracle drug"  Assata Shakur.,  Arts  Good reads in bed or in the tub 17  compiled by Geller, Joan Bridget and Ednoi Boun  The 16-steps of Charlotte Kasl 19  reviewed by Dawn Livingstone  Regulars  As Kinesis Goes to Press 2  Inside Kinesis 2  What's News 7  compiled by Leanne Keltie  Movement Matters 8  compiled by Leanne Keltie, Hannah Hadikein and Michelle Dodds  Letters 20  Bulletin Board 21  compiled by Kelly Haydon, Colleen Sheridan and Tanis Preiss  Don't kill those weeds!.  Kinesis was unable to publish our April 1998  issue. We apologize to our readers, advertisers  and distributors and thank you for your support.  Dragon Ladies and other stories.. As Kinesis was going to press, we were  disheartened to learn that Angles, Vancouver's lesbian and gay community newspaper has published its last issue. The first  lesbian and gay newspaper in the city Angles survived and thrived for more than 10  years.  Like Kinesis, Angles relied on the incredible dedication of so many who volunteered their time and talents to bring out  each issue. Over the past few years, the  dwindling energies of its volunteers and  increased competition for its advertising  base, made it more and more difficult to  sustain the newspaper.  Kinesis thanks and congratulates all  those who have been involved with Angles for their contributions to the world of  progressive activist media.  Hey, we do have some good news to  report...the MAI is dead! (or at least it's in  statis.)Yup, the OECD—the Organization  for Economic Cooperation and Development—has called for a six-month halt on  the multilateral agreement on investments.  Very few people like the MAI. In fact, there  have been information forums and protest  actions against the agreement in most of the  OECD member nations, especially in  France and Canada.  Here's something else on the protest  action front. A number of national women's groups have launched a new postcard  campaign chastising the federal government for its dismal record in funding women's organizations in Canada. The "Women  are worth more than a cup of coffee" postcards are available from the National Action Committee on the Status of Women,  toll-free: 1-800-665-5124.  One last thing before we go...you may  notice (eventually) that our featured item  on the menu this month is Glorious Garlic.  Well, you know how they say diamonds are a girl's best friend. They're  wrong. Garlic is.  So we hope you enjoy plenty of cloves  (or bulbs,) while you read this issue in the  sunshine.  ~V   A.    1*4    C   O    \J  S    T    A.    T  O    F       W^   O   IVI   JE   IM  Our appreciation to the following supporters who became members, renewed their  memberships or donated to Vancouver Status of Women or who responded to our new  Kinesis 2000 Campaign in March and April:  Sherry Baker * Elaine Biagioni * Ray Boucher * Somer Brodribb * Betty-Ann  Buss * Janie Cawley * Elsie Dean * Karen Dean * Deborah Dunne * Nancy Edwards  * Heather Frazer * Mary Frey * Gina Gagne * Christopher Gainor * Carole Gerson *  Nora Grove * Tracey Jackson * Nancy Janovicek * Ursula Kernig * Dorothy Kidd *  Karen Kilbride * Tamara Knox * Trista Lawson * Cynthia Lee * Ursula Litzcke *  Margot Louis * Alex Maas * Juli MacDonnell * Natalie Raven Mack * Barbara Jo  May * Melinda Munro * Lou Nelson * Susan Penfold * Clara Penner * Carole  Pettigrew * Catherine Racine * Dorothy Randall * Roberta Rich * Adrianne Ross *  Jane Rule * Bev & William Sheridan * Ginny Stikeman * Penny Thompson * Maureen  Trotter * Sharon Van Volkingburgh * Susan Wendell * Lorrie Williams * Habiba  Zaman » Kim Zander * BC Tel * UBC Women's Studies Class  A special thanks to our donors who give every month. Monthly donations assist  VSW in establishing a reliable funding base to carry out our programs, services and  Kinesis throughout the year. Thanks to:  Lissa Geller * Jody Gordon * Erin Graham * Barbar Lebrasseur * Eha Onno *  Valerie Raoul * Sheilah Thopmson  VSW wishes to give a special thanks to the following supporters who helped this  year's Recommending Women, one of the most successful events ever. Thanks to:  Veda Abu-Bakare * Joan Anderson * Laura Anderson * Helen Babalos * Sherry  Baker * Wendy Baker * Ray Boucher * Charlene Brisson * Patricia Browne * Nalda  Callender * Lorraine Cameron * Leslie Campbell * Sarah Cepeliauskas * Jane Clapp  * Heather Commodore * Andrea Cowrin * Barbara Curran * Louise deBruijne * Elizabeth Fortes * Chrystal Fowler * Heather Frazer * Gina Gagne * Noga Gayle * Ieke  Geise * Erin Graham * Una Grayston * Miriam Gropper * Nora Grove * Louise Hager  * Ellen Hammer * Margit Hannah * Joey Hartman * Kelly Haydon * Cat L'Hirondelle  * Noma Homer * Agnes Huang * Connie Hubbs * Fatima Jaffer * Audrey Johnson *  Jennifer Johnstone * Naomi Katz * Else Kennedy * Vivian Kerenyi * Ann Kujundzic  * Andrea Mellalieu * Melinda Munro * Karen Kilbride * Fiona Lam * Louise LeClair  * Ursula Litzcke * Alex Maas * Aylene McDonald * Shona Moore * Shani Mootoo *  Myrtle Mowatt * Joanne Namsoo * Eha Onno * Ema Oropeza * Henriette Orth *  Clea Parfitt * Jerilynn Prior * Joshephine Rekart * Claire Robillard * Joan Robillard  * Christina Schut * Esther Shannon * Simi Sara * Colleen Sheridan * Maggie Sherlock  * Linda Shuto * Joanne Silver * Mary Woo Sims * Silvia Simpson * Marion Smith *  Jehn Starr * Kathy Stringer * Penny Thompson * Gale Tyler * Nadia Vidas * Maggie  Watts-Hammond * Analee Weinberger * Yvonne Wetherall * Lorrie Williams * Ellen  Woodsworth * Kate Young * BC Federation of Labour * Burnaby Teachers Association * Eli Lilly Canada * Women In Print  They say that April showers bring May  flowers...well, for Kinesis this was true. You  may have noticed that Kinesis did not publish an April 1998 issue. First off, we apologize to all our readers, and thank you for  your continued support.  But now, we are happy to say that with  May on the way, we were able to produce  what we believe is an informative and fun-  filled issue. We hope you agree.  As mentioned in Inside Kinesis in our  March issue, Kinesis (like many other feminist and alternative publications) is going  through some difficult times, mainly  around our financial and staffing situations. At the end of February, Kinesis and  the Vancouver Status of Women, our publisher, made the decision to not publish our  April 1998 issue. It was a very difficult decision to make, especially as Kinesis has  never not made it to press in our 24-year  herstory.  Kinesis is coming out again with renewed excitement in large part because of  the women in Vancouver and across  Canada who are doing what they can to  help us get subscriptions and submissions.  We have also been encouraged by the  words of so many women about the value  of Kinesis and the criticalness of having a  national feminist newspaper in Canada.  The Editorial Board oiKinesis has also  recently been rejuvenated with the addition  of more and more women. This month,  we'd like to welcome Ellen Woodsworth  and Colleen Sheridan.  Ellen is a longtime contributor to Kinesis, and a very active activist. She works  as a seniors advocate in the Downtown  Eastside and is a member of VSW's Coordinating Collective. Colleen has been a  regular volunteer around Kinesis and VSW  for more than a year now, and we've only  just discovered her fabulous talents as a  cartoonist/artist [see back page and page 4.]  Welcome to both Ellen and Colleen.  We'd also like to thank the women who  joined Ed Board and VSW staff and Coordinating Collective members for two short-  term planning meetings (so far; there are  more to come). These women—Jennifer  Johnstone, Esther Shannon, Nancy Pollak,  Cat L'Hirondelle and Jackie Brown—all  have a longtime connection with Kinesis,  and their contributions are appreciated.  One thing Kinesis has launched is a  fundraising campaign to help us cover our  deficit incurred over the past year [check ou t  page 10 for details.] We are also working on  our annual Kinesis Benefit, which will hopefully happen in October. And we are planning to have a visioning meeting sometime  in June. Women interested in joining in any  of our projects and processes, please call  us at 255-5499.  This issue, we'd like to acknowledge a  number of women for contributing their  words, stories and analyses to Kinesis for  the first time. Welcome and thanks to:  Eileen Morrow, Pam MacEachern, Colleen  Sheridan, Tanis Preiss, Margaret Denike,  Harriet Nahanee, Adele McCrank, Assata  Shakur, Dawn Livingstone, Ednoi Boun,  Hannah Hadikein and Michelle Dodds.  Also this month, Laura Quilici and  Tanis Preiss joined us in the production  room. We were glad that they came in and  brought us smiles and good cheer.  If you're interested in writing or helping out during production, please call  Agnes at 255-5499. Our next story meetings  are May 5 and June 2 at 7pm. Or drop by  during production of our June issue from  May 19-26. Hope to see you.  That's it for this month inside Kinesis.  Have a great month and...enjoy the flow-  Corrections  Kinesis made a few errors and omissions in our March 1998 issue, which we  apologize for.  In our story on federal funding for  women's organizations [page 3,] we featured the speech given by Audrey Johnson  of the Vancouver Status of Women at the  press conference organized by the National  Action Committee on the Status of Women.  We should als have noted the other speakers on the panel: Jon Leah Hopkins of NAC,  Fay Blaney from NAC and the Aboriginal  Women's Action Network, Marjorie Cohen,  and economist and professor in the Women's Studies Department at Simon Fraser  University, Vancouver Downtown Eastside  and seniors community activist Ellen  Woodsworth.  In our informational piece on the Joint  Senate/House Committee on Custody and  Access [page 5,] we said that the Committee was reviewing provisions in the Divorce  Act. In fact, it is looking into the issues of  custody and access, and not specific provi  sions of the legislation itself. For an update  on the Committee hearings, see this issue,  page 5.  We also had some problems with the images in the March issue. Unfortunately, because  of problems accessing our 256-bit colour video  card—apparently, that is an important thing to  have working—we were unable to use  Photoshop. Thatmeant we didn'thave as much  control over the quality of the photos we  printed. So, we'd like to apologize to the photographers who took those images and the to  the women in the photos.  In particular, we apologize to Mabel  Nipshank and the women in Vancouver's  Downtown Eastside for the photo that ran  with the short piece on the Valentine's  March [page 5.]  Still, on the issue of images...in our  IWD centrespread, we forgot to credit Kelly  Haydon for the beautiful painting she created for the IWD March in Vancouver.  Sorry, Kelly.  MAY 1998 News  Women and breast cancer:  Trials, tribulations and  Tamoxifen  by Penni Mitchell  You'd think that if anyone would be  excited about the prospect of Tamoxifen  preventing breast cancer, it would be Nora  Gambioli, executive director of the Canadian Breast Cancer Network (CBCN), a  consumer advocacy organization whose  board members are all breast cancer survivors. After all, many of the organization's  directors have also taken Tamoxifen, and  like other Canadian breast cancer advocates, the organization is keen on research  aimed at cancer prevention.  However, Gambioli says that in the  aftermath of last month's news that researchers involved in a Washington-based  study concluded that Tamoxifen can be  used to prevent breast cancer among high  risk women, the directors of the Network  are "very cautious" about the conclusions  being drawn by the study's researchers.  "This is not a cure," Gambioli says of  the preliminary results, issued by the US  National Cancer Institute (NCI), the sponsors of the study.  Initially the Washington study was  supposed to span seven years, until the year  2000. However, it was called off two years  early because the researchers felt they had  achieved a "breakthrough" in cancer prevention.  British medical researchers were quick  to offer a second opinion. They called the  decision to call off the study before its long-  term effects could be determined "premature," and they seem to have a point.  Tamoxifen's ability to block cancer cells  from growing is in fact not new; the drug  has been used for 20 years to reduce recurrence of breast cancer among certain postmenopausal women with breast cancer.  Tamoxifen's success rate at preventing  recurrence of breast cancer in post-meno-  pausal women after surgery reaches a high  of 40 percent; however, it is only half as effective for breast cancer patients under 50.  The study has raised more than the  hopes of women who are being encouraged  to believe that Tamoxifen is a magic bullet  that will reduce their chances of getting  breast cancer. It also raises critical questions  about cancer research and the meaning of  preventative medicine.  Chief among the questions is whether  it is ethical to give symptomless women at  risk for one type of cancer a drug that will  double their risk of another type of cancer,  and increase other health risks.  The study involved 13,000 women determined to be "high risk" because of their  post-menopausal status, family history of  breast cancer, or their diagnosis of having  pre-cancerous cells. About 10 percent of the  subjects were Canadian.  Half of the women were given  Tamoxifen; half a placebo. A total of 1.8  percent (239 women) of the participants  have been diagnosed with breast cancer  since the study began in 1992. Among the  6,500 taking Tamoxifen, the breast cancer  detail from "Suzanna and the  Elders" by Artemisia Gentileschi,  1610.  a "medical breakthrough." But Tamoxifen,  like most drugs, has negative effects as well  as positive one. In this case, Tamoxifen users in the study had more than twice the  rate of uterine cancer-five percent (33 cases)  compared to two percent (14 cases)—as the  control group.  The Tamoxifen link to uterine cancer  is well known; in fact, it's the reason the  Hamilton Regional Cancer Centre pulled  out of the Washington study in 1992. As  well, in 1994, the Washington study was  temporarily halted following reports of  four uterine cancer deaths in a different US  Tamoxifen study.  An earlier Swedish study also found  uterine cancer rates six times higher among  those who took Tamoxifen for two to five  years—nearly two percent (23 out of 1,372)  had uterine cancer compared to .04 percent  (four out of 1,327) in the control group.  In the Washington study, 17 women  taking Tamoxifen were diagnosed with  pulmonary embolisms (compared to six in  the control group). Two of them died. The  Breast Cancer Resources  Canadian Breast Cancer Network  102 - 207 Bank St., Ottawa, On.  K3P2N2 (613) 788-3311  <http://www.cbcn.ca>provides a range of information on breast  cancer, as well as links to other internet resources and  extensive list of about 500 advocacy and support groups.  Canadian Cancer Society's Cancer Information Service  toll-free and bilingual 1 -888-939-3333  For emotional support groups and information  Breast Cancer Info Link, Alberta Resources Cancer Board  1331-29 St., NW, Calgary, AB T2N 4N2  Produces many information sheets including the "ABC's of  Finding Information on Breast Cancer" and "How to Evaluate  Media Reports about Research", [see page 6] available from CIS.  tel. (403) 670-2113 toll-free 1-800-555-8698, fax (403) 670-2899  Internet resources  Especially useful Oncolink: <http://cancer.med.upenn.edu/>  Vancouver Women's Health Collective  #219-1676 West 8th Ave, Vancouver, BC, V6J 1V2  tel. (604) 736-4234  Women's Health Clinic  2nd floor, 419 Graham Ave, Winnipeg, MB, R3C 0M3  Alliance of Breast Cancer Survivors  Toronto (416) 487-9899  Breast Cancer Action -  • Kingston - Mary Stewart (613) 531 -7311  • Ottawa - Kim Ostrum (613) 736-5921  • Montreal - Sharon Butt (504) 483-1846  • Saskatchewan - Patty Newton (306) 586-9191  • Calgary - (403) 686-6395  • Nova Scotia - Virginia Cronin (902) 443-5681  rate was 1.3 percent (85); in the control  group of 6,500 it was 2.3 percent (154). In  all, there were 69 more breast cancers diagnosed among the group taking a placebo,  about 45 percent more.  If this were the end of the story, the  findings may have lived up to its billing as  oncologists involved in the study dismissed  these diseases as just side effects, and their  opinion that the benefits outweighed the  risks seemed irrefutable. One oncologist,  whose bedside manner was particularly  touching, remarked that even aspirin can  kill you.  Unless the women involved in the  study are tracked until their deaths, the  beneficial effects of Tamoxifen in reducing  overall breast cancer incidents compared  to increasing uterine cancer incidents cannot be accurately assessed. The reaction of  the Tamoxifen oncologists to the uterine  cancer risk has been to state that uterine  cancer is 'easier to treat' than breast cancer—that is, with hysterectomies.  The five-year survival rate of women  with uterine cancer compare to women  with breast cancer is about the same: 72 percent and 68 percent, respectively. With mortality rates for breast cancer continuing to  decline, it begs the question: on what medical basis do these guys justify prescribing  one type of cancer over another?  Even Zeneca Pharmaceuticals' own literature notes a small link to cancer of the  liver, as well as "secondary tumours," birth  defects and spontaneous abortions.  Tamoxifen brought in about $500 million  per year to Zeneca, the company which was  also the corporate mastermind behind the  creation of Breast Cancer Awareness Month  in the US. Other items in Zeneca's product  line have also been questioned for their  safety to individuals and the environment.  The Women's Community Cancer Project  in Massachusetts has linked Zeneca's herbicide Acetochlor to cancer, and reports that  the company was charged with dumping  DDTs and PCBs (two of the most carcinogenic substances known) into the Los Angeles and Long Beach harbours.  In contrast to the medical research establishment and the media's obsession with  finding the "miracle cure" for breast cancer, women's health advocates are pressing  for solutions to the root causes of the disease. Last July at the World Conference on  Breast Cancer in Kingston, Ontario, hundreds of breast cancer activists, researchers and authors demanded more publicly  funded research on environmental causes  of breast cancer and other forms of cancer  in NorthAmerica.  The CBCN itself is calling for a phase  out of hormone-disrupting chemicals from  the production and pollution created by  pesticides, plastics and chlorine-based  products in Canada. In spite of efforts to  involve more cancer survivors in directing  cancer research, Gambioli says she knows  of no Canadian research currently  underway on environmental causes of  breast cancer.  Side effects aside, the most notable  limitation of Tamoxifen appears to be its  long-term effectiveness. Reports on its use  suggest that patients appear to become resistant to its protective properties within  about five years. Presumably, the researchers in the Washington NCI study were  aware of the drug's time-limited benefits  when they discontinued their drug study  after five years. Tamoxifen is already being  seeTAMOXIFENpage6 News  Women in academia:  Witch hunt at York  by Kelly Haydon  Nancy Nicol won on a technicality, but  nevertheless it was a victory. Last December, an arbitration board at York University ruled in Nicol's favour and reinstated  her in the Faculty of Fine Arts.  Nicol's battle with York started in December 1995 when Susan Mann, the president of the university, overturned Nicol's  positive tenure recommendation and terminated her from the Faculty of Visual  Arts. Although her tenure committee recommended Nicol for tenure with high  competence and York's Senate Committee  gave her an unanimous vote of support,  Mann vetoed it. This was an unprecedented move by a university president at  York.  Mann's decision was based on 22  anonymous negative comments culled  from student evaluations during Nicol's six  years of teaching at York. Nicol's classes  had up to 270 students. Apart from those  comments, there was nothing else negative  in her file.  According to these few evaluations,  Nicol was "too feminist," "too Marxist,"  "a manhater," et cetera. Six comments from  a lecture of 117 students that said she was  "biased" were used against her, while eight  positive comments from the same class that  said she was "inspiring" were ignored.  Nicol is an award-winning video  maker and interdisciplinary artist, a socialist and an activist with a long history of  involvement in labour and social justice  issues. Her video work, includes: Gay Pride  and Prejudice, A Choice for Irish Women, The  Struggle for Choice, and Working for Piece  Work Wages. Her most recent video, directed in collaboration with Panday Sirring,  is Migrante: stories and songs of Filipino migrant workers.  Critical in Mann's decision was an  evaluation letter from the Dean of Fine Arts  Seth Feldman. Feldman spent two of a two-  and-a-half page letter focusing on students'  negative comments. He wrote that "[Nicol]  has incited animosity and hatred...," and  "she has to do more than preach to the converted..."  In support of Nicol's case, York Women's Studies Professor Linda Briskin wrote:  "It is no surprise that, in a heterogenous  student population, [feminist] material  would elicit some negative and even hostile reaction especially in the current climate of backlash to feminism...Feminist  faculty need to know that the university  administration will stand by our attempts  to introduce this material, even in a hostile climate."  Her fight had gone on for two long  years, and according to Nicol, if it had not  been for the support of students and her  faculty colleagues who marched on the  president's office with banners and signs,  she might not have won. Ten days after the  protest, the arbitrator brought forth his  positive ruling.  The arbitrator ruled in favour of the  York University Faculty Association  (YUFA), which represented Nicol, stating  that comments culled from the student  evaluations were anonymous and therefore  a breach of the collective agreement. The  arbitrator ruled that Mann's use of the  negative evaluations from Nicol's file violated the clause that states, "Unless specifically requested by the employee, no anonymous material other than aggregated statistical information recorded in student  evaluations shall be kept concerning any  employee."  Because the case was won on a legal  technicality, it did not address the real issue of discrimination against lesbians and  women. Two similar cases, involving  presidential denial of positive tenure reviews, also went to arbitration boards  around the same time as Nicol's case did.  Both appeals were filed by women, and in  both, part of their grievances alleged discrimination.  Although York is reputed as being one  of the most "progressive" universities in  Canada, a pay equity evaluation found that  80 percent of female faculty were eligible  for pay increase. This is so even though  wage disparities under $2500 are deemed  ineligible for compensation. There are no  women on the Senate, and less than one-  third of faculty are women, almost all of  whom are at the assistant professor or sessional level—that is, untenured.  The arbitration decision also did not  address the wider issue of using student  teaching evaluations for promotion decisions and the potential for abuse. Student  Evaluation Forms (SEFs) were originally  implemented for informational feedback to  faculty so they might be more aware of students' needs.  According to Robert Haskell, an education policy analyst, since the 1960s SEFs  have been increasingly used in decisions of  tenure and promotion. The number of institutions using student ratings has escalated from 29 percent to 86 percent. Given  the increasing emphasis on SEFs, it can be  a dangerous tool.  According to a study of 78 arbitration  decisions, Haskell writes, "it is hard to ignore the growing evidence of abuse, caus-  Nancy Nicol  ing harm to individual careers and undermining institutional goals."  The use of SEF's can be particularly  dangerous for women or minority group  faculty members. There is some research  that suggests in the case of minority group  faculty, the usual power dynamic between  faculty and student can be reversed. A professor's formal power over students does  not prevent harassment in the form of  anonymous sexual or anti-feminist comments on student evaluations.  Nicol comments that, "SEFs can and  do reflect political and cultural conflicts. If  this is not understood, the weighing of this  material can create a 'chilling' effect on academic freedom and undermine affirmative  action".  Both Susan Mann and Seth Feldman  are no longer at York. Mann left without  completing her term, and Feldman was  motivated to leave as a result of a non-confidence vote.  After Nicol was reinstated, her salary  was returned to the level it was at when  she was pushed out of York, and she was  repaid for a year of missed salary. Anonymous comments have been purged from  her file. However, despite receiving support  the first time, the York Administration insists Nicol must go through the tenure review process again. YUFA, on the other  hand, argues that Nicol's file should just  be sent to the new president, Lorna  Marsden, for review.  Of her ordeal, Nicol says: "I have  learned one thing from these four years: I  am a passionate, point-of-view documentary artist, a committed teacher and an advocate of social justice. No one's work and  teaching should ever be condemned because of commitment and advocacy for justice and equality."  Kelly Haydon wants to be the president of any  or all universities in Canada when she grows  up. She loves the academia and particularly enjoys hanging out with the old boys.  Graphic Nancy Peterson broadsheet no 122 September 1984 News  Custody and access hearings in Canada:  Women given rough ride  [Ed note: The second day of Committee  hearings in Vancouver (on April 28) was cancelled as Members of Parliament on the Committee had to quickly return to Ottawa for a  vote on the issue of compensation for people  who contracted Hepatitis C through tainted  blood. It is anticipated that the hearings in  Vancouver will be rescheduled for either mid-  or late-May.]  The all-party Joint Senate/House of Commons Committee on Custody and Access  started its trek across Canada in March. The  mandate of the Committee is to look into issues  of custody and access in general, and not at  specific provisions of the Divorce Act. Already,  after only a few hearings in Ottawa, Toronto  and Montreal, it has become clear that the  voices of right-wing men have a lot of sway  with many members of the Committee. The Transition Houses (OAITH), and Pam  men's and fathers' rights groups, in fact, have MacEachern, a family law lawyer with  received much support for their claims. Mean- Nelligan/Power in Ottawa, talk about their ex-  while, women's groups and feminists have been periences before the Joint Committee,  constantly interrogated about the credibility of  their stories and statistics.   Below, Eileen Morrow, the lobby coordinator of the Ontario Association of Interval and  Feminists told to answer to  men's groups'claims  by Eileen Morrow   OAITH appeared at the hearings in  Toronto on March 31. We presented along  with two other groups, the Assaulted Women's Helpline (AWH), a 24-hour crisis line  service in Toronto, and Families Against  Deadbeats, a grassroots group of mostly  women who came to speak to issues of  child support. In my many years of presenting to government public policy hearings  and committees, I have never experienced  anything like the treatment we received  from the Joint Committee.  The room, a cavernous space in one of  the most expensive hotels in the city, was  filled with men's and fathers' 'rights' group  members, who were also picketing outside  the hotel. We made our five-minute presentations, then AWH and OAITH were  treated to an interrogation, literally, by  some of the Joint Committee members, especially Liberal MP Paul Szabo (the MP  who proposed mandatory divorce school  last year) and Liberal Senator Anne Cools.  Soon after the question period began, the  focus began to centre on Ruth Hislop, my  co-presenter from OATTH, and me. We were  asked to account for all the specious claims  made by the men who had spoken to the  Committee before us—we were on the second day of a three-day stop in Toronto.  The witness list for our day was heavily weighted with men's and father's  'rights' representatives—including Kirby  Inwood, a convicted wife beater who hit  the media a few years back after bringing,  with much hoopla, his new bride from Russia to "freedom" in Canada, then assaulting her and their new baby a few months  later.  While we made our presentation, the  men seated behind us heckled, hooted and  snickered. They laughed when Beth  Bennett of AWH talked about woman-killing. During the question period, they  clapped and jeered. No order was called. I  was called for order, however, when I interrupted Szabo and talked over him. (He  was claiming that in 80 percent of cases,  women get custody. I was saying that's because men don't want custody and when  they do, they get it 50 percent of the time.)  We were asked about women who lie  about abuse, especially child abuse, because they heard "experts" tell them  women make up stories of abuse during  custody and access disputes. We were  asked to comment on violence against men.  We were asked to agree that mediation is a  good idea, even in cases of violence.  At one point, Conservative Senator  Mabel DeWare explained that we were being asked these questions because we were  presenting a different point of view from  the one they'd heard so far, and they  wanted us to comment on claims of the presenters who supported the so-called men's  and fathers' rights.  Anne Cools demanded—yes, that's the  word—to know our statistics on women in  shelters who are seeking divorce, and specifically how many of them had been threatened with a gun or knife.  When we didn't have the numbers on  hand—since they would tell us nothing  about the tactics of violent men who use  custody and access to further abuse women  and children—we were accused of coming  "unprepared" to the hearings.  (I was reminded of meetings held last  year during the annual consultations with  women's groups by the Department of Justice. Women met with officials of the Department to talk about the need to reform  the Divorce Act and family law in general  so that they reflect an equality analysis and  provide protection for women and children. We were asking the Department to  include a preamble in the Act regarding  violence against women and its impact on  children. We were asking the Department  to direct family court judges to consider  see MORROW page 7  Written briefs by groups or  individuals can be submitted to  the Committee up until June 30.  Contact Richard Rumas, Clerk,  Special Joint Committee on  Child Custody and Access,  Parliament of Canada, Ottawa,  Ontario, K1A 0A6; tel: (613) 996-  1664; fax: (613) 947-9670; e-mail:  sjca@parl.gc.ca. (The National  Association of the Women and  the Law has prepared guidelines  on how to make submissions to  government committees. For a  copy, call NAWL at (613) 241-  7570.)  For transcripts of the  presentations at the hearings to  date; the hearing schedule and  list of presenters; and other  information, access the  Committee's website:  www.parl.gc.ca. After you get  there, choose the language  option you prefer; then select  "Parliamentary business" [for  those who chose English,] then  "Committee business," then  "List of Committees: House of  Commons," then "Child custody  and access."  Homophobia is not in a  child's best interest  by Pam MacEachern  I appeared with John Fisher before the  Committee on March 23 in Ottawa as part  of its "Non-Traditional Family" segment on  behalf of EGALE (Equality for Gays and  Lesbians Everywhere). We were joined on  the panel by lawyer Cynthia Peterson,  Carleton University professor Katherine  Arnup and lawyer Philip MacAdam to  speak about lesbian and gay custody and  access issues.  Basically, our recommendations were that  1. sexual orientation should not be a  negative factor in determining the "best  interests of the child;"  2. a heterosexual parent should be encouraged to support the parenting of the  lesbian or gay parent. That is, homophobic  attitudes by the heterosexual parent should  be seen as being contrary to the "best interests of the child;"  3. judicial education (and public education) is needed to combat homophobic  attitudes; and  4. the federal government must remove  barriers to equal parenting by lesbians and  gays. That is, it must review its laws to ensure discrimination against lesbians and  gay men is removed (for example, in income tax law).  As you might have expected, we received a mixed response.  Liberal MP Carolyn Bennett seemed to  be quite supportive and showed a strong  analysis and understanding of lesbian and  gay issues, and family violence.  However, then there was Reform MP  Ken Epp, who believes that long-term traditional marriages should prima facie be  seen as the best places for kids. He appears  to be completely ignorant of the reality of  family violence, as this was not a factor in  his description of what made a good environment for children. He was shocked  when told that all studies indicate there is  no difference between the parenting provided by lesbians and gays and that provided by heterosexuals.  The most disturbing points during our  presentation came from Senator Anne  Cools. Cools initially appeared to be  friendly towards lesbians and gay men, or  actually, just gay men. She has a very strong  anti-women attitude. Here is how she  worked (aside from constantly interrupting other speakers, including Committee  see MACEACHERN page 7 News  The First Women in Canada:  Too many potential  'Connies'  by Agnes Huang  The tragedy of the shooting of Connie  Jacobs and her son Ty goes beyond their  deaths. It speaks more broadly to the critical situation facing many Aboriginal  women.  On March 22, Jacobs and her nine-year  old son were shot dead by an RCMP officer on the Tsuu T'ina Reserve, near Calgary, Alberta. The killings occurred after a  band social worker and police tried to seize  six children from Jacob's home.  Viola Thomas of the United Native  Nations (UNN) says the killing of Connie  and Ty Jacobs is an example of the "domestic terrorism" that exists in Aboriginal communities.  "The way the mainstream legal system  chooses to respond to violence [against  women] is to apprehend their children, and  not to confront the perpetrators of violence  and their abusive behaviours," says Thomas,  whose organization represents off-reserve  Aboriginal people in British Columbia.  These assaults on Aboriginal women  and children are the result of post-traumatic  stress from residential schools and poverty,  she adds. They are also indicators that all  levels of government—federal, provincial,  municipal and Indian Act [band/tribal]—  are unable to effectively meet the needs of  Aboriginal women and children.  Marilyn Buffalo, president of the Native  Women's Association of Canada, says what  is also tragic is how quickly such incidents  drop out of most people's consciousness.  "If this had happened in Downtown  Vancouver, then there'd be public outcry  and it would be on the front cover every  day," says Buffalo. "But when it happens  on an Indian reserve, in two days or a week,  it's forgotten."  The deaths hit Buffalo in a very personal way. Both she and Jacobs are from the  Samson Cree Nation, and Buffalo knows  Jacob's mother well. "Not a day goes by  when I don't think about Connie and Ty."  The RCMP says it is conducting an internal investigation of the incident to determine if criminal charges against the officer who shot Connie and Ty Jacobs are  warranted. The Alberta government has  also indicated that after the RCMP investigation is completed, it will begin a fatality  inquiry to look into the circumstances of  the deaths.  Buffalo says it is important that governments don't treat Connie and Ty's  deaths as an isolated incident. "Everyday,  women call our office saying, 'I'm a potential Connie, what should I do? Should I  move to the city where I may have more  access to housing, or should I stay on reserve where I have family support?'."  What needs to be addressed are the  broader issues of systemic sexism and racism against Aboriginal women and their  children, and the lack of support and opportunities for them.  The UNN's Thomas says priority must  be given to ensure there are enough gender  specific programs for Aboriginal women and  children, both on and off reserve.  Marilyn Buffalo echoes that sentiment:  "If you help an Aboriginal woman, the  chances of her family, her husband, her  partner and her children surviving are  much, much higher. My mother was a single parent and she raised all of us—that's  where I learned to be a leader."  [At front, left to right] Mabel Nipshank, Marilyn McGillis and Reta Blind  at a vigil for Connie andTy Jacobs in Vancouver, organized by the  Downtown Eastside Women's Centre.  from TAMOXIFEN page 3  replaced in many cases by more effective anticancer drugs. Unless new markets for the drug  are found, its days might be numbered.  Popular media is fuelling women's fears  of getting breast cancer fear by citing merely  being female as a risk factor for the disease.  Similarly, since 80 percent of all breast cancers occur in women over 50, reaching menopause is now labelled a risk factor.  Even the category of 'high-risk' appears  to be a bit of a misnomer. It is not clear that  women in the Washington study all had a  strong family history of breast cancer (a  mother or sister). Of all women diagnosed  with breast cancer, less than 10 percent of  them have a strong family history of the disease, so targeting women who researchers  categorize as 'high risk' in fact leaves out 90  percent of women who get breast cancer.  Based on what is known so far about  Tamoxifen, its ability to block cancer cell  growth may be temporary, simply delaying breast cancer while increasing risks for  uterine cancer and pulmonary embolisms.  Another question which would remain  unanswered without follow-up study on  the women in the Washington study is  whether Tamoxifen benefits women later  diagnosed with breast cancer who were  given the drug as a preventative treatment.  One woman who phoned me when the  Tamoxifen study was being sold to Canadian women as 'new hope' in the fight  against breast cancer was infuriated by the  drug's link to conditions like blood clots in  the lungs. "You can live without your tits,"  she said rather undiplomatically, "but you  can't live without your lungs."  Penni Mitchell is the coordinating editor of  Herizons, a feminist magazine based in Winnipeg.  Excerpts from "How to Evaluate  Media Reports About Research"  Is this the first study to show a new finding or relationship?  It usually takes many studies and years of research before definite  conclusions can be drawn.  Did the researchers study people like you? Some studies may  not apply to you. Look at the characteristics of the people studied  to see if they match yours.  Was the study big enough? Small studies rarely provide reliable  results unless the observed change is extremely large.  How strong is the relationship and what is its impact?  Sometimes risk is expressed in a way that makes it seem larger  than it is. It's important to know something about the size of the  baseline risk to understand if the increase is significant.  Who funded the study? If the funding agency has a vested interest  in the results, the findings may be less credible.  What about research suggesting that certain conditions cause  cancer? Ask yourself if the condition caused cancer, if the cancer  caused the condition, or if both were caused by something else?  Prospective or forward-looking studies are more reliable than  retrospective or observational studies.  Does the research finding make biological sense? On the other  hand, it helps to remain open to explanations that do not fit existing  beliefs, because sometimes they need modification.  Should you change your behaviour or habits because of research  results? Try to place your own value on the health improvement you  might gain from changing your behaviour and compare this with the  personal and financial costs of making the behaviour change.  ("How to Evaluate Media Reports About Research" is available from  Canadian Cancer Society's Cancer Information Service  toll-free and bilingual 1-888-939-3333) What's News  compiled by Leanne Keltie   Anti-abortionists'  racket busted  It was brought in to deal with the  mob, but last month the United States'  federal Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt  Organizations law (RICO) was used to go  after the anti-choice movement.  A US federal jury in Illinois found  three anti-abortion activists—Joseph  Scheidler, Timothy Murphy and Andre  Sholberg—guilty of engaging in 21 acts  of extortion to shut down abortion clinics across the country. Operation Rescue  and the Chicago-based Pro-Life Action  League were also convicted for having  played a part in the scheme.  The lawsuit against the three men and  two organizations was first filed by the National Organization for Women (NOW) in  1986. In 1994, the US Supreme Court gave  NOW permission to refile its case under  the racketeering statue. They were joined  in the suit by two abortion clinics.  RICO was passed by the US Congress  in 1970 as a weapon against organized  crime. In this case, the judge ruled that the  anti-abortionists' "organized crime" was  the systematic harassment and threatening  of abortion service providers and clients of  abortion clinics.  The class-action ruling ordered the  convicted men and organizations to pay  more than $250,000. (The damages  awarded were just over $85,000, which is  tripled under the racketeering law.)  "This is the biggest courtroom defeat  for the anti-abortion movement ever," declared Fay Clayton, lawyer for NOW.  Joseph Scheidler, the executive director of the Pro-Life Action League, complained: "They want to bankrupt us; there's  no question about that." The ruling could  indeed wind up costing the anti-choice  movement millions. It's a landmark decision that will likely spark more claims by  as many as 1,000 other abortion clinics  across the country.  Clayton declared: "When they prey on  a woman's fears to make her give up her  rights, that's extortion."  Letters target abortion  service providers  A well-known anti-abortionist in Vancouver has being warned by the Registered  Nurses Association of BC (RNABC) not to  refer to her RN status in her campaign to  identify abortion service providers. The  RNABC says Cecilia von Dehn's action violates the licensing body's code of ethics.  In March, under the guise of the group  PRICE (Patients Rights Informed Consent  Ethics,) von Dehn sent out letters to health  care providers across the province calling  on them to give her information about doctors who are either performing abortions  or giving referrals for them.  Von Dehn has a long history of harassing individuals and groups who support  women's reproductive rights and freedoms.  She owns a house across the street from the  Everywoman's Health Centre, a free-standing abortion clinic in Vancouver, in order  to better spread her anti-choice propaganda. And last year, she tried to crash the  organizing committee for the local International Women's Day event.  Although von Dehn claims the list is  being compiled only for a boycott; doctors  and other abortion service providers fear  the information could be used as a hit list  and distributed on the Internet for any potential assassin to see.  One Victoria doctor says she has seen a  letter very similar to the one von Dehn is  sending out from the extreme anti-choice  group called Life Dynamics of Denton, Texas.  "Given there have been attacks—  shootings of doctors—we're quite concerned." says BCNU president Ivory  Warner. "Nurses have a high level of credibility and trust. It's inappropriate for this  nurse to use her status to give credibility to  this campaign." Von Dehn, who has not  worked as an RN for many years, only has  to pay her $51 to maintain her status.  The recent letter campaign by von  Dehn mirrors a similar request for information on abortion service providers sent  out in March by the Kelowna Right to Life  Society.  The BC Medical Association has called  on Attorney General Ujjal Dosanjh to do  everything possible to prevent physicians  from being harassed. Dosanjh has forwarded a copy of both anti-choice letters  to his ministry's criminal justice branch.  from MORROW page 5  violence against women in determining the  best interests of children. Rather than using the Charter of Rights and Freedoms and  the gender equality analysis of the Justice  Department to protect women and children  from abuse under the Divorce Act, the department put this responsibility back onto  us. They suggested that we take our view  to the Senate/Commons hearings, reminding us that fathers' rights groups would be  vocal there and it was important for us to  counter their claims.)  Finally during Cools' questioning,  Erminie Cohen, a Conservative Senator  from New Brunswick, who is apparently  on the board of a shelter, was so upset she  started to cry in frustration and accused  members of the Committee of turning the  hearings into a "war zone." That is a pretty  accurate description of the problem. Mercifully, time ran out.  Afterwards, women came up to us to say  thank you, including survivors who explained  that they couldn't speak in that public a forum.  Outside the room, the guys were doing their  usual stalking behaviour around us: lurking  around, coming up behind us, and trying to  eavesdrop on our conversations.  All in all however, I think the Globe and  Mail front-page article [of April 1] about our  appearance at the hearings showed how  disrespectful and frankly reprehensible the  whole episode was. It was, however, one  of the few times I've seen the mainstream  media accurately report the behaviour of  many of the fathers' 'rights' promoters towards women in these forums. AWH and  OAITH will be writing a letter to the minister of justice and the Committee to protest the treatment we got there.  Sadly, we didn't get to talk about the  issues we came to present—the tragedy of  violence against women and how family  law is used as a weapon by abusers against  women and children escaping violence.  Hopefully, other women will take up the  challenge of facing the Committee and  speaking out about those issues.  Recommending Women Thanks  Vancouver Status of Women's annual fundraising gala,  Recommending Women IX, was a huge success in large part due to  the support of members of our local community.  Special thanks to the following businesses who sponsored the event  or donated prizes to our fundraising raffle:  Armitage & Associates * BC Woman Magazine * Diane's Lingerie  & Loungeware * Eaglequest Golf Centres * Full Bloom Flowers * The  Fringe Festival * GAIA Adventures * Marine Printers * Betty  Nickerson * Orca Bay Sports & Entertainment * Shoppers Drug Mart,  Park Royal South * Soma Therapy Centre * VanCity Credit Union *  The Vancouver Cannucks Hockey Club * The Vancouver Grizzlies  Basketball Club * The Vancouver International Comedy Festival  VSW would also like thank the artists who contributed  to the silent art auction:  Gaile Addison * Cecilia Broisier * Claire Kujundzic * Linda  Lencovic * Diane Levings * Rae Mate * Shani Mootoo * Trina Moulin *  Marina Papias * Nora Patrich * Karen Patterson * Rachael Sawatsky *  Suzanne Summersgill * Tien We * BC Society of Spanish Speaking  Women * The Van Dop Gallery  And finally, thanks to all the women who volunteered their time to  make RWIX such a rousing success.  from MACEACHERN page 5  members, and talking or laughing loudly  while others spoke):  She reasons that most women get custody and most men don't. Therefore, lesbians, being women, must be getting custody  a lot and it is really just gay men who are  getting hurt, along with other men. This  means it is discrimination against men, not  gays, that is the root problem.  She asked the men on the panel to tell her  some real life stories to support her theory. She  specifically requested stories in which the  mother had made sexual abuse allegations  against gay fathers. The men on the panel didn't  fall for this and responded wonderfully  Basically, Cools was trying to co-opt  discrimination against gay men to further  her personal agenda. She likes to collect  personal stories and refers frequently to her  piles and piles of "real life" data.  To cap off the moment, at one point the  discussion lead to domestic violence.  Carolyn Bennett raised this issue, asking  what the Committee could do to assist in  dealing with the problem of domestic violence in lesbian and gay relationships. The  panel responded that the Committee  should be doing what it can to end all discrimination against lesbians and gay men  so that we can at least get the necessary  support and access to resources.  Cools then jumped off with a question:  Did we know the statistics of violence in  lesbian relationships? Well she did. And, according to her, lesbian relationships are  more violent than any other relationships.  Hence, in Coolian logic, women are more  violent than men. Eeek!  We did say quite strongly that her "statistics" are bogus.  All in all, the experience can only be  described as "incredible" or "outrageous."  Cools' ability to take discrimination against  lesbians and gay men and try to turn it  around into a perfect example of violent  women who make false sexual abuse allegations was unreal.  For a copy of EGALE's brief on lesbian  and gay custody and access issues, contact  EG ALE at: #306-177 Nepean St, Ottawa,  Ontario, K2Q 0B4; tel: (613) 230-1043; fax:  (613) 230-9395; e-mail: egale@egale.ca; or  website: www.egale.ca/~egale.  r A woman owned and operated business specializing in defensive driver training.  Driver Improvement and Retraining  Become a confident and safe driver with an experienced instructor ■ Movement Matters  listings information  Movement Matters is designed to  be a network of news, updates and  information of special interest to the  women's movement.  Submissions to Movement Matters  should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double spaced and may be edited  for length. Deadline is the 18th of the  month preceding publication.  compiled by Leanne Keltie, Hannah  Hadikein & Michelle Dodds  World March of  Women in 2000  Almost 300 women's groups in 56  countries have already gotten involved in  preparations for the World March of  Women in the Year 2000. What a better way  to ring in the new millenium than with actions and protests around the world against  poverty and violence against women.  The idea for the world march came out  of the Quebec women's Bread and Roses  March Against Poverty in 1995. That action  was followed up by the National Women's  March Against Poverty, which culminated  in Ottawa in June 1996. Coordination of the  march in Canada is once again being led  by the Federation des femmes du Quebec.  Because the scale of this protest will be  both national and global, a lot of preparation is needed over the next year-and-a-half.  The first of two international preparatory  meetings for the World March of Women  will take place later this year on October  17-18 in Montreal. More than 200 delegates  from countries around the world are expected so far.  The goals of the initial meeting are to  come to some agreement on the objectives  and primary demands of the march. While  this may seem to be a daunting task, the  purpose of these two international meetings is the ensure that the demands and  actions of the Year 2000 March truly represent a global collaboration of women's  movements.  For further information about the first preparatory meeting or getting involved with the  campaign, contact the World March of Women,  c/o the FFQ, 5225 Berri, #100, Montreal, Quebec, H2J2S4; tel: (514) 948-5995; fax: (514) 948-  3264; or email: marche2000@ffq.qc.ca.  New fund for  women  Former Member of Parliament  Margaret Mitchell has recently started an  endowment fund for women in Vancouver  East, the riding she represented for more  than two decades.  Mitchell started the fund last November with the money she received from a pay  raise that she voted against in parliament in  1980. Being a woman of her word, Mitchell  set the money aside during her years in parliament and has now chosen to give it back  to the women in her former riding.  Priority will be given to projects that  help alleviate poverty, promote equality, and  help women to gain confidence and power.  In addition, significant focus will be placed  on poor women, Aboriginal women, and  immigrant and refugee women.  Since only the interest earned on the  fund will be distributed to the community,  the fund will continue to benefit women in  Vancouver East for many years to come.  The VanCity Community Foundation, the  organization Mitchell endowed the money  with, has also agreed to match a portion of  the income earned for five years—an addition to the fund which will definitely increase its impact in the community.  For more information on the fund, call  the VanCity Community Foundation at (604)  877-7647.  ContinuingKathleen  Shannon's vision  In 1974, Kathleen Shannon took on a  challenge which became a landmark in  Canadian history. Shannon was the driving force behind the establishment of a forum for women's filmmaking: Studio D of  the National Film Board of Canada.  The feminist film studio, with Shannon  at the helm, would continue to thrive for  the next two decades. Until its demise in  1995, Studio D produced more than 100  films and garnered over 75 awards, including two Academy Awards and a Genie.  To help her survive the numerous management meetings with only one other  woman at the table (who was busy taking  notes), Shannon took up knitting. Not missing a stitch, she continued raising issues  relevant to women's lives and promoting  the perspectives of women through the  medium of film.  She dedicated most of her life to bringing visibility to women's lives and their  work both inside and outside the home.  After leaving Studio D in 1992, Shannon  chose the Kootenays in south central British Columbia to relocate and work at realizing her vision of establishing a retreat  centre for women. She was successful in  creating a "serene haven" in the form of a  guesthouse called Hestia's, 28 kilometres  from Nelson.  It was at Hestia's—with its offering of  women's books, music and film, vegetarian food, wonderful walks in the surrounding woods, rejuvenation at the nearby  hotsprings, and restful solitude—that Shannon moved closer to creating a safe place  for women on their personal, emotional  and spiritual healing journeys.  Kathleen Shannon passed away suddenly in January 1998 at the age of 63, before some of her dreams and hopes could  become reality.  Establishing a lasting legacy to this  woman, is a vision held by many who knew  her. Her friends and allies are calling on all  interested women to make contributions of  knowledge, skills or money, or to simply  participate in a visioning process to assist  in securing Hestia's as a women's retreat.  They are specifically appealing to women  with the expertise to help set up a fund in  Kathleen Shannon's name, establish a society, or offer other ideas for carrying her  vision forward.  Contact Hannah Hadikein in Nelson, BC  at (250) 352-3609 to offer support or for more  information. Last year, the NFB released a film  on Shannon's life called, Kathleen Shannon:  on film, feminism and other dreams...  Amazing Greys on  video  Women and aging (beautifully) is the focus of a new video, Amazing Greys: Celebration  of the Crone. The video is centred on the Amazing Greys Celebration, an annual gathering of  older women for a weekend retreat of workshops, readings, sharing lots of fun...and of  course, the Croning Ceremony.  The major impetus behind the birth of  the Amazing Greys was the publishing of  Betty Nickerson's book, Old and Smart,  which discusses aging in a very positive  manner. The first celebration was held in  October 1993 in Parksville on Vancouver  Island. That event brought together 180  women to celebrate their age, maturity and  wisdom. At the last celebration in September 1996, also held in Parksville, almost 200  women attended. (Sadly, the 1997 event had  to be cancelled.)  Amazing Greys, the video, was produced  by Cathy Lowens and Lee Mclntyre. One  amazing thing about the video was that it  was made by a crew entirely of women.  The video features the conversations  of Else Kennedy, Betty Nickerson, Tor  Forestberg, Paulette Smith and Maggie  Anderson. These women, all of whom have  long been active with the Amazing Greys  celebrations, address a whole range of issue such as death, mortality and sexuality.  As well, the whole Croning Ceremony at  the 1996 celebration is shown.  Organizers of the Amazing Greys Celebration say it is not just a once a year event.  They always encourage older women to set  up groups in their own communities, and  younger women to learn from the experiences of older women and become "Amazing Greys in Training" (AGITs).  As a compliment to the video, the producers have also prepared a facilitator's guidebook  for those interested in holding workshops  around issues raised in Amazing Greys.  To obtain a copy of Amazing Greys, write  to Lowens and Mclntyre, #102-935 Fairfield  Rd, Victoria, BC, V8V 3A3; or e-mail:  lcath@ampsc.com. The video sells for $39.95  for home use. Insitutions wishing to use the  video as a teaching tool or to broadcast it should  inquire as to the purchase cost.  NAC-BC gives Hedy  Fry an "award"  The BC-Region of the NationalAction  Committee on the Status of Women (NAC)  held its Spring conference in Vancouver  April 24 to 26.  The conference was unofficially  launched with a flurry of activity outside  the constituency office of Hedy Fry, minister responsible for the status of women  (SWC). Surrounded by more than a dozen  news reporters, NAC representatives presented an achievement award to the minister for her government's "distinguished  efforts in the de-funding and erosion of  equality-seeking women's organizations in  Canada." The award was accepted by  Artur Wilczynski, Fry's executive assistant,  on behalf of the minister.  Since 1989, the federal government has  cut funding to women's organizations by  more than $5 million. New funding criteria, introduced by SWC last year, has also  meant the elimination of program funding  that supported the organizational infrastructure of women's groups. These untenable changes have put many women's  groups, including NAC, in dire financial  circumstances and in even more vulnerable  positions of having to rely on women's unpaid work and volunteer efforts.  Taking the federal government to task  for its irresponsibility towards women continued throughout the regional conference.  Fay Blaney, a vice-president of NAC and a  member of the Aboriginal Women's Action  Network, spoke about the ongoing effects  of Bill C-31 on generations of Aboriginal  women, and how Aboriginal women are  agitating for change across the country. This  bill, she said, is a continuation of a government policy of Aboriginal elimination.  Kay Sinclair of the Public Service Alliance of Canada reported on the federal  government's refusal to adequately implement pay equity (equal pay for work of  equal value) legislation for the past 13  years. Unionized women earn 75 to 80 percent of men's earnings, and non-unionized  women only 67 percent. A coalition of labour and women's groups, she suggested,  could fight more strongly for accurate  evaluation of women's work.  Marjorie Cohen of Simon Fraser University talked about the devastating consequences of the pending Multilateral  Agreement on Investment (MAI). She  urged women to consider how their own  political circumstances will be affected by  this agreement that allows international  corporations to escape or override national  and local governance.  A number of resolutions concerning  immigration will be brought to the NAC  annual general meeting in June. The resolutions ask NAC and its member groups to  pressure the Canadian government to reject the new immigration proposals, recognize women from Islamic countries as refugees, grant permanent status to refugees,  and stop the deportation of refugees to  countries where they will be unsafe.  In other NAC-BC regional business,  Michelle Dodds, a recent graduate from  SFU's Women's Studies program, agreed to  sit as the co-regional representative for the  Lower Mainland. She will share this position with Hannah Hadikein, the co-regional  rep for South Central BC.  For more information about NAC-BC or  to get involved, contact Hannah Hadikein and  Michelle Dodds through NAC's Vancouver  office. Tel/fax: (604) 736-3346; or e-mail:  hgh@net.idea.com or h Media coverage of violence against women and girls:  Invisibilizing the obvious  by Colleen Sheridan   On March 24,1998, the day after reportedly announcing that he planned to shoot  his "ex-girlfriend" and "all the people who  broke up with him," 13-year old Mitchell  Johnson along with his 11-year old cousin,  Andrew Golden tried to do exactly that.  After pulling the fire alarm at their  Jonesboro, Ark. elementary school, the two  boys, loaded with three rifles and four handguns, laid wait in the wooded area nearby.  When the students and teachers filed out,  Johnson and Golden opened fire, hitting 14  females and one male. Four girls were killed,  as was a pregnant teacher who attempted to  shield a female student. Candace Porter,  Johnson's reported ex-girlfriend, was among  the girls injured in the shooting.  The two boys, both described as experienced at firing guns, used semi-automatic rifles complete with scopes in the attack.  This tragedy is undeniably another horrifying example of male violenceagainstwomen,  and yet, to hear it reported in the mainstream  media, it would appear "deniable."  While feminists feel the motive behind  the murders is obvious, we continually read  that so-called "experts" are still "struggling  to shed light on the killings," citing such  potential culprits as "popular culture," the  need for stronger gun-control legislation in  the US, and a new breed of criminal: "the  fledgling psychopath."  One editorial even goes so far as to  blame these and similar killings on baby  boomers. In a special to the Vancouver Sun,  the author claims that by rejecting "traditional concepts of taste and restraint", a  generation of baby boomers has succeeded  in making society more "vicious."  Even if popular culture, access to guns,  mental illness, and baby boomers were to  blame for murders such as this, not once  does the mainstream press ask why such  factors seem to so disproportionately affect  males.  In fact, the gender and skin colour of  murderers is conveniently glossed over,  except in the rare event that the murderer  is not a white male. If the killer is a person  of colour, "culture" is to blame, as in the  murders of Rajwar Ghakal and her family  by her ex-husband Mark Chahal. If the  murderer is a female, such as Karla Faye  Tucker or as we just saw with the killing of  Reena Virk, it clearly indicates that there is  a sudden "epidemic" of female violence.  Yet when white male after white male  guns down female after female, the killer's  gender and skin colour disappear, or at  least cease to matter.  More and more, as in the coverage of  the killings in Arkansas, we are seeing increased efforts by those who control the  media to render the pattern of male violence against women invisible. They must  The numbers support feminist claims  compiled by Margaret Denike   Much of the anti-feminist, anti-woman  attacks being aired at the current Joint Senate/  Commons Hearings of Custody and Access are  focused on questioning how many women and  children are affected by male violence [see page  5]. The attempt by so-called men's and fathers'  rights groups and their supporters is to  minimalize the reality and threat of male violence in women's lives.  Below, Kinesis presents a summary,  pulled together by Margaret Denike, of some  of the studies and statistics which make it clear  that the prevalence of male violence against  women cannot be denied.  Spousal assault  In 1993,9,126 incidents of spousal assault were reported to police in British Columbia. In 7,380 or 81 percent of these incidents the offender was male, in 780 or eight  percent the offender was female, and in 966  or 11 percent there were two offenders who  assaulted each other.  Of the spousal assault incidents that  resulted in convicitons [3,234], 97 percent  were against male offenders, less than two  percent were against female offenders, and  slightly over one percent were against at  least one of the offenders in the "both offender" category.  Of the 1,953 spousal assaults which  resulted in a stay of proceedings in 1993  and 1994, the survey indicated that the  majority (about 55 percent) were due to  "uncooperative or reluctant witnesses."  Source: Survey of Spousal Assaults Reported to Police in British Columbia (Ministry of Attorney General, Police Services Division, December 1996) 8-10.  Of the 118 cases of violence and/or  intimidation in intimate relations reported  to the Vancouver City Police in the month  of January 1996, 107 or 91 percent of the  suspects were male; only 11 (or nine percent) were female. Children were present  in 28 (or 24 percent) of the incidents.  Of the 135 cases of violence and/or  intimidation in intimate relations reported  to the Vancouver City Police in the month  of July 1996, 119 or 88 percent of the suspects were male; 16 or 12 percent were female. Children were present in 32 (or 24  percent) ot the incidents.  Source: Vancouver Police Department,  Violence and Intimidation Against Women in  Relationships: January and July, 1996. Prepared by Catherine Richard.  According to a 1993 Statistics Canada  survey, 72 percent of female victims of violence have been assaulted or murder by a  relative or acquaiantance; 24 percent by a  stranger. In contrast, the majority of male  victims (56 percent) are assaulted or murdered by strangers; only 36 percent by relatives or acquaintances.  Source: Statistics Canada, General Social  Survey, 1993. Reprinted in BC Ministry of  Women's Equality Annual Report (April 1996).  Female homicide  Between 1991 and 1993, there were 1,943  solved homicides in Canada. Women comprised 32 percent of these victims and men  68 percent. The overwhelming majority of  female murder victims are killed by their  intimate partners, with 51 percent being the  victim of their spouse, ex-spouse, or other  intimate partner. Only nine percent of female  murder victims were killed by strangers.  Source: Holly Johnson, Dangerous Domains: Violence Against Women in Canada  (Toronto; Nelson, 1996) 182. Cited by Ann  Duffy, "The Feminist Challenge: Knowing and  Ending the Violence, Feminist Issues," 142.  Aboriginal women are at least six times  more likely to be victims of female homicide than are non-Aboriginals.  Source: Sean Fine, "Study of native women  says 80 percent have suffered abuse." The Globe  and Mail, 19 January1990: A13. Citedby Ann  Duffy, "The Feminist Challenge," 145.  do so in order to protect the patriarchal  power structure of which they are a part.  Although the Conrad Blacks of the  world cannot control what women know  in our hearts to be true, they can control  what appears in the mainstream press and  on television. Through omission and misinformation, such as we have seen in the  Arkansas case, the public is being manipulated into believing that male violence is  no longer the problem.  Colleen Sheridan is the cartoonist in residence  at Kinesis. See her work on page 14 and the  back page.  Aboriginal women face eight times the  risk of family violence as non-Aboriginal  women. A 1985 study of Micmac women  in Nova Scotia found that 70 percent reported being abused by their husbands.  Dumont-Smith and Labelle report that 75  to 90 percent of women in northern Aboriginal communities are battered.  Source: Jane Gurr et al;., Breaking the  Links between Poverty and Violence Against  Women Ottawa: Ministry of Supply and Services Cnada, 1996. Cited in Ann Duffy, "The  Feminist Challenge," 145.  Criminal harassment/stalking  A study considered to be "a first step  in the Department of Justice's efforts to assess whether the anti-stalking legislation  [Section 264 of the Criminal Code] is functioning as it was intended" examined a  sample of 601 criminal harassment cases  handled by the police between 1993 and  1994 in Vancouver, Edmonton, Winnipeg,  Toronto, Montreal and Halifax.  Of those cases, 91 percent of accused  were men, and 88 percent of victims were  women. About 57 percent of cases involved  partners or former partners, and another  28 percent involved friends, acquaintances  or co-workers who had not been involved  in a relationship. Twelve percent of cases  involved total strangers, and only four  cases (0.7 percent) involved stalking of a  public figure.  Source: Richard Gill and Joan Brockman,  A review of Section 264 (Criminal Harassment)  of the Criminal Code of Canada (Department  of Justice, October 1996) ix; 26.  Production of records  (The presumption that women lie)  In 1997, a study was conducted by  Diane Oleskiw and Nicole Tellier on all reports of cases accessible at September 1996  in which the accused had sought the production of a Crown witness' records or  counselling history, or both. The study  shows that 120 out of the 140 cases, involved an accused charged with a sexual  offense. Only 20 of 140 were not clearly  sexual offenses and even then, 14 of those  20 exceptional cases involved crimes of violence. Even within those 20 exceptional  cases, the majority ot records sought related  to Crown witnesses who were either  women or children (eight cases) or inmates  (four cases).  Source: Diane Oleskiw and Nicole Tellier,  Submissions to the Standing Committee on  Bill C-46 (National Association of Women and  the Law, 1997) 5.  False allegations of sexual abuse  (The presumption that women lie)  As summarized by Susan Penfold, there  is a growing assumption that the court system has been witnessing an epidemic of false  allegations made by "malicious" mothers in  the course of custody disputes. However,  studies do not support this assumption.  Large-scale US studies show that sexual  abuse allegations occur in only two percent  of disputed custody/access cases. Although  authors agree that false allegations occur  more frequently in child custody and access  disputes, one study found that only 16.5 percent (of the two percent) of allegations in such  disputes are false or unfounded. Furthermore, mothers were no more likely than fathers to make false allegations.  Source: Susan Penfold, "Questionable  Beliefs About Child Sexual Abuse Allegations During Custody Disputes" (1997) 14(1)  Canadian Journal of Family Law, 20. Cited in  Sandra Goundry, "Final Report on Court-  related Harassment" (forthcoming, 1998) 33.  Margaret Denike teaches women's studies at  Capilano College in North Vancouver and is a  member of the Vancouver Association of  Women and the Law. Feature  Women and health:  Garlic, it is a girl's  best friend  (...and other girl truths)  by Kelly Haydon  Whenever you get the itch, the one  where it's tempting to scratch in public, instead of giving your money to puerile pharmaceutical companies reach for glorious  garlic. Glorious is a girl's best friend in itching times. You can easily clear it up by inserting a clove of garlic into your love canal. It's easy and there's no gicky mess.  Carefully peel a clove of organic garlic  so as not to nick it, wrap it in a bit of cheesecloth, then dip it in olive or almond oil so  as not to irritate the mucous membrane,  and insert. You can even make a cute little  tail with the cheesecloth for easy removal.  Change the clove two or three times a  day for the first two days, and then once in  the morning and once at night for the next  five to six days.  You can treat external itching while glorious is doing her job inside with a mixture  of one teaspoon of baking soda in one cup  of water. Apply to your vulva as needed.  If you've got a yeast infection, it's likely  your partner does too. Sharing is so special. If your partner's a woman, buy your  love a garlic bud so she can do the same as  you. Yeast infections are often asymptomatic in men. They can get rid of yeast by  rubbing yoghurt and/or garlic on their penis for seven to 10 days.  Note that this garlic treatment can be  used for trichomonas and gardnarella.  There are other ways to get rid of a yeast  infection without donating money to companies that cause us a lot of grief. However,  these methods are a bit messier than garlic.  Plain natural yoghurt works well. Make  sure to use unpasteurized yoghurt containing live lactobacilli.  Insert it carefully with a teaspoon or a  "baby syringe" (available at drugstores) and  wear a pad as the yoghurt will flow out.  Acidophillus capsules work well and are  not as oozy. Insert two or three capsules into  the vagina. They can be taken orally at the  same time. Follow either of these treatments  for five to 10 days, preferably at night.  At night it's not as drippy, at least not  until you get up in the morning. As above,  remember to share with your partner.  It is also a good idea to avoid acid generating foods such as tomatoes and citrus  fruit. You won't be able to eat passion fruit,  but as you are temporarily out of commission, it doesn't matter. Also avoid sugar and  white flour. Eat foods rich in Vitamin B  (dark leafy vegetables) and eat tons of yoghurt and raw garlic daily.  The info for this bit on glorious garlic was taken from the most  amazing booklet called Hot Pants: Do It Yourself Gynecology written by  Isabelle Gauthier and Lisa Vrnebaum. Hot Pants is the English adaptation of C'est toujours chaud dans les culottes desfilles (second edition). The  booklet is an introduction to basic herbal therapy.  The opening lines of Hot Pants are: "Patriarchy sucks. It's robbed  us of our autonomy and much of our history. We believe it's integral for  women to be aware and in control of our own bodies. The recipes we  present here have been known and practised for centuries, passed down  from mother to daughter, and have survived the censorship of the witch  hunts."  Other tibdits from the booklet include: herbal remedies for PMS,  painful periods and other menstrual and fertility problems; "Love in  theAge of AIDS"; "STDs and other Aliens"; "Aphrodisiacs"; and "How  to Prepare and Use Herbs". And, there are plenty of suggestions for  further reading.  To get a copy o/Hot Pants or C'est toujours chaud, check with your  local women's health collective, women's centre or women's bookstore, order  one by writing to CP871, Succ. C, Montreal QC, Canada, H2L 4L6.  KINESIS FUND RAISING CAMPAIGN  GOAL $40,000  2,000 feminists giving $20  or  1,000 feminists giving $40  or  500 feminists giving $80  or 500 feminists giving $40 and selling 500 subscriptions to Kinesis.  Use your imagination  to help us reach our  goal of $40,000 Feature  Residential schools in Canada:  The deliberate theft of  children and land  by Harriet Nahanee   Thousands of Aboriginal children were  forced into residential schools across Canada  from the 1880s through to the 1980s. On February 2nd in a court in Nanaimo, British Columbia, 30 Aboriginal people opened an historic trial against the United Church cf Canada  and the federal government for abuses they  endured at the Alberni Residential School in  Port Alberni, BC. The case is the first civil suit  launched claiming that the United Church and  the federal government were both "vicariously  liable" for the abuse wrought by the staff and  administrators at the school.  On April 17, the question of liability was  brought to the BC Supreme Court in Prince  Rupert, where many of the plaintiffs are from.  The Supreme Court reserved its judgment on  whether the United Church, the federal government, both or neither, were "vicariously liable"  in the abhorrent treatment of Aboriginal children at the school. It is expected the court will  render its decision by the end of May. If the court  rules in favour of the plaintiffs, the civil suit to  determine damages will begin in August.  A week after the civil suit was filed, a forum on residential schools was held in Vancouver. The forum was organized by the Simon  Fraser University Public Interest Research  Group. Several hundred people attended; an  unexpected number so that a second room had  to be set up with a video monitor.  The forum featured three people who are  part of the civil suit: Harriet Nahanee of the  Pacheeda Nation, and Dennis Tallio and Harry  Wilson, both of the Kwagiutl Nation. Many  others from the audience also spoke of the impact residential schools and institutionalized  racism and violence had on their lives.  Below, Kinesis presents the speech given  by Harriet Nahanee. She spent four years in  the Alberni Residential School between 1945  and 1949.  Before giving her address, Nahanee offered  a Welcome Song in her language, Ditidaht.  I want to tell you about our culture  before I tell you how it was destroyed. The  well-being of a Nation depends on its leadership. For countless thousands of years,  our ancestors governed themselves with a  hereditary chief system. In this family, all  children were raised with sacred duty training, the word is [Ed. note: Nahanee says the  word in Pacheeda, which cannot be translated  into a written romanizedform.] It means you  speak the truth. All children were raised  with the sacred duty training.  Our hereditary chiefs earned the respect of people by making sure everyone  was treated equally. No one was above another; everyone was equal. Chabud, the hereditary chiefs, were the people with the  most responsibility. A hereditary chief had  the hardest job. That person was raised  from birth to be a leader. All children were  taught this duty, but the one with the kind  heart was chosen [as hereditary chief.]  Our hereditary chiefs were lifetime  planners, always keeping in mind that what  we did had an effect on the coming gen  erations. Clean air, plenty of fish and  game—it was a sacred duty to leave everything we enjoy for the seven generations  down the road.  Our heredity chiefs maintained a harmonious relationship with the environment  and led an orderly and dignified life. Our  hereditary chiefs held our constitution in  song form and dance form, religion in  ritual form.  All children were raised with respect.  The children were raised by their grandparents, so it ended up that a child knew  more than his or her parents. They were  taught to respect the earth, to respect each  other, to respect the animals. They were  taught to respect, and with respect there's  no need for laws. There were laws but they  were in a different form. One of the laws  was that you couldn't sing someone else's  song, because it was their constitution.  I was taken to Ahousat Residential  School at age five. The RCMP gunboat-it had  a gun mounted at the front—picked us up. I  was hiding underneath Henut's porch. I  guess everybody was trying to hide there,  so the RCMP knew exactly where we were.  We were dragged onto the boat kicking and screaming. The reason I remember  this so well is that my sister Nora was  screaming all the way. She cried for hours  on that boat. The things that happened to  us were so damaging.  When we were in the school, everyone  was so hungry that my sister Nora and Stella  boosted me over the fence to get turnips, carrots and potatoes from the root cellar Well,  they knew darn well I was the one who  would be punished and I wouldn't get turnips or carrots, but they would. You see what  [the residential school officials] did to us was  divide us. I hated my sister for years because  I got the worst licking I ever had in my life  for stealing turnips and carrots.  Three hundred children arrived at the  residential school on the same day. Some  children were lonely and they went into a  corner. We went into the playroom in the  big basement. We started singing songs. We  were told we were not allowed to do that  but we did it anyway because we were  lonely. The kids from Nitinat Village, we  all went and sang songs. Somebody went  and told on us. The person who told on us  got an apple or an orange, and we got a  licking. So you see right from day one as  children they were dividing us.  The worst thing that ever happened to  us was the sex abuse. The sex abuse is something no one ever talks about. I didn't bring  it into my mind until my daughter committed suicide in 1984, and then I started  to look at myself and see why I was addicted to alcohol, why I wasn't a good parent I went to a psychiatrist; I thought that  would help. I told him, "I'm paranoid. I  think the church and the government deliberately did this to us."  A year later, I said to him, "I've been  coming here for a year and you haven't  cured me." He said, "Well, that's because  you're right. It was deliberate in order to  take the land, the resources." It's all about  the land; it's about our country. We hold  an Allodial Title to this land, right to this  day. Why do you think they're treatying?  Because we still hold the Title. It was all  about keeping us dysfunctional, keeping us  dependent on welfare. Well, some of us  have shook our head and said, "Hey we  still hold Title to this land."  I witnessed a death when I was 11-  years old. I didn't consider it a murder because when you're 11, it's just another painful memory But for 54 years, I've been paranoid about all sorts of things, especially  Maisie's death because it was used to keep  us quiet. I can't remember everything but  it was December 24 and all the kids had  left. They told me I would be staying there  because I wouldn't bow my head. I never  bowed my head; I never crossed my hands;  I never knelt. I sat in the back row [of  church.] There were a lot of us kids who  refused the religion because we knew we  had a religion; we grew up with it.  On December 24,1 was in the playroom  when I heard some shouting. I went to the  bottom of the stairs, then went up. There  were two glass doors at the top of the landing [of another set of stairs.] It was [the  school principal] Reverend A.C. Caldwell  and this Welsh woman who was the supervisor—I can't remember her name. They  were in the little cubbyhole at the top of  the stairs. They were arguing about this little girl who was running up and down the  stairs, Maisie Shaw. Reverend Caldwell often appeared to be drunk; you could smell  the liquor on his breath. He kicked Maisie.  She went down the stairs. She later died.  There were other kids who were in the infirmary and had their appendix burst No one  bothered to take them to the hospital; they were  just put in the infirmary to die. That's murder.  Other children were beaten til they died. That's  murder. I didn't consider it murder until 1984,  when my daughter died.  We can't change the past, but we have  to deal somehow. There's a way to heal and  that's by our culture, to regain our culture,  to speak our language, to once more be who  we should be. I want to regain my language. I want to be able to speak to my  Elders, to my people. If we had been left  alone, we would have evolved just like everybody else. We would have prospered.  The worst part was the loneliness.  When you're a little kid and can't go to your  mom for a hug, it really hurts. I had four  years of that. It really does something to  you. It's a lifetime wound.  When I went to residential school, I  was anxious to go. I wanted to learn how  to speak English well. I wanted to go to  school, but I didn't realize how lonely it  would be in a residential school where you  Harriet Nahanee  can't see your brother, even though he was  right next door. My favourite brother who  taught me how to hunt and fish, I couldn't  talk to him.  I tried to understand what happened  to our people, how our own people could  turn on our own people. My sister, who  knew I would get a strap, pushed me over  the fence. She knew I was going to get the  strap but she did it anyway. I want to know  what happened to us.  I came across something in a newspaper about the Stockholm Syndrome. It said,  "We were taken prisoner at age five by terrorists, church and government. We were  under extreme stress and duress. In a state  of agitation for years we started to identify  with our captors, called the General Adaptation Syndrome. You do what you have to  do to survive, which turns into love for  your captors. Intense identification with  their goal."  I read this somewhere and I applied it  to us because this is what happened. We  have this division; we have the break up of  our families. We used to have this hereditary chieftainship system which was family oriented, where families stuck together  When you're going to have a potlatch,  you invite all of your family. They could  live in Seattle, but they would still come  and then you plan for your potlatch. Every  family member has input into the potlatch.  Every family member is a part of it and they  feel good about it; they're giving. This is  how our families were and there's no reason we can't do it right now.  We can work together, we can have  potlatches once more because the potlatch  system was generous. That's what it means,  potlatch means to give. The churches and  the government took Nations and Nations  of generous people and turned them into  dysfunctional people.  The money I am suing for, I am going  to use to have a potlatch. I'm going to make  sure that when I die my children have  potlatch, they'll know what to do. Assata Shakur:  AMERICA'S M O ST "WANTED"  She was born JoAnne Chesimard, but to  most people she is knoivn as Assata Shakur. A  proud Black woman. A member of the Black  Panther Party. A target on the FBI's most  wanted list. A woman falsely accused and convicted of murder. A political activist living in  exile in Cuba.  Kinesis was sent the following open letter by Assata Shakur taken off the Internet.  Shakur tells of her experience of political repression in the United States, and of the continuing campaign by police and state authorities to "return" her to prison in New Jersey.  In her own words...  My name is Assata Shakur, and I am a  20th Century escaped slave. Because of  government persecution, I was left with no  other choice than to flee from the political  repression, racism and violence that dominate the US government's policy towards  people of colour. I am an ex-political prisoner, and I have been living in exile in Cuba  since 1984.  I have been a political activist most of  my life, and although the US government  has done everything in its power to  criminalize me, I am not a criminal, nor  have I ever been one. In the 1960s, I participated in various struggles: the Black liberation movement, the student rights movement, and the movement to end the war in  Vietnam.  I joined the Black Panther Party (BPP).  By 1969, the BPP had become the number  one organization targeted by the FBI's  COINTELPRO [counter intelligence program]. Because the BPP demanded total liberation of Black people, [FBI Director] J.  Edgar Hoover called it "the greatest threat  to the internal security of the country," and  vowed to destroy it and its leaders and activists.  In 1978, my case was one of the many  cases brought before the United Nations in  a petition filed by the National Conference  of Black Lawyers, the National Alliance  Against Racist and Political Repression,  and the United Church of Christ Commission for Racial Justice, exposing the existence of political prisoners in the US, their  political persecution, and the cruel and inhumane treatment they receive in US prisons.  According to [the groups'] report: "The  FBI and the New York. Police Department,  in particular, charged and accused Assata  Shakur of participating in attacks on law  enforcement personnel. The FBI and the  NYPD further charged her as being a leader  of the Black Liberation Army, which the  government and its respective agencies described as an organization engaged in the  shooting of police officers.  "This description of the Black Liberation Army and the accusation of Assata  Shakur's relationship to it was widely circulated by government agents among police agencies and units. As a result of these  activities by the government, Ms. Shakur  became a hunted person—posters in police  precincts and banks described her as being  involved in serious criminal activities; she  was highlighted on the FBI's most wanted  list; and to police at all levels, she became a  'shoot-to-kill' target."  I was falsely accused in six different  "criminal cases," and in all six of these cases  I was eventually acquitted or the charges  were dismissed. The fact that I was acquitted or that the charges were dismissed did  not mean I received justice in the courts;  that was certainly not the case. It only  meant that the "evidence" presented  against me was so flimsy and false that my  innocence became evident.  On trial for murder  On May 2, 1973, I, along with Zayd  Malik Shakur [no relation] and Sundiata  Acoli were stopped on the New Jersey  Turnpike, supposedly for a "faulty tail  light." Acoli got out of the car to determine  why we were stopped. Zayd and I remained in the car. State Trooper Harper  then came to the car, opened the door and  began to question us.  Renewed distortions and lies  On December 24, 1997, the New Jersey State Police called a press conference  to announce they had written a letter to  Pope John Paul II asking him to intervene  on their behalf and to aid in having me extradited back to New Jersey prison.  The state police refused to make their  letter public, knowing that they had probably totally distorted the facts. I decided to  write the Pope to inform him about the reality of "justice" for Black people in New  Jersey and the US.  In January 1998 during the Pope's visit  to Cuba, I agreed to do an interview with  NBC journalist Ralph Penza around my  letter, about my experiences in the New Jersey court system, and about the changes I  saw in the US and its treatment of Black  people over the past 25 years.  "They call me the most wanted woman  in America. I find that ironic.  I've never felt very wanted before."  Because we were Black and riding in a  car with Vermont license plates, he claimed  he became "suspicious." He drew his gun,  pointed it at us, and told us to put our  hands up in the air, in front of us where he  could see them. I complied and in a split  second, there was a sound that came from  outside the car. I was shot once with my  arms held up in the air, and then once again  in my back.  Zayd Malik Shakur was later killed;  Trooper Werner Foerster was killed, and  even though Harper admitted that he shot  and killed Zayd Malik Shakur, I was  charged in his death and in the death of  Foerster.  Although he was unarmed, and the  gun that killed Trooper Foerster was found  under Zayd's leg, Acoli, who was captured  later, was also charged in both deaths.  Neither of us received a fair trial. We  were both convicted in the news media way  before our trials. No news media was ever  permitted to interview us, although the  New Jersey police and the FBI fed stories  to the press on a daily basis.  In 1977,1 was convicted by an all-white  jury and sentenced to life plus 33 years in  prison. In 1979, fearing that I would be  murdered in prison, and knowing that I  would never receive any justice, I was "liberated" from prison, aided by committed  comrades who understood the depths of  the injustices in my case, and who were also  extremely fearful for my life.  The US Senate's 1976 Church Commission report on intelligence operations inside the USA revealed that, "the FBI has attempted covertly to influence the public's  perception of persons and organizations by  disseminating derogatory information to  the press, either anonymously or through  'friendly' news contacts." This same policy  is evidently still very much in effect today.  I agreed to do this interview because I  saw this secret letter to the Pope as a vicious, vulgar publicity manoeuvre on the  part of the police, and as a cynical attempt  to manipulate Pope John Paul E.  Instead of an interview with me, what  took place was a "staged media event" in  three parts, full of distortions, inaccuracies  and outright lies. NBC purposely misrepresented the facts. Not only did NBC spend  thousands promoting this "exclusive interview series" on NBC, but also on Black radio stations and in local newspapers.  In an interview, New Jersey Governor  Christine Whitman was quoted as saying,  "this has nothing to do with race; this has  everything to do with crime." Either  Whitman is completely unfamiliar with the  facts in my case, or her sensitivity to racism and the plight of Black people and  other people of colour in the US is at a subzero level.  In 1973, my trial in Middlesex County  [as an accomplice to murder] had to be  stopped because of the overwhelming racism expressed in the jury room. The court  was finally forced to rule that the entire jury  panel had been contaminated by racist  comments like, "she's Black; she's guilty."  In an obvious effort to prevent [Acoli  and Shakur] from being tried by "a jury of  our peers," the New Jersey courts ordered  that a jury be selected from Morris County,  where only 2.2 percent of the population  was Black. In a study done in Morris  County, one of the wealthiest counties in  the country, 92 percent of the registered  voters said they were familiar with the case  through the news media, and 72 percent  believed we were guilty based on the pretrial publicity.  During the jury selection process,  white supremacists from the National Social White People's Party, wearing swastikas, demonstrated carrying signs reading,  "Support White Police."  The trial was later moved to Middlesex County where 70 percent thought I was  guilty based on pre-trial publicity. I was  tried by an all-white jury, where the presumption of innocence was not the criteria  for jury selection. Potential jurors were  merely asked if they could "put their prejudices aside and render a fair verdict." The  basic reality in the US is that being Black is  a crime and Black people are always "suspects", and an accusation is usually a conviction.  Most white people still think that being a "Black militant" or a "Black revolutionary" is tantamount to being guilty of  some crime. The current situation in New  Jersey's prisons underlines the racism that  dominates the politics of New Jersey, in  particular, and the US as a whole. Although  the population of New Jersey is approximately 78 percent white, more than 75 percent of it's prison population is made up  of Blacks and Latinos. Eighty percent of the  women in Jersey prisons are women of colour. That may not seem like racism to  Whitman, but it reeks of racism to us.  Money for my capture  The NBC story implied that Whitman  had raised the reward for my capture based  on my interview with NBC. The fact of the  matter is that she had been campaigning  since she was elected into office to double  the reward for my capture. In 1994, she appointed Colonel Carl Williams who immediately vowed to make my capture a priority. In 1995, Whitman sought to match a  $25,000 departmental appropriation sponsored by an "unidentified legislator."  [In its piece,] NBC ran a photograph  of a woman it claimed was me. I was not  that woman. The photograph was taken  from a highly publicized case where I was  accused of bank robbery. Not only did I  voluntarily insist on participating in a line  up, during which witnesses selected another woman, but during the trial, several  witnesses, including the manager of the  bank, testified that the woman in that photograph was not me. I was acquitted.  NBC aired that photograph on at least  five different occasions, representing the  woman in the photograph as me. How is it  possible, that the New Jersey State Police  who claim to have a detective working full  time on my case, Governor Whitman who  claims she had reviewed all the "evidence,"  and NBC which has an extensive research  department, did not know that the photograph was false? It was a vile, fraudulent  attempt to make me look guilty.  NBC deliberately misrepresented the  truth. Even after many people called in, and  there was massive fax and e-mail campaign  protesting NBC's mutilation of the facts,  Ralph Penza and NBC continued to broadcast that photograph.  In a clear attempt to discredit me,  Williams was allowed to give blow-by-  blow distortions of my interview. In my  interview, I stated that on the night of May  2nd, I was shot with my arms in the air,  then shot again in the back. Williams stated,  Assata Shakur from the cover of her autobiography.  "that is absolutely false. Our records show  that she reached into her pocketbook,  pulled out a nine-millimetre weapon and  started firing."  However, that claim was even contested by Harper. Although on three official reports, and when he testified before  the grand jury, he stated that he saw me  take a gun out of my pocketbook, he finally  admitted under cross-examination that he  never saw me with my hands in a pocket-  book, never saw me with a weapon inside  the car, and he did not see me shoot him.  I had been examined by three medical  specialists. A neurologist testified I was  immediately paralyzed after being shot. A  surgeon testified that the claim by Harper  that I had been crouching in a firing position when I was shot was "totally anatomically impossible. "A pathologist testified  that "there is no conceivable way that (the  bullet) could have travelled over to hit the  clavicle if her arm was down."  The prosecutors presented no medical  testimony whatsoever to refute the above  medical evidence.  Although Williams refers to us as the  "criminal element," neither Zayd or Acoli  or I were criminals; we were political activists. I was a college student until the po  lice kicked down my door in an effort to  force me to "cooperate" with them, and  Acoli was a computer expert who had  worked for NASA before he joined the BPP.  In an obvious manoeuvre to provoke  sympathy for the police, the NBC series  juxtaposed my interview with the weeping  widow of Werner Foerster. While I can sympathize with her grief, I believe her appearance was deliberately included to appeal  to people's emotions, to blur the facts, to  make me look like a villain, and to create  the kind of lynch mob mentality that has  historically been associated with white  women portrayed as victims of Black people.  In essence, the supposed interview  with me became a forum for the New Jersey State Police, Foerster's widow, and the  obvious hostile commentary of Penza. The  two initial programs together lasted 3.5  minutes: me 59 seconds, the widow 50 seconds, the state police 38 seconds, and Penza  68 seconds. Not once was I ever asked  about Zayd, Acoli or their families. Although I tried to talk about racism, and the  victims of government and police repression, it was clear Penza was totally uninterested.  My "quite nice life"  As I watched Governor Whitman's interview, the one thing that struck me was  her "outrage" at my joy about being a  grandmother, and my "quite nice life," as  she put it, here in Cuba. While I love the  Cuban people and the solidarity they have  shown me, the pain of being torn away  from everybody I love has been intense. I  have never had the opportunity to see or  hold my grandchild.  If Whitman thinks my life has been so  nice, that 50 years of dealing with racism,  poverty, persecution, brutality, prison, underground, exile and blatant lies has been  so nice, then I'd be more than happy to let  her walk in my shoes for a while.  I am a proud Black woman, and I'm  not about to get on the TV and cry for Ralph  Penza or any other journalist, but the way  I have suffered in my lifetime, and the way  my people have suffered, only god can bear  witness to.  Williams stated, "we would do everything we could to get her off the island of  Cuba and if that includes kidnapping, we  would do it." I guess the theory is that if  they could kidnap millions of Africans from  Africa 400 year ago, they should be able to  kidnap one African woman today.  It is nothing but an attempt to reincarnate the Fugitive Slave Act. All I represent  is just another slave that they want to bring  back to the plantation. Well, I might be a  slave, but I will go to my grave a rebellious  slave.  In another recent interview, Williams  talked about asking the federal government  to add to the $50,000 reward for my capture. He also talked about seeking "outside  money, or something like that, a benefactor, whatever." Now, who is he looking to  "contribute" to that "cause"? The Ku Klux  Klan, the Neo-Nazi parties, the white militia organizations?  But the plot gets even thicker. He says  the money might lure bounty hunters.  "There are individuals out there, I guess  they call themselves soldiers of fortune,  who might be interested in doing something, in turning her over to us."  The irony of being wanted  Neither the government nor the state  police say one word about "justice." They  have no moral authority to do so. The level  of their moral and ethical bankruptcy is  evident in their eagerness to break the law  and hire hoodlums, all in the name of law  and order.  But you know what gets to me, what  makes me truly indignant? With the schools  in Paterson, NJ falling down, with areas of  Newark looking like disaster areas, with the  crack epidemic, with the widespread poverty and unemployment in New Jersey,  these depraved, decadent, would-be slave  masters want federal funds to help put this  "nigger wench" back in her place.  They call me the most wanted woman  in America. I find that ironic. I've never felt  very wanted before. When it came to jobs,  I was never the most wanted; when it came  to economic opportunities I was never the  most wanted; when it came to decent housing,... It seems the only time Black people  are on the "most wanted" list is when they  want to put us in prison.  But at this moment, I am not so concerned about myself. Everybody has to die  sometime, and all I want is to go with dignity. I am more concerned about the growing poverty, the growing despair that is rife  in America. I am more concerned about our  younger generations, who represent our  future. I am more concerned that one-third  of young Blacks are either in prison or under the jurisdiction of the "criminal justice  system." I am more concerned about the  prison-industrial complex that is turning  our people into slaves again. I am more  concerned about the repression, the police  brutality, violence, the rising wave of racism that makes up the political landscape  of the US today.  Our young people deserve a future,  and I consider it the mandate of my ancestors to be part of the struggle to ensure they  have one. They have the right to live free  from political repression.  A plea for justice  I urge every single person who reads  this statement to fight to free'all political  prisoners. As the concentration camps in  the US turn into death camps, I urge you to  fight to abolish the death penalty. I make a  special, urgent appeal to you to fight to save  the life of Mumia Abu-Jamal, the only political prisoner who is currently on death  row.  Like most poor and oppressed people  in the US, I do not have a voice. Black people and poor people have no real freedom  of speech, no real freedom of expression,  and very little freedom of the press. The  Black press and the progressive media have  historically played an essential role in the  struggle for social justice. We need to continue and expand that tradition.  I am only one woman. I own no TV  stations, or radio stations, or newspapers,  but I feel that people need to be educated  as to what is going on, and to understand  the connection between the news media  and the instruments of repression in  America. All I have is my voice, my spirit  and the will to tell the truth.  Free all political prisoners.  I send you love and revolutionary  greetings from Cuba, one of the largest,  most resistant and most courageous  palenques (Maroon Camps) that has ever  existed on the face of this planet;  -AtSdata ~J>haKur  Havana, Cuba  For a more detailed account of Assata Shakur's  story, read her autobiography, Assata, first  published by Zed Books in London in 1987,  then re-published in the US by Lawrence Hill  Books in Chicago. Be warned that the book appears to be out of print. Check with your local  library or your activist friend for a copy. Feature  CD  W  M  2  Z  h  H  THEY   fatpfcfo.?  Qd**-«"K't  «JW-:T3  TRowise fctfrem oeciAEATioM  /*>—-  We found this cartoon in an article  about the Promise Keepers in  Volume 15 of hip Mama, a quarterly  parenting magazine from Oakland  CA. Their "Conspiracy Issue " also  covered a disturbing approach to  child rearing in the US as described  in "On Becoming Babywise" and  included some poetry and a piece by  the mother of filmmaker Sarah  Jacobson.  The editor of the magazine, Ariel  Gore, is on tour for her new book  The Hip Mama Survival Guide,  hip Mama has been around since  1994 and involves many single  mothers in its writing and  production.  hip Mama,PO Box 9097, Oakland,  CA, 94613; tel:(510) 658-4508;  e-mail: hipmama@sirius.com;  web site: www.hipmama.com  Subscriptions are $12 to $20 sliding  scale (You decide how much you can  afford.)  [Ed note: JF stands for Jacky Fleming, British-born and internationally acclaimed and  very beloved feminist cartoonist] Feature  Women in the garden:  Eat your weeds  by Adele McCrank  Snow may still cover the lawn where  you live. But under the snow, dandelions,  chicory, burdock, garlic mustard and plantains are already growing. None of these  plants are native to North America. They  were all brought here by immigrants who  valued them as food or medicine. Gradually the knowledge of how to use these  plants got lost.  The plants our ancestors brought from  Europe, Asia and Africa are now called  "weeds." Americans spend $30 billion a  year to kill these weeds—and themselves.  Thirty-two of the 34 pesticides used for  lawn care cause cancer, birth defects, skin  rashes, irritation to the lungs and eyes and  damage to the liver, nervous system and  reproductive system.  But you can have your lawn and eat it  too! By doing this, you'll be saving money,  your planet and maybe, your life. Not only  that, but most native and non-native  "weeds" cure the very diseases that pesticides cause.  Dandelions,chicory, burdock, garlic  mustard and plantains are all good in a stir-  fry. Garlic mustard is beginning to choke  out many native plants in Milwaukee. The  Park People hold annual "Weed-Outs" to  get rid of it without pesticides. From early  Spring to late Fall, I keep it under control  in my yard by adding it to stir-fry along  with the leaves of the wood violet, the official flower of the state of Wisconsin.  Garlic mustard is good for asthma and is  supposed to get rid of intestinal worms. The  other plants I mentioned are best in the early  spring.Aftertheyflower,meygetbitter  Dandelion flowers are good dipped  first in a beaten egg, then in a mixture of  corn meal or flour and salt. Fry them in little oil and butter. By eating the flowers, you  are preventing the plant from going to seed  and making more dandelions. Early spring  dandelion sap is often used to cure warts.  Eat the leaves if you have liver or urinary  problems. They also detoxify the blood and  cure acne and eczema.  Dandelion roots are a laxative, aid digestion, reduce inflamation, build the blood  and cure anaemia. They are an important  liver stimulant used for jaundice, gallstones  and rheumatic joints. In the spring, the roots  contain levalose, a sugar easily assimilated  by diabetics. By Fall, this sugar has changed  to insulin, a starch good for diabetics.  Collect the roots in the Spring or Fall.  First boil them to get rid of bitterness, then  fry them. You can also dry them, grind them  up and use them as a coffee substitute.  Chicory is sometimes called "blue dandelion. " The leaves and flowers, which are blue,  have the same shape as dandelion leaves and  flowers. The leaves are rich in calcium and  are used as a bitter Passover herb. They are  good for the liver and kidneys.  Prepare the roots the same as dandelions to eat or use as a coffee substitute. The  famous New Orleans Cafe du Monde coffee  is made of half coffee beans and half chicory  root. It is very strong. I use it half-strength.  For cuts, swelling and inflamation,  bruise some chicory leaves and soak them  in boiling water Soak a clean rag or towel in  the chicory water and put it on your wound.  Keep this up for 10 to 30 minutes. Garlic  mustard leaves can be used the same way.  If you are on a picnic and you bum yourself on the grill or get an insect bite, the cure  is probably right there in the park grasses.  Look for a low growing plant with oval  leaves about three inches wide. It might have  a stalk growing in the middle of it. This is  the plantain (no relation to the banana-like  plant of the same name). Chew up a leaf and  put it on your bum or bite. Native Americans even use this for snake bite.  I usually only use catnip to make my  cats high. You can smoke it to get yourself  high, but some people say this doesn't work  (I haven't tried it.) You can put the leaves  in salads or on meat or make a tea from  them. The tea is good for colic, hyperactivity, anxiety, cramps, upset stomach, colds,  fever and scalp irritation.  Most lawns contain plenty of red clover and violets. I have made violet jam, and  you can dunk the flowers in beaten egg  white then sugar, and use them for cake  decorations. I've also made a honey-like  spread from clover flowers and sugar.  Consumer warning:  Actual weeds may not appear  exactly as shown.  Make a tea from clover and violet  leaves or flowers by boiling two cups of  water. Turn off the heat and add two cups  leaves or flowers. Let it sit ten minutes, then  strain. Soak towels or rags in this and use  for skin ailments, inflamation, and varicose  veins. Or add sugar and drink. Good for  coughs, colds and bronchitis, insomnia,  arthritis, chest constriction, coronary  thrombosis, breast and lung cancer, and  AIDS. (That's what it says in the book,  Herbs, by Lesley Bremness.)  These are some of the most common,  easily identifiable lawn "weeds" and their  uses. You should not use a plant you don't  know because some plants are poisonous.  Get some library books with clear photos  or drawings. Some other books I have used  are Growing and Using the Healing Herbs by  Gaea and Shandler Weiss, and Stalking the  Wild Asparagus by Euell Gibbons. There are  many others.  This article was reprinted from the Winter 1998 issue of Welfare Mothers Voice, a quarterly newspaper by, for and about mothers in  poverty. To subscribe or submit stories, art or  information, contact WMVat 2711 W. Michigan, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, 53208, USA; tel:  (414) 342-6662; fax: (414) 342-6667. Annual  subscriptions rates for Welfare Mothers' Voice  are $4 or whatever you can afford for low-income single mothers; $15 for other individuals; and $25 for organizations.  Adele McCrank is a proud mother of three and  a grandmother of one. ©  BEST  OF THE  ALTERNATIVE  PRESS  Looking for an  adventure in your  magazine reading?  Order a sample copy of the best of  Canada's other press by simply filling  out the request form.  With over 25 years of journalistic  experience, ALTERNATIVES is the most  widely-read environmental journal in  Canada. Thought-provoking articles go  beyond band-aid solutions to consider  concrete alternatives for a wide range of  environmental issues. Look to ALTERNATIVES for reports, opinion pieces, and  reviews of eco-books.  ARTICHOKE is Western Canada's visual  arts magazine and winner of the 1996  Western Magazine of the Year Award for  editorial excellence. Launched in Calgary in  1989, ARTICHOKE sustains a critical  dialogue about visual arts in BC, Alberta,  Saskatchewan, and beyond. Each issue  features reviews, interviews, and profiles  documenting careers, politics and trends.  BRIARPATCH is Canada's award-winning  magazine, providing an alternative view on  issues and event in Canada and the  world. Essential reading for activists  interested in politics, unions, the  environment, women's rights and  international affairs. We publish articles  the mainstream media won't touch.  Principled. Radical. Independent. For over  30 years, CANADIAN DIMENSION has  been a place where activists can debate  issues, share information, recount our  victories, evaluate our strategies for social  change. Our pages are open to all  progressive voices- debate makes the  movement stronger.  And it makes for lively reading!  Insightful, informative, inspiring,  CANADIAN WOMAN STUDIES is an  indispensable resource for the feminist  reader. We publish material that bridges  academia and grassroots activism.  Women's diverse voices from across  Canada are featured in each thematic  issue. Upcoming: Women and Education,  Mothers and Daughters, and a 20th  anniversary issue.  You're going to love HERIZONS, the  Canadian feminist magazine that delivers  the scoop on issues inside the Canadian  women's movement today. The latest legal  rulings affecting women, provocative  interviews, health, new issues and  debates. HERIZONS has it all. Plus satire,  tons of reviews, and plenty of news at a  glance. Join us.  News with an edge from Indian Country  and traditional knowledge from the  source. The award-winning magazine THE  NATION is a bi-monthly that has broken  all the industry's rules. Starting with two  borrowed computers and a $1000 ad, it  has grown into one of the leading voices  of Canada's North.  Economic crisis sweeps Asia. General SOUTHERN AFRICA REPORT- for  strikes challenge the cuts in Ontario. trenchant commentary and perceptive  Unemployed workers demonstrate in Paris. analysis on the latest events in Southern  The world has become a terrain of crisis Africa! SAR has provided 12 years of  and struggle. Every two weeks, SOCIALIST consistently informed analysis on the region's  WORKER analyses this terrain and argues political and economic developments,  for a way to fight back. Published quarterly by writers and activists.  Each issue of SUB-TERRAIN is a  stimulating fusion of fiction, poetry,  commentary and visual art from Canada  and abroad. Voted one of the two "Best  edited-in-Vancouver magazines with few  pictures, lots of good words." - Georgia  Straight, Best of Vancouver 1997.  Publishing a new front-line of writers  since 1988.  Alternative journalism that doesn't flinch.  With THIS MAGAZINE, the recognized  leader in alternative journalism, you get  genuinely fresh takes on Canadian politics,  culture and the arts. You get writing that  takes on neo-con myths with wit,  personality and attitude and award-  winning investigative journalism that the  THE COUNTRY CONNECTION  illuminates country life through heritage,  cultural, artistic, pro-nature and outdoor  themes. Stories, maps and photography  are dedicated to the restoration of natural  ecosystems, the preservation of heritage  buildings, and the nurturing of  lifestyles. A great see-and-do guide for  nature lovers and rural adventurers.  Vegan friendly.  i^iHE^LMfis  ipact  NATURAL LIFE is Canada's alternative  newsmagazine- in print and on the  Internet at <www.life.ca>. Founded in  1976, we are now Canada's widest-  ranging source of information and  inspiration for reinventing how we live...  in our communities and on our planet.  Always honest, always provocative, always  slightly ahead of our time.  Begin your  reading  adventure  here...  WE INTERNATIONAL brings a brand new  face to the 21st century with reviews,  interviews, art, essays and humour.  Independent and 22 years old, WE  (formerly Women and Environment^ is an  eco-feminist quarterly that prides itself on  its world readership and representation,  and ground-breaking research on women's  global and community realities.  FUSE MAGAZINE provides a door to  cutting-edge activities in the art and  cultural communities shaping our world.  Investigating why the work is being  produced, FUSE covers visual art,  performance, film/video, multimedia and  more. One of the only magazines  exploring in depth the political aspects of  art making and the ways art  fits in  Who's being exploited? How should we  live? Who will save the Earth? Find out  what's really going on with NEW  INTERNATIONALIST, a five-time  Alternative Press Award winner. From  endangered species to child labour, each  month Nl takes a radical look at a specific  theme. We examine all the angles to put  you squarely in the picture.  GEIST is home to the Honourary  Canadian Awards, the Trans-Canada  Phrase Book, the Canadian Mall Writing  Competition, the Who the Hell is Peter  Gzowski survey, and the very best in story,  picture, essay, memoir, crossword, toon,  and little-known fact. In print since 1990.  "A publication that is, in this country,  inimitable."- Toronto Star  POV is Canada's cutting-edge magazine  on the culture, politics, art and business of  independent documentary film and  television. POV also covers a diverse range  of work from features and shorts to video  art through lively analysis and timely  criticism. Published three times per year.  :  g   REQUEST  INFORM  • ^^^ To place your order, please:  • 1 / Indicate the magazine(s) you wish to receive.  Alternatives  Can. Woman Studies  Country Connection  Herizons  New Internationalist  S. Africa Report  WE International  Artichoke Briarpatch  Canadian Dimension  Fuse Ceist  Natural Life The Nation  POV Socialist Worker  Sub-Terrain This Magazine  • 2/ Fill out your name and address.  ' 3/ Calculate your payment. The first magazine you request  [ costs $5.00, each additional magazine is $2.50. For example, if  , you order three magazines, your payment would be $5.00 + 2  » x $2.50 = $10.OO. GST is included. Please add IS to MS  ' orders, $10 to International orders. Please make your  t 4/ Mail this form with your payment. Send to: Chaos  , Consulting-BOAP, PO Box 65506, Stn F, Vancouver, BC, V5N  » 5X5. Please allow 4 to 6 weeks for delivery. For inquiries  • only (no orders), e-mail chaos@axionet.com or  J fax:(604)875-1403.  KINESIS Arts  A number of new books written by women come into our offices each week, so Kinesis thought we'd share with you, our readers, a sampling of some of the recently-published fiction and non-fiction titles. If you are interested in reviewing any of the books  listed below for Kinesis, or know of any other exciting titles you would like to review or  that Kinesis should review, please give us a call (604) 255-5499 or drop us a line.  Genealogical response  Stranger: "Where do you come from?"  Me: "Well, I was born in Hamilton. My father, Stephen Brown, was  born in Brantford. My paternal grandfather, Gordon Brown, was born in  Brantford. My great-grandfather, Andrew Brown, was born in Dunville.  My great-great-grandfather, Stephen Brown was born in Fort Erie. His  father escaped across the border to Canada in a buggy..."  Stranger: "Will this take very long?"  Me: "My paternal great grandmother, Agnes Morey, was born in  Bufords. My great-great-grandfather, John Moreywas a free slave who  came from New York. My great-great-grandmother was Elizabeth Brant,  the daughter of Joseph Brant. My great-great-great-grandfather was a  Mohawk Indian born in Ohio. Joseph Brant was also known as  Thayendanega.  My paternal grandmother, Lorna Shelby, was born in Brantford. My  great-grandmother, Irene McCormus, was born in Cayuga. She was of  Irish descent. My great-grandfather, George Selby, was born in Woodstock.  His parents' first names are unknown, but his mother's maiden name  was Peterson..."  Stranger: "That's nice, but..."  Me: "My mother, Cora Lawson, was born in Freement, Saskatchewan. My grandfather, Joseph Lawson, was born in Oklahoma. My greatgrandfather, Sam Lawson, was also born in Oklahoma. My great-grandmother was of Irish descent. My maternal grandmother, Eva Williams,  was born in Toro, Oklahoma. My great-grandmother, Cornelia Reed, was  born in Liberty Hill, Texas. My great-grandfather, Charles Williams, was  born in Moorville, Texas..."  Stranger: "Sorry, I thought you were from the West Indies." (End of  conversation.)  (From "Responses for Resistance" by Joyce Brown in ...but where are  you really from?)  Killing the Black Body: Race, Reproduction, and the Meaning of Liberty, by  Dorothy Roberts. Killing the Black Body is  a powerful and authoritative account of the ongoing assault—both figurative and literal—  waged by the American government and society on the reproductive rights of Black women.  Roberts, a professor of law at Rutgers University, points out that, "...books on racial justice  tend to neglect the subject of reproductive  rights; and books on reproductive freedom tend  to neglect the influence of race." Some examples of the repressive controls on Black women's reproductive freedom Roberts addresses  are: the unsavory association between birth  control champion Margaret Sanger and the  eugenics movement of the 1920s; the coercive  sterilization of Black women under government  welfare programs; and the rendering of reproduction as a crime by prosecuting women who  expose their fetuses to drugs. (Pantheon  Books, New York, 1997.)  "...but where are you really from?"  Stories of Identity and Assimilation in  Canada, anthologized by Hazelle Palmer.  "Where do you really come from?" It's hard to  imagine how so few words can unleash a rush  of mixed emotions. Contributors to this book  respond with defiance, courage and humour  presenting fresh, energetic writing on racism  and cultural identity. Their stories stand as a  testament for us all to challenge our assumptions. (Sister Vision Press, Toronto, 1997.)  Dragon Ladies:  Asian American Feminists Breathe Fire, edited  by Sonia Shah. Asian-  American women writers,  artists and activists draw on  a wealth of personal experience and political analysis to  address issues of immigration, work, health, domestic  violence, sexuality, and the  media. The contributors  seize the power of their  unique political perspective  and cultural backgrounds to  transform the landscape of  race, class and gender in the  United States. (South End  Press, Boston, 1997.)  Coming to Bone, by  Fran Muir, is a collection  of four short stories filled  with acute and vivid  images that move in and  out of the real and hallucinatory world of memory  with an ease and rhythm  that is fresh and compelling. (Exile Editions,  Toronto, 1997.)  Turnip   Blues,   by  Helen Campbell, is an enduring story about  the journey of a lifetime for two 75-year old  women: Mrs. Kuzo and Mrs. Lemack. As the  two drive across Philadelphia to visit the grave  of legendary blues artist Bessie Smith, Mrs.  Kuzo reflects upon her own life's journey,  growing up in a dysfunctional family. The  journey comes to an end in a sprawling West  Philadelphia Victorian mansion and Mrs.  Kuzo arrives at her own destination, learning an important fact that recasts her entire  life. (Spinsters Ink, Duluth, Minnesota,  1998.)  Report for Murder, by Val  McDermid. A self-proclaimed, "cynical socialist lesbian feminist journalist," Lindsay  Gordon is less than overjoyed to find herself  spending a weekend at a posh all-girl boarding school. Originally commissioned to write  a feature article on the school's fundraising  efforts, Lindsay meets best-selling author,  Cordelia Brown and sparks begin to fly. The  two women find their new relationship tested  in unique ways when they find themselves  involved in a murder mystery. Their shifting  relationship intertwines a realistic romance  with a solid detective story. (Spinsters Ink,  Duluth, Minnesota, 1998.)  Don't Explain, by Jewelle Gomez. In  her latest collection of short fiction, Gomez  moves from lesbian life in Boston in the 1960s  to a futuristic fantasy. Characterized by the  her trademark rich, highly sensual language,  Don't Explain takes readers into the complexities of relationships, exploring racial,  class and generational boundaries; the abuse  of children; and the hunger for love and connection. Completely enticing and entertaining, this collection continues to demonstrate  the breadth of Gomez's literary reach. (Firebrand Books, New York, 1998.)  3€  Research has also discovered  dramatic differences in the effects of maternal alcohol  abuse depending on the mother's  socio-economic status. Although all  women in a study drank at the same  rate, the children born to low-income  women had a 70.9 percent rate of fetal alcohol syndrome, compared to a  4.5 percent rate for those of upper-  income women. The main reason for  this disparity was the pregnant women's nutrition.  (From Killing the Black Body)  Love Ruins Everything by Karen  X. Tulchinsky. Nomi Rabinovitch has been  dumped—utterly unceremoniously—by  her girlfriend Sapphire (and for a man, no  less!) Heartbroken, angry and vengeful, she  wraps herself up in her friend Betty's quilt  and wallows on the couch watching Moonstruck night after night. She cries, broods,  plots her revenge and, finally, swears off love  forever. Love Ruins Everything,  Tulchinsky's first novel, is filled with romance, family relations, humour and political intrigue. (Press Gang Publishers, Vancouver, 1998.) Arts  IDWIFERY  R e-fCc C t i o n S   o n    fi e n a i s S a n c  n n (/  R e q u (a t i o n  FARAH  M. SHROFF  3€  The New Midwifery: Reflections  on Renaissance and  Regulation, edited  by Farah M. Shroff, offers a critical perspective on women's reproductive health and midwifery issues. This inclusive collection of essays examines the impact of professional-  ization, legalization and  state involvement on  women-centred care  and implications for  birthing women. One  question which Shroff  says resonates through  many of the essays is:  "how is the experiment  with state regulation  going?" Most of the  contributors are either  midwives or social scientists working in the  health field. (Women's  Press, Toronto, 1997.)  The Wolf Ticket, by  Caro Clarke, is a novel  about two women—an  American translator and  a refugee—thrown together by chance. Torn apart by the destruction  in wartime Europe, they struggle to find each  other again across a chaotic continent. Their attempts to reunite introduces a myriad of memorable female characters who help or hinder them.  A novel of great skill and imagination, Clarke  covers the trials of survival during World War  II and the power of female relationships. (Firebrand Books. New York. 1998.)  I call my mother on the telephone long distance. "Mom," I say when  she answers, "what's our family heredity on hot flashes?"  "Terrible!" responds my mom. "Your grandmother had them until  the day she died, and I still have two or three a week myself." Mom is  seventy-three.  "Oh, great," I mumble. "Thanks, Mom. I love you."  (From Merril Mushroom's "My Life as a Volcano" inThe Lesbian Health  Book.)  Roberts' Rules of Lesbian Dating,  by Shelly Roberts, is a handy little guide  leading the way through that eternal source  of hope and anticipation, confusion and perplexity: the intricate maze of lesbian coupling-  Roberts' wit and wisdom concerning lesbian  dating runs the gamut from the finer points  of dating etiquette to dating advice to dating  truisms. Whether the reader has been out and  about for ten minutes or ten years, Roberts'  rules will help her navigate the peculiarities  of lesbian dating in her effort to attain what  every ardent dyke seeks: the ideal lesbian relationship. (Spinsters Ink, Duluth, Minnesota, 1998.)  The Indelible Alison Bechdel: Confessions, Comix, and Miscellaneous  Dykes to Watch Out For is a hair-raising  autobiographical tale of the cartoon chronicler  exlraodinaire, who for over fifteen years keeps  bringing readers deeper and deeper into the lives  of Lois, Jezanna, Clarice, Toni Ginger, Sparrow,  and of course, Mo. Real-life cartoon scripts, collaborative work with other cartoonists, cartoons  not included in the ongoing strip, old faves from  the calendars, and much, much more takes readers behind the pen and into the psyche of  lesbiana's most quick-witted and incisive social  commentator. Bechdel has produced seven  "Dykes to Watch Out For" collections, and her  strips are syndicated in over fifty US and Canadian publications. (Firebrand Books, New  York, 1998.)  1 Mill II II  ourse /es  TIIE  LESBIAN  HEALTH  BOOK  The Lesbian Health Book: Caring for  Ourselves, edited by Jocelyn White and  Marissa C. Martinez, is a comprehensive health  book for lesbians. The book brings together a wide  range of voices from the lesbian community—  doctors, health care providers, women facing illness and other life changes, and many others.  Some of the subject areas covered are chronic fatigue syndrome, menopause, AIDS, breast surgery, multiple sclerosis, lesbian health research,  and homophobia in the liealth care system. The  Lesbian Health Book highlights personal and  community efforts in the US to make health care  accessible and responsive to lesbians. (Seal Press,  Seattle, 1997.)  lJ till, this vision of a radical Asian women's movement has already  begun to take shape. It begins when a young Asian American learns of  Yuri Kochiyama's activism and tells me, "just to hear about her is a  total inspiration," and counts the days until she not only meets Yuri  Kochiyama but is involved in political actions at her side. It begins  with an APLB member marching at Gay Pride with a sign that reads,  "Gay white soldiers in Asia? Not my Liberation!" and ends with the  absence of all soldiers, gay and straight, from my imperialist army..It  begins here, with all our joy and pain in politics and identity, and carries us to the day when Asian American women agree that action is  vital in a grassroots political movement for sweeping social change.  (From "Strategies from the Field: Organizing the Asian-American  Feminist Movement" by Juliana Pegues in Dragon Ladies)  Western Canada's  Lesbian & Gay  Bookstore  Open Daily 10am to 1 lpm  Our Books/Our Issues  Gay Fiction  Lesbian Fiction  Our Magazines & Journals  AIDS/Health  Humour  Erotica  Little Sister's Book & Art Emporium  1238 Davie Street,Vancouver,B.C,V6E 1N4  (604)669-1753 Phone Orders 1-800-567-1662  Internet Address: http://www.lsisters.com  Queer Theory  Feminist Theory  Biographies, Essays, Poetry  Religion & Spirituality  Art & Photography  Community  Carol Weaver  Graphic Design & Illustration  (604)939-0776  WOMEN  IN  PRINT  BOOKS a OTHER MEDIA  Discounts jot  book clubs  3566 West 4th Avenue  4  Special orders  Voice   604 732-1128  welcome  lax        604 732-1129  10-6 Daily •   12-5 Sunday  «ffiii»MEi  A Beautiful Place  5 acres of forested foot paths with  ponds, ocean and mountain views.  Healthy Breakfasts  Hot Tub & Sauna  HS2H  1207 Beddis Road, Salt Spring Island, BC V8K 2C8 Arts  Women, addiction and healing:  Recovery uncovery  discovery  by Dawn Livingstone  MANY ROADS, ONE JOURNEY:  Moving Beyond The 12 Steps  by Charlotte Davis Kasl  HarperCollins, New York, 1992  Charlotte Kasl, an internationally recognized expert in the field of addiction, has  written a new understanding of recovery  with her popular book, Many Roads, One  Journey. [Ed note: Although Kasl's book was  published six years ago, Kinesis is publishing  a review of it at this time because it is an important resource and many women are likely  unaware of its existence.] While not afraid to  confront the traditional Alcoholics Anonymous 12-step mystique, her main focus is  to offer another choice, one that utilizes a  wholistic approach to help augment a  healthy integration of empowerment.  Kasl's solutions to addiction bring together  love, flexibility, creativity, inner wisdom,  unconditional support, and the elimination  of labels.  When reading Kasl's groundbreaking  book, it becomes clear that she has a thorough knowledge of the many addictions  women deal with, including: drugs, sex, alcohol, eating, shopping, smoking, relationships, gambling, spending, working,  codependency chronic medication, bad habits, and compulsive behaviour. All these, by  definition, are usually unmanageable, out of  control, harmful and escalating.  Kasl's previously published book was  Women, Sex and Addiction. In her writings,  counselling, workshops, and lectures, Kasl  draws on her own experiences with addiction and with various recovery programs.  Kasl concludes that since addiction encompasses a vast complexity of causes and  concerns, it is important to have a treatment  program that is wholistic and "open to the  notion of multiple addictions and addiction as symptomatic of deeper problems."  In other words an one-door policy.  This new empowerment model of  healing is especially advantageous for  women, people of colour, Aboriginal people, poor people, and other marginalized  groups of people, as it emphasizes effects  of internalized oppression. In fact, Kasl acknowledges that Many Roads, One Journey  is "essentially positioned from the perspective of women and minorities, for it is their  reality which has so often been omitted in  approaches to overcoming addiction and  dependency."  Where other programs sometimes reinforce social inequalities, Kasl's 16-step  complimentary program offers solutions to  Charlotte Davis Kasl  power imbalances and to the many problems women face by virtue of just being  women in today's society. Since addiction  and dependency are often rooted in societal  problems, it is important for women to activate an internal sense of power aligned  with their heart and wisdom. Besides, it is  time to change patriarchy as a religion!  There are many roads to recovery and  personal growth, but Kasl warns that some  organizations and programs perpetuate the  status quo of privileged white male dominance, pressured conformity, and moralistic values based on shame and guilt. In  other words, they are still sexist, threatened  by change, and do not promote diversity,  internal wisdom or a social conscience.  Based on her vast research, personal  quest, interviews, and experience as a therapist, Kasl also clearly demonstrates the links  between addictive behaviours and abuse,  dysfunctional families, incest, homophobia,  the 'isms,' poverty, and living in a patriarchal society. Her 16-step solution is a timely  in-depth alternative for finding your own  voice, social consciousness, strength and  spirituality. This broader approach can heal  the individual and the world!  For Kasl, true healing occurs through  love and validation, not fear, humiliation  or shame. She offers a deeper level to the  "recovery, uncovery, discovery" journey,  hoping to achieve and maintain a higher  quality of life. Don't we all deserve that?  In Vancouver, a number of groups have  adopted Kasl's approach. The Watari Research Association, a non-profit society that  provides a range of services to high-risk  adolescents and their families, believes in  Kasl's 16 steps for empowerment. They  have just completed facilitating their third  group and self-care workshop. Candace  Plattor, an addictions counsellor at Watari,  claims Kasl's workbook, Yes, You Can! A  Guidebook to Empowerment Groups, says it  all: the steps are real, affirming, positive,  bonding, healing, and offer solutions for  everyone. Plattor went on to say, "doing the  steps is very validating, which can help a  person find a way out of isolation."  Charlotte Kasl's 16 steps:  1 .We affirm we have the power  to take charge of our lives and stop  being dependent on substances or  other people for our self-esteem  and security.  2. We come to believe that God/  the Goddess/Universe/Great Spirit/  Higher Power awakens the healing  wisdom within us when we open  ourselves to that power.  3. We make a decision to  become our authentic Selves and  trust in the healing power of truth.  4. We examine our beliefs,  addictions, and dependent  behaviour in the context of living in  a hierarchical patriarchal culture.  5.We share with another person  and the Universe all those things  inside of us for which we feel shame  and guilt.  6. We affirm and enjoy our  strengths, talents, and creativity,  striving not to hide these qualities  to protect others'egos.  7. We become willing to let go  of shame, guilt, and any behaviour  that keeps us from loving ourselves  and others.  8. We make a list of people we  have harmed and people who have  harmed us, and take steps to clear  our negative energy by making  amends and sharing grievances in  a respectful way.  9. We express love and  gratitude to others, and  increasingly appreciate the wonder  of life and the blessings we do  have.  10. We continue to trust our  reality and daily affirm that we see  what we see, we know what we  know, and we feel what we feel.  11 .We promptly acknowledge  our mistakes and make amends  when appropriate, but we do not  say we're sorry for things we have  not done and we do not cover up,  analyze, or take responsibility for  the shortcomings of others.  12. We seek out situations, jobs,  and people that affirm our  intelligence, perceptions, and self-  worth and avoid situations or  people who are hurtful, harmful, or  demeaning to us.  13. We take steps to heal our  physical bodies, organize our lives,  reduce stress, and have fun.  14. We seek to find our inward  calling, and develop the will and  wisdom to follow it.  15. We accept the ups and  downs of life as natural events that  can be used as lessons for our  growth.  16. We grow in awareness that  we are interrelated with all living  things, and we contribute to  restoring peace and balance on the  planet.  Patti Bosomworth, facilitator of the  woman's empowerment group at Watari,  adds that, "a person gets to the core of an  issue or problem, and through a process of  sharing, self-healing and support they can  find the courage to be real, grow and feel."  Both facilitators agree that by working  through the 16 steps, a person's life can be  profoundly changed through finding their  own power.  Sixteen-step programs are forming all  over North America. All anyone needs to  begin are Kasl's books, a meeting place, and  possibly some herbal tea! In British Columbia, the Aurora Centre, a residential treatment program for women who are chemially  dependent, operating out of the BC Women's Health Centre, holds open meetings  every Saturday from 10:30am to noon.  Other groups have begun in North  Vancouver, Kelowna and Victoria. Check  your local paper to see if a group has  started in your area. If not, begin a group  for empowerment and continuing health.  For further information about Charlotte Kasl's  work, write to her at: Many Roads One Journey,  Box 1302, Lob, Montana, 59847, USA.  Dawn Livingstone has done extensive group  work, and knows Charlotte Kasl's model  works. She has been an activist all her life,  and says that she's aging nicely. Letters  dear   readers  Kinesis loves receiving mail. Please  get your letter to us by the 18th of  the month.  If you can, keep the length to about  500 words. (If you go way over, we  might edit for space.)  Hope to hear from you very soon.  Love,  Kinesis  Apples are not oranges  Dear Kinesis:  Thank you, thank you for the article  in the March edition of Kinesis about  keeping women's spaces for women.  I was most relieved to see that other  feminists are frustrated with the  transgendered male to female [MTF]  folk gaining access to women's spaces.  I can be sympathetic towards  someone who feels uncomfortable with  his body—what woman has not had  (long) moments of discomfort with her  physical self? I can be sympathetic  towards a man who is uncomfortable  with standards of male behaviour. These  men need respect, safety and a place to  explore their ideas and feelings. It  should not be a woman space.  There are some folks who believe that  transgendered people undergoing a 'sex  change' from male to female are women.  I am not one of these folks. I think these  fellows are attempting an individual  personal solution to what is a much  larger political problem—restrictive  gender roles to which we are expected  to conform. I know that these people are  victims of harassment, threats and  violence because of their choices and I  find that reprehensible. I can disagree  with someone's decisions about their  fives, but I must treat them with respect.  I maintain that M-F transgendered  people are essentially men in extreme drag,  and should organize their own space.  Alix Dobkin once said," You can paint  an orange red, and shoot it up with  apple juice, and it may not be a proper  orange, but it's not an apple." (From a  letter to off our backs, Dec 1992.)  The argument is often made that  barring transgendered people from  women-only events, is like barring  people of colour from clubs or events.  This is a flawed analogy as MTF  transgendered people come from a  position of male privilege.  Coming from a privileged group into  an oppressed group, [claimed to be] a  member of the oppressed group, is a lie.  It is an invasion. It is harassment.  I am of European descent. I would  not attempt to gain entry to a gathering  of women of colour. I may be  uncomfortable about my racism that  makes such gatherings necessary;  I may question my unearned privilege,  and the attendant power. I may  examine my own behaviour and  attitudes. I think racism and sexism are  different fish in the same tank. I wish  all men would do the same in response  to women-only gatherings.  Once, when I expressed my  discomfort (to another women) overthe  presence of a man (a self-defined  transgendered person) in a women-  only space, she replied that though he  was behaving more like a caricature of  a woman, we could teach him how to  behave like a woman. It is not my job  to "teach" a man how to be a woman.  I have enough to do. Women have  enough to do.  I encourage men to question their  [gender] roles, talk with one another,  and change these expected roles of  male behaviour. If some men want to  experiment with typically feminine  ways of dress and behaviour, that's  fine with me. Although, as I said  before, there are elements of  appropriation in that strategy that  bears rigorous inquiry.  I want men to question what is  means to be male, to examine the  concepts of masculine and feminine,  and to challenge and encourage one  another in these examinations.  Don't do it in women only spaces, that's  all. Help one another. But don't obstruct  our work with and for other women.  This is a difficult issue for all of us,  and those of us who have dissenting  views are often insulted or threatened  by "formerly fellows" and their allies.  That shuts down debate and makes  finding solutions that much more  difficult. Thank you Kinesis, and thank  you, Virginia, Jeanne, Maria, and Clara,  for sharing your ideas, feelings and  analysis of this difficult and divisive  issue.  In sisterhood,  Erin Graham  Vancouver, BC  Article is transphobic  Dear Kinesis:  "The Struggle," published in the  March 1998 issue of Kinesis.  By being part of the women's  movement, I learned of the endless  variations in the relationships between  sex, gender and sexuality. In my case,  I realized that I could sexually want a  woman while being female and being  femme; that when I live against the  grain of social expectation, refusing to  conform to rigid mainstream  perception of "white, middle class,  femininity" (read het/submissive/  female), I am infused with the courage  to fight against structural hatred—like  sexism, classism and transphobia.  Given that the sex/sexuality/gender  conflation is a powerful tool used to  control women and [other] targeted  groups, why do so many in the  women's movement perceive  transgendered people as a threat,  rather than allies?  In the Kinesis article, trans women  became the ultimate bio-boy patriarch:  socialized for intrusion and violence,  using their male privilege to drain the  so-called woman-born-woman of their  strength. (How can these women be so  sure they were born with cunts?) The  trans movement has become the  scapegoat for all the ills of feminism,  causing chaos in women's  organizations everywhere.  What a bunch of transphobic  bullshit. The article reads like the  Christian Right of the FMS [false  memory syndrome] movement's  appropriation of feminist arguments.  The women in this article not only  minimized the reality of trans people's  experiences of erasure, violence and  poverty, but also continued the history  of shaming and condemning people  who break the rules. This reminds me  of the lesbian community's response  when satanic ritual abuse and  multiplicity were raised at the  Vancouver Lesbian Connection—  everyone so busy defending their piece  of the pie, they couldn't hear that we  needed a change of flavour.  Why would Kinesis, newspaper  committed to the struggle against all  social injustice, publish an article  rooted in hatred and disrespect? Does  Kinesis also believe that transphobia  does not exist?  I would like to know how Kinesis  believes FTMs [female to male  transgendered people] fit into this so-  called women-only space. After all, they  were socialized to be women, and how  many years does it take to be a man  (sic)? It seems the women's movement  needs to learn that we do not have a  monopoly on vulnerability and that we  too can use our power abusively.  I want to be clear. I have not been  silenced by guilt as Jeanne D'Arc  would have me believe. While I want  woman raised-only space around  issues such as child sexual abuse, I also  want to integrate into my politics the  commonalities between my  experiences as a white-skinned, middle  class rural raised, femme dyke, and  those of trans women, men) and people.  I believe that the women's movement  will be enriched by the inclusion of  trans people, and we will learn in a  new way the strength that comes from  living through contradiction.  Kinesis should apologize for  publishing hate literature, and take  responsibility by allowing a rebuttal.  Sincerely,  Juli Macdonnell  Vancouver, BC  Discussion, not  divisiveness. Please.  Dear Kinesis:  I admire the way Kinesis presents  news in a feminist context and explores  women's realities—not only printing  what mainstream newspapers ignore,  but also backing everything up with  the facts and contextual information  that newspapers of the Right so  glaringly lack.  However, the feature article, "The  struggle for women-only spaces," does  not live up to this standard.  Addressing the numerous unfounded  assertions contained in this discussion  could run to feature length, so I will  only mention a few of the things that  upset me:  1) transgendered women are  characterized as men, jealous of  women, and driven to assert their male  privilege in a new forum, while  transgendered men are depicted as  frustrated young women who would  ruin their health in pursuit of fashion  and an easy road to equality;  2) "pro-inclusion" women are  dismissed as naive, confused, or part  of the anti-feminist backlash;  3) the transgendered movement is  linked to two women-hating movements:  the false memory syndrome lobby and  fathers' rights groups;  4) bisexual and transgendered  people are relegated to the periphery  of queer community.  As a lesbian and a feminist who  identifies with the queer community, I  want to hear discussion of how we  create our communities in the face of  changes occurring in society. These  issues can be discussed without hatred,  and without promoting the  divisiveness that saps our energy and  distracts us from the work of  promoting equality for women and all  oppressed people.  Sincerely,  Teresa McCarthy  Vancouver, BC Bulletin Board  read   this!     INVOLVEMENT INVOLVEMENT  EVENTS  Bulletin Board listings have a  maximum of 50 words. Groups,  organizations and individuals eligible  for free space in the Bulletin Board  must be, or have, non-profit  objectives.  Other free notices will be items of  general public interest and will  appear at the discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $8 (+$0.56 GST) for  the first 50 words or portion thereof,  $4 (+$0.28 GST) for each additional  25 words or portion thereof and must  be prepaid.  Deadline for all submissions is  the 16th of the month preceding  publication. Note: Kinesis is  published ten times a year. Jul/Aug  and Dec/Jan are double issues.  All submissions should include a  contact name and telephone number  for any clarification that may be  required.  Listings will not be accepted over the  telephone.  Kinesis encourages readers to  research the goods and services  advertised in Bulletin Board. Kinesis  cannot guarantee the accuracy of the  information provided or the safety  and effectiveness of the services and  products listed.  Send submissions to Bulletin Board,  Kinesis, #309-877 E. Hastings Street,  Vancouver, BC, V6A 3Y1, fax: (604)  255-5511, e-mail: kinesis@web.net  For more information call (604) 255-  5499.  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis? We want to get involved with  you too. Help plan our next issue. All  women interested in what goes into  Kinesis—whether it's news, features or  arts—are invited to one of our next Story  Meetings: Tues May 5 and Tues June 2 at  7pm at our office, 309-877 E. Hastings St.  For more information or if you can't make  the meeting, but still want to find out about  contributing to Kinesis, give Agnes a call at  (604) 255-5499. New and experienced  writers welcome. Childcare and travel  subsidies available.  CALLING ALL VOLUNTEERS  Are you interested in finding out how  Kinesis is put together? Well...just drop by  during our next production dates and help  us design and lay out Canada's national  feminist newspaper. Production for the  June 1998 issue is from May 19-26. No  experience is necessary. Training and  support will be provided. If this notice  intrigues you, call us at (604) 255-5499.  Childcare and travel subsidies available.  VSW IS LOOKING FOR YOU!  If you are interested in learning to do  referral and peer counselling work, at VSW  we are offering a great opportunity to  women who are interested in volunteer  work during the day. Come answer the  phone lines and talk to women who drop in  and help connect them with the community  resources they need. For more information  call Ema or Agnes at 255-6554. Childcare  and travel subsidies available.   RESOURCE LIBRARIAN NEEDED  If you have knowledge of organizing and  maintaining a Resource Centre and want  to hang out with great group of women,  VSW is the perfect place for you. VSW is  looking for women to help make our  resources more accessible and user-  friendly to women. For more information  call Ema or Agnes at 255-6554. Childcare  and travel subsidies available.  HEATHER SPEARS  Artist and writer Heather Spears will read  from her latest collection The Panum  Poems Tues May 5, 7:30pm at Women in  Print, 3566 West 4th Ave, Vancouver.  Spears has received the Governor General's Award and the CBC Literary Prize for  her poetry, and is a two-time winner of the  Pat Lowther Award. Admission is free. For  more info call 732-4128.   SONJA ARNTZEN  Sonja Arntzen, a professor of Japanese  literature at the University of Alberta, will  read from her recently published translation of the 10th Century Kagero DiaryTues  May 19, 7:30pm at Women in Print, 3566  West 4th Ave, Vancouver. Through the  lyrical prose and poetry of this text, the  reader enters into the intimate life of a  Japanese woman of 1000 years ago.  Admission is free.  For more info call 732-4128.   MARY MEIGS  Author of several works of autobiographical  fiction, Mary Meigs is also well known for  her role in the NFB semi-documentary film  The Company of Strangers. Meigs will be  in Vancouver to read from her most recent  novel The Time Being, Wed May 27,  7:30pm at Women in Print, 3566 West 4th  Ave. Meigs' novel is the story of two old  women rekindling innocent passion. Free  admission. For more info call 732-4128.  ftt/M / Oa/ 0W&- -73 &a/£$/£ I  Employers and employees!  Avoid problems in future by  having responsible hiring,  dismissal, harrassment and  human rights policies.  Mediation is a way of  finding solutions to conflict  which preserve rights,  dignity and the future  ability to work together.  MUNRO* PARFITT  MELINDA MUNRO  MEDIATOR/LAWYER  LAWYE RS  401-825 granville street,  Vancouver, b.c. v6z 1k9  689-7778(ph)     689-5572 (fax)  quality legal services  woman friendly atmosphere  401-825 granville street,  Vancouver, b.c. v6z 1 k9  689-7778(ph)     689-5572 (fax)  seeking peaceful solutions  which respect difference,  equality and justice  labour/employment, human rights,  civil litigation and  public interest advocacy.  labour/employment, human rights,  civil disputes and conflicts within  community organizations.  PROUDLY ANNOUNCING  the Opening of  DR. PENNY THOMPSON'S  DENTAL PRACTICE  Dentistry in the Heart of the Community  Phone:251-1322 Fax:251-1232       ^BPe^Jl  Call U$ ... Be a Special Patient           yjpS)  Or drop by at 1 - 1701 Grant Street (at Commercial Drive), Vancouver  Advertisement paid by Dr. Penny J. Thompson, Inc.  Ferron  in concert  with Jami Sieber • cellist  Friday  May 15  Norman Rothstein Theatre  Jewish Community Centre  41st & Oak  8pm  advance  $18-$22  lJ  sliding scale at  Urban Empire &  Women in Print  $25 at door  (if still available)  Sounds    juries  iDUCTIONS  253-7189  S&F upcoming events:  Saturday May 9  Women's Arts & Crafts Faire • Heritage Hall @ 3102 Main Street  10AM - 5PM • $1 - $3 door donation to benefit the Mole Hill Living Heritage Society  Friday May 29  3rd Women's Journey to Ireland (April 22 - May 6, 1999)  Slide show & talk with archeologist Mod O'Donnell of Mystical Ireland for Women  Vancouver Cultural Alliance • 938 Howe Street • 8 pm • $2 Bulletin Board  GROUPS  GROUPS  SUBMISSIONS SUBMISSIONS  DYKEWORDS  Dykewords is an evening ot readings by  local writers held at the Lotus, 455 Abort  St, Vancouver. Thurs Apr 30 features  readings by Lydia Kwa, Russel Baskin and  Louie Ettling. Thurs May 14 features  readings by Margarita Miniovich, Susan  Holbrook and Anna Nobile. Thurs May 28  is in honour of Asian Heritage Month and  will feature readings by Ming Dinh, Sook C.  Kong, Rita Wong, Lily Shinde, Michele  Wong and Veena Gokhale. All readings  begin at 9pm. Admission is sliding scale  $1-4. Tickets at the door. Everyone welcome. For more info call 685-7777.  FILIPINO YOUTH FORUM  Ugnayan ng Kabataang Pilipino sa  Canada/Filipino-Canadian Youth Alliance  presents a one day gathering for Filipino-  Canadian youth and students to deepen  their knowledge of Philippine history, its  people and their struggles Sat May 23. The  forum, Reclaiming our Past, Shaping our  Future, takes place from 9am-6:30pm at  the Kalayaan Centre, 451 Powell 3t,  Vancouver. For more information and to  register, contact May or Sean at 215-1103.  FESTIVAL FOR YOUNG ADULTS  X-Site, the first annual Vancouver arts  festival for young adults, will be held May  25-May 31. The event is held at the  Vancouver East Cultural Centre, 1895  Venables St. X-Site will feature Autopsy, a  play by Australia's Arena Theatre Company  developed from interviews with young  people about the struggle between  technoscience and humanity. Other  featured events include Margo Kane  performing Moonlodge, which takes a look  at the superficiality of pop culture and the  stereotypical images that surround Native  peoples. Tickets available at Ticketmaster.  For more info call 687-7697.  PLAY DAY FOR WOMEN  Play Day For Women will be held on Sat  May 2 from 10am-4pm at Simon Fraser  Village Recreation Centre, 3290 Ganymede  Dr, Burnaby. Come play with paint, collage,  sing, dance and tell stories in an atmosphere of fun and frivolity. Hosted by Barbara  Karmazyn of Arts Play Creative Development Services. Admission is free. For more  info or to register call 421-6200.  MICHIGAN WOMYN'S FEST  The Michigan's Womyn's Festival will be  celebrating its 23rd year during the week of  Aug 11-16. This fest attracts thousands of  women for a week-long event that includes  40 performances, 200 workshops, a Film  Festival, Crafts Faire and 650 secluded  areas for camping. Artists scheduled to  appear this year include: Sweet Honey in  The Rock, Indigo Girls, Alice Walker,  Ferron, Ubaka Hill, Kinnie Starr, Carole  Pope, Rhiannon, and others. For further  info write to WWTMC, PO Box 22,  Walhalla, Ml, 49458, or call (616) 757-4766  WOMEN'S BUILDING SYMPOSIUM  The 3rd Women's Natural Building Symposium and Hands-On Extravaganza will be  held solstice time, Jun 15-22, near Seattle,  Washington. All women interested in  creating healthy healing homes and sacred  spaces are invited to come co-create  magical natural buildings out of earth,  straw and wood, make a living-fence,  plasters, thatching, and passive solar  design. Tuition is sliding scale US$250-350.  For more info write to: PragtreeAA/AIL Farm,  13401 184th St NE, Arlington, WA, 98223;  call (360) 403-0185; or check out their  website at http://www.cpros.com/~sequoia  CITYFEST'98  CityFest '98 will be held this year from May  15-17 at the King Edward Campus of the  Vancouver Community College, 1155, E.  Broadway, Vancouver. The fifth annual free  performing arts festival is expected to  highlight the work of about 1,000 performers.  Among the artists showcasing their talents  this year will be Colleen Jones, singing Irish  and Canadian acappella songs; Resin, a  folk groove trio-vocals, violin and cellc—from  Bowen Island; folk singer Starchild; and  Schaandra Krown with her fire spinning and  breathing. For a full schedule of events or  more info call 526-2804.  SINGLE MOM'S DAY  The Vancouver Status of Women and the  Downtown Eastside Women's Centre are  putting out a call for volunteers to help with  the annual Single Mother's Day event on  Sun May 10. Women are needed to help  with set up, childcare, face-painting,  serving refreshments, carrying out the  games for kids, and so on. The celebration  will take place from 1-5pm at Solheim  Place, 255 Union St. [See page 23 for full  details of the event] Women interested in  volunteering, please call Colleen or Ema at  VSW, 255-6554.   INDIAN HOMEMAKERS  The Indian Homemakers Association of BC is  looking for volunteers for various tasks such as  answering phones, food bank pick-ups and  fundraising. Volunteers will receive on the job  training. For more info call 876-0944 or drop by  I HA at 208-175 E. Broadway, Vancouver.  COMPULSIVE EATING  A drop-in support group for women who  compulsively eat held every 1 st and 3rd  Thursday of each month from 7:30-9pm.  The group meets at the Eating Disorder  Resource Centre of BC, St. Paul's Hospital,  2nd Floor, Rm 2C-213, 1081 Burrard St,  Vancouver. Admission is free. For more info  call 631-5313.  TRADITIONAL PARENTING SKILLS  The Indian Homemakers Association in  Vancouver is starting the next session of its  Traditional Parenting Skills Program Mon  May 11. Interviews will be held May 4-8.  The program runs for 12 weeks, Mon-Fri  9:30am-2:30pm. This program welcomes  First Nations women and is meant to  empower and strengthen women's  parenting skills through wholistic teachings.  The program will focus on the areas of  personal development, life skills, parenting  skills and cultural awareness. IHA is  accepting applications until Fri May 15. For  more info call Ellen Antoine at 876-0944.  PWN BOARD  The Positive Women's Network in Vancouver is looking for new board members to  serve a two year term beginning June  1998. PWN supports women living with  HIV/AIDS to make their own choices by  providing safe access to services and  resources. For more info call Margreth  Tolson at 681-2122, local 229 or Diana  Peabody at 875-3782.   LESBIANS OVER 30 SOCIAL  The Over 30's Social Group meets every  2nd Saturday at 5:30pm for a potluck at the  Vancouver Lesbian Connection, 876  Commercial Dr. For more info call 254-8458.  SHAKTI-STRENGTH  Shakti "strength" is a self-help group for  South Asian Indo-Canadian Women who  have experienced the psychiatric system.  The group meets every 1st and 3rd  Tuesdays of the month from 7-9pm at  South Vancouver Neighbourhood House  6470 Victoria Dr. Admission is free. For  more info call Helen (in English) at 733-  5570 or Jito (in Punjabi) 590-8212.  ASIAN HERITAGE MONTH  This May marks the second annual Asian Heritage  Month in Vancouver. Through art exhibits, literary  readings, film, video, dance, music, workshops and  discussions, organizers say they hope to continue  forging artistic and social links between individuals and  communities, while raising the awareness and visibility  of Asian arts and cultures in Vancouver.  For a full listing of events, pick up the AHM calendar  program from around Vancouver, or visit AHM's website  at http://www.shinnova.com/asianheritagemonth/.  Some of the events highlighting the voices and creative  talents of women are:  TELEVISION PREMIERES  Friday May 1,6pm and Saturday May 2,1am  My America...Or Honk If You Love Buddha, Renee  Tajima-Pena is an exploration of how the racial and  cultural landscape of America has changed since when,  during a childhood vacation, she and her family crossed  five state lines without ever seeing another Asian face,  will be premiered on PBS.  Thursday May 7, noon, 7pm and 11pm  The National Film Board documentary, Under the Willow  Tree: Pioneer Chinese Women in Canada will be aired  on the History Channel. Directed by Dora Nipp, the  documentary unfolds through the the stories of the first  Chinese women to come to Canada and of subsequent  generations of Chinese Canadian women.  VIDEO SCREENING  Saturday May 16, 9:30pm  All You Can Eat! is a night of recently produced videos by  Asian-Canadian women and men taking place at the  Video In Studios, 1965 Main St. Featured videos include  Open Mouth Laughs, Karen Ke^rs glimpse at the simple  pleasures of Chinese heritage, and Looking For Another  Girl, a tongue-in-cheek video on lesbian love by Meena  Nanji and Jane Cottis. Tickets are $5-12.  LITERARY EVENTS  Saturday May 2, 7:30pm  The opening night of the Asian Heritage Month literary  reading series will feature the works of Jen Lam, a  Vancouver-born spoken word performer and author of  Serial Cockroach. The event will take place at the  Western Front, 303 East 8th Ave.  The readings listed below will all take place at The  Grind & Gallery Coffee Bar, 4124 Main St. starting at  7:30pm:  Sunday May 3  Readings by highly acclaimed writer Evelyn Lau,  whose most recent book is Ofher Woman; Nancy Lee,  whose writing has been published in Grain Magazine  and Writer's World, Doretta Lau, an English and  Creative Writing student at UBC; and Craig Takeuchi.  Saturday May 9  Readings by Lydia Kwa, author of the collection of  poetry, The Colour of Heroines, Gaik Khoo, a  doctoral student in Malaysian literature and film at  UBC; Fiona Tinwei Lam, whose poetry has been  published in numerous journals and has been  included in the forthcoming anthology A Room at the  Heart of Things; and Goh Poh Seng.  Saturday May 16  Readings by Larissa Lai, author of When Fox is a  Thousand and currently Writer-in-Residence at the  University of Calgary; Hiromi Goto, author of Chorus  of Mushrooms, Terrie Hamazaki, writer and performer of the play Furusato; and Rita Wong, whose  writings have been featured in several journals  including absinthe, Fireweed, and Tessera.  Saturday May 24  Readings by writer, teacher and storyteller Judy  Fong Bates, who will be in Vancouver to launch her  new collection of short stories, China Dog and Other  Tales from a Chinese Laundry, Jen Lam; Paolo  Javier; and David Michael Kwan  Saturday May 30, 7:20pm  Readings by SKY Lee, author of Bellydancer and  Disappearing Moon Cafe; lanne Sison, a Filipina  writer currently pursuing degrees in English and  Creative Writing at UBC; Virginia Chan, a student of  Latin and Creative Writing at UBC; and Henny Choi. Bulletin Board  SUBMISSIONS  MARION PORTER PRIZE  The Canadian Research Institute for the  Advancement of Women (CRIAW) invites  nominations for the Marion Porter Prize, to  be awarded for the most significant feminist  research article from a journal or an  anthology published between July 1997  and August 1998. The criteria used to judge  articles will be the importance of the issue  addressed to women, the originality of the  theme, and the article's academic excellence. For more info contact the Chairperson, Awards Committee, c/o CRIAW, Suite  408, 151 Slater St., Ottawa, ON, K1P 5H3;  tel: (613) 563-0681; fax: (613) 563-0682;  TDD/ATS: (613) 563-1921; e-mail:  criaw@sympatico.ca. Nominations must  be received by Aug 31.  TESTIMONIES OF FAITH  Women's Press in Toronto is seeking personal  essays on experiences with organized religion  from Canadian lesbians of color and African-  American lesbians to be published in Testimonies of Faith, Testimonies of Difference: An  Anthology of Lesbians of Color and Their  Religious Experiences. Essays should be  typed, double spaced with one-inch margins,  and be no more than 20 pages. American  essays should be mailed to L.K. Barnett, 1  Mead Way Bronxville, NY, 10708. Canadian  essays should be mailed to Rosamund Elwin c/  o Women's Press Suite 302, 517 College St.,  Toronto, ON, M6G 4A2. Women's Press is  particularly interested in submissions from  disabled women and welcomes taped inter-  views. Deadline is Sep 1.   CRIAW RESEARCH GRANTS  The Canadian Research Institute for the  Advancement of Women (CRIAW) offers  annual grants of $2,500 for projects that  promote the advancement of women. The  research can be the subject of a proposal that  is complete in itself, part of a larger study, in its  initial stages, or an on-going project. The  project must make a significant contribution to  feminist research and be non-sexist in methodology and language. Priority will be given to:  emerging independent researchers, women's  groups, and projects with Canadian content  Candidates should send four copies of their  application to CRIAW, 151 Slater Street, Suite  408, Ottawa, ON, K1P 5H3; tot (613) 563-  0681; fax: (613) 563-0682; TDD/ATS: (613)  563-1921; e-mail: criaw@sympatJco.ca.  Submissions must be postmarked no later than  Aug 31.  COMPLEXLY CARIBBEAN  Seeking short stories for an anthology on  female Caribbean identities into the 21st  Century-who are we now? Looking for  fiction which deals with the experiences of  being complexly Caribbean from Caribbean  (broadly defined) women inside and  outside the region. Especially interested in  experimental writing and writing which  breaks new ground and the mold of  nostalgic first generation migrant experience fiction. Send submissions to: Complexly Caribbean, Sister Vision Press, PO  Box 217, Stn E, Toronto, ON, M6H 4E2.  Deadline is Sep 1998.  CLASSIFIEDS  SPINSTERVALE  Spinstervale in Coombs (Vancouver Island)  offers rustic cabins to women. Tiny cabin  sleeps one or two close friends, at $7.50/  15 per night. Larger cabin sleeps four;  weekend rate $40. Inquire about work  exchange (three hours a day equals room/  board). Call (250) 248-8809 or e-mail  Sunshine @ macn.bc.ca.  TURNING POINTTHERAPY  Counselling with Delyse Ledgard, MA.  Fifteen years of experience in childhood  trauma counselling, including sexual abuse.  Plus relationships and sexuality, depression,  addictions, self-esteem, and lesbian issues.  I work with individuals and couples. Experiential/feminist approach. First half-hour  consultation free. Call (604) 681-6858.  GAIA ADVENTURES  GAIA (Mother Earth) Adventures presents  Outdoor Adventures for Women. Come hike  High Falls Creek in Squamish (moderate to  challenging) on May 16 and Jun 13. Enjoy  a moderate hike to Port Moody's famous  Diez Vistas trail or bike Galiano Island on  May 24. You can also discover the adventure of rock climbing with us on Jun 27 (no  experience required) or hike the North  Shore's Black Mountain on Jun 6. Call  (604) 875-0066 today!  For more info, check out GAIA's website at  http://www.vancouver.bc.com.  WOMEN'S SELF-DEFENSE  Women Educating in Self-defense Training  (WEST) teaches Wenlido. In Basic classes,  you learn how to make the most of mental,  physical and verbal skills to get away from  assault situations. Continuing training  builds on basic techniques to improve  physical and mental strength. By women,  for women. For info, call (604) 876-6390.  FRASER RIVER PLACE COOP  Fraser River Place Co-op is accepting applications for 1-3 bedroom units. No subsidies,  snares are $1600. Housing costs are $667-  977. Participation required. S.A.S.E. 530  Ginger Dr, New Westminster BC, V3L 5K8.  LYDIA KWA  Lydia Kwa, Ph.D, clinical pychologist in  private practice, works with clients dealing  with a wide range of issues. Central  downtown Vancouver location. For appoint-  ments, call (604) 682-5818.   DEEP COMFORTING RELAXATION  Experience massage. Warmth. Tranquillity.  Warm oils. Hot towels. Luxurious. Soothing.  Rejuvenating. All sizes. Take care of and  rejoice in your self. Kinesis reader's March/  April special 90 minutes for $50. Bring a  friend for company or split the time. Flexible  hours. Healthful. Respectful. Feels Fabulous. Lonsdale, North Vancouver. For an  appointment call (604) 990-1049.   SUMMER INSTITUTE WITH  VANDANA SHIVA  The Women's Studies Department at SFU  and the Ruth Wynn Woodward Chair in  Women's Studies presents Women, Life  and the Planet from Jun 16-19,1998 from  9 am to 1 pm. At Harbour Centre Campus  at SFU. The Institute will be organized each  day as a lecture followed by smaller  seminar groups. Registration fee is $200  (subsidies available). For further information and registration please call (604) 291-  3333 or fax (604) 291-5518 or, e-mail  cgoodman@sfu.ca  SINGLE MOTHER'S DAY IN VANCOUVER  The Vancouver Status of Women and the Downtown Eastside Women's  Centre are hosting the 8th annual Single Mother's Day Celebration on  Sunday May 10th. Single moms and their children are invited to come  and enjoy an afternoon full of entertainment and fun.There will be  door prizes, refreshments, performances, and much, much more! Let  us entertain your kids with face painting and arts and crafts while you  treat yourself to a free mini-massage, learn how to make your own  bath-bomb, or just join in some laughs with a great bunch of women.  This event will take place from 1:00 to 5:00pm at Soiheim Place, 255  Union St (near Main). The celebration is a FREE event for single moms  and their kids. For more information, call VSW at 255-6554 or the  Downtown Eastside Women's Centre at 681-8480.  Dahl findlay Connors & Evans  BARRISTERS & SOLICITORS  • A full range of services to meet your business and  personal legal needs  • Free initial consultation  • Lawyers experienced in protecting the interests and  advancing the rights of the lesbian, gay, bisexual and  transgendered communities  Suite 620, 1033 Davie (near Burrard), Vancouver, B.C.  (604) 687-8752 • Toll Free 1 888 4 GAY LAW LIBiZa  LIBRARY PROCESSING CTR - SERIALS  £286. EAST;jgflLL, U.B.C.  VANCOUVER, *B'C V&T 1Z8  ^ Cot\f\orl P  (and 4*8+3 +eo j)  rou...  One year  □ Cheque enclosed  D$20 +$1.40 GST  □ Bill me  Two years  □ New  □$36 + $2.52 GST  □ Renewal  Institutions/Groups  □ Gift  □$45+ $3.15 GST  □ Donation  For individuals who can't afford the full amount  for Kinesis subscription, send what you can.  Free to women prisoners.  Orders outside Canada add $8.  Vancouver Status of Women Membership  (includes Kinesis subscription)  □$30+$1.40 GST  Name   Address-  Country   Telephone _  Postal code_  Fax   Published ten times a year by the Vancouver Status of Women  #309-877 E. Hastings St., Vancouver, BC V6A 3Y1