 SDecierl Cr\U, Kinesis welcomes volunteers to work on all aspects  of the paper. Call us at  255-5499. Our next News  Group meeting Is Wed.  Feb. 10, 1:30 pm at Kinesis, 301-1720 Grant St. All  women welcome even If you  don't have experience.  PRODUCTION   THIS   ISSUE: Marsha Arbour, Noreen  Howes,  Esther Shannon,   Nancy   Pollak,   Lucy  Morelra,   Patty   Gibson,  Kathee    Muzln,   Andrea  Lowe,    Elizabeth   Shefrin,  Joanne    Nelson,    Glsele  Carrlere, Alllsa McDonald,  Ann Doyle  FRONT COVER: design  by Debbie Bryant  EDITORIAL BOARD: Esther    Shannon,    Noreen  Howes, Isis, Patty Gibson,  'Ģ  Marsha Arbour, Alllsa McDonald, Nancy Pollak, Pat  Feindel Maura Volante  CIRCULATION AND DISTRIBUTION: Cat L'Hirondelle, Nancy Pollak,  ADVERTISING:   Marsha  Arbour  OFFICE: Cat L'Hirondelle  Kinesis Is published 10  times a year by the Vancouver Status of Women.  Its objectives are to be  a non-sectarian feminist  voice for women and to  work actively for social  change, specifically by  combatting sexism, racism,  homophobia and Imperialism.  Views expressed In Kinesis are those of the writer  and do not necessarily reflect VSW policy. All unsigned material Is the responsibility of the Kinesis  Editorial Board.  SUBSCRIPTIONS: Individual subscriptions to Kinesis are $17.50 per year or  what you can afford. Membership In the Vancouver  Status of Women Is $25.50  or what you can afford. Includes subscription to Kinesis.  SUBMISSIONS: AH submissions are welcome. We  reserve the right to edit  and submission does not  guarantee publication. AH  submissions should be  typed double spaced and  must be signed and Include an address and phone  number. Please note Kinesis does not accept poetry or fiction contributions. For material to be returned, a SASE must be Included. Editorial guidelines  are available on request.  ADVERTISING: For Information about display advertising rates, please contact Kinesis. For information about classifieds,  please see the classified  page in this Issue.  DEADLINE: For features  and reviews the 10th of  the month preceding publication; news copy, 15th;  letters and Bulletin Board  listings, 18th. Display advertising: camera ready,  18th; design required, 12th.  Three Vancouver high school students discuss teen life in the 1980's 10  INSIDE  jm   Nova Scotia bank tellers on strike  3  Abortion legal in Canada   3  Childcare plan no boon for B.C  4  IWD calendar of events  4  B.C. midwives working in fear   5  FEATURES  Gitksan and Wet'suwet'en  An enduring commitment to the land   7  By Carol Nielsen  Repetitive Motion Injuries  A growing concern to working women   8  by Marianne van Loon  Teenagers  Getting ready for independance  10  by Maura Volante and Nancy Pollak  ARTS  Prision book misses strong feminist slant  12  by Ivy Scott  Rez stars rap  On theatre, culture, art and politics  13  by Nancy Pollak  Fireweed  Class issue offers challenge, insight  14  by Lorri Rudland  A historic aboriginal land title case is making it 's way through the courts   7  Movement Matters 2  What's News 6  Beans 9  Ruby Music 15  by Connie Kuhns  Periodicals in Review.... 16  by Wendy Frost and  Michelle Valiquette  Letters 17  Bulletin Board  18  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status of  Women, 301-1720 Grant  St., Vancouver, B.C. V5L  2Y6  Typesetting by Eastside  Data Graphics. Camera by  Baseline Laser printing by  Vancouver Desktop Publishing. Printing by Web  Press Graphics.  Kinesis Is a member of the  Canadian Periodicals Publishers Association.  Second class mall #6426  KINESIS Movement Matters  Movement Matters is designed to be a  network of news, updates and information of special interest to the women's  movement. Submissions to Movement Matters should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double-spaced on eight and a half by  eleven paper. Submissions may be edited for  length. Deadline is the 18th of the month  preceding publication.  COPE conference  The COPE Education Committee is  planning a major symposium on public education on Saturday, February 20th, 1988  from 9:30 am to 3:30 pm at King Edward  Campus of Vancouver Community College.  The purpose of the symposium is to provide a forum for a thorough discussion of  education issues for a wide audience of individuals and groups in the city. The theme of  the symposium will focus on this question:  How Does Education Fit In The New B.C.?  Participants will examine a broad range of  issues including government and community  responsibility for education, curriculum, financing, and how education is meeting the  challenges of today and the future.  A varied format will ensure that participants have ample opportunities to take an  active part in the discussions. It is hoped  that participants will be sufficiently stimulated to go back to their organizations and  communities to further the cause of public  education.  For more information contact the COPE  Education Committee at 321-7849 or write:  #10, 595 S.W. Marine Drive, Vancouver,  B.C. V6P 5X9  DAWN conference  upcoming  Here is an opportunity for one hundred  disabled women to spend a weekend away  from home in pleasant surroundings.  DAWN BC is hosting a conference with  the theme Violence Against Disabled  Women at Camp Squamish. The facility is completely accessibe with swimming  pool, showers, and fireplaces in the meeting rooms. It's a chance to meet with other  women in safety. There will be counsellors on hand offering self-assertiveness workshops.  The conference is a place for talking about and validating bad experiences.  DAWN has identified over thirty different  kinds of violence against women, and it is  the hope of conference organisers that burdens that got carried up to Camp Squamish  don't get taken home. One of DAWN BC's  six mandates is to deal with violence against  women. This is the third conference. Women  who need attendants should bring one.  DAWN BC, the federal office of the Secretary of State for women, and the provincial Attorney General's Victim Assistance  Program are the conference sponsors. It is  free to participants.  For more information, or to attend, call  Eunice Brooks at 589-4088 or write 14564-  106A Ave., Surrey, B.C. V3R 1T4.  Award for  mature women  This award was established in honour of  Rita Johnson, who worked in the Women's  Resource Cenre at Capilano College. She  was working towards a Master's Degree  in Counselling at UBC. Rita began post-  secondary studies in her middle years after raising four children, and the Memorial Award was established to assist mature  women enrolled (or planning to be enrolled)  in either part-time or full-time studies in  any field of post-secondary study.  Preference will be given to mature women  who have an interest in academic studies  and who have a demonstrated interest in  and awareness of women's issues.  Applicants may be (or plan to be) part-  time or full-time students. Student applicants will have at least a 'B' average.  Prospective student applicants will demonstrate an active interest in returning to  school and/or paid employment.  Applications are available from the  Women's Resource Centre, and the Financial Aid Office, and can be submitted as  follows: spring deadline: February 15, 1988.  For more information write Capilano College, Women's Resource Centre, M102, 2055  Purcell Way, North Vancouver, B.C. V7J  3H5, or phone 986-1911.  Primary care  in action  The Oxfam-GIobal Health Project is  holding its 4th Annual Global Health Conference on March 11th and 12th, 1988 at the  Vancouver School of Theology UBC.  The one and a half day symposium offers  health care workers and other interested in-  dividuduals an opportunity to share ideas  and information about health care in developing countries and locally.  This years conference hopes to explore  the similarities and differences of health  care in developing countries and Canada  and what action, as health care workers, we  can taks to achieve the World Health Organization's mandate of "Health For All By  the Year 2000".  A variety of workshops will be held on  Saturday pre-empted on Friday by a keynote speaker address and social event. The  keynote speaker will be a representative of  the Eritrean Women's Association.  Fee for the conference is $25 employed  and $15 students. Childcare will be provided through pre-registration 3 weeks in  advance. Some subsidy is available for out  of town travellers. Billeting available on request.  To pre-register or for more information  please call the Global Health Project at 738-  2116. Part of the funding for this unique  event is provided by CIDA (Canadian International Development Agency).  Mental health  support group  We meet on Wednesdays at the Vancouver Lesbian Connection on Commercial  Drive at Venables at 7:30 pm. A small group  of lesbians started this group in September  as a mutual support to lesbians who have either been through the psychiatric system at  one time or have a need to contact other lesbians with similar mental health needs. We  talk for an hour on topics such as anger and  frustration, work, housing, money, and the  ever popular subject of handling the stigma  of mental illness.  paddling the same canoe, so to speak. We  usually travel from our Wednesday meeting  to the Lotus club for recreation.  Sometimes we have visited members in  the hospital and keep in touch if illness occurs to someone in the group. We have also  promised to come out to support the active  baseball players this summer!  What is discussed in our group is kept  confidential. We offer an alternative to  structured groups in the mental health system and attempt to fill an obvious need in  this community. Who better takes care of  our health than we, ourselves. We try to  have a good time doing it. Drop in any Wednesday.  Research on  women in midlife  Very little written information exists  about single, midlife women without children. What does exist often portrays us in  stereotypes. I am a "midlife" graduate student at the University of British Columbia  School of Social Work and am interested in  studying this phase of our lives.  I would like to interview child-free women  between 40 and 55 who consider themselves  never-married. I am particularly interested  in your experiences and perceptions, since  a great deal of information about midlife  assumes women are partnered and/or have  children.  If you agree to be interviewed, the information will be entirely confidential. Women  who are interviewed will receive a summary of the results when the research is  completed. I am asking women for approximately two hours of their time. I will make  arrangements to meet you in your home, or  any other convenient location.  If you would like to take part in this  study, or have friends or relatives in this age  group whom you think might be interested,  please call: Barbara Herringer, 872-8306 or  876-7487.  Your help would be greatly appreciated!  New women's  studies library  The Nellie Langford Rowell Library is  a Women's Studies Library located at  York University. We have holdings in the  form of books, booklets, women's movement  ephemera, and subscriptions to current periodicals.  The Library is proud to announce the beginning of its pamphlet series, one on sports  equality, one on pay equity and the third a  biography of Nellie Langford Rowell.  Equahty in Sports: Perspectives discusses  the present legal and practical situation of  women in sports, funding, human rights  provisions and the everyday problems facing women who wish to participate in sports  and athletics on an equal basis with men.  Pay Equity: Perspective discusses the  philosophical, economic and political sides  of pay equity and its implications—for Ontario women and for the economy.  Probably the most important reason we  meet is the social contact with other women  Rediscovering History: Nellie Langford  Rowell 1874-1968. Traces the steps of Nellie Langford Rowell, and shows how one  woman combined a warm and successful  family life with work in organizations to bet-  VANCOUVER WOMEN'S  BOOKSTORE  Hours: Monday-Saturday  11:00-5:30 pm  WyB|      684-0523  BIG    BIG    Inventory Clearance SALE    FEBRUARY  315 Cambie Street    Vancouver, B.C.V6B2N4  ter the status of women. It illustrates the  way women's organizing furthered the social and political development of Canada in  the first half of the century.  Pamphlets cost $2 each or $5 for the series to date. Please include an additional $1  for postage and handling.  Pamphlets are available from the Nellie Langford Rowell Library, 202C Founders  College, York University, 4700 Keele Street,  North York, Ontario M3J 1P3.  Disabled women's  newsletter  In 1985, a group of women with disabilities, mothers of disabled children and other  interested women met at the UN Decade of  Women Conference in Nairobi, Kenya and  founded Disabled Women's International  (DWI). One purpose was to network, internationally, by publishing a newsletter. For  the past two years, the Danish women have  published and circulated two issues to members, and now the task has been passed on  to women in the U.S. Women With Disabilities United (WWDU) and Disabled In Action of Metropolitan New York (DIA) have  agreed to assume this responsibility for the  next two years.  There are currently about 300 members  internationally and we would like to increase  our numbers. Members are entitled to receive the newsletter as well as contribute articles, express feelings, and exchange information in the publication.  Submissions are requested to be in English, and the editors reserve the right to  edit or not accept pieces. Any relevant article such as original fiction, non-fiction, letters, pieces about the political struggle for  equahty and/or independence are welcome.  Articles must be submitted by the end of  April.  Please indicate if you are sight disabled  and require a taped version of the newsletter.  Contributions are needed to defray costs.  Membership is $10 to $25 (U.S. dollars or  postal order) or whatever you can afford.  Dues, payable to DIA-DWI, and/or submissions of written material may be sent to:  DIA-Women With Disabilities United, P.O.  Box 323, Stuyvesant Station, New York, NY  10009, USA  Goodbyes and hellos  Kinesis bids a very fond farewell to Jody  McMurray, Bulletin Board compiler and organizer extraordinaire. Jody is paddling to  one of the outer islands in the Gulf of Georgia to take up country living if not a well deserved rest. Best of everything to both Jody  and her daughter, Zoe. Don't forget us on  visits back to the urban jungle.  Our thanks to Elizabeth Shefrin for taking over the Bulletin Board for the month  of February and a very special welcome to  Lucy Moreira, a long time Kinesis proof  reader and distribution worker who will be  taking on the Bulletin Board after this issue.  Corrections  Jean Bennett's name was left off VSW's  "Thanks For Helping Us Move" message.  Sorry, Jean. Thanks, Jean.  KINESIS ///////////////////^^^^  ////////////////////^^^^^  News  Nova Scotia bank  tellers on strike  by Delores Fitzgerald  A ten week old strike in a small  Nova Scotia town marks the latest effort of bank workers to win  unproved wages and working conditions from Canada's banking industry.  Eleven women, employees of the  Antigonish branch of the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce  and members of the Union of Bank  Employees, walked off the job in  late November after five months  of negotiations brought no movement on demands for a wage increase. The women make an average of $15,000 a year and are seeking increases of between 10 to 20  percent, depending on salary levels.  In a dramatic bid to get action on their demands, the workers pooled their strike pay and sent  shop steward Marion MacDonald  to Toronto to confront Commerce  chairman Donald Fullerton at the  bank's annual general meeting in  late January.  At the meeting Fullerton told  MacDonald to take her complaints  to a session with two senior  bank managers. MacDonald declined the offer, telling reporters  that she didn't "think they want  to settle the strike. They want to  break the union and they want  to use us as an example to other  employees who try to organize a  union."  Union business agent Martin  Hanratty told Kinesis that "The  bank thinks it holds all the cards  so there is really not a lot of movement from their side of the table.  They really don't negotiate. But  the women are very strong, they've  taken the position that they joined  the union to get a pay increase and  that's that."  Although Hanratty noted that  "...recently there have been indications that the bank is willing to  come back to the table," MacDonald says the women are leery of the  banks intentions.  "We'll certainly go back to listen to what they have to say," she  said, "but I think they just want  to be seen to be doing something  because of the pressure from the  community."  According to MacDonald, who  has worked for the bank for eight  years, the wage increase is important but not the only reason the  women joined the union. "We felt  we were being taken advantage of.  They brought a young fellow over  from the Bank of Montreal and  they put him in above us and they  didn't even offer the position to  the women. They also have a new  policy of more part time work. If  a full timer leaves they replace her  with a part time employee which  makes more work for all of us.  "And they started to make selling bank products a big part of the  job and a big part of our merit review. We didn't think it was fair  since we weren't hired as salespeople and the merit review determined whether a person got a  merit increase. Of course, some of  the women here have reached the  bank's pay ceiling and they don't  get merit increases anyway, which  we also didn't like."  While MacDonald believes the  bank "doesn't want to be seen  to be caving in, " she also says  they will have to move eventually. "They have to be intelligent  enough to see that it's costing  them more to bring people in than  to settle with us."  According to Hanratty, a good  part of the reason the women are  so solid is due to the community support. "Antigonish is a very  small, close community," he said,  "and everyone, from individuals to  service clubs and other unions, is  backing the women. We couldn't  ask for more support from the  community."  The Union of Bank Employees  is a directly affiliated union of the  Canadian Labour Congress. According to Hanratty there are up  to 20 bank branches organized in  the union's Atlantic sector. The  Antigonish bargaining unit is the  first Commerce branch to be organized in the area.  Donations to the union strike  fund and/or letters of support  can be sent to the Union of  Bank Employees, Local 2107,  195 Main St., Antigonish,  Nova Scotia. Letters protesting the Commerce actions can  be sent to Donald Fullerton,  Chairman,   CIBC,   Commerce  Abortion  legal in Canada  by Esther Shannon  After more than 20 years of continuous struggle Canadian women  are free to have an abortion any  time they choose.  In a 5 to 2 decision the Supreme  Court of Canada, the country's  highest court, ruled that Doctors  Henry Morgentaler, Leslie Smoling  and Robert Scott must be acquitted on charges of "procuring a mis-  Single mother resists  maintenance project  by Jackie Brown  When the father of her fourteen  month-old son stopped coming  around, Karen Wellbelove didn't  spend much time mourning the  loss. Already frustrated by the  man's sporadic attempts at parenthood, Wellbelove decided she  was probably better off without  him and wanted only to get on  with the job of raising her son  alone.  Instead, she says she is being  pressured by her social worker to  get financial support from the man  via the Attorney General's Family Maintenance Project — established to obtain and enforce maintenance orders.  Wellbelove's problems began  last July, after her child's father apparently phoned her social  worker offering to pay support. Because she wanted nothing further  to do with the man, whom she describes as irresponsible and unreliable, Wellbelove refused to pursue his offer or let the maintenance  project do it for her. Since then,  GS CURVES.  They couldn't keep it up. Less than two weeks after these Suzuki ads were erected in five Vancouver  locations, and after they were defaced five times by irate viewers. Seaboard Advertising Company removed them. "The only angry calls we received came from people furious that the ads came down"  said Bob Smart. Seaboard president. The decision to remove the billboards—which is now happening across the country—came when the ad did not meet with the approval of Canadian Advertising  Foundation, an advertising screening group.  she says, the pressure has been on.  "It subtle. I get a note instead  of a cheque saying they want me  to come in for more information.  So instead of buying groceries, I  have to argue with them for a few  hours."  While Wellbelove is annoyed at  what she calls "a runaround" from  social services, her main concern is  that if she applies for the project  and maintenance payments are ordered, the father's chances of access to the child will improve.  "He knows that if he pays maintenance he gets his foot in the door  to apply for access," says Wellbelove, who doubts his ability to  pay and in any case, doesn't want  the help. "If you take the money,  you have to take the bullshit. And  I wouldn't see any of it anyway. I  already get a $100 allowance from  my ex- husband."  Although Wellbelove agrees in  principle with the aims of the family maintenance project, she says  it should not be forced on women  who don't want any forther contact with their children's fathers.  "I think a lot of women are getting caught up in this. It's scary  because a lot of women are having children without being married  and I don't think they know what  they're in for. It seems you have to  take the child and the father as a  package deal."  According to Deborah Nielsen,  senior policy planner for the Minister of Social Services and Housing, women on social assistance are  required to pursue the potential  of other income, including maintenance, and failure to dp so could  mean the end of their assistance.  "They are expected to explore the  possibility and pursue the income.  If there is the means to pay maintenance then there is an expectation that it be paid."  Sandra Edelman, Director of  the Family Maintenance Project,  says the ethical reasons, enrolment  in the project is strictly voluntary. "The policy of the pilot program is that if a woman attends  and chooses not to request our services, then that is the end of the  case. From our point of view, our  lawyers cannot be acting on behalf  of a client who doesn't want them  to."  carriage." The decision states that  Section 251, the section regulating  abortion in the Criminal Code,  olates Section 7 of the Canadian  Charter of Rights and Freedoms  which guarantees "life, liberty and  the security of the person."  Nora Hutchinson, spokesperson for B.C.'s Concerned Citizens  for Choice on Abortion (CCCA)  greeted the Court's decision with  measured excitement saying "Finally, the women of Canada will  not be humiliated when they need  an abortion.  "However, the decision," said  Hutchinson, "opens up many questions. For instance, what responsibility will the province take on for  funding abortion and what guidelines will the federal government  introduce.  whenl  f the most fundamental rights ot  is the right to choose whether  d have children.  "Still the news is a real victory for women. We have been  concerned about how the judiciary  would exercise the new powers it  has with the Charter and whether  they would read the public's  sensus which supports choice on  abortion. The 5 to 2 majority and  the seemingly unambiguous nature  of the decision feels like a real victory."  According to the Justices "Section 251 clearly interferes with  a woman's physical and bodily  integrity. Forcing a woman, by  threat of criminal sanction, to  carry a foetus to term unless she  meets certain criteria unrelated to  her own priorities and aspirations,  is a profound interference with a  woman's body and thus an infringement of security of the person."  The decision goes on to say that  a second infringement occurs because the procedures and restrictions in Section 251 delay access to  abortion to many women, making  access difficult for some and impossible for others. In this way the  law fails to comply with the "principles of fundamental justice."  Pat Brighouse, spokesperson for  the British Columbia Coalition  of Abortion Clinics, believes the  Supreme Court decision "will have  a very positive effect on our organization.  "The decision means we can be  less focused on the legal aspects  of opening a clinic. We know a  number of local doctors have been  waiting for this decision and we  hope that now that there is no  threat to them, legally or professionally, clinic planning can move  more quickly."  see Abortion pg 5  KINESIS Across B.C  Childcare plan no boon for B.C.  by Lea Dawson  In early December the federal  government announced it's long  awaited childcare plan, including  the new Canada Child Care Act.  Federal Health and Welfare  Minister Jake Epp says the new  program "will recognize childcare  as a social and economic priority  for Canadian families. The goals  of the strategy will give parents  choices in caring for their children  and will improve the availability,  affordability and quality of childcare offered."  Ontario childcare experts Martha Friendly and Laurel Roth-  man wrote recently in the Globe  and Mail: "The government's approach is fundamentally flawed. It  offers neither a national plan nor  an equitable program with a coherent framework for making sure  the federal money really does improve ... childcare."  In 1986 the report of the federally appointed Task Force on Child  Care, and the majority of participants at the public hearings on  the Special Committee on Child  Care favoured a longterm national  strategy that extended parental  leave benefits and offered parents  a variety of high quality, non-profit  services, with greatly reduced or  nonexistent user fees.  The new legislation offers instead limited tax credits and deductions towards family childcare  expenses, and modest operating  and capital grants to both commercial and non-profit childcare  programs. Parental leave benefits  are not addressed.  The Conservative government  plans to spend $5.4 billion dollars  on childcare over the next seven  years. Sixty percent, or three billion dollars, will be allocated to  capital and operating grants and  subsidies to low income families.  This money will be divided up between the provinces and territories, providing they are willing to  share the costs.  IWD calendar of events  Planning for Vancouver's International Women's Day has taken  off and there are numerous events  and activities to participate in.  The IWD Committee has been  meeting weekly through January  and any interested women are invited to join in organizing work.  Upcoming meeting are as follows:  • Feb. 8, Monday at the Vancouver Status of Women, 301 -  1720 Grant St., Vancouver at  7:30 pm.  • Feb. 16, Monday at the Downtown East Side Women's Centre, 44 East Cordova, Vancouver, at 7:30 pm.  Feb. 22, Monday at VSW (address and time as above)  For more information on IWD  Committee activities or to get involved come to a meeting or call  255-5511 Mon - Thurs. from 1 to 5  pm.  The following is a list of IWD  activities and some events which,  while not specifically in celebration of IWD, are of interest to  women and will take place during  IWD week. Please bear in mind  this is not necessarily a complete  list so stay posted for other events.  Friday - March 4  Women's Music Night at LaQuena, 1111 Commercial Drive.  Call 251- 6626 for more information.  IWD Women's Dance: Capri  Hall, 8 - 1 pm. Tix. $4 - 6. Childcare available. Sponsored by Vancouver Lesbian Connection.  Saturday - March 5  IWD March: starting at 11:30  from Victory Square at East  Hastings and Cambie and going  through the downtown eastside to  conclude at Oppenheimer Park.  Sponsored by IWD Committee.  Downtown East Side Women's Centre's Open House: come  and see our new space and celebrate with us from 1 - 4 pm at 44  East Cordova.  IWD Information Day: First  United Church, 320 East Hastings St.,1 - 5 pm, information  tables, speakers, food, entertainment. Sponsored by IWD Committee  Mixed Dance: Ukrainian Hall,  805 East Pender St., 8 - 1 pm.  Childcare provided. Tix. $2 - 6.  Sponsored by the IWD Committee  Sunday - March 6  International Women's Day:  Co-op Radio: brings a solid day  of programming by and for women  on Vancouver's Co-operative Radio 107.2 FM. A special noon hour  international news segment as well  as all day music, panels and public  affairs programming. All women  invited to come down to the station at 337 Carroll St. Watch the  Co-op Radio Program Guide for  more info on other women's programming during IWD week. For  more information call 684-8494.  Films On Women: LaQuena  presents an evening of films on  women in the Middle East at 1111  Commercial Drive. Co-sponsored  by IDERA. Call 251-6626 for more  information.  Monday - March 7  Women's Dance: Co-op Radio  IWD Benefit Dance at Graceland,  Richards and Drake, entrance in  the back lane. Tix $4. 6. Music  provided by Co-op Radio's star  women deejays and a special midnight celebration to usher in IWD.  At The Laundromat: opens  on March 7 women will be placing their artwork in laundromats  throughout Vancouver in an effort to display art in accessible  places. The show will run throughout March and the opening event  is 8 pm. at the Pitt International  Gallery, 36 Powell. For information call 736-5866.  IWD Union Sisters Dinner:  La Quena, 1111 Commercial Drive  7 pm. all women interested in  unions welcome to attend.  Tuesday - March 8  IWD Film and Video Screening: of new work by women producers sponsored by Women in Focus, 204 - 456 West Broadway, 7 -  10 pm. For more information call  872-2250.  IWD LaQuena Event: sorry  at press time no details about this  event but something is definitely  planned. Call LaQuena for more  details 251-6621  Fri and Sat - March 11 & 12  Conference on Pay Equity:  sponsored by the B.C. Federation of Labour's Women's Committee at Robson Square Media  Centre, 880 Robson St. Kicks off  Fri. evening with registration at  pm and a keynote address on pay  equity by Mary Cornish of Ontario. Workshop sessions continue  on Sat. Registration is $30. and everyone is welcome.For more information call 430-1421.  Global Health Conference  1988: at the Vancouver School  of Theology, University of British  Columbia. Fri. evening's keynote  address by an Eritrean woman.  For more information see Movement Matters this issue or call 738-  2116. Sponsored by Oxfam.  Saturday - March 12  NDP Women's Breakfast  and News Conference: to launch  New Democrats policy on pay equity for British Columbian women  at 8 am at the Hotel Georgia.  Breakfast is no charge but if interested must RSVP provincial  New Democrats Vancouver office  at 430-8600  S.U.C.C.E.S.S.: workshop for  women on Job Hunting Skills at  449 East Hastings 1:30 - 4 pm.  Workshop is in English only, all  women welcome. Call Celina, 253-  5561 for more information.  The British Columbia government is currently in negotiations  with the federal government. B.C.  Deputy Minister of Social Services and Housing, Jim Carter, announced in December that they  will accept the proposals for capital grants and subsidies to low income families, but not the operating grant program. "We think individuals in need should be target-  ted, as opposed to supporting the  centres themselves. If you support  centres you may support someone  earning $100,000 a year who has a  child there," he said.  This decision is consistent with  the Socred approach to childcare  as a welfare issue rather than a  long-term social policy leading to  universal accessibility and quality services. Unfortunately the absence of operating funds may mean  that existing childcare centres may  have to close because of financial  instability.  The capital grant program  could create an additional 20,000  childcare spaces in the province.  Peter Ashmore of Information  Daycare in Vancouver explains  that although there are no accurate figures for the number of children needing care in B.C., there  is a "hugh need for infant care, a  desperate need for (out-of-school)  care for school-aged children, and  a critical problem in part-time  care, as many centres do not provide part-time care."  Maureen Feeney of the Children's Services Employees of B.C.  union says the additional 20,000  spaces will mean more employment opportunities for childcare  workers, but without operating  grants salaries will remain low and  parents may have to pay higher  user fees.  One of the major criticisms of  the federal proposal for operating  and capital grants is that they will  be available to profit as well as  non-profit centres. It is well documented that profit or commercial centres offer lower quality services than non-profit. Friendly and  Rothman are concerned that "the  new federal dollars will attract  large U.S. childcare businesses to  Canada, particularly in the current free trade climate."  In B.C. childcare facilities are  all privately owned (unlike Ontario  and Quebec that have some publicly owned and operated centres).  Of these, 72.6 percent are nonprofit and 27.4 percent commercial. There are presently no franchises or chains operating in the  province. Peter Ashmore believes  that the profit sector here may  be inhibited from rapid expansion  because of regulations governing  quality (child-staff ration, facility  and group size, etc.) that have  been in place since the early seventies. The union of childcare workers has succeeded in maintaining  salaries "in the higher rather than  the lower range," at least in the  Greater Vancouver area. In the rural areas of B.C., workers are "exploited" says Ashmore, often making no more than the minimum  wage.  Confidence in the security of  the non-profit sector in B.C. may  be premature considering the current anti-union, pro-privatization  policies of the Social Credit government. And lobbying efforts of  private childcare operators have  been successful in some parts of  the country in reducing provincial  childcare regulations.  In Ontario, the provincial government has taken an approach  to childcare quite different from  that in B.C. They have adopted  both capital and operating grants,  and are ensuring that operating  funds are not channeled into profits. Only those commercial childcare operators currently licensed  will qualify for operating funds,  and those funds can only be used  for salary increases for staff or reductions of parental user fees.  Ontario Social Services Minister  John Sweeney was quoted as saying, "I've talked to all the operators and said, 'If you're not prepared to give me a commitment on  that, if you're not prepared to let  us examine your books, then you  don't get the money.' "  Low income families in B.C. will  continue to receive subsidies for  childcare with the new policy, but  the provincial record for generosity is not encouraging. Under the  previous Canada Assistance Plan,  B.C. families received among the  lowest maximum subsidies in the  country.  Families can also anticipate very  little return from the $2.3 billion dollar federal proposal for tax  measures. Families that do their  own childcare or use informal, unreceipted care will get an increase  of $200 per year to their refundable Child Tax Credit. Margaret  Mitchell, social policy critic for  the New Democrats and author of  their minority report on childcare,  describes this measure as expensive and meaningless: "Two hundred dollars a year will not buy  even informal care for a child. Nor  is it enough to be a deciding factor in a couple's decision to forgo  one income and do their own childcare. It simply encourages the underground market which has no assurances of quality for parents."  The doubling of the Child Care  Expense Deduction to $4,000 will  also do little for families as few  will be eligible for a full credit. As  it stands, high-income families will  benefit more than middle-income  families, and low-income families  will not benefit at all if they do not  earn enough to pay taxes.  The federal and B.C. governments have offered a strategy that  could set back childcare programs  for many years to come.  Penny Coates of the Canadian  Day Care Advocacy Association  describes the new program as "a  sham, an illusion created to fool  the electorate." The vision of available, affordable, quality childcare  still awaits realization.  KINESIS B.C. midwives  Increasingly working in fear and secrecy  by Leslie Kenny  I wanted to write a story about  midwifery. I said to myself, what  would it be like if midwifery in  British Columbia were legalized?  In Ontario, legislation is forthcoming which will establish the legal  role of midwives in that province's  health care system. Here in B.C.,  similar circumstances to those  which have brought positive action  in the east are instead causing fear  and confusion.  Ask the average British Columbian what they know about midwifery and they'll recall the recent series of coroner's inquests  into midwife-attended births, or  maybe that some midwives were  convicted not long ago, on criminal  charges. If you read the local papers about midwife-assisted births  where babies die or are born braindamaged, the stories are high in  sensational content but hopelessly  vague in lending any kind of understanding to what has really taken  place or why.  Take, for example, the front  page of this January's Vancouver Sun. The headline blares  "Coroner Fears More Midwifery  Deaths." The story gives an account of Chief Coroner Galbraith's  investigation into the 1986 death  was "preventable". The story offers no specific information as to  why this is so, except to say it's  because of the "state of confusion that exists with respect to  the matter of home births and  midwifery." Without any further  explanation or analysis, the article reports that the coroner recommends the establishment of a  "panel to examine the matter."  coroner recommends the establishment of a "panel to examine the  matter."  No charges were ever laid  against the midwife in the "Baby  Mclean" case, and nowhere is she  held to be directly responsible  for the death, yet the overall tone  of the article speaks ill of the quality of care provided by midwives.  When I first began this story,  it seemed the best way to balance  media misconceptions would be to  leave behind the laws and the politics and simply talk about the lives  of the women who are midwives  and the families they work with.  For this is where the integrity of  midwifery care speaks for itself.  I intended to tell the story of a  B.C. small town where midwives  have been practising, quietly and  without incident, since the early  70's.  It seemed important to consider  the midwifery question from the  perspective of people living outside of the lower mianland. While  it is true there is a solid network  of midwifery services and information in B.C., most of this is concentrated in the Vancouver area.  What would be the significance of  legalized midwifery for the other  half of B.C.'s population, those  who live in small towns and remote settlements where childbirth  options are far more limited? The  experience of this small town could  illustrate for others like it the special kind of nurturing and empowerment that midwifery can bring  to women in childbirth, and ultimately to the whole community.  Before I even finished writing  the article, I was made aware that  I was crossing the line on several accounts. Given the recent  run of bad press and legal attacks against midwives, the climate is just too hot to openly publish names, dates, and locations  relating to the practise of midwifery, especially in a small town  where there is no such thing as  anonymity. It would be like leading the police to the "scene of the  crime."  Unlike medical associations,  midwives do not have large  amounts of money and power to  fall back on when things get tough.  The only protection they have is  their secrecy and their silence. So,  I agreed to drop the story.  While I am not an expert on  midwifery, or the legal system, or  the media, I believe there are some  very repressive tactics being used  against midwives and the doctors  who support them by the medical  profession and the state. The climate being what it is I'm fearful  of saying anything that could get  someone into trouble, myself not  the least of all. My only association to midwifery is that I am a  mother who has experienced the  joys and benefits of a midwife's  care. My son was born at home  in Vancouver in September 1986,  attended by two midwives and  many friends and family. A year  and a half later, I'm still drawing  strength and courage from the triumph I discovered that day.  I know that the true essence of  midwifery is a commitment to safe,  healthy births, and I want to tell  that to everyone. The midwife ensures this through carefully monitoring the woman through every  state of her pregnancy, through educating the woman to have knowledge and trust in her ability to  give birth without medical intervention, and by the special words  and caresses she uses to guide a  woman through the difficult hours  of labour. Almost every country  in the world, including the United  States and all of Europe, has recognized that the midwife's "continuity of care" provides the safest,  most cost-effective system of maternity care available. In Canada  however we must battle a medical  system that "treats" childbirth in  the context of fear and pathology.  A system where, by international  standards, the rate of medical intervention performed on birthing  women in Canada is appallingly  high.  A common misconception in  Canada is that midwifery is synonymous with home birth. The implication is that midwives are anti-  doctor and anti-technology. On the  contrary: in countries where midwifery is legal, one would find mid-  wives attending as many or more  births in hospitals, with the benefit of full medical back-up, as at a  family's home.  In Canada, midwives are not  permitted any legitimate place of  practice, and it is illegal for any  doctor or hospital to provide them  with medical assistance. They perform home births because there is  such a high demand for it, but only  within certain well-defined parameters including proximity to hospital, low-risk indication, and physician back up. In addition, it is  common for the midwife to provide care and advice to parents  who choose a hospital birth. Her  knowledge and skills can be very  comforting, especially to "high-  risk" parents for whom obstetrical  intervention may be unavoidable.  When a close and longtime  freind became pregnant last year  she wanted to hire a midwife, but  she lives in the Cariboo where  there aren't any. While sometimes  a family will go the route of flying  a midwife up from the city to stay  with them through to post-partum  this is expensive and it's almost  impossible to find a local physician  who will offer the necessary support and medical back-up. So my  friend had her baby at the hospital, and during much of her long  and painful labour I sat outside on  the grass and cried. She had been  at my birth, but the nurses would  not even let me in the door to say  hello.  The reason I bring this up is  simply to come back to the initial question: what would legalized midwifery be like? The Midwifery Task Force, the province's  consumer advocacy group, is recommending the full legalization of  midwifery. They are calling for the  legal right to a safe, home birth,  complete hospital access for mid-  wives, and full coverage for midwifery care under the B.C. Medical Plan. The Midwives Association of B.C. has already developed a comprehensive set of guidelines for the education and regulation of midwives that is fully accredited by the International Confederation of Midwives. A simple  nod from the boys at Ministry of  Health is the only thing preventing the entry of midwives into the  province's health care system as  full-fledged professionals.  Now is a critical time for the future of midwifery in this province.  If individual midwives are at too  much risk to speak out for themselves, then we parents, health  care consumers, and lovers of babies must speak for them.  AbOrtiOVI  frompg3  Brighouse   echoed  about the role of provincial governments in the abortion issue.  "Abortion is a health as well  as a legal issue and the provinces  have the power to limit or ban coverage for abortions under medical  plans," she said. "We will have to  watch what will happen very carefully and we will have to do a lot  of education of the public, doctors and others about the important role abortion clinics can play  in providing counselling and follow up services to women who have  had an abortion."  Reaction from provincial and  federal politicians has been cautious. Prime Minister Brian Mulroney would say only that the government would respond "at an appropriate time."  In Ontario, Attorney General  Ian Scott told reporters that he  was uncertain whether hospitals  would be obligated to abolish  abortion committees or not. He  said he was certain, however,that  doctors performing an abortion or  a woman having an abortion would  not face criminal charges.  In British Columbia, where Bill  Vander Zalm's Social Credit government is generally considered  to be very anti-abortion, Health  Minister Peter Dueck said that  therapeutic abortion committees  would still operate in B.C. for now.  Dueck also said the provinces Attorney General would be carefully  studying the decision.  Anti-abortionists across Canada  reacted with outrage. Joe Borowski, who is awaiting his day at  the Supreme Court in a case arguing that the fetus is a person  with constitutional rights, said the  Court's ruling "canonized anarchy and lawbreaking." Outside the  Morgentaler's Toronto clinic anti-  abortionists told reporters "We  will be staying here (at the clinic).  We are very successful in back of  the clinic (where people enter]  changing people's minds." Other  protesters warned "They had better tighten security at this clinic."  Ontario Coalition for Abortion  Clinics spokesperson Judy Rebick  described the ruling as a "total victory for the pro-choice movement"  but warned: "We may have won,  but people will try and stop us.  "We are going to have to keep  on fighting but we have won a  great victory," she said.  According to the Vancouver  Women's Health Collective, who  also hailed the victory, "Women  may still face unequal access,  both economically and regionally,  to abortion services. We urge  women to seize thb opportunity  and demand secure, free-standing,  fully insured, women's reproductive health clinic's across Canada."  KINESIS Across Canada  WHAT' S NEWS?  by Pat Feindel  Fertilization  gets sick pay  A labour arbitration board recently ordered a Windsor hospital  to award sick benefits to a nurse  who took two and a half weeks  off work for in vitro fertilization  (IVF). The procedure allows infertile women to get pregnant by removing an egg from the ovary, fertilizing it with sperm in a laboratory, and implanting the fertilized  egg in the uterus.  The hospital initially refused to  accept infertility as an "illness"  that would qualify the woman for  benefits under the sick leave plan.  The board disagreed, ruling that  although the employee was not  "disabled so as to require a cure  with an absence from work, she  was suffering from a disease within  the medical definition which is applicable to the (sick leave) plan."  The ruling is believed to be  the first dealing with sick leave  for IVF. Infertility affects one  in seven North American women.  The nurse in this case became infertile after suffering from pelvic  inflammatory disease.  Briarpatch loses  federal tax status  Saskatchewan's alternative news  magazine Briarpatch has been notified that its charitable tax status will be revoked, in an ominous move by Revenue Canada.  The government agency claims  Briarpatch has stepped beyond its  stated goals of educating and communicating.  President of Briarpatch board  of directors, George Manz says  the action is "politically motivated, an attempt to silence one of  the few outlets for alternative, often anti-government, expression in  Saskatchewan."  A total of about $5,000 a year in  taxes would be gained by the government move, explains Manz, and  yet they have spent five months investigating the magazine. "There's  no money to be saved by attacking  Briarpatch. The goal is to crush  political dissent." The magazine  plans to appeal the decision.  Groups like the Fraser Institute and the Christian Anti-  communism Crusade enjoy registered charitable status.  No pensions  for homemakers  A Canada Pension Advisory  Board has come out against pensions for homemakers - one of the  Conservative government's main  promises to women during the  1984 election.  The report recommends shared  benefits between wage-earners and  their spouses, but rejects the idea  of homeowners joining the pension plan on their own. The advisory board calls for "as-you-  go credit splitting." People in  the paid labour force would have  to share half their CPP credits  each year with their homemaking  spouse.   Future  pension cheques  would automatically be split in  two, one for the former wage-  earner and one for the spouse.  Louise Dulude, NAC (National  Action Committee on the Status of Women) president, said the  idea of splitting credits between  spouses without improving benefits will simply result in "guaranteed poverty" for both spouses.  Dulude said only two of the  board members are women and  one of them is from a pensions  firm that has been openly critical  of homemaker pensions. "It's clear  these people don't care at all about  the situation of homemakers," she  said.  Quebec wants  more babies  The government can't force  Quebecers to have babies, but it  can make it easier for them to do  so, said Robert Dutil, junior social services minister, as he tabled  a family policy paper.  The policy would provide tax  support, housing, and day care, in  an attempt to remove obstacles to  childbearing that appear to have  reduced Quebec's birth rate to  1.38 children per couple compared  to 3.9 in 1956. The province's birth  rate is the second lowest in the  western world, next to West Germany.  Dutil introduced legislation to  create a nine-member government  advisory council on the family.  The new family policy would aim  to "recognize the family as an institution, through collective support to parents."  If the declining birth rate is  not reversed, says Dutil, it could  have disastrous consequences for  the survival of French language  and culture.  Pay equity  protects men  CUPE local 1344 in Hamilton  recently voted for a contract that  protects men from losing out when  women's wages are raised. The  contract prevents the employer  from freezing men's wages while it  brings women's wages up to their  level.  It also prevents its employer,  the Hamilton board of education,  from downgrading men's jobs to  lower pay levels or cutting their  hours.  "It's unique in the province,"  said president of the local, Gerry  McDonnell. He said he did not  know when the women who make  up about two thirds of the 550  maintenance workers' local, will  see wage increases. All but a few  are in a "wage basement", making  at least $2 an hour less than men.  He said the union will invoke  pay equity law now that it has won  assurances that men won't suffer.  Husbands degree:  family property  In the third decision of its kind,  an Ontario court ruled that an estranged wife is entitled to the benefits of her husband's professional  degree.  Victoria Caratun was awarded  $30,000 because she contributed to  her 38-year old husband's degree  by helping him leave his native Romania. She also raised their child  while he upgraded his skills and established a practice.  Dr. Caratun's dentistry license  was valued at about $220,000. He  is appealing the case. Meanwhile,  Mrs. Caratun will cross-appeal, arguing she should have received 50  per cent of the $220,000.  Blainey wins hockey rights  Justine Blainey finally scored  a winning goal in her battle  against discrimination in the Toronto Hockey League.  The 14-year-old hockey player  filed a human rights complaint  against the Toronto League and  the Ontario Hockey Association  for refusing to let her play on a  boys' team.  The Ontario Human Rights  Commission found that Blainey's  rights had been violated and that  she should be given the chance  to play on a boys' team. Com-  Report credits  farmwomen's work  Ian Springate's decision  was the first test of an earlier ruling by the Ontario Court of Appeal, striking down a section of  the provincial human rights code  which allowed athletic organizations to practise sexual discrimination.  The decision makes Ontario the  second province to allow girls to  play on boys' teams. (In 1978  a Quebec Superior Court judge  ruled that the Quebec Federation  of Ice Hockey could no longer discriminate against female players.)  by Kinesis Staff Writer  Canadian farmwomen are increasingly vital to the country's agricultural sector yet their  needs and contributions have been  largely ignored according to a report by the Canadian Advisory  Council on the Status of Women.  The 222 - page report.called  Growing Strong: Women in  Agriculture,provides information  on farmwomen's resources and  needs, their legal and economic  rights and tries to measure women's contribution to Canadian  agriculture.  The report notes that programs  and services designed for urban  women's needs are of little value to  farmwomen and points to the special needs rural women have when  it comes to issues such as childcare, health and safety and violence against women among others. Taking childcare as an example the report found that rural  women's needs were more complex  and varied due to factors such as  geographic isolation, lack of public transit and needs during peak  agricultural periods such as harvesting and planting.  Growing Strong calls for a  number of legal and economic  changes including:  • Amendments to the Unemployment Insurance Act which  would allow women who work  for pay with a spouse on family farms to make contributions  and receive unemployment insurance benefits and to receive  benefits such as maternity leave  and training programs.  • Adequate funding for battered  women's shelters as wife battering is as widespread on farms as  it is in cities yet there is less help  for rural women.  • More and better information on  farm safety.  • Adult education programs that  provide courses designed for  women such as farm mechanization and job training that takes  farm women's needs into account.  The report also notes that the  trend to agribusiness and corporate fanning has led to a tremendous increase in the number of  women working as paid non-family  farmworkers. Based on an analysis  of census data between 1951 and  1981, the report shows that overall paid farmwork has increased by  60 percent, and that female paid  workers have increased by an incredible 753 percent.  Women farmworkers are overwhelmingly women of colour from  India, Latin America, Asia, Portugal and Mexico working for wages  which are the lowest across the  entire occupational spectrum. The  most intensive non-family labour  areas are in Ontario and British  Columbia, and to a lesser extent,  in Quebec and Manitoba, all of  which have farming regions dedicated to a high concentration of  specialized cash crops.  Racist and sexist laws and employers expose these women to the  most exploitative working conditions in the country. They are excluded from the most basic protective legislation such as regulations  regarding hours of work, minimum  wage, access to overtime and vacation time. They are also subject to discriminatory provisions of  the Unemployment Insurance Act  and occupational and safety policies across the country.  The report recommends that  federal and provincial governments recognize and address these  Maternity  benefits  re-inforced  Federal employers will have to  continue paying benefit contributions for women on paid maternity  and child care leave, according to  new legislation passed in December.  Introduced by Labour Minister  Cadieux, the provision is designed  to close a loophole in the labour  code amendments made in 1984.  The legislation applies to federal  and Crown employers covered by  the Canada Labour Code.  The requirement would not apply to women who do not continue  to make normal employee contributions to pension, health, disability or other benefit programs during their absence.  KINESIS SSfSSS/S/SS/S/SS///SS/S///S/f//SfSS///S/*SS///S////////S//Sf///SSS/SSS/SSS//SS///SSSSS/  /////////////////////^^^^^  ////////////////////^^^^  Aboriginal rights  Gitksan and Wet'suwet'en  A deep and strong committment to their land  by Carol Nielsen  Strength and determination are threads  that run consistently through recent interviews of Gitksan and Wet'suwet'en women  held in Vancouver where the largest aboriginal land title trial in Canadian history is underway. As trial witnesses, elders, organizers and supporters, these women have temporarily left their homes, families and jobs  to hold key positions in this long-standing  struggle for justice and survival.  In the words of Dora Wilson-Kenni, a  Gitksan who bears the Indian name Ya-  galalh from the Clan of Laxgibuu (wolf) and  House of Spookx, "We don't feel we are going to lose because it doesn't matter what  the court says, we'll keep on fighting until  the last breath of the last little Indian."  Fifty-four hereditary Chiefs (twenty are  women) of the Gitksan (People of the Misty  River) and the Wet'suwet'en (People of the  Lower River) are suing the British Columbia and federal governments for ownership  and jurisdiction over 22,000 square miles in  the Skeena and Bulkley River watersheds in  northwest B.C., about 700 kilometers north  of Vancouver. In asserting their ownership  and jurisdiction rights, they are re-affirming  the foundations upon which their societies  have been based for over 5000 years.  The Gitksan and Wet'suwet'en Chiefs  state that because their land was never sold,  traded, or covered by treaty, it belongs to  them. They are in court to argue their right  to this land as a distinct people who share  a common territory, language, law, religion,  culture, economy, and authority. In court  testimony, they are explaining who their ancestors were, and how their way of life on  the territory for thousands of years has continuously confirmed their jurisdiction.  Both governments are arguing that the  Indian people no longer have an existing  basis of authority over their land, that the  Gitksan and Wet'suwet'en hereditary Chiefs  do not represent the people of their Houses,  that institutions of jurisdiction no longer exist, that aboriginal rights no longer exist,  that if title to the land survived Confederation, it was extinguished when reserves  were confirmed and provincial land legislation was enacted.  The governments have a monumental  task in proving their case and denying the  rights and civilization of the Gitksan and  Wet'suwet'en people. Witness after witness  has reaffirmed their attachment to the land,  their genealogies, and the importance of the  feast as a political, legal and spiritual institution.  For example, in Smithers, B.C., the original location of the trial, Mary Johnson  (Antgllilibixw), a Gitksan of the Fireweed  clan explained the deep rooted attachment  to the land that begins at birth. She referred  to the special moss gathered for use as baby  diapers. From the first moment of a human  life, a Gitksan child was cradled and comforted in this moss, and after it was used, it  was returned in its natural form to the forest. The Gitksan have a phrase to express  this personal attachment of an individual to  his or her "birth land". They say, "This is  where his or her diapers are left."  The Gitksan and Wet'suwet'en share a  common reliance on the resources of the region and a complex social and legal system.  Both societies are matrilinial. Says Ardythe  Wilson, a Gitksan:  "All our rights as Gitksan flow through  our mother. My mother (Dimbii Gibuu) is  Fireweed from the House of Gutgwinuxs  (owl) and family of Anda Ap (beehive). As  my mother's daughter I am Fireweed from  the House of Gutgwinuxs, family of Anda  Ao. My daugher is Fireweed from the House  of Gutgwinuxs and family of Anda Ap. My  brother is from the House of Gutgwinuxs,  family of Anda Ap. My father (Djogaslee) is  Frog, he is a high chief in the Frog clan and  his mother is Frog. All rights and privileges  pass through the mother to her offspring."  The basic unit of the Gitksan and  Wet'suwet'en social and legal system is the  House. Houses are composed of up to 200  people who usually know their mutual family relationships and share a common history expressed in stories (adaawk), songs,  crests and regalia. House members also belong to one of eight clans. The clan identity is an important factor in marriage law.  Each house has a territory and noone can  use any territory without permission. This  permission is given by the Chief, who could  be equally a female or male, but whose name  is always linked to the territory.  House Chiefs are responsible for the  management of their territories and exercise their responsibilities at feasts which  are given to mark all important occasions:  death, settlement of disputes, marriage and  inheritance of a name or territory.  According to Dora Wilson-Kenni, "The  feast house is our own house of parliament  where transactions are witnessed and accepted or not accepted, and that has been  the way for as long as I can remember. Even  as a child when I was brought along to the  feast house with my grandmother, I had to  sit on the floor near her and listen ... and  Important dates and events  1884 Federal Government passe* law prohibiting Feasts.  1884 Gitksan Chiefs of Gitwangak told the Provincial Government that the influx of miners to  Lome Creek within their territory, without their consent, was wrong and had to be stopped.  1872 Kitsegukia fire. Twelve Gitksan houses were burned, the fee was caused by a group of  miners who didn't put out their campfire. The Kitsegukia chiefs blockaded the Skeena to  all trading and supply boats. !  1889 Original surveys (or establishment of reserves is completed.  1889 Babine Agency established at Haselton by the Department of Indian Affairs.  1912-15 Royal Commission established to address the question o{ Indian Reserves (better known  as the McKenna-Mc Bride Commission). During the Commission hearings the Gitksan and  Wet'suwet'en chiefs insisted on talking about their territories and rejected the idea of reserves.  1927 Federal Government amended the Indian Act making it an offense, punishable by im  prisonment, to raise money to press for land claims.  1947 Indian people given vote in Provincial elections.  1960 Indian people given vote in Federal elections.  1977 Federal Government accepts Gitksan Carrier declaration for land claims negotiation.  Oct. 1984 Gitksan and Wet'suwet'en Chiefs file statement of Claim against the Provincial govern  ment seeking a declaration that they have a right to ownership of and jurisdiction over  their territories, and that right still continues to exist and was never lawfully extinguished  or abandoned.  May 1987 Gitksan and Wet'suwet'en go to court to assert their ownership and jurisdiction of and  over their territories.  AMT&UL-ILBlX   , vAcMry JoWrv^or^  (uoWlpool   i¬a\ "foe   OcearO  I dare not make a fuss about sitting there  until I got named, and then I got a seat."  During the trial, Gitksan and Wet'suwet'en witnesses are asked to justify their  ownership and jurisdiction. They are doing  so from a conviction that runs deep. Time  will tell how the governments will defend  their claim of ownership and jurisdiction  over the same territory.  As Mabel George from the House of Gis-  daywa states,  "It is ridiculous how Alfred (Alfred  Joseph, a recent witness) has to explain  to them that we are Indian, we were here  first and the land is ours. It is just like  if we would go into that court house and  we would say we want this part to dry our  salmon, and we want this part for so and  so's house until we crowd them out, make  laws and tell them what to do because we  run this house now."  A list of important dates and events that  have effected the Gitksan and Wet'suwet'en  people will assist non-Gitksan-Wet'suwet'en  to understand and context thb court case  (see box).  The women have a clear understanding  of this hbtory, and the effects these events  have on their lives. Christine William (Diil-  Ts'ah), a Wet'suwet'en, spoke of a time  when it was possible to trap.  "I remember back when my Mom and I  would travel a whole day walk to trap. This  is what I really miss, to be with my Mom  and go trapping. Now the places where  we've been are flat because of logging. When  I was small we used to have a great time  packing lunch and trapping, just Mom and  I. I'd like my kids to see that, and the feeling that you can be free and do something  like that. Right now, there is no place to go  to trap. It's just gone."  The Gitksan and Wet'suwet'en are attempting to win a legal battle that will result in a better life for their children. As  Ardythe Wilson recalls,  "My daughter asked me an interesting  question the night before I left. She said,  'Mommy, why do you have to go?' ... I  told her that in order to make her life better  Please see Gitksan pg 12  KINESIS Health  Repetitive Motion Injuries  A growing concern for women workers  by Marianne van Loon  Sheila Gilhooley and Janet Fraser used to  be carpenters. Both developed pain in their  wrists while working, which forced them to  give up their chosen occupation. Both have  joined the growing number of women suffering from a preventable category of diseases,  repetitive motion injuries (RMI).  Janet's injury is relatively recent. She developed carpal tunnel syndrome from repeated hammering and other wrist work involved in carpentry. She quit carpentry, and  her fill-in teaching job became her full time  occupation. She was careful, wore a night  splint for several months, and saw a massage therapist. She no longer has any pain,  but says "I have no guarantee that it won't  come up again as soon as I start a day's  (carpentry) work."  Seven years ago, while also working as  a carpenter, Sheila first noticed her fingers  were numb when she woke up. Soon the  numbness was accompanied by pam, and  she began to wake in the middle of the night.  A rheumatologist advbed cortisone but the  drug is inexact and can have negative effects  on healthy parts of the body, so she found  an occupational therapist. This person gave  her sleeping and working splints, which she  wore, and which did not work.  "They all told me not to work with my  hands," she said. "I don't think they would  have been so fast to tell a male carpenter  to work in an office. They didn't even know  if I could read or write." And apparently  they were also unaware that office work can  also cause RMI's. A recent study reported  in the Vancouver Sun blames the design  of the typewriter keyboard for tenosynovitis and carpal tunnel syndrome.  At this point Sheila found a woman mi-  crosurgeon who convinced her to have an  operation to remove the nerve sheath and  thereby relieve the pressure on her carpal  tunnel. "My hand didn't get better, in fact  it got quite a bit worse." Because she was  relying heavily on her healthy left hand, it  too became injured.  She underwent another operation with  another doctor, this time successful because  her doctor noticed that she scarred easily,  and applied a drug to inhibit scarring in the  wrist. Sheila is one of the eighty percent for  whom the surgery is helpful.  "My hands are not perfect now. They get  cold very easily, and I had to give up carpentry because of the cold." But she is working, indoors now, with her hands.  RMI's and Work  Larry Stoffman, Retail Clerks Union director of Union Services B.C., says that RMI's,  classified as "joint irritations" by the Workers Compensation Board, make up forty-  two percent of all industrial disease claims.  "They are the leading industrial disease."  And the incidence is increasing substantially: six years ago RMJ's accounted for  thirty percent of all claims.  What To Watch For  1. Do your fingers, hands and  wrists ache or are they  numb at night after work?  2. Have you noticed any unusual clumsiness, such as  dropping things or having  difficulty in buttoning a  shirt?  3. Have you or anyone doing  the same job as you had an  operation on the wrists?  4. Are your wrists bent as  you work?  5. Do you use twisting "clothes  wringing" motion as you  work?  If you answered "yes" to three  or more of these questions,  you may suffer from carpal  tunnel syndrome, tendonitis,  or one of the other related  occupational injuries.  Nerves and tendons pass  through the CARPAL  TUNNEL - CT. SYNDROME  Area where tendon  joins bone  TENDON - TENDINITIS  TENDON SHEATH which  provides lubrication for the  tendon inside it -  TENOSYNOVITIS  Carpal tunnel syndrome, tendonitis and tenosynovitis are among some of the strain-  related problems classified as Repetitive Motion Injuries (RMI's).  Carpal tunnel syndrome occurs when the median nerve, which passes through a narrow  opening in the wrist called the carpal tunnel, is compressed by tissues and fluids. It results  in pain in the fingers and hand, numbness, tingling, weakness and loss of co-ordination,  usually worse at night. Symptoms can also radiate to the upper arm, elbow, shoulder or  neck. It can be caused by a single forceful inujury, but is often caused by repeated, awkward forceful wrist motion.  Tendonitis refers to an inflamed tendon: a tendon is connective tissue attaching bone  to muscle. The inflammation can cause the tendons to be moved only with difficulty, and  with pain. Tenosynovitis is similar, except that it is an inflammation of the tendon sheaths  of the wrist, arm or hand. Tendon sheaths protect and lubricate the tendons, and the inflammation will first cause aching and tenderness, and later swelling and tenderness. It restricts and weakens use of the affected area, and pain may spread to neck and shoulders.  Stoffman says that "These kinds of injuries tend to increase with increased work  loads and rates, combined with poorly designed workplaces." In times of high unemployment workers are subjected to worse job  conditions, and have little or no control over  the workplace. "There are no ergonomic  regulations protecting workers in Canada.  As a consequence a lot of people are becoming injured." Last year alone 1,078 of the  claims accepted by the WCB were injuries  related to repetitive motion.  Because women fall into certain job ghettos, including part-time work, we are particularly affected. For instance in fish packing, a seasonal occupation mostly employing  women, there is a high degree of industrial  injury claims. Similarly, in light manufacturing and retail sectors, RMI's accounted  for fifty-nine and fifty-three percent of all  claims, respectively. "There is an epidemic  of RMI's," Stoffman states.  Part-time workers may be at the highest  risk. They have no contract, more stress and  strain, and often continue to work while injured. These injuries usually develop over  time, and especially with seasonal work,  workers need the money and will continue  until they are disabled. There tends also to  be less awareness in regards to compensation and treatment, as well as less money to  pursue these channels.  Not all RMI's are employment related.  In fact, carpal tunnel syndrome has traditionally been known as a disease affecting  middle aged women, often with no obvious  cause. And, women do a lot of work in the  home, which makes them just as vulnerable to RMI's as any other worker who must  perform repetitive, stressful tasks.  Treatment  Of course, as with any disease or injury, the  best treatment b prevention. But if you are  developing any of the symptoms of a RMI  (see box), you should take it seriously and  immediately cease whatever is causing the  strain. These injuries can take a long time  to heal, and if you leave it too long you may  be chronically injured.  You should seek medical attention and, if  it is work related, inform your employer as  well as your doctor, so that you can apply  to the WCB board for compensation: a RMI  will usually mean you have to rest the injury, and will be unable to work for a time.  You have several options in treatment.  Most important is rest. A good chiropractor should be able to tell you what exactly  is going on, and perform any manipulations  necessary to reduce stress of on the injured  area. In certain cases the improvement may  be immediately noticeable. You may have to  wear a splint for a few weeks while the tissues heal.  Because the blood supply to tendons and  ligaments is limited, they take longer to heal  than other tissues. Nutritional supplements,  such as calcium and manganese may also aid  healing, as well as herbs and herbal combinations. White willow bark contains the active ingredient ASA from which aspirin was  derived, and may help reduce inflammation.  Comfrey poultices and comfrey tea are also  routinely suggested for any joint/tendon injuries. Cayenne/capsicum, applied directly  to the skin over the injured area, or taken in  small amounts internally may also improve  circulation to the area, aiding healing.  The Chinese tincture tee dajow, available cheaply in Vancouver's Chinatown, is  a cheap, useful remedy. Massaged into the  skin over the injury for five minutes daily it  has been used traditionally to alleviate pain  and heal the area. And as healing progresses  you may want to add strengthening and  flexibility exercises. You may also choose to  work with other healers including massage  and physio-therapists, and acupuncturists.  Studies by Dr. Karl Folkers, director of  the Institute of Biomedical Research at the  University of Texas at Austin, have shown  carpal tunnel syndrome can often be treated  successfully by vitamin B6. At least 100 to  300 mg of B6 taken daily for at least twelve  weeks are suggested, but be careful with  this vitamin, as amounts of 500 mg per day  for the same amount of time have also been  shown to cause permanent nerve damage.  Doctors routinely prescribe immobilization of the area involved, and administer  drugs such as aspirin and cold packs to reduce inflammation. They may also refer you  to a physiotherapist, or a massage therapist. You may be advised to take cortisone,  which may have adverse effects, or, particularly in the case of carpal tunnel syndrome,  surgery.  PREVENTION  There are a multitude of ways to prevent  most RMI's. At work, these involve workplace design, scheduling and job organization, and tools and equipment. The following list is from Facts, the Canadian Union  of Public Employees newsletter.  Tools and Equipment  • tools should fit the worker, i.e. smaller  tools for smaller hands  • tools should be designed to reduce bending and rotating of the wrist and minimize vibration  Upper: strained        Lower: correct  Workplace Design  • design comfortable work stations  • provide arm and wrist supports  • make work surfaces and chairs adjustable  Scheduling and Job Organization  • slow down work rate  • increase number and length of rest breaks  and establish a time limit for repetitive  tasks  • alternate tasks  • reduce or eliminate twisting and repetitive motions by redesign  • reduce time workers perform tasks affecting circulation, i.e. use of pneumatic drill,  or in cold conditions  Good  KINESIS /////////////////////^^^^^  /////////////////////^^^^  LIFE STORIES  BEANS  To tell you the truth, I have trouble  thinking about this stuff. I don't like to remember how marginal this society's acceptance of lesbians b. I don't like to remem-  A tip of the hat  to those fighting lesbians  by Nora D. Randall  Some things are hard to think about.  During the winter holiday I went to a  potluck dinner attended only by women,  most of whom were lesbians. I was sitting  on the couch revelling in the totally satisfied feeling that comes from eating wonderful food and I just let my hearing wander  in and out of the pleasant buzz of conversations going on around me.  "Oh, I used to go to art school too, but  then my kids were kidnapped and I just  stopped."  From another conversation on the other  side of the room, "I just got my daughter  back after nine years."  I look around the room. These are my  friends. I don't usually think of them as  women of courage, but they are.  The second woman's voice continues.  "She's eighteen. The first couple of months  were really rough. I wasn't sure we were go  ing to be able to hve together, but it's working out ... He cut me dead. I used to take  the ferry over to see her on the weekend and  I'd take the bus out to his house and there'd  be nobody home."  I don't know how women survive. I think  about the first woman and I try to remember the detaib about those years she was  fighting for the custody of her children. I remember when she sent kids off to their father for two weeks in the summer and what  she got back were legal papers suing her for  custody.  She had to move east and go through a  court battle as a lesbian mother. What she  won was the right to live with her children  in the same town as their father, so that he  could keep an eye on their relationship and  start the whole custody court battle all over  again the minute he wasn't satisfied. For a  lesbian this was a victory. She lived back  there for a couple of years until he lost interest, I can't remember why, and she could  return with her kids to the city she chose to  live in.  ber how hard women have fought to gain  this marginality. I don't like to remember  the attitudes of people who consider almost  any environment better for children than  a homosexual environment. I don't hke to  remember the hate that can be directed  against us. I don't like to remember how  much political and social power this hate  can command. I don't want to remember  any of thb, I just want to have a good time  with my friends at a party.  After coffee and dessert, there's a little  floor show. One of the lesbians with a great  deal of comic moxy displays the christmas  gifts she received from her family and informs us that she is raffling them off. We  raucously enter into the spirit of the raffle,  each of us bidding on the proffered gifts  This b a woman who has been honest and  direct with her family about who and what  she is. The gifts are so totally devoid of even  the most superficial recognition of who thb  woman is that we get into a dbcussion of  which gifts are mistakes and which are malicious.  "It was depressing to open them," she  said. Her friends took them all away. The  one that tickled me most was knowing that  the frilly music box was going to a really  tough dyke who runs a tatoo parlour and  collects music boxes. It b a gentle revenge.  I think about thb evening a lot. In my  mind it's like one of those optical illusions.  You look at a room full of ordinary women  and suddenly something shifts and you see  how brave and strong they are, what in-  |: credible battles they have had to fight, how  " fighting has taught them how to fight, not  not to fight. Or you see a room full of triumphant Amazons and suddenly something  shifts and they are the woman next to you  on the bus, your next door neighbour, your  mother, your daughter, your friends.  I can stand to remember the world because I know fighting women.  >»»»»»»»»»»»»*  SUPPORT  WOMEN  IN  BU 5INE55  M BLOCK BROS. NATIONAL REAL ESTATE SERVICE  NANCY STEELE  bus. (604)321-6881  res. (604)254-0941  BLOCK BROS. REALTY LTD.  5842 Cambie Street, Vancouver, B.C.   V5Z 3A8  (Betty (Dancing  By  (Biruta  255-3091  HffliMMHMMmffllTnffi  »HH»»Him»»ii»»HW:  Proofreading • Editing • Writing • Publicity  »HMMHHHH»WmHHl  Jb. J&airrer Ji, JHsrmgfam  Naturopathic Physician  Marlene Holt  Sales Associate  2760 W. Broadway    Suite 216  Vancouver. B.C. V6K2G4  REALTY WORLDtm - Champlain Realty Ltd.  Bus. (604) 438-7117   Res. (604) 255-5027  Marsha J. Arbour  Signpainting  Screenprinting  Graphics & Design  734-9395  »»»»»»»»»mmfflffl^ j I «fflffl»»»»»n»»»t»i  unimmmmMMWHHi  WOMEN'S COUNSELLING  JANET M. LICHTY, B.A., M.Ed.  G PSYCHOLOGY  (604) 874-6982  c5MACPHEI?SON ^MOTORS  885 E 8 th Ave., Van.  876-6038  BYAPPOINTMENT  THE VANCOUVER BLOCK  419 ■ 736 GRANVILLE ST.  VANCOUVER. B.C.   V6Z 1G3  c^Aliceoflfacpherson  licensed mechanic  Crossland Consulting  Personal Management Services for Artists  Individuals, Non-Profits Groups, Small Companies  . Grant and Proposal Writing  • Bookkeeping Services, Taxes  • Resumes, Career Counselling  • FIRST CONSULTATION - FREE •  By Appointment Only Jackie Crossland 682-3109J  iimnMiiHHif  KINESIS Teenagers: Getting ready for independenee  by Maura Volante and Nancy Pollak a diet," and she's like eight years old, and I    go ... no!  Jenny: I used to stand in front of the mirror and go "oh—God! (disgust sound), and  I'd say I've gotta lose weight. And my mom  would say, "If I ever hear you say that one  more time that's it!" She'd get really mad  at me for putting myself down. She'd say,  "There's nothing wrong with your body."  When I was in grade eight a group of university students came to the private school,  and they were doing a study with the girls  on body image.  They asked us general questions, like  what part of your body do you like the most,  what part did you dislike the most, why.  They had this big long paper and you were  supposed to draw yourself the way you saw  yourself, just your outline. And then they  stood you back against it to see how close  you were.  I was very close on mine. I don't remember what I didn't like about my body, I  think it was my feet or something. I met my  friends afterwards and some of them said  my breasts, or my bum, or something like  that. And I didn't feel that way at all. I  guess Fm proud of my body.  Melanie: I have friends who could stand to  lose weight, and they are always saying oh—  look at my body! I'm so fat! How can they  really sit there and think that? It's ridiculous.  Emily: I had a hard time feeling good about  my weight, I felt bad when I'd eat. I was  getting toward anorexia. I didn't want to  eat food, and I wasn't eating properly. And  I did lose quite a bit of weight. But my  mom would say—eat eat eat—all the time.  I stopped doing it finally. And my friend is  bulimic.  Kinesis: Did it disturb you?  Emily: Yea. I have to be careful now, because when I get depressed then I'll hate  my body and I'll start getting freaked out  about eating again.  Jenny: I've never really had problems with  eating but I've noticed that the past year  or so, when I get really angry, or I just feel  sad, I won't eat, right? It's the martyr in  me coming out. Denying me.  Emily: It's never got too bad, but ... it's  something I think about now because it's  really easy to do without noticing at that  time. I never really thought about it then.  I thought I was fat. Obviously you have to  lose weight if you're fat.  There's a lot of pressure on girls to be  thin. I know a friend at school ... she's  thinking of doing modelling, she's really re-  "We got back to sex again," said Melanie  amid peals of laughter, near the end of a recent discussion around Nancy's kitchen table. Topics ranged from world hunger to pot  smoking, but the subject of sex did seem  to keep coming back, as three adolescent  women shared some of their thoughts on a  variety of bsues.  Drawn mostly from Vancouver eastside  feminist networks (some girls of different  backgrounds being unable to make it at the  last minute), this was admittedly not a representative group. The girls all live with  their mothers, they all live in housing coops, they all (coincidentally) have one or  two sisters and no brothers, and two of the  three go to alternate schools. Jenny, 17, goes  to Ideal School, Emily, 16, attends Relevant  High, and Melanie, 15, is at Templeton, a  public high school in east Vancouver.  Here are a few sections of this three-hour  discussion.  Kinesis: Women, particularly young  women, feel pressured to look a certain  way. How has this affected you?  Jenny: Just a comment before we say anything. There are those "Get Into Shape,  Girls" kits, for ages three and up. It's scary.  When you're that young, even if you are  overweight, you don't start dieting then.  Give it some time and see what's really going on with your body. There's so much emphasis on getting in shape and looking good.  And it's totally accepted. No one questions  the "get in shape girl" dolls, it's getting  younger and younger too.  Emily: Little kids, really young, eight and  ten years old, they say "Oh.I'm so fat," you  know, and you look at them and you think-  on my god! And they say, "I have to go on  ally skinny. And she has a lot of health  problems. She was bulimic before. She was  saying "I have to lose another ten pounds"  and I'm saying "No! ... talk to your doctor about it!" She really worries me because  I know if she gets any skinnier she's gonna  get even worse.  Jenny: I get pressured on it, but it's not  pressure to lose weight, it's just ... "Oh!  You've lost weight?" or "Gee, have you  gained a few pounds?"  Sex  Kinesis: What do your moms say to you  about birth control?  Melanie: My mom said, "if you're planning  to have sex make sure you use something.  K you want to go on birth control tell me."  She wants us to know all about it first because of the things it does to you.  Jenny: When I was fourteen my mom sent  me with my aunt to the Women's Health  Collective to discuss every kind of birth control anybody has ever heard of. She said,  "When and if you decide to become sexual, so long as you have birth control that's  fine." I would never use the pill because of  all the side effects. I'm not into screwing up  my body just because I screw. I use a diaphragm.  sex education. But it was presented as if it  was something we weren't going to do.  Jenny: I haven't personally been in a class  where it's been talked about a whole lot.  Kinesis: Have any of your friends gotten pregnant?  Melanie: No, but  they've been worried  about it.  Jenny: I was actually worried about that  up until yesterday. I'm happy now.  Emily: I was at the doctor the other day  and found out the I.U.D. is still legal. I  couldn't believe it. So many forms of birth  control are so bad for you.  Kinesis:  Among   the   girh   you  know,  what is the most common form of birth  control?  Emily: The pill.  Melanie: With the girls I know it's just  condoms, because they can't talk to their  parents so they use what's easiest to get.  Jenny: Condoms are a biggy, and the pill.  I also have a friend who says stuff like,  "Maybe he'll pull out ... "  Kinesis: How okay is it with your peers  to sleep with a guy?  Emily: There still is that double standard.  Kinesis: What kind of sex education do  you get at school?  All: None!  Melanie: Last year we got a pamphlet on  birth control, and two guidance classes on  I know girls at school who are called sluts.  And the guys are studs.  Jenny: It's not like that at Ideal. It's more,  "Well, did you use birth control? Did you  get what you wanted?"  Kinesis: How okay is it to be gay?  Emily: Not very.  Jenny: It's fine.  Melanie: At my school it's totally unacceptable. If they see a guy who'se obviously  gay they'll say "Oh God, look at that fag!"  Or if lesbianism comes up it's an insult.  Jenny: There's a guy in my grade who's  obviously gay and it's not a problem at  all. Sometimes it gets a bit much just because he's so blatant about it. But I've never  heard talk like, "That person is gay, therefore ..."  Dealing With Abuse  Jenny: I have a friend who was sexually  abused. She would only tell me this in pieces  and at one point she came over to my place  for the night, and I guess basically ran away  for the day, she had a big fight with her  dad and I advised her to seek counseling.  So I had done as much as I can, I phoned  all these different places. Showed her these  places. And then nothing happened. There  was the one session and nothing happened.  Six months later it came up again, and I  wanted her to do something about it. She  also had a little sister.  My friend was going to be going away  the next year for a year, for school. This  could easily happen to her little sister. And  she said that her sister had some problems  with their dad. She said, I'm gonna tell her  to tell you if anything's going on, or whatever. I said, you don't want to do that to  your sister. I was totally operating on guilt.  I thought it was the only way to get her  to see somebody or to talk to somebody.  Because she loved her mother and felt that  she would be really hurting her mother. Her  mother knew about it.  And so I told her that she had to do something about it or I was going to. And I didn't  really know if I was going to or not but that  was certainly a threat that I was willing to  use.  My mom knew about it. And my mom  was trying to get some information from  whoever it is you phone to tell about these  sort of things. They dragged all the information they thought they needed, out of her,  and didn't even give us a day.  I said, just give me twenty-our hours to  try and get her to say that she'll see a counsellor, or try to talk to somebody and he  said yes, I'm laying my job on the line and  that sort of thing, but I'll do it. I'll write to  the supervisor to tell her not to go to the  school until such and such a date, but they  did anyway. They went down and talked to  Book offers a glimpse into teenage lives  by Emily Lash  NO KIDDING: INSIDE THE WORLD OF TEENAGE GULLS  by Myrna Kostash  McClelland and Stewart  $24.95  No Kidding: Inside the World of Teenage Girls lives up to its title. Myrna Kostash  managed to condense what the girls were saying about their lives, dreams, and values,  without being condescending, critical, or putting in her opinions. The book gives a realistic  look at what is important to many types of teenage girls.  The book is part biographical and part different issues. There are twelve chapters which  are about specific girls' lives. The stories are not written by the young women but a lot of  quotes are used. Some of the issues discussed are best frineds, classrooms, boys, families,  and sexuality. Each story contains factual information and their personal experiences.  "I've told my parents to get me married right away ... Pd divorce him but get to keep  the car." This is Judy. She has been brought up in a traditional Indian family; for her this  means an arranged marriage. Her reason for getting married, when she is sixteen, is to gain  freedom from her protective parents.  Generally, opinions on marriage vary from Td love to get married ... and living happily ever after" to not 'settling down'—"There's no way Fm going to be a housewife." For  most of the young women having children is more important than having a husband.  "Teenagers who come from 'lower socioeconomic families' were less likely to be working  part-time while attending school than middle class kids. The reason for this is that employers only hire the most conservative looking people. For the people who don't fit in it could  be months before they find a job and there is no guarantee that they will not be fired or  laid-off the next month. Non-unionized and under-paid work is what is available for young  people today.  "I want to die young," said Jody. "That way I will never be pretty." Seventy to eighty  percent of teenage girls believe they are fat. There is a constant pressure from advertising for girls and women to change how they look. Looking old, fat, or having dandruff are  not acceptable by today's standards. Anorexia nervosa affects one in one hundred females,  sixty thousand Canadian females are bulimic. ,  Friends have replaced families as the most important influence in a teenage girls life. "A  best friend is she who has the right to your time and attention and the privilege of hearing your confession." However, boyfriends sometimes cause a breakup of girl's friendships.  In my opinion, boyfriends come and go but girlfriends are there to stay.  Myrna Kostash started this project to educate herself and get in touch with teenage  girls. She turned forty and she realized she was "a pass£, know-nothing stumble bum. The  type of adult who questions what is today's youth coming to?" She began the project with  three goals: to avoid sensationalism of teenage lives, to speak to adults only when necessary, and to only talk to girls. She interviewed approximately fifty girls from Vancouver,  Edmonton and Toronto.  From a young woman's point of view, overall this is an excellent book. I have two criticisms; that she didn't talk to teenagers who lived outside the big cities, such as on farms,  and it would have been more meaningful if the biographical sections had been in the girls  own words.  The three goals the author set in the beginning of the book were what made it different  than other books written about teenage girls. Very rarely do I read a book about teenagers  which is not offensive to me. I would recommend this book to you if you are interested in  teenage girls or are one.  Emily.  Melanie  and Jenny  her at school and she just admitted absolutely nothing. She said she never wanted  to speak to me again. And I haven't spoken  to her since.  Emily: I did that too, I called in on somebody and I said I don't want her to know  it's me, because I was really involved with  this whole family and ... they let on it was  me, and they were so mad at us ...  Jenny: I was physically abused by my  mother when I was younger. I must say I  don't really remember a whole lot of it. Just  a slap here, when she was frustrated. I don't  think it went that far, although you'd have  to ask her because I don't remember. She  just couldn't handle it, so she got help. After that, with anyone that would be doing  parenting, one of the rules was, you don't  touch Jenny, and that's fine.  And I've had minor sexual encounters of  that type with a boyfriend of hers. But that  hasn't been something, I think, that's hurt  me or marred me for life. I've dealt with it  my own way. I know a few people, it's more  physical abuse actually.  Kinesis: What kind of stuff do you hear  about?  Melanie: Actually, one friend in particular who's been totally unhappy. Her parents  keep on grounding her for months, like from  now till—summer. And by the time it gets  to summer she's done something to ground  her for another few months. And this would  make her hate her parents. Her dad's a real  jerk, I can't stand him. He won't ever give  anything. She can't say anything there.  And there hadn't been physical abuse until recently. Because it's just been getting  worse and worse. Now, when she can get  out, she wants to get really drunk or really  stoned, because she can never get out to do  it. And so when she does she really wants  to do it.  Jenny: Is this to get back at her parents?  Melanie: Actually it is, and that they can't  stop her from doing anything, and so she'll  go home, puking on the stairs, and they'll  just ground her again. She wants to move  out now, and so she might quit school to do  that. She's sixteen.  Being Political  Melanie: One thing I can safely say about  my school is that no one will even come near  Kinesisl  Emily: Doesn't that bug you sometimes?  Melanie: Yes, they're totally unaware.  Emily: I'm the only one who doesn't eat  grapes. I told one of my friends about the  boycott, about how the farm workers are  dying of cancer and their babies are born deformed and they weren't even told the truth  about the chemicals they're using, and she  said, "We wash our grapes." And I said, "It  doesn't even come off, but what about the  farm workers?" and she said, "We don't eat  them often so I guess we won't get sick." I  could   not believe it!  Melanie: When the teachers went on strike,  my friends and I went and picketed with  the teachers. We made our own leaflets and  tried to explain it to the other students.  Kinesis:    What   about  feminism?   Do  your girl friends have an awareness of  the women's movement?  Emily: They let the guys push them around  so much.  Jenny: At Ideal the women's movement is  sort of taken for granted.  Melanie: At Temp, a lot of girls just want  to get married. I don't think they know  what feminism is.  Kinesis: If you ruled the world, what  would you change.  Emily: Get rid of nuclear weapons to start  off with.  Jenny: For all the money we have on this  planet, so much is spent on the wrong  things. I'd change where the money is going to.  .1<1U Melanie: And where it's coming from, like  the people who pay taxes who can't afford  it and the companies who don't have to pay  at all.  Jenny: Even countries who have a lot of  wealth can't feed their populations because  the land is controlled by governments and  used for export things like coffee. Food is a  big problem.  Kinesis: So what do you think of Van-  mi   der Zalm?  All: Oh my God!  Melanie: There are politicians I don't like  and politicians I hate and I hate Vander  Zalm.  Jenny: Take this AIDS thing. Now teenagers just won't have sex.  Emily: Of course they'll never have sex if  you don't tell them what it is.  Jenny: This pamphlet he put out hardly  mentions the word condom!  Emily: Sometimes it's really isolating. You  feel like you're the only one who has any  of these values. You feel like a bizarre person. I used to say, "Mom, you've ruined me.  I can't go around anymore thinking everything's fine."  Kinesis: What kind of work do you want  to do when you're out of school?  Emily: I have no idea what I want to do. I  want to get my lifeguarding certificate and  I can do that this year. That's as far as I've  gotten.  Melanie: I know I'll go to university. I want  to got to U.Vic, so I can live on campus. I  know I'm going to write in some form.  Jenny: I would go crazy if I got stuck behind a desk. I like the outdoors a lot. And  I like working with people. If I could find  something that combined both of those that  was satisfying and didn't leave me starving,  that's what I would do. Right now I'm into  acting for TV and film. I enjoy that, but you  have to have a back-up, so I think I'll go to  college or university.  Kinesis: Do you think you'll be treated  differently from the guys? Encounter  discrimination ?  Emily: I'm sure we will.  Jenny: I don't feel like I will. Statistics  show, so I have to say yes, I will be, but  I think things are changing. I'm assertive  and it's worked frequently for me, so I don't  think I'll be discriminated against.  Kinesis: So what's fun?  Emily: Going out with my friends.  Melanie:  I  like  dancing.   I  take  dance  classes.  Jenny: I like listening to music and writing  in my journal.  Emily: I write in a journal, too. And I like  to draw pictures.  Kinesis: what do you like about your-  self?  Melanie: I can think for myself.  Emily: I'm a good friend. I don't judge. I  know a lot of political stuff.  Jenny: I give sound advice, and I'm confident.  Kinesis: What do you look forward to ?  Melanie: I look forward to being independent.  All: Me too! Arts  Prison book misses strong feminist slant  by Ivy Scott  TOO PEW TO COUNT  Canadian Women in Conflict with the Law  edited by Ellen Adelberg and Claudia Cur-  rie  Press Gang Publishers, 1987, $14.95  Too Few to Count, published late last  year, is about women and crime in Canada.  I have mixed feelings about the book;  while it contains some very useful information, its analysis is sometimes restrained by  a criminological approach.  Too Few to Count is a collection of  nine articles by twelve women. Most have  backgrounds in academia or employment  in the criminal justice system, and several  have worked with women prisoners as social  workers, advocates and community group  organizers.  So although it's a book about women  prisoners, it's not written by (or for) them.  This is a problem in itself because no matter  how accurate the accounts were or how good  the analysis, it would remain another instance of a more privileged group describing  and defining another group's experiences.  It's important to feminism that women in  differing circumstances express their own  truths.  The articles in Too Few to Count provide statistical and historical information  about women in prison and some good criticism of traditional theories about women  and crime. As a criminology book, it's a big  improvement in the perception of women  criminals. As a feminist book, it's still (in  some articles more than others) too closely  allied with the criminal justice system.  The introduction by editors Ellen Adelberg and Claudia Currie aims for a position  of solidarity with women prisoners. In some  statements, that solidarity is there:  "We entered the correctional system as  professional 'helpers,' but quickly realized  that far from needing help, our 'clients'  needed liberation—both economic and social ..."  At other times, the approach is frustrating in its loyalty to the system. The repeated reference to "women coming into  conflict with the law," for instance, sounds  as though women initiate the conflict. The  law is seen as a given, which women must  Kingston Prison for Women  learn to steer around. There isn't much discussion about how the legal system is part of  the problem, and whose interests it serves.  Prostitution is a case in point. While the  book talks about why women might choose  to work as prostitutes, it doesn't affirm  womens' right to make that choice. Here, it  would be more appropriate to ask: why is  the law coming into conflict with women?  In "Getting the Facts Straight: A Statistical Overview", Holly Johnson notes that  little research has been done about women  arrested and/or imprisoned. Still, she has  gathered alot of interesting information. I  finally know what percentage of women in  prison are Native (20 percent in B.C. where  Native people are 3 percent of the total population) instead of just knowing that it was  disproportionately high. The article traces  changes in the types of crime women have  been charged with over two decades.  "In Their Own Words" is a series of interviews which describe the lives of seven  women prior to imprisonment. The interviews show that one's life circumstances are  relevant to one's decision to do something  that's illegal (Amazingly, this is still a controversial point in criminology and in the  courts).  It's essential that women in prison de-  scibe their own experiences, and these stories contain some important truths. Unfortunately, the excerpts concentrate almost entirely on how the women have been  victimized. To see women inside as more  than victims, we need to hear about their  strengths, successes, and how they've survived.  "Native Women and Crime in Canada:  A Theoretical Model" is by Carol LaPrarie,  a researcher with the Solicitor General.  LaPrarie shows how racism, through the  break down of Native communities, poverty,  and violence, leads to Native women breaking the law. However, in trying to determine  why there are so many Native women in jail,  she largely ignores the racism of the police  and courts in arrest and sentencing.  Recognition of the prison system's role in  oppressing Native women isn't always evident in the article's phrasing. For example  saying "(Native women appear to have) a  disproportionately heavy involvement with  the criminal justice system" makes the relationship sound consensual.  Sheelagh (Dunn) Cooper's "The Evolution of the Federal Women's Prison" is  a horrifying history  of women's federal  GltkSaVl frompg7  than what mine was, and what my mothers  was, and her mother before her, we do have  to make sacrifices ... (I told her), I want  things to be better for you, and it is hard,  but everyone is giving something up in order to make things better for you and when  you have your children, it will be better for  them."  No one knows how long a resolution to  this case will take. Whoever loses the current court case will undoubtedly appeal  and, in all likelihood, the case will eventually be decided by the Supreme Court of  Canada, the country's highest court. An elder, Helen Joseph of the Gitksan estimated  that a resolution will take another century.  I hope she is wrong. There is an uneasiness permeating both native and non-native  communities. This case is a chance for the  courts to settle an outstanding score peacefully.  In many ways, the Gitksan and Wet'suwet'en have already won this case and made  hbtory. Ardythe Wilson states:  "When we started to prepare, we didn't  prepare to take the governments to court.  We prepared to make our people stronger.  We do the work as much as possible at  home. We rely on a lot of professionals for  their expertise, but in the process, all the  people who have been beaten and subdued  by the imposed systems of the reserves and  everything else that goes along with it, have  picked themselves up and dusted themselves  off, and have seen that maybe there is hope,  maybe there is life after death.  "Now, people are becoming trained and  skilled. Regardless of how the court case  turns out, the movement has started to  take place and we are now becoming skilled.  The Gitksan and Wet'suwet'en have become  very strong in the process simply because  we have had to. Simply to address this court  Much work remains to see this court case  through to a just conclusion. Of primary importance is self-education about aboriginal  rights, the Gitksan and Wet'suwet'en struggle, and native people in general.  As Ardythe Wilson points out, "A lot of  times the Canadian public at large looks  at Native people and only see the romantic view or the stereotyped image of the  drunken Indian, or the uneducated Indian  who is always begging to the government  for money. Our message is open your mind  up and start from scratch. Erase everything  you have learned about Indian people and  open up your mind totally to learn about  individual peoples."  The Gitksan and Wet'suwet'en hope that  through an understanding of the issues and  history, non-natives feelings of being threatened by aboriginal land title actions will be  reduced and additional moral support will  be generated. Cooperation is sought for a  resolution that is just for all people.  In interviews with Gitksan and Wet'suwet'en women, a consistent question was  asked. How can women, particularly non-  native women, be useful? Their reply, in addition to self-education, was support.  Important moral support can be provided by attending the court case in downtown Vancouver to witness the proceed  ings and also by making phone calls and  sending support letters. (The decision by  Chief Justice McEachern to change the location of the trial from Smithers to Vancouver has been deeply felt by the Gitksan and Wet'suwet'en. During the months  of May and June the Smithers courtroom  was packed with people who wished to witness what was being said about their title  and jurisdiction. These people are not able  to travel to Vancouver to watch the case  which will have tremendous implications on  their lives and the lives of their children to  follow. The costs to bring witnesses to Vancouver, the establishment of new offices, and  housing is very high.)  Practical support can be provided by  donations to help defray additional costs  incurred as a result of the trial being  moved from Smithers to Vancouver; assistance with tasks such as the transportation  of witnesses and the development of public  education packages, supplies for the office  and apartments for witnesses and support-  In the words of Dora Wilson-Kenni:  "We have to learn to live together, and  first of all it has to start with the recognition of our ownership and jurisdiction of our  land and work together on it. It will benefit  all."  / would like to thank all of the Gitksan and Wet'suwet'en women who took  the time to share with me their knowledge and feelings about their lives as native women and their struggle for validation and survival.  The Gitksan and Wet'suwet'en Tribal  Council Vancouver offices are at 803-  865 Hornby Street, 682-1990.  punishment and imprisonment in Canada.  Among the facts she uncovers: A sixteen  year old French girl,convicted of theft, was  the first person officially condemned to  death in this country. Cooper also cites  the government attitude that sparked this  book's title; that the relatively small number of women prisoners justifies the worse  facilities and fewer programs they receive.  Liz Elliot and Ruth Morris list specific  problems women prisoners face as woi  (such as losing custody of children) in Behind Prison Doors. The article has a somewhat more activist stance, and is the only  one which mentions prison abolition as a  feminist goal. But, while the importance  of communication between feminists and  women prisoners is stressed, the authors neglect to say that learning goes both ways.  For feminists to support women inside politically, we need to learn from them.  It's not up to outside feminists to decide  what needs changing in the prison system  and in what order. If we work on prison issues, it's as supporters; prisoners are the experts.  The last article is one of my faves because  it talks a bit about what day to day life in  prison is like. Karlene Faith explores media  images and myths about women prisoners,  and contrasts these with reality. It's good to  see myths refuted about lesbians and about  violence in women's prisons.  Other chapters in Too Few to Count  address the paternalism of the "justice"  system toward young women, attempts by  women to reform that system from inside,  and the sexism of conventional criminologi-  est theories.  We talked about the book last month at  the B.C. Federation of Women prison committee's discussion group, held every Saturday at Lakeside women's prison. Women  there liked the book, found it clearly written, and appreciated the womens' perspective.  One woman said that the nineteenth century criminological theories about women,  such as that unrestrained sexuality in  women is a source of evil, are still implicit in  the treatment of women by the criminal justice system. It was agreed that a myth exists  among prison administrators that women  prisoners are harder to control than men.  Another woman talked about how attitudes of judges toward women criminals  have changed with the growth of feminism.  Since judges are mainly older men, they  have seen women become increasingly unpredictable and uncontrollable over time.  And, as judges, they're in a position to exert  some control. Sentencing women who step  out of line to longer sentences gives them  power in a threatening situation.  "In Their Own Words" was seen as being not varied enough, in the women's  backgrounds and crimes, to be completely  representative; women charged with violent crimes were overrepresented. Abo, the  womens' lives while in prison should have  been included.  One issue we discussed that wasn't included in the book is the widespread db-  pensing of psychoactive drugs, especially  tranquilizers, by prison medical staff to  women prisoners.  Too Few to Count is worth reading to  understand which women go to jail and how  the prbon system sees them. The book does  a thorough job of showing how the conditions of women's lives (like poverty and battering) lead us to commit crimes. It does  not, however, go very far in showing the  criminal justice system's role in perpetuating these conditions.  Ivy Scott is a member of the B.C.  Federation of Women prison committee  and a prison abolitionist.  KINESIS Arts  ////////////////////^^^^  Rez stars rap  On theatre, culture, art and politics  by Nancy Pollak  Five years ago, Vancouver caught a dose  of outrageous, unnerving, rulebreaking theatre: Spiderwoman had blown New York  for the coast, and feminist performers had  never seemed so inspired.  Two of Spiderwoman's founders — sisters Muriel Miguel and Gloria Miguel —  and Monique Mojica, a Toronto-based actor (and Gloria's daughter) recently appeared in The Rez Sisters by Cree playwright Tomson Highway. Set on Manitoulin  bland, the play depicts seven related Ojib-  way women whose journey to 'the biggest  bingo in the world' in Toronto provides a  backdrop for their lives.  In conversation, the three women touch  any number of theatrical bases: Native, feminist, street, improvisational, classical ...  They've done it all.  The Real Poetry, the Real Literature  Monique is a co-founder, with Inuit Makka  Kleist, of the SeaCows. She discourages a  simplistic view of 'Native theatre.'  "I'm at a point where I want to throw  off that label... I don't know what Native  theatre is because we're involved in creating  it."  With that involvement comes an awareness of growth. Gloria sees the emergence  of "the real poetry, the real literature. A lot  of people expect us to do something with  'blankets-and-beads', and they're shocked  or disappointed when we perform as women,  as people, showing our art, our guts, our  literature."  Stories that were "always there and  passed among us" are being recorded.  "Many [Indian] people are writing now  ... and that's a recognized form: people  acknowledge the scripted play, the playwright," says Muriel.  What and how the playwrights are writing is also evolving. "It used to be that everybody's first show was an 'oh, my identity, who am I, look what you've done to us'  kind of piece," says Monique. Now, there's  "... less rhetoric: one woman's experience  or one community's experience talks about  the whole. It's more artistically sound."  It's also sounding more authentic. Tom-  son Highway didn't learn to speak English  fluently until his teens. His script captures  what Monique calls "that reservation English that's half-Indian, half-English: the  syntax is all Indian but it's in English. My  character (Marie-Adele) means to say 'Out  like a light' but says 'Out like a lamp.'  That's a really valid part of producing a literature for Native people"  The Thing That Trips You  Any discussion of native theatre will include the Trickster. Central to Indian culture and mythology, Trickster can assume  any guise and any manner—animal, human,  female, male, spiritual, sexual .... "People  ask about Trickster all the time. It's that  spirit that comes flying in just when you  don't want it, the thing that trips you when  you're walking out the door," says Muriel.  The spirit of Trickster seems to animate  much of Spiderwoman and the SeaCows'  and Spiderwoman have done: wildly funny,  bawdy, emotionally wrenching, political  theatre. "To us, in many ways, The Rez  Sisters is mild," remarks Gloria.  Their boldness has earned them scoldings  from some Native women who dismiss their  work as 'not the Indian way.' But Spiderwoman won't fudge on the up-front strength  of Indian women, or the historical fact of  gay people in Indian societies.  As a SeaCow, Monique has also been  where she's felt less than welcome. "Going  into the feminist world, performing at  women's festivab, well—all this sisterhood don't mean me. And if you go into  these things and you're a straight woman of  colour, 'there's nothing for me here, so later  for you...' "  Reconciling Politics and Art  While Muriel and Gloria dealt with discouraging 'husbands and boyfriends' when  they launched Spiderwoman in the mid-70s,  Monique took a long time to reconcile theatre and politics.  "I couldn't see being in a dance studio  when there was an occupation going on—I  was at the occupation. It was hard to figure out how to be a militant Indian in theatre. [Back then] it was 'building the strong  Gloria Miguel, Monique Mojica  and Muriel Miguel.  work, theatre rooted in storytelling and improvisation. Her six-month stmt with The  Rez Sisters has left Monique hungry for  the immediacy of 'doing her Trickster', Coyote, a character not easily absorbed by non-  native audiences.  "Coyote does a piece in drag as the most  broken-hearted woman in the world. I did it  at a woman's festival—99.9 per cent white  lesbians. I'm singing 28 torch songs, crawling on the stage, crying 'cause I've lost my  man .... It was really hard but, on the  other hand, what else does a Trickster do  for a lesbian audience? By the end, they got  the joke, but the first 3 minutes ..."  Muriel approaches everything irreverently. "That's my Trickster," she says. Irreverent b a modest term for what Muriel  "I did a bit on being a gay mother," says  Muriel, a mother of two daughters, "and  an erotic reading about two women. What  I feel about a lot of gay erotic stories is,  ' What am I reading? Heidi is Gay and She's  Making Out with Her Grandmother?!' So I  did my piece and took it so far out it kept  on going ... it became ridiculous!  "I do want to do more of that," Muriel  laughs.  nations from the bottom up, which means  you build the strong Native family and raise  healthy children so they can go on ... How  can you be the Indian earth mother and be  in theatre?  "Well, I found a way around that. You  just put the kid in a sling and he goes to  rehearsals at two months [Monique's son is  ten]. But it was a long process of giving myself permission and ... a lot of fighting with  "When a performer creates something, if she's honest with  herself, it has to reflect how she's living, where she's living,  and what she's doing about it."  -Gloria  You've Always Delivered  The Goods  Now, help deliver Kinesis. Women are  needed to distribute the paper, to local  bookstores and far-away women's  centres...  No experience necessary.  Please call 255-5499.  This comical exploring of sex-this self-  mockery—is the Trickster, again. "Makka  and I do a lot of sexual posturing as our  Tricksters," says Monique. "She wears fluorescent green tits and I have a tux with an  actual tail attached to a g-string.  "Women have been really upset with  these characters ... but it's important to  take those posturings to the nth degree, to  take the function of Trickster, of stories, of  Native humour into the immediate."  Audiences have also been upset by Spiderwoman's heterosexual content. Gloria  describes past conflicts within the company  between the lesbian and heterosexual members, and a piece that resulted. "I stood  up and said, 'I'm a woman, I'm an Indian  woman, I love women, I love men, I have  sexual contact with men, I'm a mother of  a man, I'm a grandmother of a man ... '  I ended up singing Buffy Ste. Marie's Until It's Time For You To Go and a whole  slew of people just walked out—and the rest  stood up and applauded me."  Indian people. Because acting is 'not political,' it's 'not Indian.' "  In the near future, Monique will head  for Toronto to complete taping of feminist  Marusia Bociurkiw's new drama Night Vision. Gloria is considering an offer of the  lead role in an Edmonton production of Jessica, but may go with Muriel to New York  to rejoin Spiderwoman. The company recently returned from the Netherlands where  their latest work, Winnetou's Snake Oil  Show, rattled theatre managers and audiences alike.  (Winnetou is a fictional Indian created  by 19th century German novelist Karl Mai.  Europeans adore the romanticized, strong-  silent character; Spiderwoman mercilessly  shreds the myth.)  Muriel hopes that Spiderwoman will return to Vancouver to work with Spirit Song,  the local Native company. For anyone with  an appetite for provocative theatre, they  couldn't return soon enough.  KINESIS ss*s*s$^****s*ss***^  ARTS  Fireweed  Class issue offers challenge, insight  by Lorri Rudland  FIREWEED: THE ISSUE IS CLASS.  FALL 1987  Edited by Cy-Thea Sand  Toronto, Canada  123 pages $3.75  The class bsue of Fireweed, guest edited  by Cy-thea Sand, is exciting, informative  and for me it is real. Reading it hurts. Working class women are beginning to weave the  truth of their lives from the strands of class,  and of race, gender and sexuality.  In a women's movement dominated by  middle class women, as organizers, speakers, and theorists, "class" has received too  little attention. Thb is not an accident. If  class privilege is challenged, domination is  challenged and actions must change. But  class has also received too much attention,  thought the imposition of a male Marxbt  class analysb, which renders us invisible.  When I learned about "class" as differentiated from the sociological catagories  of working, middle and upper class, I  learned about capitalism, profit, and alienated labour. It seemed that all the women in  the room, no matter what our family background, no matter what we earned or didn't,  were in the same class I was. It was certain  we weren't the ruling class, therefore we had  to be workers.  Marxism helped me identify whose interests were being served when the people  who owned and ran things acted, and they  never seemed to be mine. But Marxist class  analysis never seemed to be mine either.  How I felt about myself seemed to be more  explained by the fact that I was white, a  woman and that I came from a working class  family. Most of my friends are also working  class - those few of us who had the courage  to speak and write and work in the women's  movement. We are an angry, scrappy lot. It  took me years to realize that being jumbled  up with middle class women, as if our personal experiences were the same, was somehow an invalidation of our lives.  In thb issue of Fireweed, entitled "Class  b The Issue", many women express fear and  shame. They fear they have nothing of value  to say, no voice to say it with, and that no  one will care to listen.  Reading these stories, I feel I am home  somehow. It is so incredibly moving to share  with other working class women what it  "feels" like, not some theoretical abstraction. We feel shame, we feel less worthy. We  ; from the wrong side of the tracks; we  are still afraid that we can't quite pull it off.  How has class defined our lives, and exactly  what is our class analysis? We don't know  yet? We are only just beginning to speak,  and there are many threads to unravel.  "Red and gray brick cemented our  options—stay in Verdun, marry young,  work as clerks or secretaries, or get out, as  far away as possible." Sand, was raised in  Verdun, a working class suburb of Montreal.  She became conscious of an "inner geography" that was as limiting to her sense of  movement and personal possibilities as the  red and gray brick that contained the working class.  Sand writes with elegance and power. I  am deeply affected by "A Question of Identity", b which she describes her life in Verdun and her struggle to be a writer. From  her family, she learned that you are nothing in this life without money. Fear of losing economic control "choreographed their  every movement." Education was the way  out. But one night Sand questioned again  her right "to be one of them," and answered  by swallowing a bottle of pills. For Sand,  writing is not an act of self-expression. It b  throwing down the guantlet.  "To step out of my heritage as a member of the working class, to attempt to say  something of importance is the adventure. I  was not meant to do this. As a woman. As  a working class woman. Writing b an act  of defiance, rebellion ... arrogance. Shame  and daring compete for my attention."  "Why I Can't Write About Class" b for  Nym Hughes a painful remembrance of fear  and self-hatred. "I don't write properly. I'm  not supposed to write at all." Over and over  she begins a sentence "I can't write about  class because ..." Over and over she responds, each time confronting the internalized oppression that silences her. Through  this process, she is able to talk about the  elements she considers important to a class  analysis, and how a class analysis is crucial  to feminism. In her loudest, possible voice,  she intends to continue asking, "Who's making money off thb?"  Gwen Lambton's short story, "A Room  Of My Own", describes the experiences  of a young, single parent mother of Irish  Catholic background who left her English  husband living in Germany. She somehow  makes it to Canada early on in the second World War and gets a job in an aircraft parts factory where she becomes good  friends with an engaging character named  Sweeney, a woman union organizer. With  her two young children, she lives in a single  rented room for years until she can finally  afford two rooms, a room of her own.  The young mother was dependent on a  used baby buggy to transport her children  from her rented room to the streetcar so  that she could get to her ten hour shift on  time. Hiding the buggy in the shed of an  abandoned house near the train, she worried  each day that it would be gone. It's a beautiful story and I also really worried about  the buggy. Quickly flipping to the author's  credits, I was not surprised to learn that  Lambton had worked in factories and raised  children as a single parent mother during  the war.  The experiences of a single parent mother  are also described in "Canada Sweet, Girl",  by Makeda Silvera. But thb mother is a  Black, illegal immigrant, who works as a domestic servant. Race, gender, and class intertwine to squeeze her exbtence into the  narrowest corner she can occupy. She is  hounded by the Immigration Department.  "I trembling. I frighten. I want to scream.  I want to shout out that I been here nine  years scrubbing and cleaning and cooking.  But I know is no use."  In "Black Women and Work: The Impact of Racially Constructed Gender Roles  on the Sexual Division of Labour", Dionne  Brand explains how race and gender work  together to create the kind of lived experience that Makeda Silvera describes.  Brand challenges feminbt theory that has  "appropriated the sex oppression of women  as a white middle class phenomenon." Uninformed by Black women's lives, feminist theory and practice then lends itself  to capitalist, racist, and imperialist ideologies. These in turn reinforce the "generated, racial and racially-generated hierarchies necessary for the continued exploitation of labour."  Far from being dense and unreadable, as  too many theoretical articles are, Brand's  article is intelligible as well as intelligent and  interesting. (Watch for Part Two in the next  issue of Fireweed.)  Culture is the theme that Connie Kuhns  addresses in "Whose Culture Is It Anyway?" Girl groups, rock and roll, the San  Francbco psychedelic of Janis Joplin, and  the "great blues women who broke my heart  yet built me up" inspired and enriched Connie as she grew up. After hearing a classical  record for the first time, she unfortunately  asked what it was she was listening to. She  writes, "It was in my early twenties when I  learned I had no culture."  Expressing finely honed outrage, poet  Claudia MacDonald writes an extremely  moving eulogy to her working class father  whose soul is almost dead, "My daddy he is  broken he is broken he is broken ..." In  the poems Compensation and Quilting Bee,  Sandy Shreve writes from the female clerical  job ghetto. Joy Parks counterposes— children's nursery rhymes against the real experience of a working class women's life, in  "Rhymes To Grow By." The work of many  other working class women poets such as  Kate Braid, Pam Tranfield, Joanne Arnott,  Zoe Landale, and Karen Ballinger are included.   Excerpts from In The Turning, by  Mary Billy, explore class divisions within  women's groups where women helping other  women are paid wages far below the poverty  Une. Mary Horodyski provides a summary  of the issues in the Eaton's strike in the Ontario winter of 1984/85.  "Comments of a Working Class Crone"  describes Joy Sykes working class upbringing in England, her experiences of racbm,  and at fifty-nine years of life, her encounter  with agebm. But Sykes is determined to  form a web of old crones. In contrast,  Roberta Olenick writes a poignant story of  a woman alone, aging and extremely poor,  in "Mrs. bfeld". Dorothy O'Connell's "Options" explores a mother's personal reactions to the news of her fourteen year old  daughter's pregnancy.  Fireweed contains an excellent bibliography primarily covering the period 1975  and 1981, with later supplements, from  Michelle Valiquette and Wendy Frost. It is  a three-part affair including Working Class  Women's Writing, Writing About Working  Class Women/Class Struggle, and Class and  Gender in Literature.  Two editorials introduce the class bsue.  The first is written by the Fireweed collective and the second is by guest editor, Cy-  Thea Sand. To my great frustration, I read  the ambigouous Fireweed collective editorial over and over again to try to understand no only its target but its point of  view, the Fireweed collective emphasize's  that patriarchal and class structures cannot  be achieved "only be women changing themselves". They warn, "At a certain point in  our struggle as women it becomes necessary  to appreciate the centrality of self-liberation  in social analysis, but to give it a significance beyond class analytical tools is dangerous."  I think Cy-Thea Sand's editorial is under challenge. Sand explains that her purpose was to create a forum where class as  a force in women's lives could be examined  and an anti-racist perspective incorporated.  But Sand is primarily concerned that working class women who have been silenced and  made to feel stupid, as she has been, are encouraged to discuss the issues of class. She  has dedicated this issue to those women who  challenge the fear that restrains them, to  "take a course, finbh high school or a Ph.D.,  join a support, political or exercise group  ..." I'm guessing that the Fireweed collective heard bells ring at this editorial and  thought social change was being dumped in  favour of self-improvement classes.  The Fireweed collective seems  tent on dbtancing itself from self-liberation  that they undermine its importance and  yield too much primacy to "class analytical tools", which they never define. Self-  liberation when conducted as an individual tactic to make it as a successful career women is "dangerous", because it supports an individualism that further isolates  women and denies our experience. We are  not now nor have we ever been part of the  game. But it is my belief that Sand was  speaking of self-liberation that builds self-  esteem and promotes the building of an integrated history as working class women.  This can not be dangerous to us. Sand continually emphasizes breaking the isolation  between working class women, white and of  colour. The point is that we must begin to  liberate ourselves if we are even to survive.  On the second point, it is critical to remember that most class analyses have been developed by men. When men refer to an experience of the working class that we can  even recognize, they are speaking of the resistance of a male working class. Working  class women and feminist hbtorians of the  working class note that we are rarely part  of the picture. We must be wary of existing  "class analytical tools", for these have enforced our silence.  The Fireweed class issue is a landmark.  To my knowledge, it b the first time in  Canada that a feminbt journal has devoted  an entire issue to class. It's weakness is that  fit didn't effectively frame the complex db-  cussion, where the ground shifts from class  to race to gender and the word 'class' has  many meanings.  14  KINESIS  FEB. 88 Arts  /////////////////////^^^^^  I  Farewell to Ferron  and Ruby Music  RUBYMUSIC  by Connie Kuhns  November 13, 1986. Eight p.m. Carnegie  Hall. The sidewalk was packed. The lobby  was congested. Ferron and Holly Near had  sold out. "Ladies and Gentlemen, from  Canada ..." I was in the audience, fourth  row centre.  It was a big event and certainly Ferron  rose to the occasion. Dressed in a cream  coloured suit and hat, with a rhinestone  broach at her collar, she was seasoned and  confident as she took her place on that historic stage. Only later did I learn that her  cab had gotten stuck in traffic and she had  to walk the seven blocks to the concert hall,  and that during her performance she imagined she was singing in Sacramento so that  she wouldn't be overwhelmed by the moment. She chose this night to debut her song  "Shady Gate".  Holly Near also gave an exceptional performance, singing many of her greatest hits,  including "Started Out Fine" which won my  heart many years ago. Unfortunately the  sound was not up to par and Holly was often drowned out by her band.  My other complaint was with the woman  sitting next to me who became indignant  when she realized that Holly had men in  her band, and with the two women in front  of me who continually shot imaginary guns  at the guy at the end of the able because  he laughed and clapped louder than anyone  ebe. They alternated this behaviour with  come-hither gestures toward Holly whenever she came to the edge of the stage.  Carnegie Hall publishes a concert code of  ethics in every program. It's mostly polite  requests: don't pop your gum, don't unwrap  and eat candy, don't open and close your  purse. Don't show your ignorance would be  an appropriate addition.  On January 2 this year the audience was  considerably more open-minded when Ferron performed her solo farewell concert at  the Vancouver East Cultural Centre. Surrounded by a sold-out assembly of fans,  friends and loved ones, she let us hear her  new songs, new thoughts and plans. (She's  moving to Santa Fe, she said, so that she  can meet Shirley MacLaine).  One friend remarked that the concert was  raw, like the old days when Ferron would  try out new material with which she was  immediately connected. But it was also like  the new days because Ferron was inspired  by joy.  What stayed in my mind long after the  concert and farewell party (to which the  audience was invited) was Ferron's closing song, in which she asks, what's wrong  with a little "Harmless Love". At a time  when many hearts have been bound by political dictates and romance between two  consenting adults b considered counterrevolutionary, it comes as a great relief to  hear this once simple message. As we used  to tell the other side, we tell each other.  Make love not war.  This column marks the end of Connie Kuhns' tenure as Kinesis' premiere music  critic and columnist. Our best wishes for your future endeavors in the music and in  life. Connie.  With those words, I will also say goodbye. After much consideration, I have decided to retire the Rubymusic column. The  demands of my baby, my book and my freelance work have made it difficult to continue.  This column was a product of Rubymusic, the radio program which has been on  the air on CFRO, Vancouver's Co- operative radio station, since May 1981. The column first appeared, at Cy Thea Sand's request, in 1982 in issue Seven/Eight of The  Radical Reviewer (RR). When the RR  ceased publication in 1983, Cole Dudley invited me to bring the column to Kinesis. I accepted, and Rubymusic went to  print in thb paper for the first time in  December 1983. Rubymusic was published  monthly until August 1986, when I took a  break to have a baby. I returned in March  1987, and Rubymusic has appeared semimonthly since that time.  Over the years I have had the pleasure of  interviewing a variety of artists for Kinesis, including Etta James, Ronnie Gilbert,  k.d. lang, Ferron and Gayle Scott, Heather  Bishop, Koko Taylor, Ellen Mcllwaine, Jane  Sapp, Teresa Trull, Katie Webster and Marcia Meyer. I'm abo proud of the-work we  did in the "Women in Music" supplement in  July/August 1984, and in the music supplement I co-ordinated the following summer.  I've had a rare opportunity to develop as  a writer on the pages of Kinesis. I thank  you all.  Flood's stories a must read  by Eunice Brooks  THE   ANIMALS   IN   THEIR   ELEMENTS  by Cynthia Flood  Talonbooks, Vancouver, 1987 (165 pages).  Thb collection of short stories is not for  the escapist reader. Rarely has any book of  fiction dealt with the verities of human existence so clearly. Flood's prose is as clean  as the tables her mentally disabled character, Pearl in the story "On the Point", wipes  over and over. Flood never once stoops to  the mundane, even in name calling. "Lickspittle" is an epithet one hears. I can imagine a romance reader opening this book with  the same feeling that her character William  has when he opens the cigar box of worms,  in "Summer's Lease".  There is a strong narrative throughout the fifteen stories, but no single voice.  Rather, Flood has developed strong characters who tell you what they like, how  they come to their conclusions, and what  fear means. Each story uses a different technique. The most unusual is "A Young Girl-  Typist Ran to Smolny: Notes for a Film".  The Animals in Their Elements is  very much a writer's book. If someone ever  wondered how to, Flood shows us the variety of ways. And she does it without a  wasted word. And what words. They sit in  the mind like picture postcards: gravecloths,  fruit cellar, chartreuse, guywires, oldsickhu-  man, and death.  Flood deals with many diads in her stories. Relationships between old parents and  middle-aged children, lovers, brothers, best  friends, and marrieds. But she talks mostly  about life. One of her narrators puts it  in this perspective: "Everything contains  within it the seeds of its own destruction."  Flood hammers on this theme in each story.  She b gossipy at times, and wbtful and  reminbcent but she never preaches. She is  at her best exploring relationships between  women, such as the best friends: "How do  people get through their lives without?"  But there is no glorification of the women  here. Flood gives us manipulating matriarchs, vesseb of social change, selfless wives,  little girb deferring to brothers younger  than themselves, bombastic career women,  and pathetic left behinds. She also shows  how the seeds of destruction work in these  characters, and one finds tears dropping at  the deaths that come to the unfulfilled and  underfulfilled women. Flood's women deal  with dbabled relatives, sickly kids, dyslexia,  incest, promiscuity, and the shock of finding  love for a person when death has already  snatched them away.  One woman, while clearing out her hated  mother's home finds a shoe box of letters  from herself. She cannot read them and she  cannot trash them. In dilemma she mails  them to herself to postpone the decision to  look at her own platitudes gathered over the  years. Sorry, you'll have to read the book to  see how that one ends.  "Table Talk" b a masterpiece of overlay.  It is set at a dinner where the conversations  at the table and the famous speaker's words  knit into a cohesive whole. It is the sort  of thing so easily done on film, but Flood  brings it off on paper in glorious colour, and  one phrase stands out above all the other  voices: "You have no idea what it is like to  sit with your mother under a plum tree and  know the same man's penis has been in you  both."  In no way does Flood admit that she creates characters in this collection. In fact she  goes out of her way in "Just a Moment"; she  has one of them tell her: "You're the writer,  aren't you? You're the one with the interest  in human nature, the passions, all that? I'm  just giving the story to you." And she does.  She's witty, snippy, vain, and all of us have  at least one friend that fits her description.  The universal 'know it all'.  Flood's characters find themselves co-  parenting, experiencing both yukky and divine food, living in their own pasts, meeting with extraordinary opinions with which  they are forced to grapple, ageing ungracefully, thinking about how settings shape the  persons who live within them, and knowing  that life is merciless.  The title story reveab a nice man who  suffers a stroke, and the reader gets sucked  into his mind, so that empathy b part of  experiencing him. In the last paragraph as  he sees hb almost naked body, one feels  compelled to look at the flesh holding the  book, the breasts on which it b resting, and  the gravity-fed remainder. Harry floats free,  and there b a feeling of elation in Flood's  prombe that it is possible for the reader to  float.  The stories are of variable length and  most can be read in less than half an hour.  However, I found it impossible to do the  book at a single sitting. In fact, I could not  even take some stories in a gulp. I found myself thinking of situations, and how I might  face them. If Flood has one remarkable talent, above being one of today's finest writers, it is her ability to face the reader with  truths that just will not pass in the eyes and  out the ears. Her people are so alive, reading about them is the equivalent of asking  them home to spend the evening.  This book b not one of the many Canadian publications that stay on shelves gathering dust. This b Canadian literature at  its very best. Although I am recommending  it to everyone, I'm not the only one. Everyone b talking about it. This is the book of  the season. If you cannot read anything ebe,  make this a must.  stati a art s aphoto  oneJ^upp      copi  V V  ursAeTTI ICLAjme&  iiiiin  iiniMiBs  '1  1460 Commercial Drive  Tel. 255-9559  KINESIS     FEB88 by  Wendy   Frost  and   Michele  Valiquette  Women's studies journals vital  For nearly twenty years now, feminbt  scholars have been demolishing the myths  of the male academy: putting women back  in hbtory, rediscovering "lost" writers and  literary traditions, reclaiming the sciences  Needless to say, this work has not  been welcomed by "malestream" academic  journals—which makes women's studies pe-  riodicab vital to the development of feminbt knowledge. This month, we look at a  few Canadian offerings.  Resources For Feminist Research  /Documentation Sur La Recherche  Feministe (RFR/DRF) could be called the  grandmother of Canadian women's studies  publications. Created in 1972, it began as  a networking tool for Canadian women's  studies scholars. Today, after thirteen years  of healthy existence, RFR/DRF has become an invaluable tool for both academic  and non-academic feminist researchers. The  journal publishes Canadian and international, but not American, research and resources. Its focus is interdisciplinary in the  best women's studies tradition—both representing a broad range of disciplinary approaches and crossing or merging standard  disciplinary boundaries.  RFR/DRF's strong commitment to bilin-  gualism is clearly reflected in the content.  Li a rough survey of the last few years,  we found that about twenty to twenty-five  percent of the materials is in French. Editorials and promotional and informational  materials are always in both languages.  (It was a consciousness-raising, if sobering, experience for us, as Anglophone—  and unilingual—Canadian feminists, to receive the theme issue on Feminist Practice  in Quebec, eagerly turn to the Contents  page to find out what's happening with  our sisters in Quebec—and discover that we  couldn't read most of it.)  Theme issues have consistently shown an  openness to the full range of concerns of  the feminist community. They include a  number of "firsts" for Canadian feminist  publishing—the Women and Disability issue, for instance, and the Women and Trade  Union issue, which provided the basis for  the book Union Sisters. Other issues have  included Women as Elders, the Lesbian Issue, Immigrant Women, Women and Agricultural Producton, Women and Education,  Women and the Criminal Justice System.  UPRISING  BREADS  BAKERY  In February  CHINESE  NEW  YEAR  TREATS  1697 Venables Street  Vancouver 254-5635  Guest editors and editorial collectives  have given RFR/DRF a more solid base  in community activbm than is usual in  women's studies journab. The Immigrant  Women's Editorial Collective, for example,  actively sought contributions from immigrant women's communities across Canada.  Similarly, the Women and Dbability bsue  provided a forum for voices seldom heard  even within feminist circles. This commitment to creating space so that diverse  groups of women can speak for themselves  makes RFR/DRF stand out among feminist  academic publications.  In addition to the standard fare of  women's studies journab, articles and book  reviews, RFR/DRF offers a myriad of  accessible and pertinent resource tools—  abstracts of research, bibliographies, reports on archival holdings, listings of resource groups, innovative women's studies  course descriptions, and more. In the theme  bsues, these resources are tied to the theme.  The regular Work in Progress column,  where readers send in reports on their  current research, always makes for inspiring reading, and gives information on both  university-based and community-oriented  projects. The Announcements section is also  a good source of networking information.  A regular feature from 1979-1983 was the  Annual International Guide to Women's Periodicals and Resources. We've mentioned  this invaluable comprehensive resource in  this column before, and we look forward enthusiastically to the next version, promised  soon.  RFR/DRF is usually available at university and public libraries. In Vancouver it's  for sale at the Women's Bookstore, Ariel,  Octopus Books and Spartacus Books. Published quarterly. Sub rates $20/year for individuals, $40 for institutions. RFR/DRF,  Centre for Women's Studies in Education,  OISE, 252 Bloor Street West, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 1V6.  Canadian Woman Studies/les cahiers  de la femme (CWS/cf), a bilingual journal  from York University, celebrates its tenth  anniversary this year. The publication was  "founded with the goal of making current  writing and research on a wide variety of  feminist topics accessible to the largest possible community of women."  Several features set it apart from most  other women's studies publications: articles  are generally brief (under 2,500 words), free  of academic jargon, and illustrated—often  with unique historical photographs. Contributors include not only academics but  students, activists and non-university researchers. The editors encourage unsolicited  manuscripts and welcome experiential essays and articles, reviews and creative work.  A style sheet and a list of upcoming themes  are available on request.  Browsing through back bsues, we found  Canadian herstory to be one of CWS/cf's  particular strengths. Two fascinating special issues (V.7 #3 and #4) in 1986, for example, included articles on topics such as  the Eaton's strike of 1912, young women  and unemployment in the thirties, the roots  of the North American women's peace  movement, the convent as an alternative to  marriage and motherhood for Quebecoises,  women in journalbm at the turn of the century ... Other theme bsues have focused  on the media, sexuality, literature and art,  international issues, women's studies conferences, science and technology, the economy, the future, adolescence, multiculturalism, women and sport.  This is an impressive range of topics, and  it makes CWS/cf's silence on lesbian bsues  all the more disappointing (a notable exception is Dorothy Kidd's "Compulsory Het-  erosexuality and Sport" Vol. 4 #3, 1983).  Heterosexism by ombsion (as Bonnie Zimmerman has called it) is not uncommon in  women's studies journals—but with one as  open to contributions from the community  as CWS/cf, hopefully this can be changed.  Legal writing is not known for its readability. So it was with some trepidation  that we picked up the first issue of the  Canadian Journal of Women and the  Law/Revue Juridique La Femme et le  Droit (CJWL). But feminbt readers who  share our dread of the law in general and  legalese in particular will be very pleasantly  surprised by this new publication.  The articles we've seen have been not  only readable but informed by a keen sense  of the contexts in which the law is developed and applied. In their inaugural introduction, the editors stress their desire to  "serve the needs of the women's movement  as completely as possible."  The effects of this grounding are visible  both in the journal's form and in its content. For example, CJWL is fully committed to multidisciplinary work. Contributors  to the first issue are not only legal workers  but women researching and writing in several fields: history, sociology, education, phi  losophy, and human rights.  The first bsue focuses on women and  equahty. The editor's goal was to present articles which would demonstrate ^he range,  intensity, variety, and history of women's  equality claims in Canada." And in this they  have succeeded admirably.  The bsue opens with the story of Clara  Brett Martin, first woman in Canada to be  called to the bar. From there it moves to  topics like gender and legal language, or legislative and judicial discrimination against  lesbians. All of this draws on existing feminbt theory by Dale Spender, Adrienne Rich  and others.  Two articles in particular are not to be  missed: Susan Cole's review of Women  Against Censorship provides a thought-  provoking and informative overview of the  pornography/censorship controversy. And  in "Focus on Black Women!", Esmerelda  Thornhill calls on white feminists to confront their racial privilege, to examine  their assumptions and their practice before claiming to speak for all women. Issue  number two takes an equally wide ranging  approach to reproductive rights. Articles  by authors like Ruth Hubbard and Mary  O'Brien are on the agenda for the future.  Although the journal is weighty (usually  two to three hundred pages per issue) and  has the dense, no graphics look of an academic publication, in most essays blocks of  print are broken up by subheadings, making  them far easier to read and to refer to later.  Several times through the premiere bsue  the editors of CJWL ask for feedback and  guidance from readers. Take a look at thb  valuable addition to the Canadian feminist  publishing scene and let them know what  you think. Subs are $20 per year for students/low income; $35 for others. Canadian Journal of Women and the Law,  323 Chapel Street, Ottawa, Ontario KIN  7Z2.  1146Commercial-:: 253-0913  KINESIS //////////////////^^^^^  //////////////////////^^^^^  Letters  Sextrade: let's consider  "conversation" efforts  Kinesis:  The interview with Amber Cooke (Kinesis, November, 1987) focuses on some important issues that all of us women need  to think about. However, when she suggests  that those of us who oppose pornography  and prostitution do so out of defensiveness  and fear of our own sexuality, I beg to differ.  The debate around the sex trade must  start from a position of mutual respect and  openness on everyone's part. Thb means  we must be willing to engage in honest  debate with our sisters, to challenge each  other and confront contradictions as we see  them, without discounting each other's experience through psychological one-upping,  and without merely acquiescing to whatever  the other says in the sorry tradition of white  hberal guilt.  I find pornography and prostitution (the  phenomena themselves, not the women who  work in them) objectionable because they  continue to put women's sexuality at the  service of men, make sex into a commodity  for capitalist enterprise to profit from, and  bring in their wake countless harmful effects  on the images and self-images of girls and  women and the ways we are treated in our  everyday lives. I would like to have these respected as valid concerns that are open for  discussion, not written off as the mere products of my supposed individual psychological hang-ups or projections.  It is certainly true that many women who  have accepted traditional roles in patriarchal society (and they have reasons for doing so) have been encouraged to look down  their noses at prostitutes and porn workers,  and have often refused to recognize the parallels between prostitution and conventional  marriage. As victims and survivors under  patriarchy, like the rest of us, these women  have indeed been taught to fear their own  and others' sexuality and the power it represents.  As a feminist, however, I have a very different understanding of my sexuality and  the ways I choose to explore and celebrate  it. Basic to this alternative experience is the  fact that my sexuality is no longer centred  around any man's fantasies or desires; it b  no longer at any man's service. Whether,  how and with whom I share it is my choice  alone, no longer dictated by economics, custom, or some man's expectations and power  I was a battered wife for nine years, and I  know what the pornographic mentality did  to me. Theoretically men may indeed, as  Cooke says, have "the responsibility to relate to women as whole human beings", but  in real life in a patriarchal society, most men  simply don't do so. If Cooke's experience  tells her something different, then she is a  very fortunate woman. But I too am talking  about "what is"; my experience is just as  real and just as valid as any other woman's;  and my theory and my "rhetoric" come directly out of that reality.  It seems to me that in this dialogue on the  sex trade, there is an analogy to be made  with the attempts by the peace movement  to work with (rather than against) people  employed in the manufacture of weapons.  In both instances, we see harmful effects  resulting from the very existence of these  industries—in one case, the threat of nuclear war and destruction; in the other,  the continued objectification and abuse of  women. We therefore envision a society  where these phenomena would have no  place. Far from condemning the workers in  either industry, or trying to deprive them of  their livelihood, we wish to work with them  wherever possible to develop better alternatives which can meet their needs without  sacrificing our vbion.  In the peace movement, this approach  is called "conversion"; an example is the  Crube Missile Conversion Project and its  links with workers at the Litton plant in  Toronto. Feminbts could well use an equivalent concept in dealing with the dilemmas  around prostitution and pornography.  The women's movement saved my life by  respecting my reality and helping me to  make sense out of it and change it. I hope we  can do the same in working with our sisters  in the sex trade, without compromising either their well-being and autonomy, or our  own insights, our struggles, and the hard-  won bits of progress we have made towards  a society where women could no longer be  seen as commodoties.  Helen Forsey  Pad ads  not nice  Kinesis:  I want to disagree with Tova Wagman's  assessment of feminine hygiene ads as "the  least offensive ads in terms of sex role  stereotyping and sexism" (Dec./Jan. 1987).  Although, as Wagman implies, the camera in these ads doesn't focus on body parts,  the tenor and content reduce women to their  crotches as throoughly and effectively as a  camera could. Women are not always fully  dressed, but when they are, it is often in  fight colours, so we can imagine blood stains  in the appropriate place. Women together  exercise their wit and intelligence on pads  with wings. A woman is congratulated on a  business success, but all the while the ad is  suggesting that it's the tampon between her  legs that made it all possible.  It's hard to appreciate these images as  positive when clothing, friendship and intelligence are enlisted to serve a purpose  as reductionbtic as an image of a scantily  dressed woman draped over a car.  On the other hand, we are presented with  so few images of ourselves that are positive,  it may be too easy to mistake the mere presence of clothing and absence of the male  eye as affirmative of women. I don't believe  advertisers of these products take risks. It  doesn't really matter how the woman b  packaged and portrayed, as long as we all  understand that she's really no more than,  and no better than, her parts.  I believe these ads send this message  clearly, and it's for that reason that I find  them objectionable.  Sarah Loube  Lesbian  outreach  projectfolds  Kinesis:  We are writing to let you know that the  Lesbian Outreach Project (L.O.P.) is no  longer in existence. Since the spring of 1985  we have been offering workshops on lesbianism and feminbm to a variety of audiences.  Our collective has now dwindled to three.  Abo, we believe that the Vancouver Lesbian Connection is now fulfilling many of  the needs for support and education (for  Vancouver area lesbians) that our workshop  originally addressed.  We know however that there remains a  tremendous need for pro-lesbian and anti-  homophobic education programs in thb  province. Although our collective no longer  formally functions, we as individuab are  willing to be available as resource persons  (especially to rural areas): Please contact:  Nym Hughes 251-4601, Jan Raymond 898-  5561, Claire Hotchin 898-5561.  Yours in sbterhood,  Lesbian Outreach Project  Reader  seeks info.  Kinesis:  In "Lover", one of the leading Dutch feminbt magazines, I read an article covering  Canadian feminist magazines. You were also  mentioned.  I would like to have information on feminbt organizations and lawyers who help  women patients that have suffered sexual  harassment by medical practitioners. I'm interested to know thb because I have just  finished my research "Legal implications of  sexual harassment by medical caretakers."  I intend to continue my research comparing  the Dutch and Canadian situation, both on  a theoretical and practical level.  So, if you could inform me, I'd be much  obliged.  Kind greetings.  Peggy Lesquilliere, Javastraat 54, 3531 PIV  Utrecht, The Netherlands.  CCEC CREDIT UNION  Have it all  With CCEC RRSP's^"  >■ Excellent rates on fixed & variable terms  >~ Instant tax receipts  >■ No user fees  >- RRSP Loans available  Invest In Your Community  CCEC CREDIT UNION     876-2123  33 EAST BROADWAY  VANCOUVER, B.C. V5T 1V4  "Keeping our money working In our community"  io-8oaff  SAT., FEB. 6 TO SAT, FEB 13, 1988  feminism, anarchism, socialism, environment, lesbian, gay, film, art, labour,  history, economics, literature  311 West Hastings Street, Vancouver  688-6138  KINESIS Bulletin Board  Read this  All listings must be received no later than  the 18th of the month preceding publication. Listings are limited to 75 words and  should include a contact name and telephone number for any clarification that may  be required. Listings should be typed or  neatly handwritten, double-spaced on 8 ^  by 11 paper. Listings will not be accepted  over the telephone. Groups, organizations  and individuals eligible for free space in the  Bulletin Board must be, or have, non-profit  objectives. Other free notices will be items  of general public interest and will appear at  the discretion of Kinesis.  Classified are $4 for the first 75 words or  portion thereof, $1 for each additional 25  words or portion thereof. Deadline for classifieds is the 18th of the month preceding  publication. Kinesis will not accept classifieds over the telephone. All classifieds must  be prepaid.  For Bulletin Board submissions send  copy to Kinesis Att'n Bulletin Board, 301-  1720 Grant Street, Vancouver, B.C. V5L  2Y6. For more information call 255-5499.  EVENTS  VCC WOMEN'S STUDIES  Free public lecture series, Langara Campus Rm A314. 7:30-9:30; Feb. 4.  Suzanne Bell, "Large as Life: Fitness in  the Fast Lane": Feb. 11. Jackie Goodwin, "Psychic Defense: Aura and Attitude"; Feb. 18, Sandy Simpson "Living Dangerously: Women in Conflict With  the Law"; Feb. 25, Nadine McDonnell.  "Meech Lake Accord: Saying Yes to Quebec Si No to Women?"  EVENT SIE VENT SI EVENTS  POLITICAL TAPESTRIES  "Sewing Dissent: Patterns of Resistance  in Chile," an exhibition of stitched wall  hangings made by women in the shanty-  towns of Santiago. Museum of Anthropology. UBC, 6393 N.W. Marine Dr. until March. Info. 228-5087.  POLITICALLY SPEAKING  Women's art & performance at Women  in Focus Gallery. Rita McKeough, Mary  Scott. Jan. 13-Feb. 20. 12 pm to 5 pm  Wed. to Sat. Marcella Bienvenue, Feb.  27. 8 pm. 204-456 W. Broadway. Van.  Info. 872-2250.  VISIONING PALESTINE  Posters, video, film, sculpture, photos,  textiles by Palestinian, Israeli, and Canadian artists on Palestinian life & struggle with a particular emphasis on work  from/about the West Bank Si Gaza. Pitt  Gallery, 36 Powell. Van. Jan. 25-Feb. 13,  daily 12-5. Opening Jan. 25. 8 pm.  EDUCATION SYMPOSIUM  Symposium organized by COPE Education Committee—"How does education  fit in the new B.C.?" Feb. 20. 9:30-3:30  pm., King Edward Campus, VCC. Info.  321-7849. See details in Movement Matters.  EXPERIMENTAL FILMS  Films by Canadian & West German  artists at the Pitt Gallery. Feb. 5, 8, 11  & 12, 8 pm. 36 Powell. Van. Info. 681-  6740.  Women in Focus  INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S DAY  1988  MARCH 8 1988     7 TO 10 P.M.  Come celebrate International Women's Day at  Women in Focus by attending free screenings  of the latest women's film and video work  from international producers. Everyone invited!  204-456 WEST BROADWAY (AT CAMBIE)  KINESIS  WOMEN & SPORTS  A screening of Annie O'Donoghue and  Julie Warren's film "Closing the Gap".  With guest speaker Betty Baxter. Feb.  8. 9 pm.. Graceland, 1250 Richards (entrance in alley), $2-$6. Doors open 8 pm.  Info. 255-9654.  GILLEAN CHASE  Poetry reading by the author of "The  Square Root of Female". Feb. 15, 9 pm..  Graceland, 1250 Richards (entrance in alley), $4-$6. Doors open at 8 pm. This  is a fundraising event for The Lesbian  News(paper). Info. 255-9654.  VLC DANCE  Valentine's Dance, Feb. 12. 8-1 am..  Capri Hall. 3925 Fraser St.. Van. Sliding  scale. $4-$6. Off-site childcare provided.  Wheelchair accessible. Info. 254-8458.  DRAWINGS ON PEOPLE  Work by Mariken Van Nimwiggen. artist  of the 1987 Vancity calendar. Van. East  Cultural Centre Gallery. 1895 Venables,  254-9578. Feb. 1-28.  FREE LECTURES  A New Work Agenda for Canada presents  a lecture by Monica Townson, Economic  Consultant, on "Work Employment Si  Family Life." Feb. 17. Lecture Hall 4,  Woodward Bldg. UBC. Info. 430-0450 or  430-0458.  CONFERENCE ON CHILD ABUSE  This national conference in Toronto is  designed for professionals who work in  the area of child abuse and adult survivors of child abuse. Conference presenters include dynamic feminist therapists,  researchers and activists such as: Lucy  Berliner. Sandra Butler. Diana Russell  and Lucie Blue Tremblay. For registration  info contact: Community Resources and  Initiatives. 150A Winona Drive. Toronto,  Ont. M6G 3S9. (416) 658-1752. May 24-  27. 1988.  WOMEN'S HEALTH  "Woman to Woman: Your Health Si Happiness", a 1-day program in which Vancouver women doctors will share up-to-  date medical information with other busy  women. Feb. 27, 8:30-4:30, Woodward  Building. UBC. Cost $50. Info. 222-5272.  IWD DISPLAY  Display of photos, posters Si momen-  tos, Mar. 7-Apr. 2, Van. Public Library  (Robson Si Burrard). Organized by Onni  Milne.  IWD FILM FESTIVAL  A film festival at the Y.W.C.A. celebrating women will be held during the day.  Mar. 8. The showings will begin at 10  am with the last film being shown at 8  pm. For more info, call 683-2531 or drop  in to 580 Burrard St.  WOMEN'S SKILLS  A career information fair for women, Apr.  16. Hastings Community Centre. 9:30-5.  Panels, workshops, displays, entertainment, food. Included: employers, government agencies, training programs, educational institutions, women's organizations. Wheelchair access. Call Women-  Skills (Beth) 430-0450.  WORKSHOPS  S.U.C.C.E.S.S.  Chinese-Canadian Women's Workshops;  Six workshops with various topics of concern to women: presented by S.U.C.C.E.S.S. (United Chinese Community  Enrichment Services Society) Jan. 16-  Mar 26 Info. 253-5561.  JUSTICE INSTITUTE  The Justice Institute of B.C. is offering workshops at 4180 West 4th, Van.  Feb. 17-19. Mediation in the Workplace.  $180; Feb. 29, Dealing with Conflicts  on the Job, $75; Feb. 15-16. Asserting  Yourself Under Pressure, $150. Info. 228-  9771.  SKILLS FOR PARENTS  "Nurturing Skills for Exhausted Parents:  A Workshop for Parents of Special Needs  Children; Feb. 5-6. $65. For more info.,  985-3544 or 738-0211.  LEGAL ADVICE  "You and me and our baby makes three."  Free legal advice workshop outlines having children within lesbian relationships.  Discussion will include contracting with  sperm donors, artificial insemination Si  the rights of non-birth mothers. VLC  Feb. 15, 876 Commercial Dr. 8-10 pm.  Info. 254-8458.  TRAINING GROUPS  Battered Women's Support Services will  be holding spring training of peer counsellors Si support group facilitators Apr.  29-June 26. on 5 Saturdays, 3 Sundays Si 4 Thurs. evenings. Women will  be trained in crisis line/peer counselling  Si support group facilitation skills. More  info, call 734-1574. Deadline for applica  tions. Mar. 28.  SUPER 8: MOVING IMAGE AS ART  LE SUPER 8: UNE CINETIQUE ARTISTIQUE  TORONTO FILMS:  : Friday, Feb.12  1J$4 employed  PITT INTERNATIONAL GALLERIES,  36 POWELL ST., VANCOUVER, INFO: 681-6740 /////////////////^^^^^  //////////////////////^^^^^  bulletin Board  GROUPS iSUBMISSIONS  LESBIAN CENTRE  The Vancouver Lesbian Centre is open  Mon-Fri, 11-4 pm. We have a library,  housing board, referrals, art exhibits,  pool table, juke box etc. etc. A free legal  advice clinic is held on the last Saturday  of each month. A Young Lesbian Support  Si Social Group meets every 2nd and  3rd Friday of the month. 7:30-llpm. 876  Commercial Drive. Info. 254-8458  WOMEN WITH DISABILITIES  International network of disabled women  welcomes new members. Membership  includes newsletter. Contributions to  newsletter also welcome. Membership  $15-$25 (U.S.). DIA-Women with Disabilities United. P.O. Box 323. Stuy-  vesant Station. New York, N.Y. 1009. For  details see Movement Matters.  BI-SEXUAL GROUP  For women and men. Meets Tuesday  evenings. Info, call Lynn 589-2054 or  Scott 261-2502.  LESBIAN SUPPORT GROUP  A small group of women are now starting a lesbian support group in Port Coquitlam. We invite all lesbians to join us  and to give us your ideas on what kind  of group is needed in this area. Info, call  Port Coquitlam Area Women's Centre.  941-6311.  SUBMISSIONS  LESBIAN NEWS(PAPER)  Name the paper contest. Drop off your  entry at VLC. We welcome submissions  of all kinds. They can be mailed to The  Lesbian News, c/o VLC, 876 Commercial  Dr.. Van. BC. V5L 3W6.  FRINGE FESTIVAL  Applications are now available for the 4th  Annual Vancouver Fringe Festival, Sept.  9-18, 1988. Info, call Joanna Maratta or  Linda Gorrie. 9-5 weekdays at 873-3646.  ARTWORK it CRAFTS  Artists and craftswomen to display their  work on Mondays (women's night) at  Graceland. Contact Marlene at 255-9654.  CALL FOR HELP!  Artists with work suitable for an Amnesty  International greeting card are requested  to phone the Al office at 734-5150.  Deadline for submissions is March 15.  Slidesor work will be returned.  CLASSIFIED  SUBLET AVAILABLE  Female/non-smoker to sublet room in coop house for 4 months. Feb. through  May. Located in Kits, near stores, bus  routes etc.  Good warm living environment in sunny  furnished room, with friendly, independent women and wonderful cats. Opening date is flexible. Reasonable rent $270  plus utilities. Call 732-8927 and ask for  Jan. Brenda, Valerie or Russall.  SINGING GROUP  Come join us if you like to sing. A chorus is being formed for gay men. lesbians, and friends. For info, call Kaery  321-7368.  HOUSING NEEDED  Feminist moving from Victoria looking for  apartment to rent or sublet or house to  share for Mar. 1st or Apr. 1st. Prefer  west side of Vancouver. Leave message  for Beth at 736-1041.  CRAFTSWOMEN NEEDED  Seeking craftswomen who are making feminist jewelry, altar/ritual instruments, ceramics, clothing, etc.—  goddess/witch/Wiccon theme—and who  would like to merchandise their products through a mail-order business. Prefer women living in B.C. but open to  other Canadian .women. Leave message  for Patricia at (604) 732-5153 or write:  P. Hogan. 1937 W. 2nd Ave.. Van. B.C.  V6J 1J2.  WOMANSPACE ON SALTSPRING  Newly built, fully equipped, self-contained cabin on 5 | seculuded acres. Close to  Ruckle Provincial Park, hiking trails and  sea. Saltspring is accessible by ferry from  Swartz Bay and Tsawwassen. $50/night  double. $35/night single. Wheelchair accessible. Children welcome. No pets. No  smoking indoors. Call Gillian 653-9475 or  write Box C85, King R., R.R. 1, Fulford  Harbour. B.C. VOS ICO  SHIATSU MASSAGE  Give yourself a treat—Shiatsu massage  uses gentle pressure and stretching to enhance the body's natural healing abilities  and leave you feeling great. Sliding scale,  flexible hours. Call Astarte 251-5409.  ml .** ^  "No more Torture" Demonstrations like this one in front of the National Dentention  Centres in Chile are held for only two or three minutes so participants can avoid arrest. Part of an exhibit of political tapestries now on display at the UBC Musseum  of Anthropology. Free admission every Tuesday.  CLASS IFIEDICLASSIFIED  VANCOUVER EAST HOUSING  CO-OP  The Vancouver East Housing Co-op. with  38 units in 6 different locations in the  lively East End. is now accepting people for its waiting list. Market rents are  very reasonable: single units from $260-  $374 (share purchase $1000). 2 bedrooms $397-$577. 3 and 4 bedrooms  $482-$601 (share purchase $2000). If you  are interested in working cooperatively  with others and living in stable, affordable housing, send SASE to: Membership  Committee. #3 -1220 Salsbury Dr.. Van.  V5L 4B2.  GOLDEN THREADS  A contact publication for lesbians over  50 and women who love older women.  Canada and U.S. Confidential, warm, reliable. For free info send self-addressed envelope (U.S. residents please stamp it).  Sample copy mailed discreetly, $5 (U.S.)  Golden Threads, P.O. Box 2416. Quincy.  MA 002269.  WOMEN'S COUNSELLING  My specializations include depression,  sexuality, sexual and emotional abuse,  adult women survivors of childhood sexual abuse, identity issues, self-awareness,  relationship issues, decision-making and  career explorations. I work using verbal and expressive therapies, gestalt and  guided imagery. Sliding fee scale. Janet  Lichty, B.A. M.Ed Counselling Psychology. 874-6982.  WOMEN it WORDS JOBS  Women and Words summer school West  Word is looking for 3 feminists receiving U.I. benefits (for a U.I. top up program) from approximately March-Sept.  The 3 positions require some or all of  these skills/experiences: office and administrative: writing; membership drive  experience: PR experience; interpersonal  skills; analysis of racism and literary interests. Info. 872-8014.  BOOKS BY MAIL  Feminist and lesbian books by mail  (in English and French). Free new  book bulletin published 3 times/year.  L'Androgyne Bookstore, 3636 St. Laurent, Montreal H2X 2V4.  HOUSING CO-OP  DERA Housing Co-operative now accepting applications for its waiting list.  Bachelor, 1 and 2 bedroom suites—some  subsidized, in Downtown Eastside. Send  SASE to Membership Committee, #503-  638 Alexander. Vancouver V6A 3X9 for  application.  OPEN SEVEN DAYS A WEEK,  10am to 7:30pm  • KIDS play space  • FRESH produce—incl. organic  NEW convenient location  10% OFF for seniors, Wed. & Thurs.  1034 COMMERCIAL  254-5044  una  F U I  at GRACELAND 1250 Richards St  Monday  February 22  1988  DOORS 8:30 pm  Benefit For  Barb  Hayman $10.00  Health Fund  Music by:  KEYCHANGE  WOMEN ONLY  Books *nd Airheart Co-operative Travel Centre  DREAM  FUTON  Wholesale & Retail  1420 Commercial Drive  Advertise   in  KINESIS  FOR AS LITTLE AS  Call us for details at 255-5499 I \0  KINESIS mm  If it GOUlu  anyone,  IIO|l|JCII  to  anywhere,   -5»-*S"1  1 ' K"KS'S •"."* - $45 1) Renewal (rieI"» ■  D1,uS«"^c ncmsubscr.,....."'" j  D Hill n»e  Q Will i»e  ^g? -SO-  it could happen to you.  ^*arf°  Published 10 times a year                                                    ^  by Vancouver Status of Women  #301-1720 Grant SL, Vancouver, B.C. V5L 2Y6  to  D VSW Membership-$25.50 (or what you can afford)-includes Kinesis subscription  E  D Kinesis subscription only - $17.50       D Sustainers - $75  D Institutions - $45                                  □ New  □ Here's my cheque                                □ Renewal  □ Bill me                                                  □ Gift subscription for a friend  O  Name  Add ^-^ WOMEN'S ART  OVER 40 SELECTED ARTISTS INCLUDING JUDY  CHICAGO, SUE COE, HELEN LUCAS, SHARRON ZENITH  1988 ANNUAL    CORNE, & PERSIMMON BLACKBRIDGE. ARTICLES ON  WOMEN'S CULTURE BY JUDY GRAHN & BETTINA  APTHEKER.  Gallerie is a new women's publication  devoted to women's art and women  artists. The first issue of Gallerie is the  1988 Annual, appearing in June 1988.  The Gallerie Annual is a book-length  publication of over 140 pages. It features  the work of over 40 women artists in  various media. Most of the publication is  filled with photographs of their work,  alongside their own descriptions of their  art and their philosophy. Gallerie also  includes articles addressing issues of  women's culture, and announcements  and advertisements of concern to women  artists.  Another three issues of Gallerie will be  published throughout the year. These  issues follow the same format for artists  presentations, and are produced in a  smaller-scale magazine style.  Special "Early Order" Offer  The Gallerie network of early subscribers  makes this unique publication possible.  Gallerie is created by women, for women,  speaking in their own words of their  experiences and concerns.  » $8.00 for the first issue of Gallerie,  the 1988 Annual, which will be sent  to you in June 1988.  » $14.00 for a one-year subscription to  Gallerie,   beginning   with   the   1988  • $50.00 for a "friend of Gallerie'' 6-year  subscription to the publication.  Make cheques payable to Gallerie Publications. Canadian residents pay in Canadian funds, U.S. residents in U.S. funds.  All money is fully refundable in the event  of any delay in publication. Gift certificates are available.  Call for Entries  Gallerie is open to all women artists  regardless of medium. Artists present  their work with photos and a short written text. Write for detailed entry guidelines. Writers please send for editorial  guidelines.  Advertisements and  Announcements  We welcome announcements of interest  to women artists: suggested donation  $25 for 25 words.  Display ad rates are available on request.  Advertisers are assured of Canada-wide  and U.S. distribution in a high-impact,  top-quality publication.  Deadline March 15.  Be One In  A Thousand!  Gallerie needs only one thousand more  subscriptions to make the publication  possible.  Artists and supporters from all over  Canada and the U.S. tell us: "Gallerie  is a great ideal" and "Lhc time has  come for this women's art publication".  But without your support, Gallerie  cannot be published. We have neither  stale funding nor any mysterious benefactor — just this network of early  subscribers.  Please help! Order todayl Be one in a  thousand!  iubscriptions and inquiries to:  Gallerie Publications  Jox 2901 Panorama Drive  North Vancouver, B.C.  Canada V7G 2A4