 news about women that's not in the dailies Prostitution law:  First Victims  by Esther Shannon  The politics of street prostitution took a fatal turn  for 21 year old Chantal Marie  Venne who was found strangled  to death in Victoria in late  February. Police say Venne  was killed on February 25  between 1:30 am and 7:00 am.  Venne, who Esquimalt police  said appeared to have no  fixed address and "seemed to  live the lifestyle of a lady  of the night," had only been  living in Victoria for a  month before she was murdered.  According to Inspector Harold  Brittain of the Vancouver  vice squad Venne was well-  known to Vancouver police as  a prostitute who had worked  in the Mount Pleasant area.  "We have had her on our files  for two years," Brittain said.  It appears Venne left the  Mount Pleasant area in January when Vancouver police  began a crackdown on street  prostitution.  "January was when we saw the  biggest decline in the number  of prostitutes working here,"  said Brittain.  -Ajtj£jj|ugh no police officials  have said it directly, it's  obvious that Venne left Vancouver since being known to the  police would have made it impossible for her to work. In  Victoria, working alone in a nev  territory, would clearly make  herself more vulnerable to  violent tricks.  Lisa Marie Morrison, also a J  prostitute, worked in her  regular district, at Seymour  and Helmeken in downtown Vancouver. At press time she had  been missing for 17 days.  Morrison's disappearance has  elicited little attention from  the police or the media.  According to Marie Arrington,  a spokesperson for a prostitutes rights group, Morrison  has lived in Vancouver for a  number of years, and is planning to be married soon. She  is not a transient. She was  working on the night she disappeared and was last seen  between ten and midnight at  Seymour and Helmeken. -"  Early in December, Morrison  was attacked by a customer in  a downtown hotel. The man, who  police subsequently arrested,  threatened Morrison with a gun  and nearly forced her out of  the hotel's 10th story window.  Morrison's customer, Mohamed  Elma Hauchi, was charged by  the police with attempted murder and forceful, confinement  and appeared at a preliminary  hearing that was, according to  observers, packed with his  fr  :nds.  Vancouver police, contacted  over the holiday weekend,  could provide no information  on the status of Morrison's disappearance . According to  Arrington, Morrison's boyfriend,  her friends and other prostitutes are worried and believe  I Morrison may have been murdered.  Arrington said everything  prostitutes and their support  groups have been saying would  happen as a result of the  new street solicitation law  is happening.  She said more women have been  arrested then men, there has  been more police harassment,  more violence and now prostitutes are being murdered.  "I'm putting the blame for  the violence directly where  it belongs, onto the police  who passed this law. They did  not take what would happen to  prostitutes seriously, and  they are etill not taking  it seriously."  In a separate matter Arrington announced this month  that a new group—Prostitutes  and Other Women for Equal  Rights (POWER)—has been  established in Vancouver.  Arrington, a POWER member,  said the new group would  focus on the repeal of the  street prostitution law.  Choice  threatened  by Gretchen Lang  Under pressure from pro-lifers,  Terrace City Council is sticking to its recommendation that  the Terrace Women's Centre oust  an abortion referral service  now sharing the centre.  At a March hearing on the issue,  council voted to change the  wording, but keep the content  of a recommendation that the  Women's Centre refuse to shelter a pro-choice committee.  Both services now operate out  of the city owned building.  The social planning committee  aparently acted on the demands  of Mark Ruelle, chairman of the  Terrace Pro-Life Education  Association. Ruelle, who came  to the February meeting  equipped with pro-life pamplets  featuring fetuses, complained  that taxpayer's money was  being channeled into "vigorously promoting abortion  counselling."  Darlene Westeraan, spokesperson for the women's centre,  denies the pro-choice commi-  tee seeks to influence a woman's  decision on whether or not to  end a pregnancy. "We're not out  there promoting abortion," she  said.  The independant group of  counsellors that form the pro-  choice committee use the centre  on a monthly basis. In a statement of purpose the committee  says its counselling is non-  judgemental and only provides  information for women.  Although, Westerman says, this  was explained to the social  planning committee at its  February meeting, City Council  decided to ask the centre to  stop sheltering the pro-choice  service, before the centre's  lease comes up for re-negotiatioi  in 1987.  Government told again  of crisis in child-care  Terrace continued page 6  by Esther Shannon  In a typically non-commital  way, childcare has finally  made it onto the federal conservatives political agenda.  The Tories have launched a  Special Committee on Childcare comprised of seven  members of parliament who have  set out on a cross-country  study which wilL cost taxpayers a million dollars by  the time it reports in November. The government, however,  has given no assurances that  it will be willing to act on  committee recommendations to  improve service.  Health and Welfare Minister  Jake Epp has said, "to maintain social programs we have  to have economic growth." The  minister also cited the need  to reduce the cost of service  charges for the deficit and  would not commit himself to  provide increased funds for  childcare or set a time for a  decision on the committee's  recommendations.  Canadian women can be excused  if this new task force leaves  them with a sense of deja vu.  The most recent federal task  force on childcare only reported its findings to Parliament  last month. The Cooke Task Force  on Childcare, which cost $900,000  and took two years to complete,  described Canada's childcare  situation as being in a "state  of crisis" and called on the  government to develop a universal tax financed system of childcare.  According to the Cooke report  only 9 percent of approximately  two million Canadian children  under the age of 12 who need  care can be accomodated in the  existing licensed childcare  services. The report says developing a universal system would  eventually cost federal and  provincial governments more than  $11 billion a year.  Walter McLean, Minister responsible for the Status of Women, said  the report is "the most comprehensive analysis of the situation of childcare and parental  benefits ever undertaken in Canada." McLean, however', also refused to promise any new money from  Ottawa for childcare.  The new task force has already held  hearings in Newfoundland, Prince  Edward Island and BC. Committee  Chairman MP Shirley Martin (PC-  Lincoln) said "the theme coming  through is that there is a need  out there for more care and also  a need for better (staff) training ."  Of the 23 groups which the commi-  tee heard in Vancouver almost  all were critical of the lack of  adequate childcare subsidies from  the provincial and federal governments. According to presenters  from the Solidarity Coalition,  the Vancouver School Board and  the Vancouver Status of Women,  B.C. parents pay the highest  childcare costs in Canada while  throughout the province there is  an acute shortage of licensed  daycare spaces.  Ian Reid, spokesperson for the  Solidarity Coalition, told the  committee that "Poor families who  meet the subsidy and waiting list  requirements still pay, on average  $2,102 per year for childcare."  The Vancouver Status of Women's  spokesperson Patty Moore reported that in 1983, 69 percent of  women between ages 20-44 worked  outside the home and called for  the federal government to "establish a Childcare Financing  Act that would promote the development of a universal, free,  non-profit, comprehensive quality childcare system."  "In a time" Moore said "when  women supposedly have equal  rights to work in the labour  force, we witness many women  who are severely limited in  their employment choices as a  result of inadequate child-  Moore also told the committee  that the current system, financed under the Canada Assistance Plan, is a welfare system and forces parents to beg  for money in order to give  their children childcare.  "The result of this," she said,  "is segregation of children  on the basis of socio-economic  status."  Carmela Allevato, of the Vancouver School Board echoed  Moore's criticism and said "only  those at the top of the income  scale have access to licensed  daycare."  Childcare continued page 4 msioM  Across BC ,  3  IWD 5  Across Canada      6  No Name Column  9  Apartheid and health   International news   South Africa   Transition House   DisAbled Women's Network   Lesbian visibility   Women and Science   VISA workers       Arts  Dale Splender 21  Sheila Gostick  22  Colours of Resistance 23  Gaza Ghetto 24  Hinda Avery 25  Rubymusic  27  Periodicals in Review  24  *Night Reading  28  Letters 29  Bulletin Board  30  Kinesis welcomes volunteers to work on all  aspects of the paper. Call us at 873-5925.  Our next story meetings are Wed., April 2  and Wed., May 7 at 7:30 pm at the VSW  offices 400A West 5th Ave. All women welcome, even if you don't have any experience.  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE: Maura Volante,  Esther Shannon, Gretchen Lang, Ann Doyle,  Noreen Howes, Connie Kovalenka, Aletta,  IsiS Sharon Hounsell.  COVER: photo taken at IWD by Kin  design by Isis.  Irving,  EDITORIAL GROUP: Libby Barlow, Kim Irving, Esther Shannon (editor), Isis (production  co-ordinator), Barbara Kuhne, Maura Volante, Sharon Knapp, Janie Newton-Moss, Cy-  Thea Sand, Connie Smith Leather Harris,  Rosemarie Rupps.  EDITORIAL BOARD: Carol Bierenga, Jan  DeGrass, Patty Gibson, Punam Khosla, Emma  Kivisild, Michele Wollstonecroft.  ADVERTISING: Jill Pollack, Vicky Donaldson, Esther Shannon, Isis.  OFFICE: Cat L'Hirondelle, Kim Irving.  CIRCULATION AND DISTRIBUTION: Judy  Rose, Joey Schibild, Vicky Donaldson, Cat  L'Hirondelle, Kim Irving, Esther Shannon  Kinesis is published ten times a year by the  Vancouver Status of Women, its objectives  are to be a non-sectarian feminist voice  for women and to work actively for social  change, specifically by combatting sexism,  racism, homophobia and imperialism.  Views expressed in Kinesis are those of the writer  and do not necessarily reflect VSW policy. All  unsigned material is the responsibility of the Kinesis editorial group.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status  of Women, 400 A West 5th Ave., Vancouver, B.C.  V5Y 1J8.  MEMBERSHIP in Vancouver Status of Women is  $23/year (or what you can afford). This includes a  subscription to Kinesis. Individual subscriptions  to Kinesis are $15/year.  SUBMISSIONS are welcome. We reserve the  right to edit, and submission does not guarantee  publication.  MOVEMENT MATTERS  Vancouver Status of Women:  AGM planned for June  Vancouver Status of Women's annual general meeting, slated for June, provides  one of the best opportunities to get  involved in our organization. At the  AGM the years activities and actions  are reviewed, possible options for the  upcoming year are reported, there are  lots of women to answer your questions  and elections for the board are held.  Since the fall of last year VSW has  moved out into the community with new  energy. We have responded both to  immediate needs and organizing priorities, offered solid information programs and brought CR. and assertive-  ness training groups back.  ■We need new women with energy, ideas  and an interest in getting involved in  organizing. Whether as an advocacy  NOMINATIONS are now being accepted for  the executive of the Vancouver Status  of Women.   In order to run for the  executive, you must have been a member  of VSW in good standing for at least  six months. If interested, send your  name and phone number by April 30, 1986  to Vancouver Status of Women, 400A W  5th Ave., Van., BC, V5Y 1J8; Attn:  Nominations Cmtee.  Upcoming Supplements  Supplements for 1986 are as follows:  MAY: Provincial Overview. In depth  examiniation of the status of B.C.  women. Deadline April 15.  JULY/AUGUST: Kinesis'  annual women in  music issue. The best in women's music.  Deadline June 15.  OCTOBER: Women and sexuality. Women  sex and feminism in the 1980's. Deadline Sept. 15.  DECEMBER: Women and the economy. From  mega projects to the cost of milk,  how well off are women?  Women interested in contributing articles for any of these supplements should  contact \  ^***^**}t  publicize your event,  service, campaign, co-op  or business in English  Canada's oldest feminist  newspaper  Call us for rates  873-5925  worker, a researcher, a feminist journalist, a spokeswoman, resource person,  administrator, activist, artist...the  list is quite unlimited, there is  important and exciting work you can do  at VSW.  The VSW annual general meeting is a  chance to get some ideas, become informed of what one Vancouver women's  organization is doing, or get involved.  For whatever reason you decide to come,  we'll be glad to see you.  Mark the date in your calendar and we'll  be part of your plans for June.  Date: Thursday, June 26  Time: 7:30 pm  Place: New Democratic Party Hall, 517  E. Broadway, Vancouver. For information  call 873-1427. Memberships in VSW are  $23 per year. Both members and non-  members are welcome at our meeting. If  you want to join our organization write:  VSW, 400 West 5th, Vancouver, B.C.  V6Y 1J8. Memberships include a subscription to Kinesis,   Canadan's oldest and  most news-oriented feminist magazine.  Kinesis  needs women to do distribution  of the paper on a regular basis. You  would be needed,'with a car or a partner who has a car, every few months  for four hours. Gas money is available.  Contact Kinesis  873-5925.  Our apologies  Our apologies for the inconvenience  caused to the Women's Health Collective  by our running a Health Collective  Calendar event which was actually  scheduled for last year.  VAT/ONS  • RESIDENTIAL  • INTERIOR  • DRYWALL REPAIR  LEIGH THOMSON  251-6516  KINESIS IS AVAILABLE AT:  VANCOUVER AND AREA:  Agora Food Co-op  Ariel Books  Beckwomans  Duthie Books Ltd  East End Food Co-op  English Bay Books  La Quena Coffee House  Little Sisters  Mall Book Bazaar  Manhattan Books  McLeods Books  North Shore Women's Centre  Octupus East and West  People's Co-op Books  Peregrine Books  prass Gang  Reach Clinic  Simon Fraser Student Society  Bookstore  Simon Fraser University  Bookstore  Spartacus Books  U.B.C. Bookstore  Vancouver Lesbian Connection  Vancouver Women's Bookstore  West Coast Books  Women's Health Collective  IN B.C.:  Cody Books, Port Coquitlam  Everywoman's Books, Victoria  Friendly Bookworm, Dawson  Creek  Haney Books, Maple Ridge  NDP Bookstore, Gibson's Landing  Nelson Women's Centre  The Open Book, Williams Lake  Port Coquitlam Women's Centre  Quesnel Women's Resource  Centre  South Surrey/White Rock  Women's Place  Terrace Women's Resource Centre  Unemployed Action Centre,  Nanaimo  IN CANADA:  Halifax  A Pair of Trindles Bookshop  Atlantic News  Red Herring Co-op Books  Montreal  Androgyny Bookstore  Librairie Alternative  Winnipeg  Dominion News & Gifts  Liberation Books  Thunder Bay  Northern Women's Bookstore  Thunder Bay Co-op Books  Globe Mags and Cigars  Mags and Fags  Octupus Books  Ottawa Women's Bookstore  Edmonton  Common Woman Books  A Woman's Place Bookstore  Newfoundland  Sayer's Books and Co.  Toronto  A&SSmokeShop  Bob Miller Book Room  Book City  Book Loft  Book World  DEC Bookstore  Glad Day Books  Lichtman's News & Books  Longhouse Bookshop  Pages  Readers Den Inc.  SCM Bookroom  The Book Cellar  Toronto Women's Bookstore  World's Biggest Bookstore  York University Bookstore  IN U.S.A.:  Ca.  Laughing Horse Books,  Portland, Or.  It's About Time, Seattle, Wa.  Old Wives Tales,  San Francisco, Ca.  Room of One's Own, Madison, Wi.  NEW ZEALAND:  Broadsheet, Auckland  Women's Bookshop, Christchurch  \ ACROSS BC  House workers lose jobs  by Sharon Knapp  Transition House workers have  lost their jobs following an  LRB decision that the Salvation Army is not the successor employer to the YMCA.  Instead, the Board determined that MHR had exercised  its right to contract out one  of its services to a new  agency.  If the Board had found that  there were grounds for  successorship status, the  BCGEU members from Transition  House would have been assured  employment at the new Salvation Army services. The  Sally Ann has already  staffed their Kate Booth  House, with their own  employees and women who are  known to them.  In the statement handed down  March 3rd, the LRB declared  that there had been no  transfer of the actual Transition House building, its  land, equipment or supplies,  which would have provided a  case for successorship stat  us. The LRB also cited that  there had been "no continuous provision of services  to the same group of clients  and no transfer of client  records." The Board concluded that, while there is no  material difference between  the work previously performed  at Transition House and that <  performed at Kate Booth House, 1  this work still remains i  part of the business of the s  Ministry of Human Resources  who has the right to contract  it out as it pleases.  Hope for a favourable LRB  decision was partly based on  the fact that the YMCA had  honoured the existing terms of  employment that the Transition  House workers had as members  of the BCGEU. When the YMCA  assumed the service in 1983  the union applied for a declaration of successorship. However, the position of the  union members was resolved by  informal discussions and  a formal declaration of  successorship was never issued  by the Board.  People's Free Expo, a Vancouver based group which is organizing  local educational and cultural alternatives to the world's fair  held its first benefit in late March. Their next benefit is  slated for May 3. As well as providing entertainment the event  will focus on Expo related evictions, educational, education  and social cutbacks.  Discrimination at UBC?  UBC's Law Student Association  (LSA) voted against an antidiscrimination amendment to  their constitution in March.  The amendment, proposed to  address a rash of sexist and ■  homophobic incidents at the  law school was vetoed by a  large majority. It sought to  bar discrimination on the  basis of sex, sexual orientation, race ethnic origin, religion disability or age.  Music and views on Co-op marathon  The women of Co-op Radio are  going, all out to provide their  best programming for the week  of April 18th through 27th.  Why? Because they want women  to listen to "the only radio  that's left"—for women, for  lesbians, for all the other  people not covered in commercial radio's demographic,  surveys. And they want women  to join Co-op Radio or renew  their memberships, during  this fundraising Marathon.  For those who would like to  hear the pleas for membership accompanied by choice  tunes, two time slots have  been given over to women's  music. On Monday, April 21,  Ina Dennekamp expands her  regular presentation of  classical and jazz women,  playing opera and jazz'  favourites from 2:30 to 5 pm.  Friday, April 25 you*ftan-..  tune in from 7:30 pm to 1:00  in the morning for "An  Evening of Women's Gold",  presented by Connie Smith,  Janie Newton-Moss, Bridget  Rivers-Moore, Ina Dennekamp,  Vinny Mohr and Kandace Kerr.  If you're ready for some  news, analysis and original  political music dealing with  Expo 86, the Womanvision  collective begins this on  Monday, April 21, 7:30 pm  with a look at how the fair  will affect women. Kandace  Kerr also delivers two hours  on the subject in "The Day  the Circus Came to Town: An  Expose", Sunday, April 27.  Another collectively produced  women's programme, the Lesbian  Show, will be overlapping with  the Coming Out Show (a show  for lesbians and gays) for a  special Marathon edition,  Thursday, April 24, 7:30 to  9:30.  Women's programming doesn't  stop there, as many mixed-  gender shows have strong input from feminist women.  The Rational, RadioPeace,  America Latina Al Dia and  others strive to maintain  a women's viewpoint on many  issues of general concern.  If you listen to any of these  shows which present a woman's  viewpoint, you can let programmers know by calling in  any time with your feedback,  and by phoning in your pledges during their show times  in Marathon week.  Yes, it's tedious to heals all  those "pitches" for money and  memberships, but just remember  all the annoying advertising  for commercial products you  heard last time you tuned  into one of the commercial  stations.  You may think you're tuning  them out, but the message goes  in. Co-op Radio prefers not to  pollute your minds with garbage; instead, you get to  listen every year to direct  appeals for money to run the  station. Please respond with  new or renewed memberships,  and help keep alive, "the  only radio that's left."  Court weakens prostitution law  Federal anti-prostitution legislation was weakened last month  when a Vancouver judge ruled that the street prostitution law,  enacted by Parliament in December, is too broad in banning  solicitation "in any place open to public view." Provincial  Court Judge Keith Libby's ruling struck down the section that  says a motor vehicle is a public place.  Libby, however, upheld most of the new law which means that  Vancouver prostitute Michelle Lee has failed in her effort to  have the law declared unconstitutional. She will face trial on  the prostitution charge later this month.  Vancouver Crown Counsel Sean Madigan has announced the crown  will appeal the ruling and that it may have jeopardized most of  the 193 prostitution-related charges currently before the courts  Vancouver police Inspector Harold Brittain, vice squad head,  said two thirds of the city's prostitution arrests involved  unmarked police cars.  "We're going t<  Brittain said.  Madigan commented  as to use their a  Lee's lawyer Tony Serba said he was glad his arguments "made  some sort of impact" but said he may appeal to have the entire  law struck down.  A Hookers Defense Fund has been set up to pay for court related costs for prostitutes. Send donations c/o POWER,  Vancouver Main Post Office,  Box 2288. Make cheques payable to  Hookers Defense Fund.   carry on as we've been doing with the cars,"  "I didn't realize the police were <  Two of this years LSA annual  events, the "Trike Race' and  a theatrical review offended  students.  In the students theatrical  production, titled a Chorus  Lien one performance had a  woman student singing "Marks  10-Looks 3/ Get plastic  surgery/Now I've got an articling position."  In another incident a gay male  student, who tore down homophobic promotional material  related to the "Trike Race"  was physically threatened by  other students.  Students voting against the  amendment said it limited freedom of speech and was beyond  the LSA jurisdiction.  Nicaragua  tour  We are planning a women's tour  of Nicaragua. Since 1979, the  people of Nicaragua have been  working to rebuild their country. We are women concerned  with these efforts, and are particularly interested in conditions affecting women in Nicaragua. We want to focus on the  progress women'have made, the  problems they continue to  face, and how their interests  are addressed within the revolutionary process.  We anticipate the tour will  include women from a variety  of backgrounds. We hope it  will be of interest to women  who have been involved in issues  which are common to Canadian  and Nicaraguan women. We  believe the tour can be of  use in ongoing work for women  in both countries. After,  the group will form a nucleus  for continuing work in the  interests of Nicaraguan women. ■  Applications should be sent  to the address below no later  than April 30. Tour participants will be selected in  May and fehould be prepared  to take 16 weeks of Spanish  lessons.  A date for the tour has not yet  been established, but we are  considering the first two  weeks of August or some  time in the fall.  For more information and an  application call Debra 734-2228  or write to: a women's tour of  Nicaragua, c/o 1343 Lakewood  Dr ive, Vancouver. 4     Kinesis April «6  ACROSS BC  Nielson balks at report of inadequate welfare  by Alex Maas  Jim Nielson is newly appointed as  Minister of Human Resources (MHR),  but it is already apparent that his  commitment of alleviating poverty  stops at the Socred's pocketbook.  A recent report by the Social Planning and Research.Council of B.C.  (SPARC) has called for thirty to  sixty percent increases in B.C.'s  welfare rates. The report, "Regaining Dignity," was released early  last month. It says that a price  survey done in December shows basic  living costs in the Lower Mainland  range from $599.00 for a single  person to $1,433.00 for a four person  family.  Welfare rates average $378.00 per  month for singles and $888.00 for a  family of four. Rates have not been  increased since 1982 and were actually reduced for some categories  of recipients in 1984.  Nielson has said he "cannot support"  SPARC'S finding, despite meticulously  documented statistics, and called  the report "incomplete" because it  does not take into account all the  extra funds available to the poor  through the GAIN program.  Childcare from page 1  The only dissenting voices in the  call for a better financed childcare system came from a number of  right wing groups who spoke against  the need for any system at all.  Joe Stephens of Sullivan Family Action,  a fundamentalist, pro-family group,  told the MPs that there is "considerable evidence that shows that daycare  is not as good as a family situation  but (is) detrimental."  "Parents in society," Stephen said,  "neglect their children for their  own personal fulfillment."  A Realwoman spokesperson, Agatha  Ratlaff, said that "women should have  the financial and social choice to  stay at home and should be given an  income rather than be forced into the  workplace."  Ratslaff also said that "anything  that destroys the family destroys  democracy" and that "the best daycare is spelled H-O-M-E."  According to the National Action  Committee on the Status of Women  (NAC) women need to be concerned about  the childcare committee's broad mandate, which is to report on the future  of childcare in the context of the  changing needs of the Canadian family.  NAC fears the Committee hearings will  be diverted into an examination of  . the Canadian family by groups who want  to reverse choices and gains won by women  over the past number of years.  While NAC's fears may be useful to bear  in mind, it seems the real concern about  yet another report on childcare should  be whether parents will see any action  at all.  In commenting on the Cooke report Status  of Women Minister McLean said, "as we  look at this report, we have our eye on  the year 2,000." If McLean's time line  is a measure of government intent children without childcare in 1986 will be  arguing, as adults, the same case that  their parents present today.  The report does in fact list all the  extra benefits available through MHR  in a appendix stating that it has  excluded additional allowances and  exemptions from income calculations  since they apply only in special  circumstances. Further there are no  figures available on the degree to  which income assistance recipients are  able to benefit from additional  allowances and earning exemptions.  The report does show that less than  one percent of basic income assistance  expenditure is accounted for by school  start-up, diet, natal and crisis  grants.  Of its eight recommendations Nielson  has chosen to act only on the one  which will cost nothing. In an  announcement in late March, Nielson  increased earning exemptions for all  categories of recipients. This at a  time when any job, even part time  ones, are scarce. According to SPARC  it is unlikely that a significant  number of recipients benefit from  earnings exemptions on either a regular or irregular basis.  In releasing the report, Council  president Tim Beachy said "while  SPARC is aware of the difficulty of  providing support when the economy is  weak this is also the time when adequate hardship allowance is essential."  The report goes on to say that the  Ministry of Human Resources is failing to meet this mandate "to provide people in need with assistance to facilitate their daily  living" as outlined in the Ministry's  own Services Policy and Procedures  Manual.  The report is concise and makes easy  reading and provides a wealth of detailed information on current costs  of basic food, clothing and shelter  in the Lower Mainland. While its  recommendations are directed at the  present government the report is  designed to be used by community  organizations and anti-poverty  groups. It includes a blank budget  form at the back so that the individual can calculate their own costs of  living based on the report's figures.  Calculations can then be checked  against the established poverty lines  given in the appendix.  SPARC makes eight recommendations, six  of which are directed at increasing  shelter allowances and support payments,  increasing the earnings exemption,  eliminating age discrimination and  reduced support payments during the  first eight months, and indexing  GAIN to increases in the "low income  cost of living."  Among the more pertinent of the study's  findings is its discussion of the  shelter allowance component of the welfare payment. By comparison with average Lower Mainland rents in low income  rental areas MHR shelter allowances were  shown to be inadequate in every configuration of family size whether rates  for singles, one parent or two parent  families were compared.  The inadequacy of shelter allowances  accounts for the largest percentage  of the overall shortfall. While the  average shortfall in income assistance,  when cost of shelter is included  ranges from 30 to 60 percent, when cost  of shelter is removed and only support  costs are considered shortfalls range  from 7 percent for single, parent  family to 40 percent for two adults  with two children and 47 percent for a  childless couple. Nearly, all GAIN  recipients find it necessary to use  their support component towards the  cost of shelter thereby placing further  strain on already inadequate funds.  Along with the obvious increase in shelter allowances, these figures have led  the Council to make a further recommendation which provides for public access  to information. Information regarding  the rationale by which MHR sets support  rates is not published, nor is it clear  how the Ministry establishes maximum  shelter levels. These calculations,  SPARC believes, should be a matter of  public record.  UsSgij graphic from SPARC report  Although the main purpose of the report  is to provide information for an  "examination of policy options for the  much needed reform of Canada's sofffsfflr*^*~"  security system both provincial and  federal," SPARC has looked at average  UIC payments and the minimum wage as  sources of income. In every case the  total possible income whether from  GAIN, UIC or minimum wage, falls well .  below the poverty lines of the National  Council of Welfare. The lowest of all,  however, was the income of a sole  support earner at the minimum wage.  In two examples, the report showed that  a single mother with one child working  full time at the minimum wage would fall  short of her required income for basic  living costs by 20 percent. A family of  four with only one parent working at the  minimum wage would experience a shortfall  of an incredible 81 percent.  It should be kept in mind here that  "basic living costs" included shelter,  food and clothing with small allowances  for transportation- and personal costs.  This calculation omits entirely all the  various household,, school, entertainment and emergency costs incurred as a  matter of course in daily living.  Despite the facts, and in the face of  the recent flurry of lobbying after a  federal government announcement raising  the federal minimum wage to $4.00 per  hour, the Socreds have maintained that  they will not follow suit and raise  the provincial minimum wage from $3.65  per hour. B.C.'s minimum wage is the  lowest in Canada.  According to Jim Nielson there are no increases in welfare rates this year because  Sooial Credit's philosophy is that income  assistance is not a substitute for a  steady income. The SPARC report demonstrates the impact that philosophy is  having on the poor in BC. For hundreds  of thousands of poor people in this  province, philosophy is no substitute  for survival. For the first time the Vancouver Chinese women's communit;  hosted an IWD celebration. The event, held at the Strath-  cona Community Centre, attracted over 300 people and included traditional dancing, skits on women's issues and  workshop sessions on women's health and women in the home.  This year the BC Federation of Labour Women's Conf  an annual event, was scheduled .to coincide with IWD. Trade  union women at the meeting adjourned the conference to join  the march and r^ll^r,.,.Labour wqmen also sponsored "B.C. 86:  An Enquiry, a look at the impact of provincial politics on  issues.  Vancouver's IWD committee also organized workshops about  peace, disabled women and isolation, women of colour, lesbians and women of the right. In the evening the committee  sponsored a women's coffee house at Women in Focus.  The Contemporary Saga of Little Mellon  by Terri Roberton and Harris Taylor ACROSS CANADA  Women  protest  rape in  Edmonton  Edmonton women, nervous  after the recent rape and  murder of Brenda McLenaghan,  and other women who have been  abducted and murdered in  Edmonton over the past few  years, refuse to let the  incidents rob them of the  right to walk out into the  darkness.  The Edmonton media, fed by  archaic ideas, has put forward  the suggestion that women  who go out alone at night  are partially to blame if  they are assaulted. It has  not been suggested that  assault on men and murder of  men is a result of their  freedom to walk outside at any  hour of the day.  The local police, who should  know that more than half of  assaults on women take place  within the home, have circulated dire warnings to women  to stay home after dark.  According to the Sexual  Assault Centre in Edmonton's  director, Jane Karstaedt,  "We must strive for a society  where women are not deprived  of the right to walk on the  streets, and where women  are also safe in their homes."  A candlelight vigil organized  by the Alberta Status of  Women Action Committee and  the Sexual Assault Centre of  Edmonton mourned the loss of  their sister who was killed  on her 21st birthday. A list  of Edmonton women who have been  murdered recently was read at  the i  graphic from off our backs  Caesarian rate may drop  Alberta's Health Minister, Bill  Diachuk suggested women should  learn from Brenda McClenaghan's  murder and not go out alone  at night.  Alberta women will not take to  the idea that they are tempting  death by acting normally,  coming and going to work, and  acting as men do by walking  freely.  An action long demanded by  women's health groups happened  recently. The Society of Obstetricians and Gynecologists  of Canada met and made  recommendations that will  lead to less caesarian sections .  1,400 physicians-supported  recommendations from a panel  of medical experts who concluded that doctor's fears of  malpractice suits have unduly  affected their decision-making,  and that choice in the matter  of c-sections has largely  been unilateral—up to the  doctor. They voted to decrease  the number of unnatural births.  In Canada, the number of c-  sections rose 200 percent  between 1970 and 1983 (the  latest year for which figures  were available) and the ris-  Abortion by husband's consent  In Saskatchewan some people  want to jump back into the  fifties with a law requiring  a husband to give written  concent before a woman can  have a therapeutic abortion.  Bill 53, introduced as a  private member's bill, by PC  MLA Gay Caswell is known  as the Freedom of Informed  Choice Concerning Abortions,  and it calls for among other  things the consent of the  husband before a woman can  obtain an abortion.  A coalition of women's groups,  church groups, the Saskatchewan  Action Committee, and others  have been denied opportunity  to intervene in the Appeal  Court hearing on Bill 53.  Justice Minister Gary Lane  referred it to the Saskatchewan Court of appeal to  determine whether or not it  is constitutional.  Chief Justice Bayda ruled in  October 1985 that the issue  was primarily one of constitutional law, and no one  could intervene.  The coalition was formed in  response to ads in the Regina  Leader Post  and the Saskatoon  Star Phoenic,   inviting interested parties to apply to  intervene as friends of the  court. When they were denied  the right to intervene, the  coalition tried to collect  some $4,750 in legal costs  from the department of justice. They were refused.  Now they are mounting a fund  raising campaign to cover  legal costs.  Terrace from page 1  Community support for the  Women's Centre's position was  soon apparent.  "Women we had never seen before  came into the Centre to sign  letters to Council asking them  to rescind the recommendation,"  Westerman says.  But at the March 10th meeting,  and although a large number of  concerned citizens spoke out  in behalf of the service,  Council voted to send the matter  back to social planning, keeping the recommendation but ad-  "We got on the phone and polled  our members and decided to say  no to the council's recommendation," said Westerman.  The Centre refused the recommendation on the grounds that it  ingerfered with a woman's access  to information as defined by  the Charter of Rights. They also  voiced concerns that the reference to the lease was a covert  threat of eviction if the  Centre did not comply with  Council's recommendation.  vising that references to lease  negotiations be dropped.  Pro-choice women were angered.  Pro-choice counsellor Maureen  Bostock said, "It was clear  that the appropriate action  would be to rescind the  recommendat ion. Obviously  Council didn't listen to what  people said here tonight."  "It was to keep peace in the  community" said Council member Ruth Hollock of the  recommendation. Ms. Hollock  acknowledged that abortion  counselling is legal in Canada but felt that it would be  better if they (the pro-  choice committee) didn't do  "that kind of thing" on city  premises.  The wording of the recommendation, Hollock admits, with  its reference to lease renegotiation, was a "faux pas  on the city's part."  "We feel council is acting  out of its own personal biases."  said Darlene Westerman. The  wife of Mayor Jack Talstra,  she noted is a member of  Birth-Right (an anti-choice  organization) while the  chairman of the chairman of  the social planning committee  works with Mark Ruelle.  Council-^woman Hollock said  she knew of no personal  biases. Mayor Talstra could  not be reached for comment.  Pro-lifers have a high profile in Northwestern B.C.  said Westerman. Abortions,  she said,-are becoming increasingly difficult to  obtain.  "We used to have a rotating  board of doctors on the  therapeutic abortion committee here. Now only three  doctors will sit on the  committee. They're afraid  of harassment by the pro-  lifers.  Westerman felt that pro-life  numbers are probably small  but through extensive networking and a high profile  campaign their voices are  being heard.  "It's really scary how verbal  they are," she said, "It makes  it look like they're the majority."  ing trend continues. Women  who had one c-section often  automatically had another at  their next' birth. Of .eight  western nations, Canada's  section rate was exceeded  only by the United States,  according to StatsCan.  This panel of medical experts  was made up of, among-others,  a lawyer, a teacher of health  sciences at McMaster University, and naturally doctors.  Two solid recommendations put  forward were: that women  who have had one previous c-  section be permitted if possible to have second children  by vaginal birth, and that  doctors emphasize consent so  that those patients can make  a reasonable decision between  another c-section and natural  birth.  As a result of the recommendations it is expected that  the c-section will soon lose  its status as the third most  performed operation on Canadian  Equal pay case  stayed in Halifax  The first case in Canadian  history involving equal pay  for work of equal value has  been stayed by the Supreme  Court of Canada while it  decides whether to allow .  Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.  to appeal a ruling that AECL  waived its right to challenge  the independence of a human-  rights tribunal hearing the  case in Halifax.  Chief Justice Brian Dickson  reserved decision on the AECL  motion and at the same time  ordered the Halifax tribunal  not to continue proceedings  until the five justices who  heard the motion have decided  on it.  The tribunal is hearing a 1979  complaint that AECL engaged  in sexual discrimination against  31 women who worked at the  federal Crown corporation's  heavy-water plant in Glace  Bay, N.S. The plant has since  been closed.  The women, members of Local  916 of the Energy and Chemical  Workers Union, contend they  were underpaid, compared with  men at the plants  After the Federal Court of  Appeal ruled that bias was  built into the way a similar  tribunal heard a complaint  of sexual harassment against  former Liberal MP Allister  MacBain, AECL challenged  the Halifax tribunal on  the same grounds.  The Federal Court of Appeal  ruled on Dec. 23 that AECL  should have made its complaint  when the tribunal was established in 1984 and began  hearings. Because it did not,  it waived its right to complain . Kinesis April TO  ACROSS CANADA  RCMP, military told to stop discriminating  by Eunice Brooks  From an onlooker's position,  it would seem that the more  power Canadians have, the  less we understand the  meaning of equality. Enforcing  an understanding of equality  will be up to Justice Minister  John Crosbie, and the Solicitor-General Perrin Beatty,  as far as powerful groups  such as the RCMP and the armed  forces are concerned.  RCMP Commissioner Robert  Simmonds says he will reluctantly change RCMP's policy  of not hiring homosexuals.  Discrimination is banned in  all matters relating to sexual orientation and gender.  In the past neither the RCMP  nor the armed forces would  accept homosexuals because it  had been thought they would  prove a threat to security.  Commandor Barry Frewer, a  spokesperson for defence  headquarters in Ottawa, said:  "The only instance where somebody could be denied a promotion or denied entry is where  the homosexuality is directly  relevant to the conditions of  work under which he or she is  operating...if he or she is  a candidate for blackmail,  ■ then security clearance would  be denied. But the issues  would not be homosexual or  heterosexual per se."  Justice Minister John Crosbie  has also told the Canadian  Army to stop discriminating  against women in combat roles,  but he has left the time  table and methods for change  up to the military. In the  Canadian Army only one in  three jobs are open to women  to ensure they are not exposed  to combat.  A number of lobby groups  including: Right-to-Privacy,  Coalition of Gay Rights, the  Association for Women's Equity  in the Canadian Forces, the  Canadian Advisory Council on  the Status of Women, and others  have expressed doubt that  there will be change without a  strong shove from the Progressive Conservative government.  Sylvia Gold, of"the Aflvisory  Council says: "As is often  the case with issues affecting equality of opportunity  for women, government continues to call for studies, when  the facts are widely known."  Her point is that in the fall  of 1985 the government released  its Equality for All  report  which states quite clearly:  "The exclusion of women from  so many job opportunities  has several adverse consequences, especially since the  Armed Forces is a major source  of employment in many parts  of the country." It also  states: "The Canadian Human  Rights Act has, since 1978,  prohibited any policy that  deprives an individual of any  employment opportunities on  the basis of sex."  So what do we have in reply  to that -from sitting government  members? Patrick Crofton  PC, Esquimalt-Saanisn, and a  naval officer for 18 years  says: "In tough situations  such as in submarine warfare  for long stretches, the absence of privacy between men  and women would cause a breakdown of all-important discipline."  ILO criticizes  Socreds for  going too far  by Eunice Brooks  The eyes of the world turned  to British Columbia as the  United Nation's International Labour Organization (ILO)  ruled that Bennett's Socreds  went too far in clamping down  on the collective bargaining  rights of its own employees.  Since the passage by the  Socreds of the Compensation  Stabilization Program Act in  1983, public sector unions  in BC have been forced to  submit all negotiated collective-agreements to a government appointed commissioner  for approval. The International Labour Organization, in  a decision forwarded to the  Canadian Labour Congress,  criticized BC for resorting  .to the principle of prior  approval of collective agreements before they can come  into force.  In a report prepared by its  committee of Freedom of  Association, the ILO said:  "The Compensation Stabili- ■  zation Program is contrary  to the principle of voluntary  collective bargaining." It  went on: "The committee, expresses hope that the government will at an early date  take appropriate steps in  light of the principles  stated above to restore free  collective bargaining  between the parties and to  remove limitations currently  imposed on them by the pro-  Shir ly Carr, executive* secretary of the two-million  member CLC hailed the ruling  as an overdue victory for  workers in British Columbia.  She told reporters: "If they  don't pay heed, we'll continue to embarass them in the  international field, and I  don't think that's what they  want. It's time (the Socreds)  understood they cannot continue to abuse the work force  and not abide by international laws."  Usually such initiatives  by the ILO are associated  with repressive regimes,  such as those in Poland,  South Africa and Chile. .  We also have Bill Lesick  PC, Edmonton East and World  War II vet, saying quite the  opposite: "I'm probably the only  one in the 51-member defense  caucus who believes that  women have a fighting role in  the armed forces."  As for the RCMP, only homosexuals who openly state their  sexual orientation, and live  in open relationships will be  admitted. No one who is vulnerable to blackmail will be  considered for the job.  A spokesperson, Staff-Sargeant  Dennis Rich, said the RCMP is  studying Crosbie's directives  and cannot comment on how fast  changes will be made.     Local action against apartheid has escalated over the past several months. Protesters here  demonstrate outside the Centre for-Investigative Journalism conference which invited  South African ambassador Glen Babb to speak on freedom of the press. For more news on  South Africa see pages 10 and 13.  Church suspends gay deacons  Two female deacons, Rev. Joyce  Barnett and Rev. Alison Kemper  announced, at a December 29  service at Holy Trinity Church  in Toronto, that not only are  they married, but that Barnett  is pregnant. Pregnancy was  achieved by artificial insemination. The two have been on  official leave from Holy  Trinity, but are now suspended  from the ministry. As lay  members of the church they can  still participate and take  communion. The priest at Holy  Trinity has said he is ready  to welcome them back.  As deacons the two women had  been one step below a priest,  licenced to conduct various  services, but not administer  communion. Now both have  flouted the church's standard  on morality, which holds for  male homosexuals as well as  lesbians. If an unmarried  priest fathered a child, he  too could expect suspension.  The Anglican Church, however,  does not recognize marriage  between homosexuals or lesbians.  At the same time it does not  approve of sex outside of  marriage, or the bearing of  children out of wedlock. The  Archbishop called the matter  "a scandal".  The interesting feature of this  incident is the question of  whether the deacons will  accept the suspension or appeal  the ruling and make an issue  of their case—Such an appeal  would force the church to  re-examine their stance on  homosexual and lesbian marriages,. '  The Anglican Archbishop of  Toronto, Lewis Garnsworthy,  has enforced the church rule  on homsexuals. For Anglican  priests and deacons who are  homosexuals -there must be  either celibacy or suspension.  Right now none of the ministry  will comment. Barnett and  Kemper are also remaining  mum on being moms.  When will we  be represented?  With the present government,  advisory committees are a way  of governing.  The Prime Minister's Office  is setting up yet another  committee to ensure women make  up half of government appointments to federal boards,  commis s ions, c our t s, and  other posts by the next election.  The key words in the last  paragraph are: "by the next  election."  Walter McLean, Minister  Responsible for the Status  of Women, will ask all  women's associations for  the names of two or three  women who would like to sit  on the committee. Naturally,  the Prime Minister will have  the final say on all appointments .  During the last election Mr.  Mulroney said he would have  an equal representation of  women appointees, but he did  not name a time for carrying  out this promise. It is true  that the proportion of women  being appointed is on the  increase, but the figure has  risen from only 7 percent to  25 percent. Mr. Mulroney  promised 50 percent, and he  hasn't come through yet. 8     Kinesis April TO  ACROSS CANADA  Youth sexuality and social services studied  by Eunice Brooks  If you are young in Canada  today, chances are you are  being studied almost as much  as you are studying. Researchers  are getting interested in  youth behavior and how it is  influenced.  One study of 45 Canadian  Universities concluded that  there is serious sexual harassment on Canadian campuses.  Despite this situation only  18 of the 45 universities had  any procedures to deal with  the problem. The Sexual  Harassment on Campus  survey  was undertaken in 1984-85 and  says many incidents of harassment go unreported. It also  states that sexual harassment  creates fear and mistrust  among students and teachers.  labour force participation,  and women's income. They  found that sex education  and birth control clinic  services are available in 18  out of 21 communities With  a high socio-economic status.  But sex education is only  available in 8 of 18 communities where socio-economic  status -is low. •  This study was undertaken  for Planned Parenthood by  sociologists Ellen Rosenblatt  and Maureen Orton who  gathered statistics from  One of the reasons that sexual harassment has not been a  priority might be in the results  from another study, this one  on pornography. The study  by Toronto psychologist James  Check reveals some shocking  details. It shows that persons  between 12 and 17 are the  greatest consumers of porn,  and that 37 percent of them  watch at least one sexually  explicit video a month. More  than 1000 persons completed  the questionnaire.  Sexually violent scenes  proved to have more appeal for  younger persons than for  adult consumers Check found.  Check also found college  students to be very accepting  of violence in sex. For  example, 16 percent of the men  surveyed agreed that rape  was an appropriate way to  "turn on" a sexually cold  woman.  Check summed up his - survey  with this chilling statement:  "For today's youth, pornography is sex education."  If it is possible to change  that situation, Planned  Parenthood of Canada is  going to do it. In a recent  study they have done they  found that every dollar  spent on sex' education saves  ten in later social services.  They learned that the rate  of teen pregnancies is finally  dropping.  Between 1976 and 1981 the  Canadian teen pregnancy rate  has declined 11 percent.  In Canada the rate of teen  pregnancies for every thousand girls is less than half  what it is in the United  States, according to Planned  Parenthood. All the provinces  except Alberta and Newfoundland had declining rates.  The study showed that programs  to prevent teen pregnancies  favoured the rich. To reach  this conclusion the study's  authors measured the socioeconomic status of Ontario  communities using post-  secondary education level  among men and women, female  1975 to 1983 from across the  country. They also surveyed  all Ontario Health Units  and school boards, and reviewed  a number of studies already  .done.  The authors called on all  schools to provide sex edu-  Workers  threatening  their union  Workers at six Eaton's stores are  calling on the Ontario Labour  Relations Board to decertify  their union. Employees are  writing and circulating petitions to oust the union which  represents them.  About 1,200 Eaton's workers at  six Ontario stores are represented by the Retail, Wholesale, and Department Store  Union. Though the union  scored victories in 1984, a  5h month strike last winter  ended badly with little  gained for workers at the  retail giant.  The strike was popular with  women' s, ':■ labour and church  groups, who saw unionization  as a chance to raise the  status of retail workers,  mainly women. Eaton's, however  despite a national boycott,  was able to hold out for $6  an hour wage.  The union contract expires  in two months and anti-union  workers are making their  "We want them out. Its not a  fair union." said Barbara  Murray, an Eaton's saleswoman  who has been gathering signatures for the decertification  petition. Ms. Murray added  that her supporters are not  anti-union. "We probably need  -something, but we certainly  don't need the RWDSU."  Union staff member Paul Kessig  had been instructed not to  comment but he confirmed that  petitions are being signed in  all six unionized stores.  Union opponents need the names  of 45 percent of a bargaining  unit's members in order to  get a decertification vote.  When a petition is brought  to the labour board, and if  board members are satisfied  that the petition is not the  work of the management, a  vote must be held.  Votes are expected to be  ordered in May. If more than  50 percent of a bargaining  unit's membership votes to  decertify the union, it then  no longer represents the  workers.  cation. In 1983 almost half  the adolescent pregnancies  ended in abortion. It is the  intention of Planned Parenthood to prevent pregnancies  through birth control information, and to make birth  control easily available.  Cracking down on violence  The Quebec government has  toughened its measures against  domestic violence, including  prosecution even if the victim does not press charges.  Justice Minister, Herbert Marx  said, "We are now telling the  perpetrators of these crimes  that they will be treated  like any other common criminal. Battering will no longer  be viewed as just family  quarrels; it is now a serious  criminal offence." Independent  confirmation of battering  would be enough for police to  lay charges.  Figures from a federal report  indicate 200,000 or 10 percent  of Quebec women are battered.  The new regulations, a joint  effort by the Justice, Health  and Social Services departments, the Solicitor General's  office and the provincial  status of women department,  provide a network of care  for battered women including  increased protection and  support for women who testify.  Monique Gagnon-Tremblay, Min-"  ister for the Status of Women,  said the measures assert that  battering is a criminal act;  one that society has tolerated too long.  "Moreover," she said, "this  policy demonstrates genuine  concern for the victim. It  aims at understanding the  battered woman and at giving  her the attention and the  support she needs all the way  along the judicial process."  Media sexism hearings this month  For the first time in five  years, women's groups will  have an opportunity to speak  out on the issue of sex-role  stereotyping in the broadcast  media.  The Canadian Radio-Television  Commission (CRTC) has scheduled public hearings in Vancouver, Montreal and Hull to  get reaction to its "Report  on Self-regulation in the  Broadcast Media." This report,  which was published in January 1986, makes it clear that  self-regulation by the broadcast and advertising industries  has failed to eliminate sex-  role stereotyping in programming and advertising.  MediaWatch will be presenting  a major brief at the hearings,  but it needs the support of  many women's groups if it is  to demonstrate to the CRTC that  sex-role stereotyping is a  serious problem that is of  concern to all women,  not just  the members of MediaWatch.  MediaWatch will be urging that:  •the Broadcast Act be amended  to allow the CRTC to introduce-  regulations to eliminate sex-  role stereotyping on radio and  television.  •the CRTC introduce regulations  requiring radio and television  stations to set targets and  time-frames for improving  their depiction of women and  girls.  •the CRTC monitor the performance and impose penalties,  such as fines, suspensions  and revocation of licenses, on  broadcasters which fail to  comply with the guidelines.  WHAT YOUR ORGANIZATION CAN DO  Present your brief at the  public hearings, which are  scheduled to start on the  following dates:  Vancouver - Sunday, April 6  Hull - Sunday, April 27 and  Montreal - Sunday, April 20.  Write or call CRTC,   Central  Building,  Les Terrasses de la  Chaudiere, Room 561,  1 Promenade  du Portage,  Hull,  P.Q.  K1A 0N2.   Telephone:  997-2429..  Domestics to pay  Foreign domestic workers—  which most often translates  as women—must now pay the  federal government fees of  $125.00 for a request for  permanent residence, $50.00  for a request to extend a  visa beyond 90 days, $50.00  for an employment authorization, and $25-.00 for a verification of landing.  Each time a domestic worker  changes employers a new work  permit is needed. The average wage for foreign domestics in Canada is under  $10,000 annually and often  the bulk of the wages are in  the form of room and board.  A coalition, which includes  members of the Canadian Bar  Association and the International Coalition to End  Domestics Exploitation, has  been formed to fight the imposition of the fees which  not only form a real hardship  on women, but are also not  expected to improve service.  Anyone interested in more  information should contact  INTERCEDE, 58 Cecil Street,  Toronto, Ontario, M5T 1N6. JMo Name Column^  by Nora Randall  I have enough work, mind you, it's just  that my income sucks, so I am once again  on the trail of the elusive paying job.  I had a great idea, I thought, I can upgrade my driving license and try to get  a job driving a school bus. I've done  it before. On and off over the years  I've driven an egg truck, a fish truck,  rush delivery and taxi. Why not school  bus?  I called up a friend who works in the  school bus business and got the latest  gossip on who's hiring whom, when. Get  your application in right away, she  said. They should be hiring soon. Oh  happy day. Only I'd have to get my  license upgraded right away. No problem,  I thought. I just have to phone up the  motor vehicle branch and find out what I  need to do. Let me tell you, I found out  a lot more than that, and what I found out  was not pretty.  First thing the next morning I phoned the  motor vehicle branch closest to where I  live. The line was busy. I phoned back  later. The phone rang and rang and rang  and nobody answered. That's strange, I  thought, but never* mind, I can drcvp in and  find out on my way to the bank.  I drove to the nearest branch, not even  sure if it was open since the phone  wasn't being answered. The place looked  like Zeller's on a sale day. There must  have been over fifty people in there  waiting in two long painfully slow lines.  There was no information desk and there  was no way of telling by reading the  signs which of the two painfully slow  lines I should wait in. This is ridiculous  I thought. I'll go home and try phoning  again. I did.. The phone rang and rang and  rang and nobody answered. This can't be. I  know they're there, I saw them. So I got  the operator to try ringing through. It  rang and rang and rang and nobody answered.  The operator said she'd have the line  checked.  Baseline will design your brochure, typeset  your newsletter, paste-up your program,  reduce or enlarge your illustrations,  and halftone screen that photo.  At decidedly reasonable rates.  let Baseline  be your line  to printed communication  683-5038  I Baseline ,"im  J6 HOMER STREET VANCOUVER. B.C.  I tried calling other branches. I finally  got through to the branch downtown. The  woman who took my call was very helpful. Since I already had my taxi  license I didn't need to take a written  test. All I needed to do was to take  a road test in an 8 to 24 passenger  bus. I could get the manuals I needed  to prepare for the test from her  branch, but I would have to take the  road test at another branch. This  meant phoning a branch and making an  appointment for a bus road test. Easier  said than done, as I  now knew. Never  mind, first things first, get the manuals. Having learned from my recent  experiences, I asked her how many  people were standing in line at her  branch. (Would an overnight bag do,  or should I pack for the week?) She  said their were about ten customers  in the office at the moment.  I rushed right out and took a bus downtown. (That's like saying you hurried  to watch the slug cross the road.) By  the time I got to the downtown office  forty-five minutes later, I got to  be nineteenth in line. By this time  I realized that I was very lucky that  it only took me twenty minutes to work  my way up to the desk and ask for the  manuals. It took the worker about ten  seconds to give them to me since they  were sitting in a pile right there  behind the counter. (I only point this  out because if they had been sitting  in a pile in front of the counter,  the whole thing would only have taken  me ten seconds instead of twenty minutes and ten seconds)". Still I was.  lucky. Because when I dropped into  the branch in my part of town on the  way home there were still over fifty  people waiting in two long painfully  slow lines.  I went to the end of the counter and  interrupted a worker to ask if they  were answering the phones. She said  they were. So I said that I had been  trying for two days to phone this  branch and the phone rang and rang  and nobody answered. (I'd thought  they'd want to know their line was  faulty.)  "Well, she said, we're answering the  phones. See, there's somebody on  the phone right now. Well, I said,  I'm telling you that I tried to get  through several times and the operator  tried and neither of us could get  through. I can't help it, she snapped,  we're answering the phones." I called  her a turkey and stamped out. It was  the only laugh the people in the  lines got.  PRESS GANG  PRINTERS  a feminist, worker-controlled collective.  603 Powell Street, Vancouver  ' 253-1224  yCJl/s U&tWA-flirt  NEW  SEX, POWER AND PLEASURE  by Mariana Valverde    $8.95  Kinesis April W     9  I know it was wildly incorrect and  rude, but remember the job where I was  supposed to get my application right  away? And remember that I was to phone  and make an appointment for a road  test? If they were answering their  phones and I was the only person in  the world who could not get through  to them, me and the operator who tried  for me, then I probably wasn't going to  to get the school bus job.  I went home and tried phoning another  branch. I vowed never to have anything  to do with the branch in my NDP  neighbourhood again. I got through  to a branch in a Socred neighbourhood.  The earliest date I could take the  road test was two weeks away. Meanwhile the clock on the bus job was  ticking.  Reluctantly, I asked if he thought I  could get an earlier test on my side  of town. "Oh yes," he said. He'd  heard it was a zoo over there. Encour-  ,'on my side of town. I told him I  thought that was because you couldn't  phone them. "Oh yes," he said, he'd  heard it was a zoo over there. Encouraged, I complained about not being able  to phone them and then going in and  not being able to tell which line to  stand in. He was a nice guy. He told  me exactly which end of what counter  to go to and what to say when I finally  got waited on. I thanked him profusely  and set out with steely determination  to wait all day if I had to, to make  an appointment for my road test (which  I should have been able to do over the  phone.)  I stood at the right end of the counter  and waited. It only took ten minutes  which proves that if you live long  enough anything can happen. I got a  road test in three days. Encouraged  by my wild success and the friendliness  of" the worker, I chanced to mention my  experience of the last two days and my  suspicion that their phones were out of  order. He said, no, the phones weren't  but of order, that when the place was  really full they waited on people who  were standing in line rather than those  on' the phone. (A perfectly reasonable  explanation to me. If only the worker  had told me that yesterday, I would  have known what was going on.)  He also told me that that office used  to have twenty-five people working in  it and they had been cut back to eight. -  That explained a lot. I was dealing  vith an example of "leaner" "meaner"  Social Credit efficiency.  Now all I want to know is wouldn't it  have been a lot cheaper and more productive for all of us if—when I  called the motor vehicle branch I had  gotten through, even to a recorded  message that said, please don't hang up  and you will be waited on in the order  in which your call was received. I could  have had a five minute conversation  with one worker in which I found out what  I had to do and made an appointment for  my road test. Then, if the manuals had  been put where the public could get at  them, I could have dropped in and gotten  them without having to see a worker at  all. Instead, I talked to two workers  on the phone and three workers in person, not to mention the operator and  the repair service from B.C. Telephone  and not to mention two full days of.  my time I  and the job with the immediate opening.  Well, I thought, you learn something  new everyday. Social Credit government  is like leftovers. If there's too little  left at "the end of the meal,- it just  sits in the fridge and rots. INTERNATIONAL  Apartheid: Resistance focuses on health rights  by Susan Prosser  For black South Africans apartheid,  meaning separate development, means  the systematic breakdown of the social,  familial and personal fabric of their  lives. Black resistance to apartheid  has been organized on many fronts, one  of the most important of which is the  struggle for adequate health services.  South Africa is one of the world's  forty most wealthy countries with a  high standard of health care, for  whites only. For blacks, malnutrition  and poverty are more pervasive in South  Africa than in many third world coun-  Women listen to a health worker at a rural clinic.  Health services for blacks are charac- \  terized by their absence or their in-  accessability. What hospitals or clinics  are available are grossly overcrowded  and under-staffed. The segregation and  duplication of health services which  apartheid maintains is unique in the  world.  A country's basic health services are  judged on two main criteria: the infant  mortality rate and the life expectancy  of its population. There is a distinct  difference between the disease patterns  of the white and black populations.  Whites have a low infant mortality rate .  and a long life expectancy, and diseases characteristic of the affluent,  industrialized world. Blacks have a high  infant mortality rate, a low life expectancy and diseases characteristic of  underdeveloped countries. Ninety-eight  percent of the medical budget is spent  on curative services for the white  elite and two percent on the preventative health care needs.  Pneumonia, tuberculosis and diarreal diseases such as enteritis are the greatest  cuases of adult and infant mortality, and  these diseases are often directly or indirectly caused by malnutrition. Malnu--  trition is a direct result of poverty.  The majority of blacks live in poverty  due to inadequate wages and widespread  unemployment.  In 1976 it was estimated that two thirds  of all black households earned less than  R80 per month. This was at a time when  it was estimated that on average a family  of five need R129 to survive. A similar  study in 1978 confirmed these findings:  60-70 percent of blacks were living  below the poverty line while 2 percent of  the white population lived below the  poverty line. The situation is often  worst on bantustans. For example in Nquto  in the KwaZulu bantustan the average  monthly income was reported to be R20.  Unemployment in the late 1970's ranged  from 19 percent among blacks in Cape Town  to 42 percent in Limehill, KwaZulu.  Unemployment on the bantustans is  accentuated in many areas by extreme  overcrowding and severe soil erosion (land  hunger). In most cases people can no longer eke out subsistence from the land so  that people living in these areas are  either forced to seek illegal work or are  further marginalized because they are  entirely dependent on income from a spouse  and/or children working off the bantustan.  In 1980 only 13 percent of the income  of the bantustans was generated inside  their borders.  The pass laws are used to strictly control movement of blacks in South \  3§|p|§s&|;  Africa. Further laws detail who may  live where, what kind of employment  they may take and whether or not they  may live with spouses and/or family.  For example, if a woman working as a  domestic has left her job due to pregnancy (the law forbids her to have a  child at her domestic residence) she  risks being classed as unstable, losing her domestic worker classification  and being sent back.to her bantustan  though she may have lived all her life  in the city and this homeland may be  completely foreign to her. Once back  on the bantustan she could be reclassed  as a farm labourer and from that time  on she would only be legally entitled  to work as a farm labourer. Farm  labour employees comprise the highest  percentage of workers at the lowest  wages. Pass laws and forced relocations work to preserve a constant labour reserve for this work.  The social stress that a family experiences as a result of forced separation  from "superfluous appendages" is  tragically apparent in the rising incidence of alcoholism, homicide, rape  and suicide. Homicide and wilful  injury to others were the third highest  cause of death amongst blacks in 1976.  This trend to violence is born out by  rape statistics which in 1976 were  estimated at 292,000 women raped per  year. As in most parts of the western  world rape has the lowest conviction  Rape statistics in 1976 were  estimated at 292,000 women  per year.  rate of any crime of violence in the  country. Employment related sexual and  physical abuse are rife, but women often  fail to report it for fear of losing  their jobs.  ' Alcoholism, especially among men, has  become a severe problem. State-run beer  houses have become the focal point of  social life in the absence of families,  homes and recreation facilities. Suicide  is said to be the fastest growing cause  of death among the black population.  The only government sponsored systematic  form of health care women receive is  family planning. This disguised form of  population control allows the state to  appear concerned about high infant mortality rates while avoiding the real  causes of the problem. The government  blames infant mortality on women, saying  it is due to women's "uncontrolled  breeding." Depo provera is prescribed  regularly and health counsellors and  users alike are often unaware of the  risks the drug imposes.   Abortion in South Africa is illegal  except in closely controlled situations.  One of the provisions is for victims Of  rape.  In 1976 with upwards of 290,000 rapes  estimated, only 21 black women received  legal abortions. This atrocious situation exists because rapists must be convicted before a rape victim can get an  abortion. In 1976, conservative estimates  of the number of back street abortions  performed was one hundred thousand.  Health in South Africa is inseparable  from the economic, political and social  structure of the apartheid state.  Improved health care will not eradicate  the causes of disease, hunger and social  strife. Only when apartheid is dismantled will black South Africans have the  power to determine their own health.  Women bear the brunt of apartheid.  As in other societies, although more  profoundly in South Africa, women's  work acts as a substitute for social  and health services so that, in real  terms, black women "provide what  would otherwise be called unemployment  insurance, pension funds, education  and health and sickness benefits."  Work around equal access to health care  and improved health services is increasingly seen by black women as a politicizing force and a key means to organize black women fighting to survive  "separate- development."  SOURCES: For Their Triumphs and Their  Fears - Hilda Bernstein;  Crippling A  Nation -Aziza Seedat.  Speacial thanks to Ann Riopel for her  enormous contribution to this article.  For amore extensive bibliography on  South Africa and women in South Africa  see Kinesis March 86.  No political rights  In 1913 the Native Land Act was passed  in South Africa. This law stated that  no black might own land outside of the  "traditional" areas called "homelands"  where they were forced to live unless  they were employed outside. The homelands or bantustans became a resevoir  of conscriptable labour and a dumping  ground for all those inelligible for  work (mostly women, children, the aged  and disabled). Enactment of the Native  Land Act and the pass laws (1919) have  evolved a system of forced removals  from land. This creates ■unemployment  and poverty and destroys families,  communities and traditional culture.  Only by keeping blacks in a state of  poverty and isolation can the system  on which the white way of life depends  continue.  "We are trying to introduce the migrant  labour pattern as far as possible in  every sphere. This is in fact the  entire basis of our policy as far as  the white economy is concerned...(the)  African labour force must not be  burdened with superfluous appendages  such as wives, children and dependents  who could not provide service." G.F.  van L. Froneman, Department of the  Ministry of Justice, Mines, and Planning, 1969.  "We need them to work for us," stated  the then Prime Minister, B.J. Vorster,  in 1968, "but the fact that they work  for us can never entitle them to  claim political rights. Not now, nor in  the future...under any circumstances." INTERNATIONAL  Libya:  Fighting extremism, not Islam  by Eunice Brooks  In 1969 when Muammar el-Qadhafi overthrew Kind Idris' regime he curtailed  women's rights. In a true Islamic state,  not run by an extremist, society is a  patriarchal one, but women are allowed  to be fully educated, to own land, to  earn equal pay, to be treated with human  dignity. The first Islamic martyr was a  woman killed by atheists. Libyan women  are not fighting Islam, but extremism.  Today Libyan women who want to raise their  voices against Qadhafi must do so from  the safety of other countries. The General Union of the Women of Libya (GUWL)  is a group of exiled Libyan women who are  speaking out at conferences and in the  media. The information in this article  comes from the vice-chairperson who for  her own safety will be named only as  "Fauzia."  Fauzia says that not even Amnesty International is publishing the news of  atrocities against women in Libya,  because Amnesty insists on a full investigation, and many women are afraid  of reprisals against all members of their  families if they talk. But she has heard  whispers of things that caused her to  fight. In 1969 Qadhafi suspended the Libyan Constitution, and with it any rights  women held. He published his now famous  Green Book, a portion of which is shown  here (see box). In Qadhafi's Libya women  are silenced, tortured for speaking  out, and killed.  'Ģ GUWL was formed in the United States  in 1983, by exiled Libyan students,  mostly women. Since then they have  attended meetings and conferences to  state their views of the situation in  the homeland. In Baghdad, last March,  they met with more than 500 women. That  conference had as its theme "Baghdad  Meeting for Women of the World in Frame  of the Aims of the Decade of Women and  Development."  According to Fauzia, Libyan women are  descendents of what we think of as the  Amazons, tribes of strong fighting women  who colonized Arabia some 1000 years ago.  Yet Qadhafi considers women feeble.  Feeble or not Qadhafi has universal conscription for his army. Many families,  fearing their daughters will be forced  into the army, keep them out of school.  Twenty years ago it was common for a  Libyan woman to have a university  degree; now many leave school at grade  five level. School is where Qadhafi  takes his inductees.  According to Fauzia, Qadhafi and m; ny  Libyan men consider women to be "less"  than men. Women are taught that to be  a mother is the only purpose of womanhood. Women in Libya have no dignity  today, not even the dignity of motherhood, because the children are taught  to not respect women. What the GUWL  group is seeking is a change in attitudes.  There are other organizations, outside  Libya, actively fighting to overthrow  the Qadhafi regime but the GUWL wants  to be an autonomous women's group  although they are interested in forming  networks with other Arab women's groups,  to work for equality.  Fauzia says the real horror of the homeland situation is that Qadhafi has  formed a squad of brainwashed Libyan  women called the "Nuns of Revolution" which propagates and supports his  way. Women in this group are trained  as his protectors and personal bodyguards .  The Nuns of the Revolution have no  families, and have taken a vow of life  commitment to Qadhafi. According to  Fauzia their major task is to infiltrate  women's circles and to denounce women  who are not doing full duty to the  revolution.  Qadhafi has talked about closing the  primary schools and having mothers  educate younger children at home, then  only the males will go on to higher  education. A woman's fertility is her  only asset in today's Libya.  Most women in Libya live in fear.  Dissenters' wives are tortured in front  of their children. There are no lawyers  and no trials, the Revolutionary Committee kiils anyone accused of dissent.  There are hangings in the streets.  Fauzia wants the world to know that  Qadhafi is not acting in the Islamic  tradition. He is a fanatic. The prophet  himself respected women, and named his  wife as a model for Islamic women. He  asked her advice and she was known to  be wise.  Does Fauzia want to return home? Of  course she does, but not until Qadhafi  and his way of life are gone.  Excerpts From  THE GREEEN BOOK  by Muammar el-Qadhafi  "... Woman is a female and man is a male. According to  a gynaecologist, woman menstruates or suffers feebleness  every month, while man, being a male, does not menstruate  and he is not subject to the monthly period which is a bleed  ing. A woman, being a female, is naturally subject to monthly  bleeding. When a woman does not menstruate, she is pregnant. If she is pregnant she becomes, due to pregnancy,  feeble for about a year, which means that all her natural  activities are seriously reduced until she delivers her baby.  When she delivers her baby or has had a miscarriage,  she suffers puerperium, a feebleness attendant on delivery  or miscarriage. As the man does not get pregnant, he is  not liable to the feebleness which a woman, being female,  suffers..." w* \1;"V'  ".. . To demand equality between man and woman in  carrying heavy weights while the woman is pregnant is unjust  and cruel To demand equality between them in fasting and  hardship, while she is breast-feeding, is unjust and cruel To  demand equality between them in any dirty work, which  stains her beauty and detracts from her femininity, is unjust  and cruel Education that leads to work unsuitable for her  nature is unjust and cruel as well... "  ".. .Drivinga woman to do a man's work is unjustaggression  against the femininity with which she is naturally provided for  a natural purpose essential to life. For man's work disguises  the woman's beautiful features which are created for female  roles. They are exactly like blossoms which are created to  attract pollen and to produce seeds... "  "... The physical structure, which is naturally different  betwen man and woman, leads to differences in the functions  of their different organs which lead in turn to differences in  the psyche, mood, nerves and physical appearance. A woman  is tender. A woman is pretty. A woman weeps easily. A  woman is easily frightened. In general woman is gentle and  man is tough by virtue of their inbred nature.  To ignore natural differences between man and woman and  mix their roles is an absolutely uncivilized attitude, hostile to  the laws of nature, destructive to human life, and a genuine  cause for the wretchedness of human social life... "  Anti-abortionists celebrate 'Year of Pain and Fear'  by Nancy Pollak  On April 28th, American anti-abortionists will mark the end of their so-  called "Year of Pain and Fear" by  demonstrating agair^stt Planned Parenthood organizations. It has indeed been  a fearful, painful year for those  engaged in the struggle for reproductive choice, largely because of  violent actions by the anti-choice  movement.  In 1985, 27 health clinics offering-  birth control and abortion services  were attacked by bombings or deliberate fires. These assaults, which have  numbered over 50 in the past 2 years,  are becoming increasingly life-threatening to the women working in the  clinics. In December, a bomb exploded  during office hours at the Manhattan  Women's Medical Centre; the same month,  the Feminist Women's Health Centre in  Portland Ore. received a letter bomb.  No one was injured in either attack  but according to Nanette Falkenberg  of the National Abortion Rights Action  League, "This is really the first time  that it's clear the intent is to kill  people."  Both the Reagan administration and the  mainstream media seem undisturbed by  these events. Reagan continues to  flaunt his anti-choice stance and recently sent a solidarity statement to  a 'right-to-life' rally. One convicted  clinic bomber told the Washington  Post, "Everybody who is conducting  these attacks...feels that they have  a green light from the President."  News coverage of the latest bombings  was scant, yet reporting on the anti-  choice movement generally tends to be  thorough and sympathetic.  Women have responded to the right-wing's  escalating tactics by refusing to be  intimidated. Overnight vigils at tar-  getted clinics and assistance to clinic  staff from pro-choice supporters have  been organized. The American public  continues to overwhelmingly support  legal abortion (80-90 percent according  to one study), and anti-choice referenda  in New Hampshire and Connecticut were  soundly defeated last year.  In a rousing show of strength, 125,000  pro-choice people converged on the  White House on March 9. Sponsored by  the National Organization of Women  whose president, Eleanor Smeal, is  being threatened with ex-communication  from the Catholic church, the march was  declared the largest demonstration for  women's rights in U.S. history. (It  exceeded by 90,000 an anti-choice rally  in Washington earlier in the year.)  HERdles.  iu // other cowr&a I  MOTHERS HAVE A  BETTER CHAHCE OF  UV/UG THROUGH  CHILDB/RTH  30% OF /HFANTS  THAT DIE DO SO  FROM POVERTY  cojuo/r/ons 12   Kfafeas April ra  INTERNATIONAL  fWD in the Philippines  by Nancy Pollak  "It was the women who knelt  in the path of oncoming tanks  and called the bluff of the  dictator," declared Corazon  Aquino to the Filipino women  who had gathered outside the  presidential palace to mark  International Women's Day.  She wasn't saying anything they  they didn't already know. As  Fe Mamaghas—one of the over  five thousand women in the  crowd—said, "If the women .  had been passive and fearful,  it would have had a critical  effect on the revolution.  But they were brave and determined and they brought  the whole family out."  Originally planned as an  IWD demonstration to put  forward women's demands to  the now deposed Marcos, the  event took on a distincly  celebratory flavour. Yet  women noted that Aquino had  not campaigned on a feminist  program and that the need  for radical change in women's  status stili remained.  Nelia Sancto of Gabriela, a  national women's organization,  referred to some of. the problems. "Seven thousand women  serve American servicemen as  prostitutes at the military  bases," she said. Altogether,  it is claculated that 190,000  Filipino women are employed  as prostitutes. Another symptom  of women's extreme poverty is  the practice of 'bride marketeer ing ', in which young women  are sold as wives on the basis  of photographs. Sancto estimated that 19,000 women have  been bought by men in Australia  and West Germany.  Zemaida Laron, a worker in a  foreign-owned snack food factory, told how she and her  49 co-workers had revolted  against being paid $1.80 for  a 12 hour shift. They started  to unionize and, when threatened by company goons, went  out on strike. "The place is  closed. We sleep out on the  picket line," she said,  collecting strike-support  donations from the crowd.  Women from rural areas were  also present, protesting the  exploitation of women banana  plantation workers who earn  even less than the-starvation  wages of the men they work  beside.  Whether the new regime of  Corazon Aquino can—or will—  tackle the massive economic  disparities that exist within  Filipino society remains  to be seen. But as Judy Tag-  uiwalo, a leftist organizer  recently released from jail  said, "They have freed up the  talk, to voice what you feel."  Iranian pres. spurns women  The president of Iran refused  to attend a state banquet in  his honor in Zimbabwe because  women sat at the head table  and wine was served. In what  a leading newspaper called  "an unprecedented diplomatic  incident," the dinner went  ahead without the Iranian  guests and without the customary speeches.  The Iranian leader, Ali  Khamenei, had earlier refused  to shake hands in a receiving  line with two women, the  Natural Resources and Tourism  Minister, Victoria Chitepo,  and the Deputy Education Minister, Naomi Nhiwatiwa. Chitepo was so incensed she  refused to accompany the  Iranians on a trip to Victoria  Falls. The Iranian embassy  had also insisted that female  Lesbians denied visitation rights  A Minnesota court denied all  motions brought by Karen  Thompson in her on-going battle  to regain visitation rights  and guardianship of her disabled lover, Sharon Kowalski.  Judge Kim Johnson ruled against  Thompson, denying charges of  negligence brought against  Kowalski's court-appointed  gnardian, her father. The judge  also denied appeals that  Sharon Kowalski be retested  for competency.  Thompson has already filed  . notice of appeal on the de  nied motions, and is also  contesting the original  district court order of July,  1985, that appointed Donald  Kowalski guardian for his  daughter. The Minnesota Court  of Appeals is scheduled to  rule on the case shortly.  Tax-deductible donations to  help pay legal costs for  Karen Thompson may be sent  to: Minnesota Society for  Personal Liberties, c/o  Suzanne Born, 3436 Holmes  Ave., Minneapolis, MN  55408.  journalists attending Khamenei's news conferences wear  veils.  A statement by Zimbabwe's  government said, "No  acceptable compromise could  be reached on various points  of difference." The statement added that the role  played by women in Zimbabwe's  struggle for majority rule and  the current development of  the country "entitle them to  an equal status and standing  in every respect with their  male counterparts." It added  that this was a "principle  : on which the government  would not compromise."  India meeting  Over three hundred women from  all over India attended a four-  day conference in Bombay on  the autonomous women's movement in India. The conference included workshops on  subjects such as the connection between women's organizations and other mass  organizations, the participation of men in feminist  groups, personal growth,  the media, prostitution,  and the role of religion  and communalism. Many  conference participants felt  organizers were over-cautious  in excluding workshops on  sexuality and lesbianism.  A significant issue at the  meeting was the question  of establishing a "common  civil code" to override the  separate bodies of personal  law that now govern family  relationships in India's  Muslim, Christian, and  tribal minorities. The  issue received particular  attention because of a recent  case involving a seventy-five  year old Muslim woman,  divorced by her husband, who  sued for support payments  under the country's constitution.  After heated debate, women  at the conference passed a  resolution supporting an  egalitarian civil code and  specifically supporting the  section of the constitution  which grants support payments  to divorced women.  Manushi editor deported  by Nancy Pollak  Riciculed. Manhandled. Deported. This was the treatment  accorded an Indian woman by  Belgian immigration officials  . last September when she attempted to transfer from British  Rail service to a flight out  of Brussels International Airport.  The woman in this instance was  Madhu Kishwar, an editor of  the Indian feminist magazine  ■Manushi.  Prior to leaving  London, she had twice been  told by the Belgian embassy  that, with a confirmed plane  ticket showing an onward  journey, she would be able  to land at Ostend, Belgium,  obtain a transit visa and  proceed directly to the  Brussels airport.  Instead, she and her male  colleague were brutalized by  immigration officers whose  actions escalated from verbal  to physical abuse within minutes and resulted in a deportation order in under an hour.  Kishwar's experience confirms  that racism against Third  World people by immigration  services is a commonplace of  travel in western nations.  Information for international new$-f&&m"Women of Power,  Sojourner,   New York Times,  Off Our Backs,  SpareRib,  Globe and Mail, Manushi,  Worker's World.  POLITICS • ART  HISTORY • PERIODICALS  FEMINISM • THIRD WORLD  PEACE  Spartacus Books  EMILY'S PLACE  Women's retreat and vacation getaway on Vancouver Island. Enjoy a fully equipped cabin located  on French Creek in the Parksville Qualicum area.  Lots of space available for camping. Share a picnic  shelter cooking facility.  Daily rates:  Campers: $5.00 per woman  Cabin: $15.00 each first 2 women,  $10.00 each ' additional friend  The cabin can accommodate group events: planning sessions, annual meetings, celebrations.  The Emilys Place Society directs all users fees to  the continued growth of the project  Reservations and bookings:  248-5410, Cindy    or Cafe.  All planned for this summer: a bunk house,  and a manager's "broom closet". Kinesis April WS   13  INTERNATIONAL  Talking with Jesse Duarte on S. Africa:  by Antoinette Landa  On the eve of International Women's  Day, a group of South African women met  together with Jesse Duarte, of the  Federation of Transvaal Women, for supper  and to talk politics. There were three  main themes that the conversation kept  returning to over the seven hours that  we talked: the strength of the women  who are fighting against apartheid in  South Africa; the total injustice that  anti-apartheid workers endure on a  daily basis and the continued building  of international solidarity and support  as well as the effect of isolation on  the South African government.  The illegitimate South African government has never  expressed the intention  of giving all adult citizens the franchise. Instead they try to balance a  policy of power sharing with sell-out  tribal chiefs (Bantustans) and misguided Indian and 'coloured' leaders  who are genuinely trying to resolve  their country's problems with change  from within. (Most recently via a tri-  cameral parliament).  Neither of these two groups realise  that the white government will never  truly share power because to do so  would signal the end of Afrikaanef  domination, and therefore the Afrikaaner  'nation.'  The African National Congress (ANC), the  domestics workers, factory workers,  students, etc. know this and that is  why they see only one option—to fight  the government with every means possible  until there is full franchise.  These are some of the ways in which women  and children are fighting a government  that controls where, how, with whom,  and even if  they live:  •in the Transvaal province, women have  developed a washer woman program. In  many towns domestic labour is the only  form of employment. In order to control their labour and ensure equal  ^ggf^Y.    wages for all workers,  /  ,J*V (including slow, old, unem-  TM ployed) the women do an entire small town's laundry  collectively  •market, barter, and exchange  systems are being used extensively between women  •bulk food is being bought and distributed through co-operatives  •except for ANC missions into South  Africa, the people are unarmed. When  the South African Defense Force (SADF)  shot 3 children under the age of 15  years at Athlone, near Cape Town, last  year, the women attacked the SADF. House  to house phone calls resulted in women  boiling water and scalding SADF men.  Women made quick mustard bombs and  pelted the armed soldiers. Cayenne  pepper was thrown into their eyes  (a standard practise by whites,  reversed)  •citizens of Duncan Village outside  East London have a clear analysis  of the government. They are claiming  land and paying no rent. Blockades  are set up and children patrol the  claimed areas. They construct makeshift watchtowers and shacks from  which they warn and protect political  activists from police. Although  municipal services have been cut the  children have learned to install  electricity. Sanitation and garbage  disposal is done manually  •Sharpville residents received a  government guarantee that they would  not have to pay rent after the first  20 years use of their cindercrete  block houses. The 20 years have expired and rents have; actually been  increased rather than removed  Citizens have refused to pay any rent  and subsequently, all services have  been cut. The people are holding out.  They too dispose of their own garbage and sewage and fetch water from  outside the town. (The municipality  does distribute water from trucks  but most people refuse it as the distribution trucks are the same as  those once used to collect sewage.  Residents also suspect that the water  has been tampered with)  •'safe houses' are designated in fighting zones so that injured people can  get treated by sympathetic doctors  rather than go to hospitals where  police arrest many injured people  •domestic workers are unionizing  •women are working prominantly in the  ever-expanding trade union movement  •children dig deep trenches and lead  SADF armoured vehicles (hippos) into  them at night  •to show the absurdity of the constant  government accusation that South  African protesters are armed from 'the  east', (ie. Russia) children sometimes  write "made in Russia" on the stones  they throw at the police and SADF.  The South African government has been  given an ultimatum to institute equal  education to all children by March 31st,  1986. Failing this, all black schools will  be boycotted. According to the recent  budget figures, only 11 percent ($315  million of a total of $3.1 billion) of  the education budget, will be spent on  black education, black children are  going to have a lot of time on their  hands to think up new ways in which to  frustrate and fight a government that  does not take their future seriously.  Jesse's visit gave our fledgling group  focus and a renewed sense of urgency. We  have decided to call ourselves: Southern  African Women Against Apartheid. Our  basis of unity is as follows:to:  •work collectively against apartheid with  special emphasis on women's issues  •support the ANC and SWAPO (Namibia)  •support women in South Africa  •fight against racism in B.C.  •network with women's groups within South  Africa  •support South African women in Canada  and the U.S.A.  •support each other emotionally within  the group  •educate ourselves on apartheid in South  Africa  •be a resource group.  We welcome women to join—the group.  Contact: 988-3258 or 738-5236.  The Sharpeville Six  Theresa Ramashamole was the breadearner  in her family. She worked at a fast food  outlet called the Roadhouse. When rents  were increased in Sharpeville in 1985,  Theresa indignantly went to confront the  Sharpeville mayor, Mr. Dlamini, who was  a neighbour. The result of the confrontation obviously was not to her satisfaction as she was heard to shout at the  mayor as she left. She said he was not fit  to be mayor and represent the people.  Two weeks later a large group of people,  also protesting rent increases, went to  the mayor's home. The mayor was killed,  as he was seen as selling out to government policy.  Theresa was in that group and based on  her outspokenness with the mayor two  weeks earlier, was arrested together  with five men. Some of the men were not  at the demonstration.  These six people have been sentenced to  hang. The final evidence at their trial  was given 'in camera'. No one knows who  the witnesses were or what was said.  Based on that evidence, Theresa is to  be hung even though she did not touch  the mayor. Such arbitrary punitive actions  are a common form of control within  South Africa.  Please protest against the hanging of the  Sharpeville Six. Write: The President,  Mr. P. Boatha, P/Box 213, Pretoria, South  Africa. 14   Kinesis April ^  TRANSITION HOUSE  by Sharon Hounsell                                                   r»     *                 +*   n.  Sharon Hounsell interviewed three                         rOSt Occupation:  battered women who had used Vancouver  i V i  1         "1                          1  Transition House during, the time it                        M B ^.^ ^.^  " AT*. ~M^ AT*. AT~M                             1   A  rw rw It"    l^v ffc aT% u7~  was occupied.                                                                    Ddll  tereci+n  DOR DdCK  SseTz o/ j/ok efcose to use the occupied                                -           Women.s Emergency Shelter  wonderful everything was.  Like,   there  Trans%won House.  Would you axscuss                      and explained  to them that  I was really  are people out  there who care for you.  now you maae vnav cno-uce:                                              scared that my Doyfriend was going to  I didn't know that before at all.   If  Donni:   I had been in contact with the                   find me,  because he'd already threatened  I would have went to any of my friends  crisis line.  There was room at Kate                       a few things on me.   She said,   "Has he  it would have been 24 hours before he  Booth and at Vancouver Transition                           hit you?" That  was the only question  found me.  House.   I had a feeling that Kate Booth                 she had  to ask.   I  said yes.  They put  Alison:   I'm still thinking about how  was more religious and I didn t want to              me through to  a worker at the transx-  I came across transition house.   Every  get involved with something like  that.                 tion house.  thing was  so muffled  that weekend.   Four  Tina:  I didn't know it was occupied.   I                 They paid for  a cab and then I found  years ago I was abused.   I met up with  was scared.   I went to a phone booth and              out everything about the house—how  (another)  fellow and  things would have  TRIBUTE  to the more than 100 women  who did shifts in the House;  to the many others who answered the crisis line and carried the pager;  On February 28, 1985, the Women's  to those valiant women who co-ordinated shifts;  House Saving Action ended its eight  to the women who did interviews and wrote press releases and organized meetings;  month occupation of Vancouver Tran  to the people who wrote  demonstrations;  and distributed leaflets and supported us at public  sition House. The occupation's success  to the women who raised money and did the banking and kept the books;  is itself a tribute to the skill, stamina and  to the women who did the grocery shopping and maintained the house and engineered  communications systems;  committment of the women, both inside  to the individuals and groups who donated food and money and clothing;  and outside the occupation, who con  to the women who organized  made speeches;  to the women who supported  the City Hall strategy and lobbied and wrote letters and  tributed to the triumph. But it is important  us with their skills and energy and encouragement;  and fitting to salute each other publicly  and to say thank you!  to the battered women who came to the House or called us and, by their example,  gave us the courage, determination, and motivation to overcome our doubts and to  keep going til we'd won.  Alex                                                         Anne  Cindy  Fiona                                                        Marion  Lisa                                                              Martha  Silva  Jeanne                                                      Eliza  Wendy                                                      Marylin  Frances  Christine                                                   Kathy  Ellen                                                        Janyce  Andree                                                   Darlyne  Andrea                                                     Coral  Bern  Linda                                                     Leah  Joan                                                         Barb  Joanne  Janet                                                        Dorrie  Jill                                                            Ariba  Pam                                                          Lois  Ellen                                                         Holly  Myra  Marian                                                      Shelly  Merle                                                        Rachel  Pam  Claire                                                    Andrea  Frances                                                    Heidy  Bridget •                                                  Anneke  Maureen  Margo                                                       Leigh  Carol                                                         Cecile  Barb  Christina                                                   Oeb  Fatima  Janet                                                        Janet  Janie                                                        Kathy  Marise  Megan                                                    Meredith  Michelle                                                   Monique  Pauline  Sara                                                          Gail  Shirley                                                     Diane  Cedar  Shari                                                         Jane  Ajax                                                          Catherine  Debra                                                       Judith  Arlene                                                      Gardia  Megan  Serena                                                      Dyan  Brooke                                                     Claudia  Paula  Corrine                                                     Karen  Nikki                                                        Jo  Jackie  Sue                                                           Susan  Marnie                                                      Ruth  Evy                                                        Marion  Jude                                                         Kellie  Gloria  Muggs                                                   Lynne  Elaine                                                       Paula  Sheila  Deb                                                       Anita  Marlene                                                    Patricia  Patti                                                          Kathleen  Barb                                                         Kathleen  Dev  Deb                                                          Luanne  Jill                                                            Nancy  Rivka  Alet                                                           Hilary  Vickie                                                       Gail  Press Gang  Nancy                                                       VSW  ^1  Wendy                                                      Ruth  Renate  Gene                                                        Jeannie  Debra                                                       Kate  Donna Lee H.  Sadhna                                                     Kathy  Jan                                                           Joy  Astrid                                                        Heidi  Judy                                                         Joanne  Helga  Women's Resrch. Centre                         Chris  Libby                                                        NDP Worn. Rights Ctte.  Val  P.F.                                                          Colin  B.W.S.S.                                                  Cornelia  Sue  Chris                                                        Jennifer  Fuji                                                              Kim  Horatio  Isadora's                                                   Jane  Sheila                                                      Johanna  WAVAW/RCC  Margaret                                                   Sheila  Danielle                                                    Margaret  Barb  Surjit         '                                              Jacqui  Jane                                                         Sharon  Brenda  Donna Lee                                                Jancis  Stella                                                        Shari  Linda  Mary                                                         Sue  Cher                                                         Rape Relief  Jackie  Bobbie                                                      Esther  Lori                                                              Allison  Stuart  Christina                                                   Jane-Anne  Jacqueline                                                Patty  AUCE Local 6  Women in Focus                                       Margo  P.S.A.C.                                                    Pearl  Lynne                                                       Carol                              §#£&ss®£  Nou                                                          Pat  Nancy  Bev  Julie                                                         Susan  Corisande                                                 Ann  Susan                                                       Mary  Robin                                ws&S&fe .  Reema  Patrick                                                   Myrne  Mary                                                            Lois  Violet  Shelley                                                  Joan  Sophie                                       .             Mary  Nikki                                                         Phyllis  Leah  Elizabeth                                                  Nora  Monica  Marilyn                                                  Val  Jean                                                         Joanne D.  Maureen  Eloah                                                     Jan.  Celeste                                                  Jacie  Susan  Karen                                                    Agnes  f  Pat                                                            Evely  Fatima  Moira                                                        Leona  Joanne                                                     Patti  Beth                                                         Christina  Aida                                                         Carol  Joanne  Nora                                                      Nancy  Richard                                                  Pamela  Kim                                                              Susan  Balbir                      g^sgpa  Gwyneth                                                   Nancy  Denis  Daphne                                                    Susan  X  Rhonda                                                    Peg  Andrea ■  Janet                                                     Helen  Inge                                                         Ann  Susan  Jackie                                                    Hilda  Rosemary                                                 Cindy  Elsie  Lynne                                                       Ann  Miriam                                                      Mrs. M.  Jenny                                                       Andrea  Janet                                                        Jean  Patty  Jan                                                           Kay  Evan                                                         Claire  Faune                                                    Louise  Emily                                                        Kathy  Claire  Sulka                                                        Ingrid  Sarah                                                        Pat  Helen                                                       Mr. F.D.  >  Brig                                                          Mona  Kate  Mary                                                      Eva  Dr. Dennis                                                Nora  Mrs. D.  Mrs. April                                                  Maylynn  Joanne                                                     Shirley  Audrey  Sharon                                                      Dr. C.  Diana                                                        Dr. G.  Carol  Ann                                                       Shirley  Mr. Mrs. N.                                               Doreen  Sander  Daniel                                                    Chris  Dr. John                                                   Philip G.  Wendy                                                      Mr. R.  Mrs. A.                                                         L.I.L.  Mrs. B.  Dr. G.                                                        Donna  A.  Betty                                                        Joh  Gwendolyn  Cathleen                                                Julie  Janet                                                        Patrick  Michael  Lois                                                          Cathy  Ken                                                          Mrs. A.  Margaret  Ian                                                         Linda  Janie                                                        Georgia  Alisharan  Leo                                                           Donna  David                                                           Elinor  Little Sisters  Mrs. A                                                       Mary  Ms. A                                                           Ms. A  Fran  Louise                                                      Pat  Marion                                                      Linda  Cloutier  Ron                                                       Mildred   j  Badjit                                                       Carol  Rosalind                                                Frances  Alva                                                          Heather  Monica  Nita                                                           Coro  M.                                                             Helen  Frankie  J.P.                                                           Corrinne  Louise                                                      E.  J.  A.A.                                                          George  Amy                                                         Valerie  Carol  Donna                                                   Verna  Susan                                                    Ralph  P.  Margaret                                                  C.B.  Ina                                                            Madeline  Shew  S.L.                                                           Marian  Stuart                                                       Joanne  Ida  Jill                                                             Marilyn  Valerie                                                     Ken  Scott  D.                                                              Linda  Natasha                                                    Ida  R.&A.  Betty                                                         J. & D.  H.S.A.                                                       Edith  Patti  Susan                                                     Louise  AUCE Local 2                                           c.S,  Paul                                                           Michelle  John                                                       Deborah  CUPW/Vanc.  H.E.U. 180                                              . Audrey  BCWLC                                                       CAIMAW14  Elizabeth  Sheila. •                                                   ' e>»yn  Bob                                                        Bo:®/-  Pauline                                                      Laura  CCW(BC)  Erling                                                       Toby  Marian  Jane                                                       Leila  Perrv                                                        Edith  Chavo  Carol  Noreen  ... and many more whose names we don't know. TRANSITION HOUSE  Kinesis April TO   15  been really super but all my fears  and things started resurfacing somehow. I started going to Battered  Women Support Services (BWSS). I went  to two meetings. After my second  meeting, I went home and sort of fell  apart. An argument came up. This was  the first time there'd been any physical  violence with our relationship. I  phoned BWSS. I felt so bad for hold-  -  ing up the line. I kept saying maybe  I should let you go and she said,  finally, well you could go into the  transition house. I phoned them up  right away and I went down. I didn't  know anything about the occupation  and that didn't really affect my stay.  Donni: I did know they had told me  it was an occupied house and I had  heard about it several months prior.  But it really didn't matter that  much. I just had to get out. It  didn't matter to me whether it was  occupied or not.  How did the occupation affect your  stay in the transition house?  Tina: That's a hard question. It  seemed very, very homey and when you  wanted to talk they were there to  listen to you. If you didn't want to  talk you didn't have to. It was a place  to get away. A place to hide.  Alison: I don't think (the volunteers)  were really candid about it. I didn't  understand what was going on. I was  more in awe. I was impressed. It didn't  really affect my stay there. I appreciated every day I could stay there. I  was concerned about having to leave  |before I was ready to leave. The first  thing I heard was that this, place was  closing down. I thought, "Gee, they're  telling me to relax and this place is  closing down." That was one of the  pressures—the feeling of having to  Tina: The thing about it is they were  doing it illegally, they were doing  it without pay. They were doing it for  us. Which is the important thing.  Alison: The house was warm. We never had  the hydro cut off; use of the phone—  stuff like that just amazed me more  than anything. I thought, this place is  occupied and it (is) a normal running  household—which is really amazing.  Donni: The fact that the house was  occupied seemed to affect my stay quite  minimally. There was a minimal amount  of professionals to give advice, but  if you needed help (the volunteers)  usually would say, "Well, I know someone who could help you out on that."  And somehow everything got done.  Tina: But they always made you feel  like, "don't worry about it—we're  here to take care of that."  Alison: There were days' when I felt almost reluctant to talk about my problems because all of these volunteers  were in there and their main concern  was keeping the house running for us.  It was sort of a conflict of issues.  I thought, "Geez, which is more important?"  Donni: One thing that was a little  difficult at the time was the number  of women; the number of volunteers.  There'd be a different one on every  shift. I didn't feel like I had a  continuum. With every person you'd  have to start over—you had to introduce yourself, tell them what's happening.  Mind you it worked beautifully for my  little boy, who was just coming into  a shv period. There were so many women  coming in all the time and he learned  to socialize with all of them. He  blossomed there. If he was a little  shyer he might have had problems.  Alison: Did either one of you ever sit  in on one of those (house) meetings?  Tina: yes.  Alison: Did you? What happened?  Tina: Everybody just gave their opinion  on "things that were happening.  Still work to do  by Lisa Price  Eight months after we occupied Vancouver Transition House the last  shift walked out and closed the door  behind them. They walked out knowing  that though the struggle Isn't over,  some pretty amazing battles have been  The Women's House Saving Action (WHSA)  is not about to roll up its banner and  disappear. There is still work to be  done, work for the whole women's movement. In January, Vancouver City Council  voted in favour of a city-operated  transition house with major funding  from senior levels of government.  In itself that vote is a tremendous  victory for the women of Vancouver.  It came about because scores of women  and women's groups spoke out publicly  in their union halls and at rallies,  raising public awareness of the need  for a transition house. That awareness translated Into political pressure—letters and phone calls demanding  that the city politicians act.  City hall has now begun the process  of designing the proposal for a city-  operated house. We are encouraged by  'this process, particularly by the  city's evident cosroitment to avoid the  mistakes made by the Ministry of Human  Kesonrces and the Salvation Army in  conducting their negotiations and pro-  graiimse development behind closed doors.  The city's process is open and the experts  feminists experienced in the field of  battering, particularly women from the  WomeiPs Protection Committee—are being  consulted. We applaud and encourage  their work.  At every step municipal* provincial and  of our demands. They need to be told  that feminists aren't going to go away,  that we will keep writing and telephoning  and lobbying for a feminist government-  funded unionized transition bouse for  Vancouver.  «HSA will monitor the process and will  endeavour to keep other women's groups  informed of the work yet to be done.  Individuals can contact us by leaving  a message at 873-5925 OrSW). After eight  months we have a sense of the commitment of this cotBBunity to the need  for a safe, supportive environment for  battered women and their children. We  believe that with that commitment ve  can make it happen. -  Alison: Did you get the impression they  felt almost threatened though?  Tina: Oh they did feel threatened. But  they stuck together.  Alison: That's the power of the whole  thing. They were doing something. They  had a cause. They stuck together. You  could feel the power. You know, they're  saying, "Hey, we're doing this regardless of...1.' I think that was a sense of  security in itself.  Tina: It gave me strength. Just by sitting and listening to the way they  would talk and stuff, I could see that  they were not only doing it for me but  for the future. No matter what happens  there's always gonna be another  battered woman.  Alison: And no matter what happens  there's always going to be a way  out. That's'what I interpret.  Donni: Actually it was impressive in  that there were people who never were  in battering relationships, but their  commitment to a bigger cause was so  remarkable, that somehow it didn't  matter whether they'd been hit. It  was a commitment to understand and  be friends and just be there.  Alison: And just their care, their  concern for women. A lot of them were  feminists. You could see it just in.  their energy.  Tina: They gave me strength. Just  the things that they made me realize.  (Things) that I knew deep down inside.  I always knew. It was like I couldn't  see it. It was in me but they sort of  pulled it out and said, "Hey, look  you've got this. Why don't you use  it?"  Alison: When I heard they were volunteers I thought, "Oh great! I can  sit there and talk to a total stranger  for hours and they go; yep, that's  great, yep, or that's too bad." But  I didn't find that. I didn't look at  them as volunteers any more. I expected someone with a nice long PhD.  in sociology. But the volunteers were  very personal. You felt instant  friendship. There was a bond and the  things they had to offer were things  that you already knew but that you'd  forgot.  Tina: It's not so much that you forgot.  It's just that you've lost it over the  years. You know you still have them.  Somebody kind of just took them away.  And:you want them back because they're  the things that make you live.  Alison:-I think that kind of thing—  sisterhood—was really neat. There  was a definite connection and it was  sincere. It really made me feel good.  For the first time I felt laughter;  that bonding was not just something  you could see but you could feel it.  It was a physical feeling.  Tina: It's a feeling of excitement,  communication. It is so important  to communicate with people. And it  almost makes you feel excited inside.  Giddy like a little kidJ  Like you found a new toy?  Tina: Yeah, exactly and you can play  with it and not have somebody grab it  away from you.  Alsion: Despite the unfortunate circumstance, it was almost a good thing.  I mean, if we didn't have this bad  past to share together we may not have  discovered all the good things we have  in common. We may not have found that  contact, that bond.  Tina: The best thing is that when I want  to cry I can reach out now and I stop.  I don't feel myself ripping inside anymore. Because somebody can touch you  and it melts it.  What would you have done without the  transition house?  Donni: I would have ended up going to  a friend's again. I had left my husband  once before and I went to friend's. He  found me within 24 hours. When I disappeared (this time) he was calling  back east to my family, trying to find  me. He wouldn't have left me alone. At  least, I had two weeks when I didn't  even speak to him, where I was totally  safe and he still was trying to find  Occupation continued page 23 TV     Li   j   a   a| hb Common words, i  icommon experiences  ^^of f ^^ ^J U f C? Lf l)P ^-Am^lStm by Anne Field Pat recounts responding from her | ask "you had shock treatments? And  women  com/'  together  '  rV+++/+/++++**+++A/++/++*  ng  Wilma and her compare crutches. Wil-  «-^3^ ma lifts Lu's and shakes her head.  v>^***Vi'V»v»wn»s»***^^^^^i^*i'»/>*/*aN'*v**^»w* She looks at Lu and says, "they  can put men on the moon, y'know."  Some time later she adds, "mine are  starting to rattle."  Linda talks at breakfast about needing a shower in the morning. "It  needs the hot water. It stiffens up  night."  A signer, Susan, wears a dark sweater  From across the room her hands and  face are clear, with their gestures,  the clothes.  by Joan Meister and Marion Pollock  There was a new dawning for disabled  women in British Columbia on the  weekend of March 21-23. Over that three  day period more than 50 disabled women  ranging from their early twenties to  their early seventies met to discuss  issues of concern, share ideas for action, and found DAWN BC: DisAbled  Women's Network of British Columbia.  It was an exciting, exhilarating conference. For the first time in this  province, women with all different  kinds of disabilities and from many  different regions had a chance to be  together. From morning to night the  convention site, Camp Alexandra at  Crescent Beach, was alive with groups  of women talking and laughing. And then  talking some more.  The participants felt that a meeting  like this was long overdue. Some of the  most frequent comments were that, "it's  too short," "we don't have enough time,"  and "we should hold these conferences  regularly—twice a month!"  The very existence of the conference  is, in and of itself, a triumph for  disabled women. Ten years ago disabled  women would not have dreamed of the  possibility of attending this kind of  event. The image women held of themselves might have been restrictive, but  societal constraints would have  been worse. To get this conference,  disabled women had to use planes,  trains, buses and ferries.  Ten years ago, for instance, various  airline companies would not have  allowed disabled women to travel alone.  Other facilities would not have  existed to enable the mobility or  visually impaired the ability to  travel freely-. It would have been inconceivable for mentally disabled  women to have travelled unaccompanied  from points of departure as far away  as Dawson Creek. Today, it is not only  possible but it is one of the acquisitions of the disabled community at  large.  The conference was also an example of  government spending in accordance  with people-oriented priorities. The  funding for this event was provided  through Health and Welfare Canada's  Health Promotion Directorate,  (administered by the BC Coalition of  the Disabled) and the Secretary of  State Department. All costs were  covered for this group of women who  are even further down the economic  ladder than most other women.  The weekend was divided into the Friday evening social, a day of workshops and plenary sessions and a Sun-  mornjn^AniuiaJ^GeneraJ^leeting.  After the ramp drops-on my foot, Joan  remarks from her wheelchair, "look,  Anne wants to be disabled."  wheelchair to a neighbour who worries  about a native Indian family moving  in next door, "It's a bad enough that  you live beside a cripple. What will  happen to our property values?"  Betty says she was told in 1968 that  she had two years to live. She wants  to know which are her two years,  because she intends to have fun. Taking her health into her own hands,  resisting medical advice, her total  blindness has remitted to partial  blindness.  Pat: "people scatter when I'm in my  own power chair. Dogs bark, kids  point. They're scared skinny, and  Ijm going a big 3 mph!"  Maria watches Still Sane.   She smiles  and points to herself. "That's me."  drugs  She laughs "Oh, I had all of that.  Lots. And the CIA...when I was  working as a housekeeper, years,  later, I read about it in a magazine.  The hosptial in Montreal..."  "Was involved with the CIA?"  She nods vigourously.  Then I begin to remember. "Maria,  that reminds me of something I read  or heard on CBC radio, that sometime  ago the CIA were involved with brainwashing experiments..."  . psychiatr:  »^VyW^V\*WW>/WW*AA  M^MMMMM^^M^AM^AM^^^^^^VWWM  The Saturday series of workshops included issues ranging from sexuality  to accessibility, from health to  political and economic action. Other  irkshops included discussions on  family relationships and parenting,  chronic pain and assertiveness.  Women spoke about the barriers. Most  attending the conference are  but the women's movment  is literally inaccessible. Although  consciousness is growing slowly,  most events put on by the women's community are still not accessible.  The analogy that comes to mind is  racism. The responsibility for  consciousness raising around questions  of race and disability does not rest  solely with women of colour or women  with disabilities. All women must  participate in the project.  The conference was very powerful.  It was the first time that disabled  women had a chance to talk with other  disabled women about such intimate  topics as sexuality. No wonder that  this workshop was one of the most  well attended; it ran overtime.  Several of the women who participated  in this workshop spoke of the importance of having their experiences  and feelings validated.  A comment made about the chronic pain  workshop in answer to a question posed  on a session evaluation form is indicative of the spirit of the conference:  "The openness and honesty—people  were baring their souls about their  pain." This same respondent answered  the question, what did you like least  about the session as follows: "I felt  the need to cry for other people and  I feel uncomfortable about crying  in front of others.."  The workshop on the family was an eye-  opener. Woman after woman spoke about  the problems of being a disabled parent.  "This discussion is only the beginning.  tst carry on," said one woman. The  participants called for a regular  discussion group for disabled mothers.  Saturday night ended with a circle conducted by one of the native women who  attended the conference and who was  assisted by another who turned 74 "years  young" that day. The latter said a  prayer for DAWN in Ojibway, a once in a  lifetime experience for most of the  participants.  The Annual General Meeting on Sunday  morning was the place where many of the  issues became clarified and where  action plans were outlined. Because of  time constraints, the issues arising  from the various workshops were discussed  briefly, approved in principle and referred to the new Board for action.  There will be a position paper submitted  on the economic concerns of women with  disabilities to the Women's Economic  Agenda group. DAWN BC will establish a  public education committee to consider  the best wasy to educate professionals  to understand and deal with the issues  of the disabled family and the best ways  to lobby for the implementation of  better services.  DAWN BC will also investigate the special  needs of disabled parents with regards  to housing and encourage support services for the children of disabled  mothers. A policy supporting women at  risk when pregnant to assure that a  fetus defined as disabled is not  automatically aborted will be established.  Links with the anti-Depo Provera groups  I ask, "You were :  titution?"  She still smiles. "Lots of them. All  over. When I was 21, 20, 19, I had  a nervous breakdown. I was...I was...  C.I.A."  I say, "how does the CIA come into  She smiles and shakes her head. "um.  Maria, to me the CIA means the  American intelligence organization."  She bursts, "That's it! That's it!"  I say "you were, or the psychiatric  hospital was involved with the CIA?  She nods and says "Cameron. The  doctor. At the hospital in Montreal.  *+++*+++**+*+*A**+A/S  WMA^^^^^M^vwwwwvywwvwyw^'  "You were par  She nods.  "What did they leave you S  She smiles and shakes her head.  "You don't know?"  "Is it like post-hypnotic suggestion?  They give you all this info, to fill  your head and then take away your  conscious recollect:  "That's right."  "So you've got it  what it  yup  Marl  will be made and a letter to the Minister  of Health and Welfare will be written.  Support will be given to a project to  provide a land base for a healing centre  in the East Kootenays by the Columbia  Society for Independent Living. And an  election had to be held because there  were more candidates than positions on  the new Board of Directors!  A sense of community emerged out of the  conference. One woman's response to an  evaluation question regarding her favourite aspect of the conference sums it  up: "the chocolate chip cookies, the  camaraderie and the mutual support." The  women, despite some political disagreements, were clear about the necessity  of continuing with such a process. DAWN  BC is the link which will connect the  various components of the network."  i  A*************/**  troke. "When  I was 42, 43, 44, 45, uh, 47, I woke  up in the morning on the floor. I didn't  know what had happened. It happened in  my sleep."  "Have you recovered any of the abilities  you lost?" I ask. "Are your facilii  being :  She smiles brightly.  She decodes 'normally', I can talk at  my usual rate and she easily understands.  She has some physical impairment on  her right side.  During the Still Sane  video she paces  outside and I ask "Are you okay? This is  pretty upsetting." 18   Kinesis April TO  IR@IL<£ fa  by Gina Evankovich and Marilyn Fuchs  Lesbian visibility/invisibility in the  feminist movement—that's what approximately thirty lesbians came together  to discuss in a January workshop organized by Vancouver's Lesbian Feminist  gang.  Who is the Lesbian Feminist Gang? As the  group's written statement says, "we  have varied from 5-20 in number and  range from 21-50 years old." At present,  "we are all white, able-bodied, from  different cultures, countries, different  class backgrounds/experiences. We  identify in general as feminists, lesbians, political women. We came together  in this group 1) with a commitment to  lesbian organizing, 2) to work with other  lesbians and to work on lesbian issues,  3) in reaction to our frustrations in  working in various political movements."  "We have been meeting for a year. We  have exchanged personal and political  histories. We've had long discussions  over whether this group could satisfy  different needs for support and political  action/study. Concrete tasks have been  creating and distributing a poster, participating in the VSW Forum, and planning  this workshop."  The Lesbian Feminist Gang chooses the  topic of lesbian visibility/invisibility  in the feminist movement because, again  from the written statement, "we began  with general discussions on visibility in  all areas of our lives—at home, at work,  in various political groups, in the feminist movement. We discussed the possibility of a series of workshops but  were short on woman power. After a  process of narrowing down, we seemed most  interested in, and had the most to say  about lesbians in the women's movement."  active concerns, and time and time  again, heterosexual women neglected  to raise lesbian issues or confront  homophobia.  We uncovered our own lack of clarity  about what we mean by "lesbian issues".  We realized that this in part stems  from the fact that our experiences  as lesbians are not "appropriate"  material in feminist groups, and therefore are not talked about and put to  political analysis. We need more of  a forum to put together our lesbian  and feminist perspectives.  Those attending the workshop, however,  quickly came up with the following  list of lesbian issues: how we support  each other emotionally, how we support  each other economically, how we work  out childcare, how we 'get' children,  pensions, legal protection, health  care, harassment.  We had some debate on what we do want  in the realm of legal rights—do we  want legal recognition of lesbian  "families" as equivalent to heterosexual families, particularly in terms  of property rights, child custody,  pension and insurance benefits? Some  of us felt that these protections are  crucial, while others felt that fitting into the nuclear family model,  and giving the state more power to  define and control our lives, is a  dangerous step.  It was clear that there is no lack  of lesbian issues needing to be discussed, debated and organized around.  We then asked ourselves why we don't  focus on the very issues that affect  our daily lives. Our common answer  was homophobia—homophobia from  external oppression and our own fears  of taking up the challenge.  There is also the Feeling that lesbian issues are not 'broad-based'  enough, although this test is not put to other feminist issues.  The workshop started with sharing experiences of being a lesbian in the  feminist movement. Of the lesbians who  attended, most of us had been or are  now involved in political work. The  spectrum included mixed feminist groups  (anti-pornography, women's health,  political action, violence against women,  trade union, and specifically lesbian  groups: media, social, political action.)  The overriding sentiment, expressed over  and over, was one of feeling invisible  in mixed (lesbian and heterosexual)  groups. This took various forms—while  some of us were known to be lesbians,  we were told by members of the group  not to be visible as such; some of  us were not out as dykes even within  the groups. Most groups refused to  add lesbian issues to their list of  Many of us acknowledged that we gave  in to the pressure to not raise lesbian issues because it was seen to  exclude heterosexual women. We realized the irony of the following: our  feminist groups are meant to represent  all women. We don't make our lesbian  presence felt because it will exclude  heterosexual women. Our lesbian  realities are therefore excluded; this  is unconsciously accepted—as if dykes  are not really women.  There is also the feeling that lesbian  issues are not "broad based" enough,  and if we focus on them we are  sacrificing a broad political outlook,  although this test is not put to other  feminist issues. The pressure around  funding, and threats to cut off the  money if lesbians are visible, is also  a factor. All in all, what we're left  with is invisibility.  The final part of the workshop was  spent discussing strategies to break  out of this situation and make sure  that our lesbian politics are heard.  To this end, we could continue to work  with heterosexual feminists, and organize workshops to discuss lesbianism.  This idea would be especially useful in  high schools.  We could also increase our general visibility by creating posters and using  the media. We need to discuss what kind  of images we want to present and if and  how we can use the straight media  without being co-opted.  We could also work in coalitions of lesbian groups. This would require a lot  of ground work—discussion and debate,  and defining of common politics. This  coalition building could potentially-,sr?  expand to networking on a national and  international level.  The idea of lesbian groups consulting  with each other about political actions  and strategies was discussed. The lesbians present left with a reinforced  commitment to increase our visibility.  We clarified some of our thoughts about  lesbian issues and clearly identified  the need for work on lesbian political  analysis.  Alexander Technique  Relearning to  by J. Broatch  Marjorie Barstow is 87 years old. She  lives with her horses on 140 acres  just outside of Lincoln, Nebraska. She .  is a teacher of the Alexander Technique.  "Constructive thinking," says Barstow,  "is doing what you want to do with your  own organism. Thinking is the way we  use ourselves and negative thinking  prevents us from redirecting our energy  up."  Barstow takes trips across the U.S. to  help other Alexander teachers and students to "redirect their energy up,"  and is a great example of what the  Alexander Technique is all about.  The Alexander Technique was developed  in the late 1890's by an actor who  started losing his voice whenever he  performed on stage. He had to give up  his career but spent the next 8 years  finding out why this was happening to  him, and how he could stop it from  happening. What he discovered was that  there is a subtle link between mental,  emotional and physical stress and that  it was affecting every small part of Kinesis April TO   19  PROGNOSIS GRIM FOR SCIENCE  by Nadine Schurrman  There are many many more male scientists  than female scientists. This dichotomy  of numbers is much greater than that  between male and female lawyers or  social scientists or teachers or between  the sexes in almost any profession.  There are a myriad of factors which  have and continue to contribute to this  imbalance. There are those causes which  are generally accountable to the fact  that we live in a patriarchal society  and those which are specific to the  world of science and technology. It is  also important to differentiate between  women deciding against a career in  science and male dominated structures  that systematically keep women out.  Early socialization is a major force  that keeps women out of science. Young  girls are encouraged to envisage themselves, in their adult life, as  mothers, nurses, secretaries or teachers.  Rarely are girls encouraged to become  physicists, computer scientists or  electrical engineers. The media reinforces this by providing few images of  women in science. Women scientists  who are depicted are usually shown  as unattractive to men and lacking in  social skills. Thus girls learn early  that they will get little positive  reinforcement for aspiring to be a  scientist.  Recently, there have been a number of  studies which reveal that boys and  girls receive different treatment in  the classroom. Research has shown that  teachers tend to answer more questions  from boys than girls. When a boy makes  a mistake in his answer, the teacher  is more likely to make him reconsider  and correct his response. Girls tend  to lose their opportunity and the.  question is redirected to another child.  In mathematics, it has been found that  when the work of a young boy is scrutinized he is asked to correct and  understand his mistakes. Girls tend to  be reassured that they tridd hard and are  not required to put any further effort  into it. The skills necessary to do  Move the Body  his life because of the way he was  using—or misusing—his body. The  technique he developed to cure himself  involves relearning ways to use the  body as a way of relieving the physical,  mental and emotional stresses we experience every day.  'Thinking is the way we use  ourselves.'  The Alexander Technique has been used  by actors, dancers, musicians and  artists. It is seen as being especially  good for people who have to perform;  but recently, more and more people not  involved in the arts are also using the  technique as a way of reclaiming their  bodies and feelings, and a way of dealing with stress.  A Vancouver pianist explains it this  way: "I have this feeling of being  separated from stresses in the world  and not being part of them, but just  being physically myself. Yet at the  same time, I feel more part of things.  It's paradoxical."   Alexander Technique continued page 24  the work correctly are never developed.  Our education system's conditioning  does a lot more to explain women's  reputed inability to do math than  some biological explanation about  brain hemispheres.  Boys, not girls, are given Meccano sets,  chemistry sets, build your own radio  tool kits and model airplanes. These  are all toys that provide children  with the basic principles that are  later treated as 'givens' in high-  school science classes. When the young  women who actually reach high school  science level, realize that they are  not familiar with some of the basics  the boys were taught in the playroom,  they feel inadequate and unable to  'do this subject.'  By late high school, most girls have  already been dissuaded from pursuing  a career in science. In every province  in Canada, fewer than 10 percent of  upper high school physics and chemistry  students are women.In the last decade,  however, an increasing number of young  women 'have been enrolling in university  science courses. Of today's. medical  students,, for example, 30 percent are  women. While this seems positive it is  a deceptive trend as it does not  describe the number of women employed  not acceptable and quickly subverted  by men who retain the power. This  power is wielded most visibly in the  decision of who gets grants to do what  research. There is a notable lack of  life-enhancing research projects  being funded at universities. On the  other hand, in B.C. 40 percent of the  research grants given to universities  are military research related.  The position of women in industry is  even more tentative. One of the main  reasons for this is that industry does  not receive obvious government money  and is, therefore, not subject to the  same scrutiny applied to university  hiring practices.  Attempts to apply feminist principles to the direction technology  takes are quickly subverted by men who retain power.  in science, whether in industry or in  academia.  Men have sewn up the jobs in the universities the same as they have in  construction, plumbing, welding and  other well-paid jobs and professions.  This is more true in the sciences than  in any other discipline. At the University of Alberta alone there are over  100 professors in the biological  sciences. In all of Canada, there are  less than 100 women professors in the  biological sciences. Simon Fraser  University, which has one of the biggest  Geography departments in Canada, has  only one woman lecturer, who was hired  in 1985. In the so-called 'hard'  sciences such as physics and chemistry,  there are even fewer women.  Increasingly, there are women allowed  in most university departments. Typically,  these women are on one or two year  contracts as lecturers and seldom  receive full tenure, as statistics on  the numbers of women professors indicate.  In the university tenure system people  are first hired as lecturers, then  promoted to assistant professor which  is usually followed by tenure.  Most lecturer positions are 'tenure  track'. That is that they eventually  result in tenure. Hiring women as  lecturers, on one or two year contracts, is a cheap way to keep the  teacher-student ratio down while making  no commitment to breaking the male  hold on tenured jobs. Being employed  at a couple of universities and not  receiving tenure is a blight on any  young academic's record.  Those women who do receive'tenure in  the sciences and any other discipline  do not easily become full professors.  Only 3 percent of the professors in  Canadian universities are women. Women  who enter this university boy's club  are token women in the patriarchal  structure.  Attempts to apply feminist principles  to the direction technology takes are  As well, there is a particularly  alarming trend developing in industry  hiring practices. Major technological  firms are beginning to train technicians  (the base of today's technological  pyramid) and engineers themselves,  rather than recruit from universities.  The effect of such hiring practices  used by large corporations has meant  that few, if any, women are trained for  jobs in science. It has meant that  even though women are slowly worming  their way into university science  departments, this will not necessarily  influence the number of women employed  in science.  The critically important question that  must be asked is whether increasing  the number of women employed in  science will influence the direction  that technology is taking. Women who  have been accepted, into the male .  world of technology are now questioning whether they can remain in a system  which is ultimately working against  us.  There are women who have made the decision not to accept the silence required  of them in order to remain in the male-  world of science. One such woman in Dr.  Rosalie Bertell (author of No Immediate  Danger? A Prognosis for a Radioactive  Earth).   She"has made an enormous contribution to research on the effects of  low-level radiation and in doing so has  alienated herself from the mainstream  scientific community.  ■ Given the domination of science and  technology by men, it is not surprising  that few women are allowed into the  world of science. We as women and feminists must determine whether this  should become a feminist goal or whether  our needs would be better served by  working toward alternative technological  infrastructures.  Alex Brett'a second aptiete on bio*  technology and women vrWl appear in the  May issue of Kinesis. 20   Kinesis April TO  LABOUR  Commerce bankworkers win contract  by Jean Rands and Jackie Ainsworth  In January, two hundred striking  Toronto bankworkers cheered a Canada  Labour Relations Board (CLRB) decision  to impose a first contract on the  Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce  (GIBC) covering workers at the bank's  Visa Centre and head office mailroom.  The 180 Visa workers had been on strike  since June 1985. They had organized  in September 1984 and after six months  of frustrating bargaining, the bank  was still demanding absolute control  over raises, promotions, demotions  and firing, a management rights clause  that would make seniority and grievance  was more than the bank had paid them.  The amount of strike pay was unusually  high, and the CLC's decision was controversial. It certainly made1 it easier  for individual strikers to withstand  a long strike. But it meant that the  CLC paid out $1.6 million in strike  pay, and had to resort to interest  free loans of $100,000 each from the  Postal Workers and the United Auto  Workers (UAW) to cover the last weeks'  strike pay. The strike was solid. But  the strikers were replaced with management and scabs, and it's not clear  how the strike was hurting the Commerce.  The Commerce is capable of withstanding  substantial financial losses in order  to beat the union (profits last year  were $389 million). On the other hand,  all of the CLC's fund for organizing  clerical workers had been spent on  one strike of 220 people. Workers at  the Commerce mortgage house, who  were certified at the end of February,  will be going into negotiations  without much of a strike fund.  While the Board's decision rescued the  strikers and the CLC from the immediate  dilemma of how to pay for the strike,  it is not yet clear whether the contract  is something the bankworkers can build  on.  The contract, which is for a term of one  year, provides a 5% wage increase on the  LRB decision greeted with cheers by Commerce Visa employees, shown here on the picket line.  procedures almost meaningless, and  exclusion of part-time employees from  the benefits and protection of the contract. In September 1985, after a similar  negotiating experience, 60 employees  at the Commerce head office's mailroom  joined the picket line. .  The strikers considered the LRB  decision a victory even before the  terms of the contract were released  because they were confident anything  the Board imposed wquld be better  than what the bank had offered. At its  few unionized branches (four Commerce  branches with 22 employees were already covered by union contracts),  the bank has refused to negotiate  anything better than it gives its  non-union employees.  The Visa strikers knew they were  fighting for all bankworkers and for  clerical workers generally. They  strongly believed they had to win some  improvements to show other bank-  workers that the right to join a union  means something in the banking industry.  The bank's anti-union campaign has  been so successful that less than 2 percent of Canada's 165,000 bankworkers are  covered by union contracts. Where  jf^SE^*  workers have organized, certifications  have often been followed by decertifications. The potentially powerful  150,000 women in this industry remain  powerless, and the banks today lead  the way in cutting wages, lengthening  hours, and undermining job security  of clerical workers. The size of the  banks as employers means their personnel  policies affect the wages and conditions of all clerical workers.  The strikers had been receiving $300  per week strike pay from the Canadian  Labour Congress (CLC). For some, this  There was no improvement in benefits.  In fact the contract allows the Commerce  to unilaterally change the benefit plans.  The union also did not win the union  shop, or even a modified union shop,  but all employees are required to pay  dues although no one is required to  join the union.  The contract requires the bank to respect seniority in promotions and layoffs. Benefits and protection under the  contract apply to all part-time employees who work regularly scheduled hours.  Temporary and casual workers are not  covered and there is no limitation on  the bank's right to use such workers.  The Commerce workers are members of the  CLC's Union of Bank Employees (UBE)  which is a string of directly chartered  CLC locals across Canada. This means  the CLC executive is the national executive of the UBE, and UBE representatives are responsible to the CLC rather  than to bankworkers. Like Canadian  bankworkers generally, the strikers are  90% women. Their representatives in  these negotiations have been United  Auto Workers (UAW) officials and  some Visa workers expect their  group'will become part of UAW. The  main spokesperson for the bankworkers  about their new contract is a man  who is responsible not to bankworkers  but to UAW president Bob White.  The Visa strike demonstrated the  dilemma that bankworkers face in  trying to organize. Until thousands  of bankworkers are involved, the costs  of taking on the banks are beyond  the resources of bankworkers. In  the long run, bankworkers will only  succeed if they control their own  organizations. But this strike cost  millions of dollars. Do bankworkers  have to give up that control in  order not to be starved out by incredibly wealthy employers?  The CLRB's decision to impose a  first contract, combined with another  important Board decision last fall,  may considerably increase the bargaining power of bankworkers.  Last November the Board certified  the CSN (CNTU in Quebec) for a bargaining unit consisting of all  employees of the National Bank working in branches in the city of  Rimouski. This is the first multi-  -In the long run, bankworkers will-  only succeed if they control their own organizations.  lowest rate in each job classification,  but it does not correct injustices and  discrepancies in workers' wages. Only  about half of the employees are actually  at the lowest rate, and for all the  rest any wage increases will be based  on the bank's arbitrary and unilateral  determination of their "merit". In nonunion branches, employees rated "satisfactory" to "highly competent" are  getting raises of 5 percent to 7 percent.  This system, which means every employee  gets a different wage largely based on  how much their supervisors have liked them  is divisive and undermines union solidarity.  "Merit" increase was a major issue in  the strike. Although the Board did not  replace the merit system with pay grades  and seniority increments as the union  had asked, they did provide that performance ratings and merit raises are  grievable.   branch geographic certification  and should mean an alternative to  the fruitless attempts to bargain  contracts at individual small  branches scattered across the country.  The significance of the Visa decision  on future organizing will be clearer  when the Board releases written reasons  for its decision, but it might mean  there is less incentive for banks  to force long strikes over first  contracts (the law does not allow  the Board to impose a collective  agreement except where no agreement  has existed before). And it should  mean that bankworkers who are fighting for a first contract won't be .  risking their jobs by taking strike  action. The decision requires the  bank to take back all the strikers  and prohibits reprisals for strike-  related activities. Kinesis April TO   21  ARES  Spender speaks on made made language  by Jackie Goodwin  Australian feminist Dale Spender sits  curled up in a large arm chair in the  women's lounge of Brock Hall at UBC. She  admires the bright, clean room and asks  the members of the UBC Women's Center  about the space. She says she has seen  so many institutions where now that boys  are permitted to take traditionally  female courses of study, like home  economics, the only woman-only space  available is the girls' washroom.  She talks about how boys are praised  for cooking and sewing, while girls  have to fight for equipment and respect,  let alone acknowledgement, when they  take traditional male courses like  woodwork and metalwork.  She is dressed entirely in purple, including her earrings, stockings, watch-  band and watchface. She carries an  enormous purple leather handbag. She  talks.about how she has changed. "Even  my clothes are different. I don't turn  up in my jeans anymore at press conferences. It's too easy to be dismissed.  If I'm going to be dismissed it's not  going to be because I wear jeans. It's  going to be because of what I say."  Dale Spender is probably often dismissed  for what she says. During her speech  at UBC several men (boys  she would say)  spent their time wandering back and  forth for coffee. During the question  period following her speech someone  pulled the fire alarm and we had to  clear the hall until the. fire department turned off the bell..  ;In her speech, entitled "Man Made  Language," Spender talks about the research for her book Man Made Language.  When she began her research she was  told that the subject of language and  sex was not an appropriate research  topic. Rather then being discouraged  she took that as a challenge and began her research. Much of Spender's  work involves demystifying academic  studies. She says that with her extensive academic background she can  prove 'anything and then turn around  y^w©(om ©%©£:  ' KIDS play space  ! NEW convenient location  • HOUSEHOLD and gift ideasj  1 FRESH produce -inch organic;:  NEW HOURS     ' '%.^S I'  \   10:00 a.m. to 7:30 p.m.  I Open 7 days a week.      ,.;•;;$  il034''C01VCvttiS^£  254-5044  and prove the opposite. And she adds  that there is not anything that she  knows that she could not teach to a  five year old, and nobody knows more  complex things than she does. She  strongly recommends that women  do their own research. (One of her  premises is that women get much less  speaking time in mixed-sex conversations. She recommends taping a conversation and noticing how much time  men and how much time women each speak.)  Spender began her research by taping  conversations. She was listening to  discover "what was wrong with women's  language," a long held linguistic  assumption.  "I wasn't going to add to the information on what was wrong with women's  language. I didn't really know where to  start. In fact, in retrospect, it seems  quite ridiculous that it took me so  long to do that really rigorous, intellectual research, counting the  number of minutes men talk and the  number of minutes women talk in mixed-  sex conversations. And of course, once  I started to do that I had some absolutely rivetting information. I was  back to the old premise that first  attracted me; that women weren't  getting the opportunity to express  their world view.  So, I started making all these tapes,  I made hundreds and hundreds of tapes.  The first thing that occured to me when  I sat down and tried to get some data  on the way women talked. I couldn't get  enough data of women talking to make  any sort of explanations or deductions.  Very strange to see, because we all  know that women are the talkative sex.  And here I was making these tapes of  women talking to me and not being able  to get enough woman-talk to make any  sort of comment on. So then I started  to measure how much time men talked,  it's a great deal.  I worked out how often men interrupted,  99 percent of interruptions are performed by men, that's in Britain and  the States, in Sweden 1>00 percent of  interruptions were by men. In fact,  I don't have an example of a woman  interrupting a man although I'm prepared to say under some circumstances  a woman might.  There's also all the evidence of men  controlling the topic. The most common  statement that men make to women is  'what you mean is.' So what you have  is a bid to turn the topic into a form  that's acceptable to men. What I find  again and again, is the only topics  that are talked about in mixed-sex  company are topics that are acceptable  to men. If you don't believe that, go  and try to talk to a man about a topic  that you want to raise specifically as  a woman and see how long you get to do it.  In fact, if you don't feel that a lot  of this fits in with what you know, I  suggest that you make a tape before  you make a comment, because a lot of  this is about perception.  What I found was that women are considered good at the art of conversation,  and the art of conversation is the art  of getting men to talk about themselves.  In restaurants, for example, you'll see  men and women come in, and this was  quite important in Sweden, no matter  how tall the woman is when they sit down  she gets lower so the conversation can  take place.  As an aside to my point, it's interesting  that there are very few situations in  which women can comfortably talk to men  and talk down to them. Women look up.  But back to the restaurant scene,.what  you get is the man sitting there waiting to have his conversation developed.  If you watch the woman you'll see that  she offers him a smorgasbord of topics.  You'll see her ask some sort of question, and you'll see her ask some other  sort of question. The facial expressions  and the gestures just travel from one  culture to another. You'll see her try  again, you'll see her smile (she mimics  the man nodding and grunting in response)  and then finally you'll see that she  actually gets the right question and  away he goes. There's no stopping him."  In her research Spender has found that  the most conversation-time a woman  gets with men is somewhere between 10  and 30 percent. Any more than that and  both women and men feel that the woman  has dominated the conversation."  At her press conference, Spender quoted  UN figures that state that men control  99 percent of the world's resources.  "One qf the ways they got those resources," Spender said, "is because we  It sounds like my life is spent  worrying about how to treat men,  but what really worries me is how  to try and resource women.  take them seriously and keep according  them those resources. One way to stop  them is to say I'm not handing them  over to you, I'm not being nice to  you, I'm not smiling in the street at  you, I'm not resourcing you anymore.  I'm not building up your ego, listening to your boring conversations, and  that's what I mean about not taking:  them so seriously.  Of course they won't start to get rid  of some of those 99 percent of the  world's resources until we start  challenging them, and we won't start  challenging them until they start getting rid of them but we have to start  doing both.  It sound's like my life is spent worry-.  ing about how to treat men, but really  what worries me is'how to use that  1 percent of resources that women have  to try and resource women. You know 1  percent is not enough to go around  no matter how good we are at budgeting.  You can't feed the world's women and  children on 1 percent of the world's  resources. So all women are in the  position of having to negotiate and  trade^with men. Spender refers to herself  as "one of the senior citizens of the  women's movement." She says that she  could not have written Man Made Language  today because she would have to be less  subversive for today's younger feminists.  "I still sleep with a smile on my face  because feminism exists," said Spender.  She grins as she says this.  Dale Spender's next book is: 100 Good  Women Novelists Before Jane Austen.  She also wrote:Women of Ideas and What  Men Have Done to Them; Feminist Theorists;  There's Always Been a Women's Movement  this Century; For the Record. 22   Kinesis April TO  ARTS  Point of view:Gostick  by Harris Taylor  She is dressed like the Tetley Tea Man.  She sounds like Kermit the frog. She  doesn't dance. She doesn't sing. She  "talks too much to be a mime." Who is  this woman?  She... she... Sheila Gostick live or at  least she was when I saw her on March  28th at the Vancouver Cultural Centre.  She assured me and the rest of.her awestruck fans that she'd never kill herself because first she'd have to clean  up her apartment: "Neatness isn't natural. It's fear of dying unexpectedly."  I spoke with Sheila Gostick, self-titled  as "the representative of a major cult  figure" after the show.  Harris: When's your birthday?  Sheila: Why—you going to buy me something? Sept. 14, 1959.  Harris:  Very good.  Sheila: Thank you, Sir. How old are you?  Harris:  26.  Sheila: I don't have to do anything you  say 'cause you're not older than me.  Harris: Confess I  Sheila: I'm terrible. I'm shit. Connie  Kaldor gets big laughs and she can sing  and play the piano and keyboards and  write songs and stuff. Makes me so  jealous...  As Connie tickled the ivory above us,  we sat in the star's dressing room and  we talked about deep things. Sheila has  a deep voice. When I asked her what sort  of image she wanted to create for herself she said: "This is my problem. I  have no image—Gorilla girl maybe. I'm  not anyone I'd like to be. I don't want  to be associated with her."  "And from where do you draw your inspiration ?"  "I don't have any," she said. "That's  my problem. See all I am is a frustrated  country song writer. I like Lucy Ricardo  as a comedian and I like country music  as an art form. But unfortunately, I  can't sing and I'm totally amusical.  Like I cut myself learning to play  spoons."  Of mice, she says the ones in her building are psychotic. Of men, she says:  "they can put a man on the moon but  there's thousands more who deserve to  go. Of women, she says: "I like working  for-women because now I can get heckled  by collectives." Of men and women, she  says: "This is the only loophole women  get—you can be an unwed mother as long  as the father of the baby is God. But  it's rather a large loophole because  there are quite a few men out there  who do believe they qualify."  Harris:  Comedy is very risky.  Is it  different for women to take that risk?  Sheila: I've never been a man. You may  beg to differ. It's less of a risk for  a man becapse they can say whatever  they want and it's okay. Like:""girls—  don't you just wanna rape em? Ha ha."  The audience is more used to men saying what they want where, as women, if  they want to make jokes, it has to be  like: "I'm so flat. I'm so dumb, ha ha  ha."  Harris:  What are you up against as a  woman comedian in the business?  Sheila: Well, the business is that I  don't get any work. The comedy clubs  don't give me any work but they don't  give any  of the girls work. Most of  them haven't had a chance to develop.  And my friend who's a comedy writer,  who happens to be a girl, finds she  makes less money than men comedy writers. So it's the same as anything, as  any job."  Harris: How often do you get work?  Sheila: Well, I could work except I  don't have a phone number—that probably cuts down on it. I usually create my  own shows because that way I can make  more money and I can control it. A lot  of the time you get people from the volunteer benefit crowd and they want you  to work for free. They'll pay their  sound person but...l  just say I'm pro-  nuke. . .anyway, they expect people to  work for nothing and I get a lot of  that kind of work."  Harris: How do you support your'self?  Sheila: I find a way to get by. I wrote  for CBC radio, so I've been living off  1  Co-op Radio 102.7 FM  B.C.'s non-commercial, listener-supported  radio station  Join us for our annual marathon, April 18 to 27.  Mon. Apr. 21: 2.30 - 5 pm WOMEN'S MUSICSPECIAL Classical and jazz  7.30 - 8.30 pm EXPO 86 AND WOMEN Womanvision special  Tues. Apr. 22: 9 -11 pm SOUTH AFRICA :NOW  Wed. Apr. 23: 1 - 2.30 pm NATIVE RIGHTS NATIVE AFFAIRS  Thurs. Apr 24:7.30-9.30 pm COMING OUT WITH THE LESBIAN SHOW  Fri.Apr25:7,30pm-l am AN EVENING OF WOMEN'SGOLD  Sat. Apr. 26: noon - 3 pm NOTAS REVO LUCIONARIAS  3 -5 pm AGAINST RACISM  Sun. Apr 27: noon - 2pm THE DAY THE CIRCUS CAME TO TOWN AN EXPOSE  plus the best of our regular shows  CFRO 684-8494  Call up and join!  that. I sell things. I sold a lot of  things I owned before I left Toronto,  which was basically nothing but people  are fools...  Harris: What sort of things do you  write for radio?  Sheila: The tall gal corral for a kid's  show, (she sings) "We're the tall gal  corral ridin' into your town"—with  the lovely theme song there. Little  things they can put into the morning  show and stuff like that. Comedy  things.  Now we're getting some place. When I  asked her about her plans for the  future, she replied coyly:  "I may start to work with Nancy.Gwendolyn the stripper, who I once did a  show with, to show how women can work  together by fighting really a lot. I  think it'd be more stimulating to  work with someone else for awhile  because this woman (Gwendolyn) and I  fought. It was like the worst hell  I've ever been in. It was absolute  hell. It was hell on earth. But if  I'm willing to go back and try again,  it means there's something worth  salvaging." ^L^ft?  "We'd be a very good team and there's  absolutely no competition on earth  because of the subjects we do and  stuff. And we're a good physical contrast and all that stage stuff. She  comes from a totally different stage-  she comes from stripping and doing  kid's magic shows. She forgets and  takes her clothes off for kids."  Sheila really is a nice Catholic girl,  but what is she doing in a place like  this? Well, when she's not being outrageously funny, she's questioning the  priorities of serious feminist types.  She asks, "Is this how you choose your  entertainment—by which set of mucus  membranes a performer irritates in their  spare time?"  As to Sheila's "preference", for years  she has slept with a little stuffed  llama. But then it fell in a big way  for a camel that it met.in a San Francisco bar. Sheila didn't say whether  they continued to sleep together after  "the incident". Later, when the pair  were vacationing in France, the llama  ran away—possibly to rendezvous with  the camel in some sleazy watering hole  on the Riviera. Though I was far too  polite to suggest such a thing.  Harris: You 've been doing comedy for  almost 10 years now.  Sheila: That's the hard way of putting  it. Sheila is 45. She's been in show  business for 19 years and her big break  is just around the corner. Occupation from page 15  He had private detectives looking for  me and he'd figured out I was either  at Kate Booth's or Vancouver Transition  House. He was trying to get detectives  to get me. So I didn't have a lot of  choice. Thank god there was somewhere  safe. I wouldn't have had a chance  outside.  Alison: Without the transition house,  coming at the time it did, I probably  would have ended up in a round, padded  room with a jacket. Without transition  house, and getting in touch with the  reasons why I was angry, and knowing  that I should have been angry — it sort  of grounded me. I think I still would  have been flighty and very self-critical  and probably would never have ventured  out. I would have destroyed any social  adventures or any kind of discoveries  because I was too afraid.  Tina: I think I'd be dead. I don't think  I'm the only one. I think there's others.  It's scary.  Did you use any other community services  or MHR during your stay?  Alison: I made an appointment (with MHR),  went down and the the lady in the office  said, "First of all, you're out of our  district. We don't have any transition  houses in our area. I don't know what to  do with you. I've never dealt with a  case like this before, just a minute,  I'll go talk with my supervisor." She  was really cool. She was a financial  worker. She did as much as she could  to help me out. She came back With my  file. And she kind of looked at me.  She was sort of mimicking her supervisor  and said, "well, I'm supposed to turn  a blind eye because you're staying in a  house that's illegally occupied. Technically, we can't do anything for you." When  I did get to the (MHR office) I was  supposed to go to, I tried to get a  damage deposit. (The worker) said as long  as I was at the transition house I  obviously didn't need the money for rent.  I tried to explain to them that in order  to secure a place I'm going to need a  damage deposit. So I sat in the office  with my knitting. Transition house or no  transition house as an address, I'll just  wait here until I get the damage deposit,  which I finally did.  Tina: I won't mention any names but the  first worker that I ran into asked me if  I could get money from my boyfriend. I  thought that was kind of...silly.  Do you think the state should provide  services to battered women, or should it  be left to private sector or volunteers?  .  Tina: I think the government should realize  that this is what's happening and it's  not fate and it's not behind closed doors  anymore. Think of all the suffering, all  the medical bills, psychiatrists—very  expensive and you go through a lot  of psychiatric care when you've been  battered. And it would be, I'm sure,  for the government, a lot cheaper to  pay for a place where people can run  away from it.  Not saying anything against the  Prime Minister or anything but seeing  that he's male, I think it has a lot  to do with it. He just doesn't...  Maybe I shouldn't say something like  that. But I think that he, or they are  avoiding the facts. It's more men  that are abusing. There are women that  abuse, but basically it's men who  brutalize women, thinking that they're  more powerful or more dominant. Why  don't they just go by the rules that  they make up?  Donni: It's evading an issue if they  put it down to the private sector or  to volunteers. It's pretending that it  doesn't exist. It's a very big problem  and it's not something that should  Kinesis April TO  ARTS  Weaving exhibit and auction:  Guatamalan Colours of Resistance  "Colours of Resistence" is an exhibition  of Guatemalan weavings using traditional  Native Indian methods. The pieces,  both aesthetic and functional, take  everyday forms such as blouses, vests  and blankets. To a Canadian eye they  seem like beautiful garments—but they  are much more than that. A typical  piece contains colourful symbols or  patterns that illustrate the lives  and traditions of the Native people.  They are a people in a country whose  government persecutes and tortures its  citizens daily. Many are forced to  flee to refugee camps in Mexico. In  a place filled with misery and pain  these colours are worn as a sign of  resistance and hope.  "Colours of Resistance" is also a celebration of this rich Indian culture  which to this day resists modern  technological influence. The exhibition will close on Sunday evening  (April 6) with Guatemalan music by  Fido Garcia and friends. The film  "Todos Santos" by Olivia Carrescia  will also be shown..Guatemalan foods  will be available. Every piece in the  show will be sold to the highest  bidder in a silent auction—a great  chance to take home a beautiful  traditional garment. All money raised  goes directly to Guatemalan refugees.  "Colours of Resistance" is coordinated by  Wendy Solloway. She spent two years  living in Central America and has  worked with Guatemalan refugees. She  feels that Guatemala is often forgotten  by the news media. Her hope is that by  mmmmmmmmm  participating in "Colours of Resistance"  people in Vancouver will better understand the situation in Guatemala.  Wendy wants to raise as much money as  possible to send to the refugees and  is counting on the generosity of Vancouver citizens. She invites everyone  to join her in this evening of colour,  music and fun.  "Colours of Resistance," an exhibition  of handmade Guatemalan weavings at  the Native Education Centre,   285 E.  5th at Scotia, April 3-6,  hours 1 pm -  9 pm. Admission free.  Celebration and  Action,  Sunday April 6 -at 7 pm.  $4  admission,   $3 unemployed/students/  seniors. For more information call  Wendy Solloway at 872-5305 or 255-  6873.  be ignored. It's been ignored so much  that the three of us got into the  mess we did. There's a need for education, for more houses, more professionals. What's required is a very  big change in the attitudes of all  of us. And there's just not enough  people-power to do it in the private  or volunteer sector.  Did you see the occupation as being  related to feminism or to the women's  movement?  I don't really understand  ten's "movement" so to speak,  a personal level you could  inite feminist attitudes. In  very strong. That was  the primary reasons they were  making that statement and  "we're taking control of our  Alison:  the worn  But on  see def  some it  one of  there,  saying  lives."  Donni: For me, after being in a relationship where I was so degraded, it  was good to be around women who made a  statement, "I'm a woman. I'm proud of  it and no one's going to put me down. You  don't deserve that treatment. Don't  take that shit." That was the most outstanding thing—these women making a  statement that women didn't deserve  this.  Alison: I was a little bit apprehensive  hearing some statements of women who  were divorced, women who never married  or never intended to marry—because men  were dot dot dot. It confused me. I  know that all men "aren't like that. The  impression I was getting from some women  was that they were saying that men are  men and this is why they are like that.  I didn't have much to contribute to  that. I was very wary. I was so confused  about my own feelings about myself and  how this would affect my relationship  with men.  Donni: I think, as women, we are in a  way disadvantaged. We get paid less.  We're expected to be a certain way in  a relationship—generally on the submissive side. I recognize that I'm  going to have to make some big changes  if I'm ever going to get into another  relationship. I'm going to have to work  a lot harder at being a human being in a  relationship than a man would.  Alison: I think the feminist mode  taught me to fight for what I believe  in rather than go "well, okay, yes sir,  right away sir." It taught me to fight,  be strong as a woman. To go for what I  believe in rather than acquiescing to  whatever's useful at the time.  How do you feel about it today?  Tina: I feel different. I feel like a  woman j  Does it sound -wierd ? Before I  didn't feel that way. Before I felt  like I was a person...it took another  woman to make me realize that I'm a  woman .  Alison: That's true. One woman laughed  and called me a raging heterosexual.  And the thing was I was really afraid  to admit that I can love women. I like  what they represent. I like the way  they look. I like the things they stand  for. I think it sort of broke down  that defense and that prejudice-fear.  My whole life had been so wrapped up  in a man's world and concentrating on  man's needs, man's desires and what a  man likes to see in a woman.  Like you said it took another woman to  make me feel like a woman—to make me  realize the virtues that we do have—the  strengths and the weaknesses and the  things we have in common. I learned to  value being a woman and feeling good  about it. 24   Kinesis April TO  ARTS  Life in the Gaza Ghetto  t>y Chava Mintz  Gaza Ghetto focuses on the story of three  generations of one Palestinian family  who have lived in the Gaza Ghetto since  1948. The documentary film focuses on  their daily life and how it is affected  by the Israeli occupation. According to  Aftonbladet,   Sweden's second largest  newspaper, "It's only after seeing Gaza  Ghetto, that for the first time I understand the real tragedy behind the daily  news from the Middle East..."  Gaza Ghetto includes interviews with  major Israeli figures such as Ariel  Sharon and Yitzhak Rabin, Minister of  Defense.  Written, produced and directed by Pea  Holmquist, Joan Mandell, and Pierre  Bjorklund, the film has received critical  acclaim.  Gaza Ghetto will be premiered in Vancouver on April 17 at 7:30 at The Swedish  Hall, 1320 East Hastings as part of an  International Day of Solidarity with  Palestinian prisoners which is organized  by the Committee to Oppose the Iron  Fist. (The Iron Fist is the Israeli  term used to designate their official  policy towards Palestinians in the occupied territories of the West Bank and  the Gaza Strip.)  Leading up to the film showing, La  Quena will be exhibiting the photographic work of Jane Story, a Canadian  photographer presently living in Toronto.  From 1980 to 1982 Story photographed  daily life on the West Bank while  working as a photographer for a Palestinian newspaper in Jerusalem. The photo  exhibit has received much praise and  was previewed in Canadian Forum  (January)  1985). The exhibit has been shown in a  number of galleries including Hart  House at the University of Toronto.  April 17 has been declared International  Day of Solidarity with Palestinian  prisoners by the Ccjmmittee to Oppose the  CHAIR IN WOMEN'S STUDIES   s  THE WOMEN'S STUDIES PROGRAM AT SFU IS SEEKING A  SENIOR CANDIDATE TO FILL ITS ENDOWED CHAIR, BEGINNING IN EITHER JANUARY OR MAY 1987.  THE  APPOINTMENT MAY BE MADE FOR FOUR, EIGHT, OR 12  MONTHS.  APPLICANTS IN ALL FIELDS ARE INVITED,  PARTICULARLY IN HEALTH CARE, LAW, SOCIAL POLICY,  ANTHROPOLOGY/SOCIOLOGY, VISUAL ARTS, ENGINEERING,  EDUCATION AND LITERATURE.  APPLICANTS MUST BE  CANADIAN CITIZENS OR LANDED IMMIGRANTS, AND MUST  HAVE APPROPRIATE ACADEMIC OR PROFESSIONAL  QUALIFICATIONS.  RESPONSIBILITIES WILL INCLUDE  TEACHING, PUBLIC LECTURES AND COMMUNITY OUTREACH.  SALARY WILL BE THAT OF A SENIOR SCHOLAR.  CANDIDATES SHOULD SEND A CURRICULUM VITAE AND THE  NAMES AND ADDRESSES OF THREE REFEREES, NO LATER  THAN 30 MAY, 1986, TO: THE COORDINATOR  -"-WeMlMwa STUDIES PROGRAM  SIMON FRASER UNIVERSITY  BURNABY, BC  V5A 1S6  (601) 291-3593  Vancouver Lesbian Connection  P.O. Box 659S1. Station F. Vancouver. B.C. VSW 5L4 (604)254-8458  CALENDAR  «*■  EVENTS  WednssdauS - sTAc-nMQ EEB 5*1 -9a-"v>- " »•"  — JlESBIA^ A\pM3+-ttrTS _DB0p-ltf  ThursdoAjs-LJESBiAn ovas 4o* dbop-in  I vj 2ncL+ 4tlr\ ThurScU-^   -    7- lO-ZO p.rti.  rt-ickxMS- VLC COFFSEtfdOsE - -fcc-llpm.  VT'ENTERTAIMMEMT   EVEBY    Ist+ijrel   T=ClOiVy  '  1st Moneiau of Each rwrrh - CAFfc LIU -  7-IOp.TM. V-LEsaAN  iNf&RMATlOl   t-lME    DROp-lSl  , Lost Saronbu of Each month - 9 - - *■ •*"  ..• VLC LEGAL'ADVICE CUMIC WAcriMa JAM-25H  with   LAWyeC - «UTH USE   TAYLOR  DROp-N HOOgS:   11-4   -MoMCAV-FCtOAV  I    COFFEE fttoc TABLE • • 'LESBIAN  UBBAl2y  ANGLES i KINESIS FOB. SUE •' ' «A-ES<S   CALENDARS  . ..<&»,y i cEse/AN foot>8MK r>«op.©FF poitfr  fob. Moee /wpaaMAnoN- vhone 264-Q4S&  ••• 24 HOUa MISVJS&H6  MACH/A/e   " *  Uftl  mm  Iron Fist, based in Israel and composed of  , Israeli Jews and Palestinians.  Prison is part of the regular experiences  of Palestinians living under Israeli  occupation. An estimated 25 percent of  the Palestinian population in the  occupied territories have been arrested  since 1967 and 60 percent of the adult  male population has spent at least one  night in an Israeli prison, often without being charged with a specific offense.  So what is the fabric of daily life in  the occupied territories of the West  Bank and the Gaza Strip? What is the  lived experience of the men, women and  children who inhabit these territories?  Two events have been organized in  Vancouver to give us some understanding  of these questions-.  WORD    PROCESSING  IBM PC "PLUS"    (HARD DRIVE)  Papers, Theses, Manuscripts,  Resumes,  Financial Statements, etc.  LOCATION:    12th Ave.  & Commercial  Call    876-2895  The Alexander  Technique  Relieves back pain, excessive  fatigue, poor posture and physical  tension. Learn to move with  flexibility and ease in daily activities,  work, performing arts, and sport.  JULIA BRANDRETH (604) 689-8327  KATHARINE  P.  YOUNG   •  BARRISTER & SOLICITOR  • Accident & Insurance Claims  • Personal & Insurance Claims  • Employment & Labour Law  CONTINGENCY FEES AVAILABLE  FREE INITIAL CONSULTATION  500-2695 GRANVILLE ST., VANCOUVER, B.C. V6H 2H4 (604) 734-4777  Alexander Technique from page 19  We all have attitudes that we express  with our bodies. Most of us, as women  in the world, hold ourselves in a particular way, out of emotional stress,  defensiveness or fear .of putting ourselves out there. We reflect Bthis in*  our bodies. Hunched shoulders, rounded  backs, stiff necks, locked knees, rib  cages that never move, and eating  disorders are examples of how this  happens.  These attitudes lock our bodies into  postures and habitual movements that  cause painful conditions like backache, arthritis, migraine and depression.  When postures and movements become  habits our sensory awareness is deadened.  We literally don't know what we're  doing with ourselves much of the time.  Do you recall-, for example, really experiencing even one mouthful of food  at your last meal, or how you got it  to your mouth?  Most of our every day movements—walking,  sitting, standing—are like that. But  you can change.  Through learning the Alexander Technique,  your coordination and habits do start to  change. The teacher gives you new ways  of thinking in activity; gives directions  to lengthen and widen the back, and uses  her hands in subtle ways to suggest an  upward movement through the body.  Barstow insists "one must experience it  personally in order to have the fullest  understanding" of it. Then as the physical  patterns change your sensory awareness  heightens.  A Vancouver woman who has practiced the  technique on and off for several years  describes her experiences this way: "It's  helped me to recognize my habitual patterns, and at first I was able to see and  to make choices on a physical level. Now  it has moved to other levels. I see  choices more often in other situations  and I can decide whether or not I want  to stay with my habitual actions."  Feeling light, physically and emotionally,  is another experience of Alexander  pupils.  "I like the sense of lightness."  "I can describe my good days as feeling  light and my bad ones as feeling heavy  and clumsy."  "I feel lighter—taller."  This is the result-of what Barstow refers  to as "redirecting your energy up." She  explains this as "learning to prevent  excess pressure on yourself, inside and  out."  Also, Barstow speaks often of flexibility  and ease. She sees a person's ability to  come in and out of slumps (physical, mental and emotional) as expressions of that  flexibility. So the technique not only  unlocks your body to increase your physical  flexibility but it unlocks mental and  emotional stances too.  Through learning the Technique, says  Barstow, "eventually your sensory  experience is sensitized so that you  automatically  come out of a slump."  The Technique is accessible to everyone. Joan, 35, has Multiple Sclerosis  and has been in a wheelchair for 5  years. She neatly describes what can  happen when she sums up the experience  of her own first 6 Alexander lessons  in this way: "My body is being taught  some lessons it's never learned before.  It's as though it's all completely  different, but it feels at the same  time the way it ought to be." Kinesis April TO   25  ARTS  Worksite highlights role of workers  ICassett's largest work "The Modtrn  | Woman", a mural In this building f  gghai not been seen since the demolition,  and must be assumed destroyed , ,*  Detail: Montage by Jill Weaving excerpted from collaberative  poster project "Women Building".  by Carol Williams  Worksite is a collective of women  artist/organizers. Our aim is to facilitate the viewing of art (of many disciplines) by primarily local women  artists. We accomplish this by organizing and stimulating bi-monthly  events" gathering artists from our  community to create work. Worksite  therefore is a metaphoric rather than  an actual site. As feminists we do not  necessarily see the gallery as a place  which has welcomed women ~as full participants in creating a visual/theatrical/linguistic her/story. We are reaching into the community and its  resources (radio, print, cable ten,  the street, local halls) as a site for  production of our work.  In celebration of International Women's  Day we released our March Art Event, a  two foot by three foot poster made by  nine Vancouver women artists in a photomontage of text and image. We chose a  thematic of "Women and Work" hoping to  continue to highlight the central role  of women as workers in and outside the  home. As artists we desired heightened  recognition and support of our role  as workers contributing to the  creation of alternate images, and in  the retrieval of a her/story which is  often erased or lost.  Running with all their might  by Sima Elizabeth Shefrin  Women like them but men don't. Like  any image of people with power, these  strong running figures pushing themselves forward are often mistaken for  men. Hinda Avery's painting of athletic  women displayed throughout March at  the Vancouver East Cultural Center  offer us images of women which we  see far too seldom.  The women on the walls and pushing out  from the walls of the gallery are all  in motion. Some are running with all  their might, some pushing themselves  across the finish line, some laughing  and dancing. ,Others slow down after a  race reaching out to each other for  comfort in defeat.  Hinda's series of paintings grew out of  her need to find images of women to  which she herself could relate.  The women's movement made me conscious  of the types of images that have been  expressed of women.  Portrayal of women  throughout history has always reflected  male attitudes of how a woman should  appear and act women must be shown  as individuals,  not as some external  standard of an inanimate beauty ideal  which continually leaves the majority '  out.  Most of the athletes are painted on four  square wooden panels. A few are painted  and then cut out of the wood. Some of  these cut-out figures stand alone;  others are mounted in front of the  pictures, sometimes a few inches from  them.  Hinda likes a little confusion, a bit  of ambiguity in her work. "I spend a  lot of time playing and cutting out and  placing images on top of each other"  she tells us.  The women in the paintings are easily  recognizable, their moods and their  concentration readable, but they are  abstracted as well. The perspective is  not always correct, and the figures  behind are sometimes bigger than those  in front. Smaller figures are cut out  of wood and hung in front of the  paintings, or glued on to it.  The colours Hinda uses are not always  those of reality. Some of the women and  some of the backgrounds are drawn in  blues and oranges and purples. "Running  Woman 3" is all in green, flesh-green,  fabric-green, hair-green. "Running  Woman 4" is all in red, with real wrinkles  in her clothing.  The backgrounds tend to be a confusion  of lines and shapes and colours. They  are difficult to read literally, but  they do convey to me a sense of the  heat and sweat and blur of runners in  motion. And wherever the background is  confusing, a very clear cut-out image,  perhaps 18 inches high has been super-  inposed on the picture. Sometimes these  . images act as a translation of the more  complicated background behind; sometimes  they tell stories of their own.  I had some problems with Hinda's use  of cut-out cows placed near the women's  breasts in "Running Woman 1" and  "Running Woman 2." The image itself  was certainly not offensive. The cows  were among other animals pictured,  and Hinda's use of nudity in her work  I has always impressed me as a good  example of how depictions of women  without clothes need not be objectifying. But I was reminded—and I don't  think this was the artist's intention-  of those elements in society which  insist on seeing women solely in terms  of their reproductive functions, and .  I found this association distracted  me from the rest of the picture.  At the same time as she likes to play  around with images and the way people  perceive them Hinda: is concerned that  her work not be obscure. She says,  "It's important to me that people  look at my work and understand it and  The basis of the overall design of the  poster is the transept portal entrance  of an important yet lost site: The Woman's  Building  from the 1893 Chicago World's  Columbian Exposition. This building,  demolished in the late 1890's, was  designed, decorated, and constructed  by women; Sophia Hayden, the architect,  was just 22 years old; exterior ornamentation was by Alice Rideout;  internal mural The Modern Woman was  painted by Mary Fairchild Macmonnies;  the building was mamaged by a council  headed by Mrs. Bertha Palmer. The  murals both disappeared in the confusion following the fair. The photograph we reproduced was from The Magic  City  as 1894 publication by J.W. Buel.  In this revived image of The Women's  Building  each artist miniaturized  photomontage or photographs which  are collaged between the columns of the  main and second floor. This visual  work about work is by Lorna Brown,  Cynthia Smith, Jill Weaving, Carol  Williams. Lucy Harrison, Kati Campbell  and Lorna Mulligan. The border and  montaged text, fictional and research  statistics about work, is by Angela  Hryniuk and Margot Butler. The project was co-ordinated by Margot Butler.  This poster can be purchased for $6 at  local bookstores in your neighbourhood:  Octopus, Spartacus, Ariel, The Women's  Bookstore, McLeods, the UBC Bookstore,  Peregrine Books. Proceeds of sales goes  to Worksite for continued support and  sponsorship of art events by women  artists. Our next event will be on  May 15 and 16 at Heritage Hall. This will  be a performance event of theatre,  dance, film and poetry. On site will be  installed visual work.  The working board of Worksite is Lorna  Brown 985-0281, Margot Butler 687-7585,  and Carol Williams 875-8987. Our consultative board members are Margaret  Birrell, Cate Jones and Donna Zapf.  Our mailing address is 3708 Main Street,  Vancouver V5V 3N7.  enjoy it." For the most part her  series of women athletes meets her own  criteria.  The exhibits at the Vancouver East  Cultural Centre are curated by Executive Director, Wendy Newman and Publicity Director, Penny Sidor. They try  to coordinate the visual art with  both the time of year, and the programming taking place in the theatre  in any given month. Because International Women's Day falls in March, the  Centre featured Hinda Avery as a  feminist artist, as well as performers  such as Wallflower Order, and Rosalie  Sorrels and Nanci Griffith. In April,  coinciding with the Peace Festival,  the gallery is presenting Salvadorian  artist Jose Ventura, and in the theatre  Bob Bossin's Anti-Nuclear Show. 26   Kinesis April ^  by Connie Smith  Cora Walton's childhood friends nicknamed her Koko because they couldn't  pronounce her name, and when she  married musician "Pops" Taylor back in  1953, they decided Koko was the name  they'd put on her records. Since that  time, she's been called a few other  things: the hardest working lady in  show business, Chicago's premier blues  growler, and the queen of the blues.  Koko was raised on a farm outside Memphis, but grew up singing in the clubs  of Chicago. Among her fans were Muddy  Waters, Howling Wolf, Junior Wells and  Willie Dixon. She played with all of  them at one time or another. It was  Willie Dixon who wrote and produced  her first big hit, "Wang Dang Doodle,"  for Chess Records. The song was a  million-seller in 1965, prompting the  first of a dozen European tours for  the young star.  Koko stayed with Chess Records until  the early seventies when the label  folded. In 1975 she signed with  Alligator Records. The company called  it "the best decision we ever made."  They were right. Since that time., Koko  has won every major award the blues has  to offer. Her most recent honours came  at the 1985 W.C. Handy Awards in Memphis  where she won Entertainer of the Year,  Blues Vocalist of the Year, and for  the sixth time, Contemporary Female  Blues Artist.  The College Media Journal voted her  recent album Queen of the Blues,   Best  Blues Album of '85, and in 1984, after  five previous nominations, Koko  received a Grammy for Best Blues Album  of the Year. ("I waited twenty years  for that one, and I was real pleased  to get it.")  But of all the titles she's received,  it's "the hardest working lady in show  business" that sticks in my mind. Koko  spends 10 months out of the year on the  road. She and her husband and her four-  piece band The Blues Machine travel  throughout North America in an '83  Dodge van, ("We all comfortable in  there; there's just six of us,") eating  at Denny's Restaurants along the  interstate, ("That's my favourite  place to eat"), and in the case of her  November trip to Vancouver, driving on  some of the most treacherous snow-  covered roads she'd ever seen.  Sponsored by the Pacific Blues and Jazz  Festival, Koko Taylor performed November 29 and 30 to packed houses at the  Town Pump. I spoke with Koko on Saturday afternoon while the band watched  the football game. We began a favourite  topic—her family.  Koko: I've got one daughter and 2 grand-  kids. My little grandaughter is 12 and  my little grandson is 6 years old. And  he's just like I was when I was his age.  He wants to be a musician. He's trying  hard to play guitar. Right now he's  trying to play drums. He's trying to  sing, (laughs) Oh man. I remember when  I was growing up, when I was his age, I  would be just singing away, you know.  -Connie: You had the choir,  didn't you,  to help you get started?  Koko: I grew up singing gospel. Going  to church. Just like he's doing. And  every day when he come from school, he  gets that guitar and goes to playing  and trying to sing "Wang Dang Doodle."  (laughs again) I remember I used"to do  the same thing every day. Me and my  sisters and brothers, we would go to  the field or wherever we were doing out  daily chores, and we'd be just playing  and singing the blues, and listening  to the radio and stuff like that.  Connie: How old were you when you went  to Chicago?  Koko: I was about 18.  Connie: Did you go there to be a singer?  Koko: No. I didn't have no idea I was  going to be a singer. I have always  loved singing and listening to other  singers, and whatever music is going on,  that's what I liked. I used to sit in  with other people, you know, other local  bands, and all of this was for my own  enjoyment. It was something I enjoyed  doing. No money involved or anything.  And it was Willie Dixon that heard me  and got me my first recording for Chess  Records in Chicago.  Connie: Did you have any idea that  "Wang  Dang Doodle" would become such a big  hit?  Koko: No, I sure didn't. Let's see, he  wrote this tune1vfor me "I Got What It  Takes'1, which is re-recorded now on  They didn't give me million  dollars when they told me  I was famous.  Alligator Records, and I did "What Kind  of Man is This", a tune that I wrote,  and "Honkey Tonk". Those were my first  recordings and didn't nothing really  happen. It was just a recording, you  know. Then after that I did "Wang Dang  Doodle" and it went straight to the top.  Connie: That must have been kind of a  shock.  Koko: It was a shock. It was a surprise,  and it was really unique. I couldn't  believe—I had to pinch myself. Is this  really me. I just couldn't believe it,  but when that happened that's when I  formed my own band, The Blues Machine,  and I've been going strong ever since.  It's been good times, bad times, rough  times, and even now it's still rough  times, but...you know.  Connie: Well,  how do you feel about that?  On one hand,   they tell you you're the  greatest blues singer in the world, on  the other hand...  Koko: It's no flower bed of roses just  because they say I'm the greatest. They  didn't give me a million dollars when  .they told me I was the greatest, (laughs)  It didn't increase my salary none. I'm  not getting rich out here. I'm a long  way from that. And it's hard work  travelling up and down the highway,  travelling for miles and miles.  Connie: One thing you've been able to  do that a lot of women never get the  chance to do is produce your own records.  Koko: Yea, I help out with that a lot.  With ideas, with selecting tunes, help  arranging, getting the music and stuff  together. That's also a hard job.  But I've been managing pretty good.  Connie:  When you put together The Blues  Machine,  what were you looking for in  a musician?  Koko: I was definitely looking for a  special kind of musician. Someone that  loved music, loved blues, as well as I  did. Now if I meet a musician and he  say, now I can play your stuff'but I  really don't like blues, but I can  play it, I'm really into jazz, then  that's not my musician. That ain't my  man at all. Because I figure he'i  got to be into, the same thing and want  to do what he's doing to put his best  foot forward. He's got to support me.  Support the blues.  Connie: Have you always had a lot of  say in your own career?  Koko: No. When I was with Chess I didn't ^  have no say at all. All I did was just  perform. Just sing. And it was altfSys":' !  somebody else that did the arranging  and took care of what had to be done.  Connie: Was that a problem then?  Koko: It wasn't a problem, but I do  find that now that I have a little say  so into my own music, I can get into it  more. I'm more comfortable with the tunes  that I'm doing:;because these are tunes  that I selected. It makes it more comfortable. Easier.  . Connie: Are you still writing?  Koko: Not a whole lot. I am doing  writing but I don't have a lot of time  to devote just on writing because I  spend most of my time concentrating on  what I'm going to do in clubs or in  concerts.  Connie: When you sing songs like "I'm a  Woman" or "You Can Have My Husband But  Please Don't Mess With My Man", do you  find you get a strong reaction from the  females: in-the audience? "I'm a Woman"  is a great song.  Koko: I feel that way. And that's one of  the reasons I feel proud of myself that  I'm able to do this because it's like  I'm saying something or doing something  for other women that maybe they don't  have the nerve to say. (laughs) It's  like I expressed something or said something to their man. I couldn't say that,  but she said it for me.  Connie: Do you like being on the road as  much as you are?  Koko: Ya, I enjoy being out here. I gets  tired but I do enjoy it. Matter of fact,  if I didn't like what I was doing I  wouldn't be out here at all, because like  I said before, I'm not getting rich, and  it's not something easy. But it is something enjoyable. I enjoy it. That's the  one thing that keep me out here. I'm  doing what I enjoy doing.  Koko continued page 27 Kinesis April 'M   27  by Wendy Frost and Michele Valiquette  The 1986 Sylvia Book of Days  names  December 5th St. Tom's Day. Who's St.  Tom? He's the patron saint of all of  those who cannot be left unattended in  a bookstore. We both belong in this  category. It's not uncommon for either  of us to fall into a trance in the vicinity of a bookstore, only to regain  consciousness hours later with our arms  full of books. Depression, elation,  boredom, the arrival of a U.I. cheque...  any or all of these have been known  to lead to serious book binges.  We celebrated an.unusually warm and sunny  day earlier this month, for example,  by doing a round of the city's book  vendors. "We'll just look  at new women's  journals...for the Kinesis  article," we  assured each other, ignoring the particular dangers of known addicts browsing  in pairs (Addict One: Should I buy this?  Addict Two: Sure!) Hours later, when the  frenzy of page flipping and cheque  writing had abated we emerged...proud  possessors, between us, of six novels,  a collection of short stories, more  Sylvia, a play, a cookbook, ten blank  notecards and  a selection of new  women's magazines and papers. The latter,  at least, we can justify by sharing  them with you.  First, a clutch of new offerings from  England:  Shifra  is a Jewish feminist quarterly  whose first issue appeared in December  1984. Named for a woman active in the  Warsaw ghetto resistance, Shifra  is  put out by a collective of "Jewish  feminists (who have come together) to  produce a magazine which will provide  Jewish women with a forum to understand (their) experiences in all there  Koko from page 26  Connie: Has there been any particular  time that was more difficult than any  other?  Koko: There has. Like I said, it's been  rough times. There's been times that—  uh—it was difficult. Like trying to get  airplay and stuff. It's kind of difficult  right now with me. It's kind of annoying,  too, that blues entertainers, we always  the last one on the list. We get less  recognition, less airplay, less money,  less everything. And yet we work just as  hard and put just as much into it as a  rock singer or any of those people.  Connie: What do you do when you have  time off?  Koko: Well, when I'm off and I'm home,  I'm right back to housewife, grandmother, daily chores. After being on  the road so much and so long, when I'm  home I spend most of my time trying to  get things caught up—like laundry.  Really, I've got a pile of clothes here  right now that needs to go to a laundromat. But I don't have the time to get  into that now.  Connie: When you're home, whose music  do you listen to?  Koko: I don't have time to listen to  nobody now.  Partial discography: Queen of the Blues  (1985), Alligator Records; The Earth-  shaker (1978),  From the Heart of a  Woman (1981), Alligator Records; I Got  What It' Takes  (1975),  Alligator Records;  Basic Soul  (1972),  Chess Records.  diversity. Through articles, sharing  personal experiences, history and  poetry," they want to "challenge the  privileges of men over women, non-Jew  over Jew, white over black, heterosexual over lesbian." We've seen the  first two issues—articles included  feminist reflections on Jewish culture and tradition, recovering Jewish'  women's history, implications of reproductive technology for Jewish women,  fiction, poetry and even a few recipes.  Shifra  is available from Box No. 2, 59  Cookridge Street, Leeds 1, England.  $23 US per year for a subscription. The  magazine can be found locally at Ariel  Books, and Spartacus for about $3 a  copy.  Women's Review is a lively cultural  monthly which debuted in November 1985.  Each issue has reviews of current work  in visual arts, dance, film, theatre  and writing, as well as longer articles  offering more in-depth analysis, interviews, and original poetry and fiction.  Women's Review  is highly readable and  attractively laid out; it covers mainly  British and North American art and  writing by both new and familiar names.  Recent article topics have ranged from  ballet from a feminist perspective, to  the marketing of Mills and Boon, the  British equivalent of Harlequin, to a  profile of a mother-daughter pair of  artists.       %$lilll  Even by the second issue this magazine  had generated considerable debate: Editors  comment in #2 that they have been  reproached by readers for printing adverse criticism of women's work. They  respond: "We feel it is vital, at this  stage in feminist debate, that disagreements and divergences can be discussed...  It is precisely because Women's Review  aims to celebrate and further women's  art and ideas that it is also a space  in which work can be frankly assessed  by women." This is a welcome attitude  in the world of feminist publishing.  Judging by the first 3 issues, which we  both read at a gallop, this will be a  journal worth following regularly.  An annual subscription is 25 pounds. An  unwaged/student subscription at half  the normal rate is available; however,  this doesn't seem to apply to overseas  rates. Make cheques payable to Women's  Review Limited, and send to Women's  Review,   Old Loom House, Back Church Lane,  London El 1LS, England. Available here  for $2.50 an issue at Spartacus and  Octopus Books.  Trouble and Strife  is Cockney rhyming  slang for wife. The journal's editorial  collective chose the name "because it  acknowledges the reality of conflict in  relations between men and women." As  radical feminists, their "politics come  directly from this tension between men's  power and women's resistance." Beginning  its third year of publication and newly  available here, Trouble and Strife  has  feature length articles discussing radical feminist issues from both activist  and theoretical perspectives. Articles  are accessible and informative, contributing to the development of a radical  feminist theoretical framework. $19 US  per year for three issues, c/o Women's  Centre, 50 Bethel Street, Norwich, Norfolk, Britain. Available at Spartacus,  Octopus and the Women's Bookstore for  $4.00 to $4.90 per issue.  Back in the U.S.A.:  There's a new national feminist newspaper  "by, for and about women of color" called  Between Our Selves.  The quarterly began  publishing in 1985, and is widely distributed across North America. It carries news  and feature stories and provides a forum  for women of colour. We've seen one issue,  Fall/Winter 1985. The twenty page tabloid  focuses mainly on women's cultural work,  especially music—e.g. Nona Hendryx,  Linda Tillery, A Piece of the World. It  also includes some conference coverage  and an excellent article by Audre Lorde  looking at connections between South  African Apartheid and racism in North  America.  As one of the few North American publications by and for women of colour, Between  Our Selves  is long overdue. We hope future  issues will be able to carry more news  and analysis as well continuing to provide  information on black women's culture. We  found our copy at the Women's Bookstore  for $2.80. Subscriptions are six issues  for $10 US. Send to Between Our Selves,  P.JO. Box 1939, Washington, D.C, 20013.  And finally, on the homefront, there's  Cayenne: A Socialist-Feminist Bulletin  from Toronto. The inside front cover  tells us that cayenne means 1. A very  hot red  pepper used widely in India,  China and the Caribbean;  2. a female  spice; 3. a long-lasting irritant;  4. hot stuff. Heady goals...but in the  year since they began publishing the  Cayenne  collective has come a long  way toward meeting them. Some of the  problems—cramped format, poor distribution—are clearly the result of lack  of funds. As well, the Canadian content  tends to focus on Toronto—a problem  the editors have acknowledged and one  they're trying to correct by soliciting  articles from across the country.  Cayenne  has a refreshingly clear political focus and an activist orientation.  The journal is committed to creating  a forum for strategy discussions among  socialist feminists, something much  needed in the Canadian women's movement.  The two issues we've seen, #4 and #5,  include articles on women's organizing,  both in Canada and internationally, in  the reproductive rights movement, for  trade union rights, as native and immigrant women, as lesbians, in interna-:  tional solidarity work and in national  liberation struggles. Cayenne"s  book  and film reviews are short but thoughtful. We'd like to see more extensive  cultural analysis (like "True Confessions  of a Romance Junkie" by Bev Crossman in  #5).  Cayenne  will be coming soon to Octopus  and Spartacus. Watch for it. Better yet,  subscribe. $10/year. Send to: Cayenne,  229 College St. W., Toronto, Ontario  M5T 1R4.  PIANO TECHNICIAN  2206 S.W. MARINE DRIVE  VANCOUVER, B.C. V6P 6C2  (604)261-2577  ftopteS 28    Kinesis April «6  ARTS  A Little  Night Reading  by Cy-Thea Sand  Women and Words  Les Femmes et Les Mots  Conference Proceedings 1983  Edited by A.  Dybikowski,   V. Freeman,  D.  Marlatt,  B.  Pulling,  B.  Warland  235 pages. Edmonton:  Longspoon Press.  1985.  For those of us unable to attend the  historic 1983 Women and Words Conference in Vancouver, In The Feminine  is an important guide to what went on  there. A book cannot recreate the intense interaction which engaged the  over one thousand women from across  Canada who met to discuss women's past,  and ongoing relationship to the word.,  But it comes close.  I can easily imagine women laughing  and enjoying Marian Engel's talk  on the logistics of mothering and  writing: Twins and a Typewriter;  white women being defensive about or  authentically attentive to How Far  Have We Come?  by black activist/Writer  Makeda Silvera; some listeners pondering Andrea Lebowitz' concerned  question about feminist literary  criticism: "Are we in danger of creating another literai speaking only to  the initiates who understand the lingo?";  and still others wishing the conference  could last a few weeks instead of just  a few days.  While reading this anthology, I sensed  the explosive creative energy which  must have kept participants awake for  nights afterwards mulling over, with  themselves and others, the infinite  possibilities for their work and their  lives.  There is a lot here to agree and disagree with. The articles guide the  reader into new areas of consideration  and speak to specific concerns such as  sexist reviewing practices, reactionary  elements in children's literature  and the subversion potential of art.  The collection is divided into six  sections weighing heavily in favour  of critical thought, language theory  and analysis: the reader is given an  overview of the francophone feminist  deconstruction of language and its  implications for women writers. As  Nicole Brossard said in her talk, "We  cannot rethink the world except with  words." Taking up that challenge are  writers like Gail Scott,' Daphne Marlatt,  Betsy Warland, Louise Cotnoir and  Louky Bersianik who are actively  subverting and recreating language in  their work.  There is some discussion on race arid  class issues as they apply to the  silencing of women, but not nearly  enough. Beth Brant, Lillian Allen and  other women of colour are 'ghettoized'  under the heading of.'Writing Against  Double Colonization  and there is no  article by a writer of colour under any  of the other categories.  This observation is underscored by the  disheartening fact that the second  Pan-  Canadian Women and Words conference,  which was to be held in June of this  year, has been cancelled. A group of  key organizers - women of colour -  left the organizing committee because,  of racism. What was to be an even more  diverse exploration of cultural production than the successful 1983 confer  ence, broke down; in a resounding reminder that we are stammering to each  other even as we grapple with creating  a language with which to change the  world.  The Reach and other stories.  Lesbian Feminist Fiction  Edited ~by Lilian Mohin and Stella-  Shulman,   166 pages,   London:  Onlywomen  Press Ltd.  1984.  I remember reviewing the anthology  Lesbian Fiction  (Persephone Press,  1981) and commenting on the diversity  of themes and concerns. This is also  true for The Reach and other stories,  a relatively small anthology of short  fiction by white British lesbians. This  is the first anthology of lesbian  fiction to be published in Britain and  in her introduction Lilian Mohin  appreciates "black lesbian's refusal  to be edited by white women" and says  that she "looks forward to black edited,  black lesbian fiction." One of the many  attractive features of Lesbian Fiction  is its work by American writers of  colour so it is interesting to note the  contrast.  Two stories by Anna Wilson (author of  Cactus   (1980) and Altogether Elsewhere  (1985) (Onlywomen Press) open the  anthology and I was impressed by the  courage, conviction and confidence  which characterize her two very different stories, one a fantasy; the  other born of everyday survival in an  increasingly dangerous world.  What is historically and culturally  significant is that lesbians are  demanding space on the page.  mtmmmmmm*mmm*mmm0mm**mmm*mm  I was reminded of Nicole Brossard's  assertion that "in order to write  one must be a person who is moving  and seeking. To write, one must first  be one's own mistress, or be on the  point of becoming so." (In the feminine  "tender skin of mind.")  I Remember Ethel by Helen Pacey is a  humourous reminiscence about the  author's lesbian aunt, while Old  Photographs (J.E. Hardy), also a familial tale, breathes with a deep sadness about the unnecessary alienation  between a woman and her grandfather.  Not all of the contributions in The  Reach  reflect the work and care of  serious writing. As with most collec-  . tions, readers will find both memorable  and forgettable glimpses into the  psyches and lives of various characters.  What is historically and culturally  significant is that lesbians, as protagonists, are demanding space on the  page, and in doing so are challenging  the paradigms which have made us invisible. Maro Green writes in her piece  Visible Writing:   "My ink is fragrant as  lemons. In what follows, I'll make many  mistakes but I will not lie."  e Not the Only Fruit  by Jeanette Winterson,  176 pages,  London: Pandora Press,   1985.  This story begins with the lines: "Like  most people I lived for a long time with  my mother and father" and ends with the  observation that "families, real ones,  are chairs and tables and the right number of cups, but I had no means of  joining one, and no means of dismissing  my own."  The pages between these two pronouncements detail the life of an adopted  child who is raised by an evangelist  mother (and a background father), in  this fugue of betrayal and lovelessness.  The novel is considered by some to be  a comic lesbian tale but I hurt more  than I chuckled reading of Jeanette's  indoctrination into a church consumed  by demonic visioris. I found it quite  horrifying and terribly sad. Humour does  enter into the narrative, but like  the mythic scenes which parallel the  main plot, it offers only minor relief  from the novel's tension, and Jeanette's  suspension in a loveless world.  At one point the narrator realizes that  "it is not the one thing nor the other  that leads to madness, but the space  in between them." This is a poignant  novel and indicates much native talent.  A second novel is in progress and I  look forward to it.  On Our Backs  Entertainment for the Adventurous Lesbian,   Vol.  I,  Issue 3,  Winter 1985.  P.O. Box 421916 San Francisco,   CA  94142  I enjoyed this issue of a new magazine,  a product of the feminist sex debates.  I was impressed by the quality of the  short story writing by Daji Shook and  Hannah Gold, was informed by the interview with anthropologist/sex  explorer Sally Binford and by the regular column feature, Sex Point,  which  explores contemporary issues of sexuality. There is also a short interview  with photographer Sean Reynolds,  information and ads on sex services  and products and a section on fantasies.  One letter writer praised the mag's  name saying that the "subtle dig at  that other prude newspaper" makes her  giggle. That is the one thing I don't  like about it. Off Our Backs  is excellent feminist journalism and deserves  better than this cheap shot from the  lesbian/feminist erogenous war zones.  I would prefer that we confront our  diversity with dignity not pettiness.  Otherwise, I look forward to reading  and getting turned on by future issues.  ■ Other Information:  Gossip -  a new journal of lesbian feminist ethics was born in February  1986 and is available from Onlywomen  Press, 38 Mount Pleasant, London WC1 XOAP.  Featured in issue one is an article by  Julia Penelope on how feminist ideology  is becoming too respectable; Sheila  Shulman discusses lesbians having  babies and Rosie Waite discusses her  disability.  Canadian Lesbian and Gay History Newsletter,   Issue 1, December 1985 is  available from the Canadian Gay Archives P.O. Box 639 Station A Toronto,  Ontario M5W 1G2. The newsletter was  founded at the Sex and the State International Conference on Lesbian and  Gay History in Toronto in July 1985.  This issue consists of statements of  research interest and, work areas in the  hopes of breaking down the isolation  that many gay historians feel.  Women: Images, Role-Models,  Proceedings of the CRIAW (Canadian Research  Institute for the Advancement of Women)  Conference 1984,   is available for  $6.00 plus $1.00 for postage and  handling from CRIAW/ICREF 151 Slater  Street, Suite 408, Ottawa, Ontario,  KIP 5H3. Kinesis April ra   29  LESBIAN  INFORMATION LINE  Need Information?  Want to Talk?  Contact LI.L (604) 875-6963  Wed. & Sun. 7-10 p.m.  mMmetitm   or write 400A w-5th Ave-  Vancouver V5Y1J8  LETTERS  specializing in kitchens, basements,  desks, general maintenance  Ariel  <^gt  Books  ^^  Retrospective readin  y of lesbian  erotic poetry  Helene Rosenth  al,  Friday April 11,8pm.  <^  2766 W. 4th Ave.  733-3511  • • THEATRE * •  For the best in Foreign Films  and Independent Quality Films  Non-Sexist, Coffee Bar, Crying Room for parents  with small children  16th and ARBUTUS STREET  Phone 738-6311  $2.99 on Tuesday $4 Students with valid cards  Sitka Housing Co-op is a 26 unit housing  co-op especially for women and w  with children in East Vancouver. After  months of work the building has started  and we are excited to begin accepting  applications for membership.  If you are interested in applying please  contact Sitka by phoning 255-9265 or  291-0703 or write to us at Sitka Housing  Cooperative Society, 2842 St. George  St., Vancouver, B.C. V5T3R7.  No link between  occupation and NDP  Kinesis:  A recent issue of Out of Line  (March 14)  included an article by Drena McCormack,  attacking the social democratic views of  the NDP. Fair enough.  However, Drena also took the opportunity  to attempt to link the recent occupation  of Transition House with the polities'  of the NDP. There is no link.  The occupiers worked diligently for  eight months, not for jobs for ourselves,  not to add to our revolutionary resumes,  but because we saw two possible choices  for the future of Vancouver Transition  House:  1) a private society, vulnerable to  funding cutbacks, vulnerable to shifts  in priorities/perspectives, and prob-.  ably without unionized staff.  2) a government run, publicly accountable transition house, with 24-hour  unionized paid staff, childcare and  reasonable funding security.  We chose the latter option, maintaining  the same demands as those fpught for by  Women Against the Budget in its attempt  to prevent privatization in 1984.  Drena suggested that the occupation was  a sell-out to government, accomplishing  almost nothing in the long run. Drena ;  is a member of Rape Relief, which takes  a rather different view of how to run  social services.  Rape Relief supports a third option, the  model upon which it runs its own house.  That is a model based on:  1) double taxation - getting money from  progessive members ox The community  who already pay taxes for social  services, but pay again because  they want to support services for.  women.  2) non-union, non-paid staff.  3) charging those who use the service,  i.e. battered women who stay at  their house, for room and board  (up. to $10/day—$300/month).  The people who worked in and provided  support to the occupation want to see  government take on that responsibility  for paying for services to battered  women. We persuaded the City of Vancouver to take on that responsibility.  We do not think that qualityi free  service should be sacrificed in order  to maintain so-called autonomy. Rape  Relief disagrees, although they apply  to the city of Vancouver each year  for funding.  We would prefer that merits of that  disagreement be debated up front, in  the feminist press, rather than as a  sideline to criticisms of the NDP in  the left press.  Lisa Price, occupier  Working for  mother's income  Kinesis:  Thank you for printing, in your March  issue bulletin board section, the notice sent in by Beth Shaw and myself  concerning our plan to present the  idea of mothers' income to the federal  Task Force on Childcare.  In view of the article (in the same  issue) on Real Women and their similar  objective, Beth and I would like to  make a clarifying statement: we are in  no way affiliated with this group. We  find most of their policies reactionary  and anti-woman. Our own objective in  supporting the idea of a mothers' income  is to provide low income women the  choice (regardless of marital status) to.  remain home with their children, to  give all mothers financial autonomy,  and to provide women with the choice  of leaving intolerable marriages while  retaining the right to care for their  children themselves, if they so choose.  By the time the next Kinesis  comes out  the Task Force will have been and gone.  We have not, at this point in time,  been told whether or not they will  hear us. However, there are to be  written, as opposed to verbal,- submissions accepted up to June, so anyone willing to work with us on one of  these please contact:  Beth Shaw, General Delivery, Sechelt,  B.C. VON 3A0 or Anne Miles, Box 1216  Gibsons, B.C. VON 1V0'  Thank you for the opportunity to make  our obj ectives clear.  . Sincerely,  Anne Miles  Community  is dangerous  Kinesis:  My name is Catherine. I am a rape victim. I have been raped three times:  at 13 by one man, at 15 by two men and  at 20 by a woman. At 13 I felt shame,  at 15—humiliation,•but at 20 I felt  pain—emotional, physical, sexual  agony.  I cannot afford to trust or love women.  Those two words—love and trust—  have less meaning, to me, than some  truly profane words we use in our everyday language.  The community is dangerous because  rape happens, be it in Vancouver, Toronto, Halifax, etc. Repeatedly I am  told that women don't rape women. That  is the greatest danger—your continuous denial of my existence. I am not  a figment of anyone's imagination  least of all my own. I am here, I exist.  I cannot deny my existence any longer,  not to myself and especially not to you.  I am not a nightmare that will go away  after the morning coffee. You cannot  kick me back into the closet and pretend  that you've never heard of such a thing,  that you imagined it. I won't let you.  I am a victim. I've been a victim of my  father. A victim of men. A victim of  women. I will continue being victimized  by women for as long as you deny my  presence. Open up your hearts and minds.  Let me in.  Catherine  THE  \ftNCOUVER  OUTDOOR  CLUB  FORWOMEN  ORGANIZED AND RUN BY WOMEN  LEARN NEW SKILLS  phone:  Linda     874-4713 30   Kinesis April TO  BULLETIN BOARD  EVENTS  •WOMEN'S SKILLS ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING:  Wednesday, April 16, 7:30 pm. 4340  Carson St., Burnaby. For further info,  or for a ride call Lynne at 430-0450.  •HERBARIUM: Photographs by Joan Fontcu-  berta. April 4-May 4, 1986, opening  reception, April 4, 7:30-10 pm. Presentation House Gallery, 333 Chesterfield Ave., North Vancouver, B.C.  V7M 3G9 (604) 986-1351  •BARBARA STEINMAN'S PIECE "CENOTAPHE",  a symbolic tomb, will open to the  public on February 28th at the Presentation House Gallery: Cenotaphe  is  a tribute to those whose history remains unrecorded, and is part of  Luminous Sites,  an exhibition of video  installations taking place in Vancouver  galleries. Exhibition dates: Feb. 28-  March 30, 1986.  •VANCOUVER CENTENNIAL PEACE FESTIVAL,  APRIL 19-27 The city of Vancouver, the  Vancouver Centennial Commission, and  members of the End the Arms Race Coalition are sponsoring the largest and  most intensive peace and disarmament  event in Canadian history. The 9-day  festival will bring together such  international experts as John Kenneth  Galbraith and ordinary citizens, to  develop strategies for preventing  nuclear war.  •INTERNATIONAL PEACE FILM FESTIVAL April  18-24. The Ridge Theatre will host  this festival of 14 feature-length  films on themes of war and peace. Tickets: $5/per double bill or $15 for a  Peace Film Festival Pass (special rates  for students and seniors).  •PEACE AND DISARMAMENT SYMPOSIUM April  24-26 This symposium offers an opportunity to hear the ideas and strategies  of experts on the subject of peace and  disarmament. Orpheum Theatre. Ticket  info. 873-7299.  •VANCOUVER WALK FOR PEACE April 27. The  climax of the Peace Festival will be the  annual Walk for Peace. The walk this  year begins at both Kitsilano Beach  and Cambie Street to converge at B.C.  Place where there will be an indoor  rally with speakers, music and the  presentation of the "Vancouver Peace  Proposals", a document detailing Vancouver's strategy for peace. For further  info. 736-2366.  fOUR IMMIGRANT LAWS information workshop  sponsored by the People's Law School.  Frog Hollow Neighbourhood House, 2131  Renfrew St. 7:30-9:30 pm Mon. April 7,  phone: 734-1126  •INTERNATIONAL DAY OF SOLIDARITY WITH  SALVADORAN WOMEN May 10 dinner at La  Quena. Bring your mother. For more  details call Pat 255-3848. May 31—  benefit dance at Ukranian Hall. Music  by Ginger Group and Women's Jazz Blues  Band. Sponsored by Friends of AMES.  •WOMEN AND THE CHARTER information  session sponsored by People's Law  School. Kits Neighbourhood House, 2305  W. 7th Ave. Info. 734-1126. Tuesday  April 8  •FUN RUN FOR REFUGEES, Sunday, April 13,  OXFAM's annual run to raise money for  refugees. The run is 10km. Contact  "■  OXFAM for details: 736-7678.  •WELFARE RIGHTS CLASS - learn about welfare rights, the GAIN Act and regulations. April 12, 7:30 pm Frog Hollow  Neighbourhood House, 2617 E. Broadway,  Vancouver, phone: 875-8616 or 875-8311  for details.  •LESBIAN NETWORKING IN VANCOUVER HAS  BEGUN: next meeting April 17, 7:30  pm at VLC, Commercial at Venables.  Networking meetings will be held  on the 3rd Thursday of each month.  "What makes an issue a lesbian  issue" is one of the topics to be  dicussed April 17. All lesbian groups  and individuals welcome.  •MARGOT IZARD AND THE TALKING FREDS  April 11th, 8 pm., La Quena, 1111  Commercial Drive. Musical-political  satire.  •PEOPLE'S FREE EXPO Saturday May 3rd.  Festival of people's issues and concerns. Free music, theatre and workshops all day. Free food. To be held  at a park near Expo 86 (site not yet  finalized). We urge everyone to attend.  For more info, or if you or your  group want to participate phone:  Em McPherson 255-6252, Anne Beesack  254-9962 or 872-6622 (Wed. and Thurs.)  Essence Vida 255-0160.  SUBMISSIONS  •IN SEARCH OF GREAT FEMINIST MYSTERY  STORIES. Penny Goldsmith, an editor  of Women and Words  and Common Ground,  and Margie Wolfe editor of No Safe  Place  and Still Ain't Satisfied  are compiling a mystery anthology of  short stories and novellas. If you  have one with a progressive perspective please submit before July 1,  1986, to Mystery Anthology c/o 229  College St., Apt. 204, Toronto,  Ontario, M5T 1R4 or  Box 2269, VMPO  Vancouver, B.C. V6B 3W2  •CALL FOR ARTIST to contribute works for  art exhibition Peacestrokes, to benefit  the women of El Salvador. Volunteers  also needed to help organize. Contact  Jennifer Fog 874-2723. Sponsored by  Friends of AMES.  •LOOKING FOR CONTRIBUTIONS and input to  the new Women's Music Resource Network  in Vancouver, at the Vancouver Lesbian  Centre. Will include music corner with  various instruments and resources, a  general communication and gathering of  women's music herstory, both locally  and internationally. Meetings will begin  in early March. For info, phone Nadine  at 327-8534 or VLC 254-8458.  CAROL  WRIGHT  DESIGNER + BUILDER  TELEPHONE: 876-9788  OCTOPUS  BOOKS  INEXPENSIVE QUALITY BOOKS  HARD TO GET ART, SOCIAL 1  UTERART MAGAZINES  t JOURNALS  UPRISING  BREADS  BAKERY  Vancouver's Best  Wholeqrain Breads  1697 VENABLES ST.  VANCOUVER, BC  V5L2H1 (604)254-5635  LAWYER  Susan Richter  B.Sc. L.L.B.  Preferred Areas of Practice  Family Law  Employment Law  Commercial Law  Civil & Criminal Litigation  Languages Spoken —  German & English  Free Initial Consultation  in Association with  DeBou, Wood, Wexler & Maerov  500 - 845 Cambie St.  Vancouver, B.C. V6B 2P4  CL/4RE  SIGNPAINTER  GRAPHIC TECHNICIAN  COMMUNICATING DESIGN  254 • 8892  CCEC  CREDIT  UNION  "CCEC works for community development.  We offer reduced interest loans to our member  cooperative, housing and advocacy associations.  CCEC Credit Union:  Keeping your money in your community."  And now we pay interest!  Call for more information.  876-2123  33 East Broadway  Vancouver, B.C. V5T 1V4  Mon. & Wed. llam-5pm.  Friday 1pm-7 pm - BULLETIN BOARD  GROUPS  •RUNNERS, COME RUN WITH US local women's  soccer team starting a running club. Week  nights or week end. Runners from the  women's community welcome. For more information 734-0658.  •LESBIANS WHO LIVE WITH TEENS: We meet  about once every 3 weeks. Some of us  are moms. Some of us are not moms but  live with and have relationships with  teens. This is an open support/rap/  venting group where problems of mothering  and relationships with teenagers are  dealt with from the perspective of being  lesbian. If you would like to attend callg  Janie or Jackie at 291-0703 or Janet or  Judy at 876-8446.  •SINGLE MOTHER'S SUPPORT GROUP: Little  Mountain Neighbourhood House, 3981 Main  Street, Monday nights, 5-6:30 pm pot luck  dinner; 6:30-8:00 pm Group. Child care  available. $1.00 per family. 879-7104  (Sheena or Barbara).  •INTERESTED IN WOMEN'S NON-VIOLENT CIVIL  DISOBEDIENCE on Nanoose Test Range?  Especially needed are boaters. Please  contact Sunshine, 752-5380, mornings  or write C-20, Site 260, RR//2, Qualicum  Beach, VOR 2T0.  •WEST END WOMEN'S MARTIAL ARTS club  meets Sundays at 3:30 pm at the West  End Community Centre. Come join us!  All styles welcome. Free! Phone 654-  2747.  •KARATE FOR WOMEN instructor with 15  years experience is leading classes  now. Emphasis on self-defence. Non-  militaristic, non-competitive. Come  join us! For more info. 685-2747, ask  for Lynn Calvert.  •VANCOUVER UNEMPLOYMENT ACTION CENTRE,  is loojjgjnjgjj^pjg volunteers to serve  on Ministry of Human Resources appeal  tribunals on behalf of welfare recipients. Some knowledge of the GAIN  Act and regulations is necessary. Call  875-8616 or write VUAC 17 E. Broadway, Vancouver, B.C. V5T 1V4  •BENEFIT NIGHT FOR WOMEN'S SOCCER April  24th, 8 pm-2 am. Lotus Hotel. Cover-  charge $1.00.  •PRESS GANG PRINTERS IS LOOKING FOR  WOMEN interested in volunteering,  primarily to do bindery work. We are  asking for a minimum four months  commitment of one day a week. We will  provide five or six evening training  sessions, which will include a discussion of Press Gang's history and '  politics, an overview of the print-  int process, and a more detailed  training in bindery and some aspects  of pre-press work. Training will  start in May. If interested, please  contact Marilyn at 253-1224.  MISCELLANEOUS  •WE ARE 2 WOMEN: looking for others to  form an original/political/dance band. We  play guitar, bass, drums, keys etc. etc.  and sing but can't do it all at once.  Influences: highlife, reggae, hardcore  calypso, garage band...call 872-4251 or  327-8534.  B.C.'s only unionized travel agency.  7L7  TRAVEL UNLIMITED  ELLEN FRANK  •MUSIC FOR NICARAGUA! Music for Nicaragua,  a component of Tools for Peace, was founded  last year by a group of Vancouver cultural  workers to collect musical instruments,  sound equipment and funds for use in  Nicaragua. If you have instruments of any  description in repairable shape, audio  equipment or sound equipment, please  bring it to: Folk Festival Office, 3271  Main St., Vancouver. Get  involved! The  people of Nicaragua need your aid!  •TRANSFORMATION - A NEW CANADIAN PUBLICATION, with a class perspective on social  change. In our first issues: "The Politics of the Pro-Choice Movement: When  'abortion' Becomes a Dirty Word,"; "Class  Realities in the Canadian Women's Movement,'  "The Feminine Mystique: The Fantasy of  the Women's Peace Movement." Subscription  (6 issues): $15. Sample copy: $3.00.  Write Box 1983, Saskatchewan, S7K 3S5.  •WORK EXCHANGE ON HERB FARM. Please  contact Sunshine 752-5380 mornings  or write C-20, Site 260, RR#2,  Qualicum Beach, VOR 2T0  •IF ANYONE KNOWS WHERE KRIS ROBERTSON  is or can pass this message along...  (Kris was a former folksinger at the  "Chat Noir" in Gastown, 1972) She  had 3 children. Have her write Gaye  Chahl, 493 Baker Dr. Quesnel, B.C.  V2J 1L2  •LESBIAN EDITOR SEEKS MATERIAL for  book exploring friendships between  lesbains who are not lovers. Discuss  play, work, growing-up, coming-out,  separations, family bonds, commitment,  betrayal, humor, aging, raising  children, affection etc. Send life  stories, drawings/graphics, photos-,  headlines, taped conversations, essays,  poems, songs, prayers etc. to Carol-  Jean Pint, 1050 Title Insurance  Building, 400 Second Ave. South,  Minneapolis, MN 55401.  •FINDING A JOB IS HARD WORK: A five  part video series including—Women and  work (22 minutes); Assertiveness (20  minutes); Decision Making & Goal  Setting (15 minutes); Transferring  Skills to a resume (14 minutes);  interview skills (19 minutes). These  videos were produced with low income  women in mind. They deal with current  issues affecting women entering or reentering the work place. They feature  visible minorities, women with English  as a second language, women of White  and, Native origin. If you are interested  in purchasing these tapes or if you  would like more info..please contact:  Project Starting Over, 197-204 Second  Ave., Williams Lake, B.C. V2G 1Z5  398-6011  •Kinesis NEEDS VOLUNTEER women to translate  periodicals in German, French, Spanish and  Hebrew. Please, give us a call at 873-5925.  •LOOKING FOR TWO FEMINISTS or woman  with one child to share 3 bedroom  house. Located at 21st and Cambie.  Partly furnished, fireplace, basement.  $232 per month. Call Maureen 879-9721.  Avail. April 1st.  •SAVE $$$ - CONTRACT ASSIGNMENTS newsletters, P.R., photojournalism, fund-  raising. Expertise at reasonable rates.  Write: Box # 59371, Stat. L. Vancouver  V6P 6E6, Ms. Richards, 274-4096.  •BED AND BREAKFAST FOR WOMEN ONLY on  Quadra Island. Waterfront home, beautiful view, private bath. 5 hours from  Vancouver. Write Susan: Box 119,  Quathiaski Cove, B.C. VOP 1N0 or call  (604) 285-3632.  " »WANTED TO: SHARE a mature quiet woman  to share furnished house in Surrey.  Close to transportation and shopping.  Preferably a non-smoker. Owner travels  a lot and needs a responsible person  to look after small animals. Call  Keryn for more info, at 588-2048 (h)  591-6747 "(w).  •NEW LESBIAN S/M CLUB will meet Wednesday, April 16th at 8 pm at the Shaggy  Horse (upstairs) 818 Richards. Not a  pro/con discussion group regarding  the politics of lesbian s/m.  •COMMUNITY SOUND SERVICES: Complete  three-way P.A. plus operators and  truck, available at socialist rates.  Phone Communique 253-6222.  •FEMINIST THERAPIST: FOCUS ON ISSUES RELATED TO WOMEN, substance use, addiction  and abuse, overeating and undereating.  Group, individual and "family" counselling. M.A. Clinical Psychology, sliding  scale. Susan Boyd, 251-1710.  •HOUSECLEANING AND YARDWORK: Professional, reliable, unique cleaning. Bondable,  references on request. $9.00/hour, call  Jade, 251-1710.  •WOMAN.LOOKING FOR 1 bedroom sublet in a  corop as soon as possible call Joanne  736-7678 or 253-2720.  •HOUSE WANTED IN VANCOUVER for May 1st,  two-three bedrooms, unfinished basement  or other suitable space for pottery  studio. Reasonable rent. Excellent references. Call Mary or Heather, collect  after 5 pm, 792-0808 (Fraser Valley).  •TREAT YOURSELF TO A TAROT READING  .either in your home or mine. $10  for an hour-long reading. Call Teresa  at 685-4148 evenings or weekends.  •VOLUNTEER CO-ORDINATOR: POSITION AVAILABLE now at Battered Women's Support  Services. Call 734-1574, for more  information.  •FEMINIST N/S VEGITARIAN women seeks  shared accom. Kits area May 1. Sublet OK, call Leslie, 734-2953.  CLASSIFIED  •MOTORCYCLE FOR SALE. 1981 Yamaha, 400  Special II. New tires, battery etc.,  runs well, parked inside. Call Isis  873-4251.  •SORWUC MAY DAY CELEBRATION Thursday, May  1st 7-9:30 pm at La Quena. Speakers/Singers/Poetry and Raffle. Admission - raffle  ticket stub or price of one (3 for $1).  Everyone welcome.  <£MACPHE%SON <£MOTORS  885E8thAvc,Van.  876-6038  BYAPPOINTMENT  cAHceoMacphersoii  licensed mechanic  Classifieds and Notices  Kinesis classified are $3 for individuals and $6 for groups.  iWoritaM&trfed length* 10-30 flfords. Deadline 20th of month.  There is no charge for announcements. Deadline is 23rd  of the month. Kinesis recommends announcements appear  in the issue one month before the event, especially if it  happens near the beginning of the month.  Please do not p  n your ads.  Isadora's Cooperative Restaurant  Come to our  Rain  Festival1.  Last 2 weds in April  1540 Old Bridge- Street  Granvifle Island • 681-8816 LODKWHXrS  HAPPENING  HERE!  Kinesis|nvites the world!  Explore tomorrow's world today.  Discover amazing facts about  fascinating issues.  Be introduced to scores of superstars.  XMESfS W MOTION-  KIM S/J IN'TOUCH  Share the excitement with your friends  in this once-in-a-lifetime  offer!      Subscribe now!  Published 10 times a year  by Vancouver Status of Women  400A West 5th.Ave., Vancouver, BC V5Y1J8  "22*§r  □ VSW Membership - $23 (or what you can afford)  □ Kinesis subscription only - $17.50  □ Institutions - $45 D Sustainers - $75  D Here's my cheque D New  □ Bill me □ Renewal  □ Gift subscription for a friend  includes Kinesis subscriptioi