 Kinesis  vol 6 no 10  wmi coLiecTioKS  Vancouver status of women  0M.M   w 1  1 RISQN  " JUSTICE  " &&*_  x..,.j m  t   Women observing a 24 hour Vigil  and Fast outside Oakalla to  mark National Prison Justice  Day, August 10 1977.  WHILE THERE IS A  LOWER CLASS 1 AM  IN lTf WHILE THERE  15 A CRIMINAL Elf  MENT I AM OF n",  WHILE THERE 15 A  50UL IN PRISON  I AM NOT  FREE. ¬a GENE DEBS  at VSW,       kjnesis means change RAPE*  FEMINISTS  ORGANIZE  The Pappajohn rape trial has generated much public interest.  For days  women from every political orientation sat through the proceedings  listening, taking notes, meeting at  breaks to talk, review and analyze  the preceding events of our supposed  justice system.  For all of us the  trial was a learning experience on  many levels. We were there in moral  support of the victim and it would  not be unreasonable to say that the  presence of so many women including  some well-known public figures like  Rosemary Brown and Simma Holt, made  an impression on the members of the  Court.  However, it has become apparent that  women's involvement in trials such  as this, should not be limited to a  one-time effort. We need to monitor all the rape trials across B.C.  to support the victim and to become  aware how the justice system functions against the rights and concerns of women.  This can only be  accomplished by an active involvement by women who would monitor  these trials on a volunteer basis.  As part of our policy of positive  action, we are now organizing and  compiling a list of women who will  attend these trials.  We need names,  addresses and phone numbers, so  that we have a lengthy list from  which to draw our resources.  If you want to monitor any part of  a rape trial, please send this  information to Mieke Hamer at Vancouver Status of Women, 2029 W. 4 th  CONVICTED RAPIST spends weekend in jail  A WEALTHY VANCOUVER BUSINESSMAN,  George Pappajohn, was convicted  of rape in the Provincial Supreme  Court on August 20th. He was sentenced to three years in jail. By  the following Monday he was out  on $15,000 bail, with appeals pending.  We do not need to recapitulate upon  the intimate details. The woman went  to the rapist's house because he was  a business contact. He wanted her to  have sex. She did not consent. He  raped her repeatedly; he tied and  gagged her. This was an utterly typical rape case. 75% - 80% of all cases  involve acquaintances who cannot hear  that no means no.  "You're a Female  Chauvinist and I'm  Going to Break  You."  G.  Pappajohn to Victim  Aug.   4,   1976  Overall conviction rate in rape  cases brought to trial is 56%,  but the rate of conviction when  the rapist is known to the victim  is much lower. (Compare this fig  ure with an 87% conviction rate  in trials involving aggravated  assault.)  It must be recognized that the  victim possessed many class advantages. She is white, middle-  class,and she had the support of  many prominent women in Vancouver.  Even so, .she had very great difficulty in bringing the rape to  trial. For one year, she pursued  the matter in the face of legal  delays and outright harassment.  Her determination and perserver-  ance won her the support of women  He said, "You are a  Cold Person and  Too Independent."  from all economic levels. She endured the incredible humiliation  of having her private life pushed  around on the court-room floor.  But she won. Not just for herself,  but for us all.  The jury accepted the victim's  testimony that she resisted verbally. Inferences by the defense  that she was 'crying rape' proved  useless. The accused contended  that the woman had offered only  token resistance. But for once,  the jury did not accept this as  a justification. For once, NO  MEANT NO!  The women who attended the trial  in solidary with the raped woman  will be able to use this victory  which she won for us. We will use  it to express the same solidarity  for all women, especially women  who are poor and who belong to  racial minorities. For each woman, the chances of getting the  rape to trial, and of winning a  conviction, will be that much  better.  Rape, as this trial indicated clearly, is a matter of power, not of  sexual gratification. The rapist  wants to show himself who's boss.  Rape is assault against a woman,  and should be re-located under the  criminal code as assault. Write  Justice Minister Ron Basford,  Parliament Buildings, Ottawa, and  tell him so. (For the details of  the trial, see an excellent article  by Suzanne Fournier, Province p.l  '22/8/77)  She asked him,   "why are you doing this"  "Because I'm Up  Here and You're  Down There." kfoesis  august      1977  ISSN 0317 - 9095  Vol.Vll, #10  MEMBERSHIP DONATION  INSTITUTIONAL SUB: $15 p.a.  INDIVIDUAL SUB: $8.00 or, if less, what  you can afford.  PLEASE TICK ONE:  Subscriber Only:  Member:  Renewal:  Indicate clearly if you wish to be  a member and subscriber, or a subscriber  only. Membership in VSW is by donation.  In determining your donation, please  balance your own financial situation  with the fact that VSW receives only  partial funding.  KINESIS costs 50cents in bookstores.  You can help our sub. base by delivering  free copies in your community. Call VSW  and we'll send you some : 736 3746.  KINESIS is published monthly by the Vancouver Status of Women.. Its objective  are to enhance understanding about the  changing position of women in society  and to work actively towards achieving  change.  Views expressed in KINESIS are those of  the writer and do NOT necessarily reflectf  VSW policy. All unsigned material is  the responsibility of the KINESIS editorial and production crew.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status  of Women, 2029 West 4th Ave, Vancouver,  B.C. V6J 1N3  SUBMISSIONS: VSW welcomes submissions  from the feminist community and in part-  iclar, from VSW members. We do reserve  the right to edit, and submission does  not guarantee publication. Include a  SASE if you want your work returned.  WORKERS ON THIS ISSUE: Miriam Azrael,  Janet Beebe, Meike Hamer, Gayla Reid,  Patsy Tryon.  Cover: Meike Hamer; p.l Women: A Journal of Liberation; p. 2 Peg Averill,  LNS; p,3 Su Freidrich,LNS; p.4 Second  Wave; p.5 Second Wave; p.6 Pat Halle  Women: A Journal of Liberation;p. 7  Union Maids Film; p.8 SA LNS; p.9  Hamer photos; p.10 Peg Averill LNS  & The Guardian-MPOC Bulletin; p.12  Peg Averill,  LNS; p.13 LNS; p.14 Coop Radio; p.15 Peg Averill LNS; p.  16 Emergency Librarian; p.17 Women's  Agenda,  The Health and Abortion Committee; p. 18 Peg Averill,  LNS,  p.19  Su Freidrich; cover design: Meike  Hamer; Debs quote: Women Behind Bars.  sciBscRiBe et  LetteRs  sciRoioe  KINESIS:  In last month's KINESIS was a request (excerpted from the Women  Against Rape newsletter) for women  to request statistics on rape and  sexual offenses from their local  R.C.M.P. offices.  It was also  pointed out in the article that  there may be some difficulty obtaining some of the required statistics.  Because I work with crime statistics all the time, I would like to  contribute some information about  the way they are collected, and to  offer my assistance to those trying  to obtain statistics on these offenses .  First of all, local R.C.M.P. offices  only collect specific statistics on  the number of "founded" and "unfounded" cases, together with the  number of persons charged. These  statistics are collected for every  crime category on a monthly basis,  and assembled by Statistics Canada.  Statistics for every police detachment in B.C. are collected by the  B.C. Police Commission, and we would  be very happy to provide information  on request, as far as it is available.  Statistics for what happens  after a charge is laid are usually  not kept by the police. Anything  from then on is up to the courts. I  doubt if people trying to get court-  related information will have much  luck asking their local R.C.M.P. for  it, but they might try their local  Court Administration office.  The information on type of assault,  geographical location, circumstances  surrounding assault, etc. is, for  the most part, not available in  statistical form. As you probably  know, there is a very good report by  Lorenne Clark and Debra Lewis recently published by the University of  Toronto's Centre of Criminology which  has this kind of information in detail. The publication is called "A  Study of Rape in Canada" (Phases C  and D) and should be available from  the Centre of Criminology. These  two researchers spent two years or  more analyzing Vancouver rape files  and did similar work previously to  that, in Toronto.  Although the  breakdown on rape situation refers  to an urban environment, some of  the specifics would, I'm sure, be  relevant and informative, with some  surprises. Lorenne Clark was interviewed as part of the Rape Prevention film now being made here in  B.C., sponsored by Rape Relief and  the B.C. Police Commission, and with  the help of the National Film Board.  Furthermore, there are several  other research projects concerning  rape which I personally have encountered this summer, sponsored by the  universities, United Way, and the  Federal Solicitor General's department.  I think it would be useful if  someone, as part of this survey on  rape, collected information on just  what research jls_ going on, because  there is a lot here in B.C., without  even looking at other provinces.  In the U.S., there is a national  centre set up for monitoring information on rape projects, and they  have hundreds. A similar "clear-  usuo  or, grzoups  JOIN A CONSCIOUSNESS-RAISING GROUP  Groups begin September at VSW.  To  join, phone JUDI at 736 3746 and  leave your name.  inghouse" for this kind of information would be most useful.  The search for more information on  rape is important.  But further than  this, the attitude toward this crime  obviously needs more attention.  In  this field, the police are only a  part of the social-service chain  which includes the medical professions in examination and treatment  of rape victims, the legal profession, which defends and prosecutes  the victims and assailants (these  are lumped together deliberately),  the judiciary system, which has  displayed a lack of understanding,  and finally, the public at large,  which can provide the necessary  changes in attitude to influence  the law-makers and the justice system.  In this regard, I would suggest that  women contact their local Justice  Councils and bring up specific concerns about their community to a  Justice Council meeting. Representatives of police, courts corrections  and local town council are usually  members of local Justice Councils.  So it is an efficient established  way of contacting interested people  who are trying to improve the "un-  just-ness" of the Justice System.  Dorthea Atwater  Research Consultant  B.C. Police Commission  KINESIS:  The latest edition of KINESIS, volume 6 number 9 contains, on page 6,  misinformation which I am sure you  will want to correct in a future issue. The Mile Can-Can campaign was  launched by the Ontario Ministry of  the Environment and not by Environment Canada, as stated in your article.  As you are aware, the Government of  Canada is committed to improving the  status of women in Canada, and this  commitment has been publicly stated  many times.  Every effort is being  made to avoid sexist advertising on  behalf of government departments and  agencies.  Dr. Julie Loranger  Coordinator  Status of Women KINESIS page three  BURNS LAKE  WOMEN  Landlord and Tenant  "You don't know what you've got  till it's gone" warns a sign on  the window of Ts'aiku Women's  Centre.  Burns Lake women face eviction from  their Ts'aiku Women's Centre unless  they can dissuade their landlord,  the RCMP, to forego plans to demolish the 3-story house to make way for  a parking lot.  The local RCMP sergeant insists he  has been instructed to provide a  minimum of nine parking spaces for  the present RCMP headquarters next  door and that this necessitates the  removal of the old building now  occupied by the women's centre.  But the women at the centre, whose  lease ran out at the end of June,  have devised a scheme of angle parking whereby the number of spaces  could be increased from 9 to 12, and  they say this complies with department of highway regulations.  The RCMP  claims the 1-way scheme proposed does  not provide for two entrances, as required by the federal department of  public works.  Women say the centre is a vital part  of their lives.  It provides a place  where those who do not live in town  can take their children while they  shop, and it has a quiet room on the  upper floor where nursing mothers can  feed and change their infants.  The  centre is one of very few places in  Burns Lake - indeed, in the Northwest  - where white and native women meet  and work together.  Programs and facilities provided  include a children's playroom, library, exercise room, 1-to-l counselling, and a small store which sells  crafts and clothes at a reasonable  price.  While community agencies and local  social workers agree that the value  of the centre cannot be measured in  terms of parking spots, the mayor of  the town appears to differ.  He has  been quoted as saying that the centre  creates a dependency by relying on  outside funding, which is one of the  things that the current funding body,  Canada Works, frowns on.  But organizer Joyce Hamilton has been  only too well aware of the need to  become self-sufficient.  The thrift  store is a start in this direction,  and some money is raised by charging  a small fee for the use of the upstairs clawfoot bathtub, which is  popular with families who have no  running water at home.  The Burns Lake Centre, like so many  other women's centres, has been obliged by the rules of the funding  game to pursue financial support  from the Secretary of State, LIP  programs and now Canada Works. Now  that it has community support and  federal funding for its vital programs, it would be too bad, but an  apt reflection of our society's  priorities, if it were forced to  cede everything for the sake of a  few cars.  There is no alternative  accommodation for the centre in  Burns Lake.  (NORTHERN TIMES)  d  SAVE VRB  «:  -ROBIN HOOD  The struggle to save the Vancouver  Resources (VRB) continues.  Vancouver Status of Women representatives  were among members of the Vancouver  community who went to Victoria on  August 25th to lobby Premier Bennett.  We presented him with a petition of  30,000 signatures, calling for the  presentation of the VRB.  Bill 65, the legislation that would  kill the VRB, was introduced June 22.  If we can keep the pressure on the  government, it may die on the order  paper.  Keep the letters up.  If  you have time, call your local constituency office and register your  protest.  Continue to hound Bennett  to have this matter taken out of  Vander Zalm's hands.  At SORWUC's Special National Convention, a resolution was unanimously  passed in support of the striking  Robin Hood Flour Mill workers in  Quebec.  Local 1 of SORWUC feels  that the shooting of eight workers  while exercising their legal right  to strike is an outrageous act of  violence against all working people.  These workers felt cor.pelled to  strike after their wage increase of  42c was rolled back by the AIB.  Local I feels that the AIB as well  as management of Robin Hood Flour  Mills is directly responsible for  this act of attempted murder.  It  is a most appalling example of hov  ineffectual the AIB has made our  right Lo collective targaining. We  call on all trade unionists and  working people to boycott Robin  Hood Flour for their flagrant disregard for human life.  (SORWUC)  homosexual non-rights ?  The Homosexual Rights workshop presented August 4 by the Vancouver  People's Law School was a disappointment. There was not enough specific  information, such as - stating certain laws, how they have been interpreted , or how they could be interpreted and what fines, punishments  or consequences were attached. There  was not enough research done to provide a knowledge base that would include case decisions and their implications (not just in B.C. but  throughout Canada), various changes  in laws, or proposed changes, trends  and directions.  The orientation presented by Diana  Davidson (the lecturer) was one of  winning the case, but not establishing precedent in favour of homosexuals. The strategy of winning includes: a straight front, denial  that you are gay, playing the game  according to society's and the  court's rules - do this and you have  a chance. This strategy was put  forth as "realistic". You may win,  but not as a homosexual. Have  changes occurred for any minority  with this approach? A definite  paradox arose: win the case, but  lose your integrity and self-worth,  and no gains for homosexuals; lose  the case (maybe your child, job or  house), but keep your integrity and  identity, and no gains for homosex  uals (at least legally).  Bleak,  isn't it? And a bleak picture was  drawn. Perhaps, the next Homosexual  Rights Workshop, and I hope there  will be another (attendance certainly warrants it) will not have  just one presentation, but two or  three, and definitely someone with  a political perspective.  One important item of discussion was  the significance of the GATE (Gay  Alliance Toward Equality) Decision.  First, the decision by the B.C. Supreme Court has left homosexuals with  no rights.  Secondly, by allowing  reasonable cause it allows other  groups to be discriminated against  as well.  (Reasonable cause being  when an individual's moral or religious code is offended; or reasonable bias being majority of public  opinion.) This judicial decision  leaves a rather large hole in the  B.C. Human Rights Code because it  leaves room for discrimination which  is just what it was designed to prevent. The truth is that it is impossible to discriminate against  homosexuals in the Human Rights Code  without discriminating against others.  Hopefully, the Canadian Supreme Court  will see this, even though the B.C.  Supreme Court didn't. However, until that decision is reversed we have  no rights by law. KINESIS page four  The Pie  Nationally, the average income rose  11% to $13,805 in 1975 from $12,437  the previous year.  Average family  income reached $16,613, up 12.0%;  for individual males, $10,865 (11%);  and for females, $4,788 (13%).  One in 10 males surveyed reported  government transfer parents as the  main source of income compared with  one in four females.  Only 39% females reported working 50 weeks of  the year against 60% of males.  Of both males and females, those at  the lower end of the scale received  a 2.5% share of the aggregate income  of all individuals and those at the  highest received a 47.9% share. Males  made up the bulk of high income recipients (91.2%) and females were  predominant in the low bracket (68.8%),  Families living on low incomes in  Canada in 1975 rose to 11.8% of all  families surveyed.  Low income families headed by males increased to  9.2% but the proportion of families  headed by females falling below the  low income cut-offs decreased from  41% to 40%.  Estrogen, Progestin  Warnings  NEW YORK (LNS) - The Food and Drug  Administration (FDA) ordered on July  20 that estrogen and progestin drugs  - prescribed to more than 3 million  women annually - carry warnings as  of September 21.  The estrogen drugs are largely prescribed to menopausal women, supposedly to reduce menopause-related  symptoms; and to retard aging - for  which the drug has been found to be  ineffective.  The most widely sold  brand is Premarin.  The warnings will inform women that  use of the drugs is related to cancer  of the uterus.  The estrogen brochure  will state that the drug is ineffective against nervousness, depression  or restoring youthfulness in menopause, and the progestin "when taken  in early pregnancy can increase the  risk of birth defects...such as heart  defects and deformed legs and arms,  and that there are safer and more  rapid pregnancy tests."  According to two national medical,  surveys, the incidence of cancer of  the uterus has skyrocketed since  1970, mirroring the simultaneous  growth of estrogen treatments.  Progestin drugs are prescribed  largely to prevent miscarriages  and in pregnancy tests.  However,  the drug has been found to be ineffective in preventing miscarriages  and has been linked to serious birth  defects when taken during pregnancy.  The most common brands are Delalutin,  Duphaston, Morlutate, Norlutin, and  Provera.  Estrogen production has yielded high  profits for drug companies, with  1973 sales reaching $69 million.  Ayerest Laboratories, the makers of  Premarin, have been responsible  for much of the unfounded claims of  estrogen's "therapeutic" effects.  (LNS, 8.5.77)  ueajs in bri&F  y  South Africa  A white South African farmer has  been jailed for five years in  Vereeniging for having intercourse  with a black woman in exchange for  eggs and pig-fat.  Inter-racial sex  is illegal in South Africa because  it contravenes their Immorality Act.  There is nothing in South African  law, however, which discusses the  immorality of a woman being so poor  that she will submit to intercourse  in order to obtain basic necessities.  If the woman had been white, such an  activity would not be considered  immoral. (WR)  Name the Rapist  The names of men who have faced rape  charges were publicized by women in  Dallas in early March as part of a  counter-attack against the city's  rapists.  Twenty-five thousand copies of a one-issue newspaper were  produced containing the names of  more than 2,000 local men. Many of  the women who spent seven months  poring over court records to make up  the list were themselves rape victims.  They saw giving rapists unwanted publicity in this way as the  only means of combatting the apathy  of authorities where abuse of women  is concerned. (Daily Telegraph 5.3.  77)  (WR)  Need Less Space?  Years ago psychologists discovered  that female and male rats reacted  quite differently to overcrowding.  Now (Gregory Nicosta in the Journal  of Social Psychology) it seems that  humans do likewise.  Packed into  small rooms men become tense, breathless, sweat a lot, and want to escape,  especially if they actually have to  touch each other. Women don't react  with panic. (Sunday Times 27 Feb)  Bias in the Brain?  Research by Jeannette McGlone of  University of Western Ontario  psychology department has found  sex differences in the organization of women's and men's brains.  Most reviews of brain function say  that verbal abilities depend more  on i \e  left half of the brain  whereas non-verbal functions are  more dependent on the right hemisphere.  However this generalization is based on male-dominated  findings - on male brains.  It now  seems that women's brains are less  rigidly organized. McGlone discovered that men with left hemisphere  damage had impaired verbal capacity  and men with right hemisphere damage had depressed non-verbal performance, whereas women did not show  such a selective deficit with damage to only one side of the brain.  Women seem to use both sides of the  brain in speech abilities, allowing  greater flexibility in case of  damage. (WR)/'  Ireland  A proposed 'family planning' bill,  which would liberalize the Irish  Republic's birth control laws, has  been narrowly defeated.  The majority of three was the smallest yet  to frustrate attempts to alter legislation that permits contraceptives  to be imported for personal use, but  does not allow their sale. (Times  6.5.77) (WR)  Fear of My Life  A new anti-abortion law in the state  of Louisiana defines a person as 'a  human being from the moment of fertilization and implantation', allowing  murder charges to be brought against  women who have abortions.  The  American Civil Liberties Union has  filed a suit to prevent the enforcement of this law. (Health Right III,  2 - Spring 1977)  Uruguay  A law proposed to the Council of  State in Uruguay will severely limit the use and sale of contraceptives  there.  The birth rate is falling,  so the military authorities, who took  power after the economic crisis of  the late 60s, plan to pass legislation to force women to have more  children.  It would also help them  ,counter the depopulation caused by  many people leaving Uruguay every  year.  The legislation bans the use of contraceptives and any form of birth  control propaganda.  To get contraceptives a woman will need a doctor's  certificate to say that having children seriously endangers her health.  Penalties for breaking this law will  be jail sentences of six months to  two years and fines of $100-$1000.  Contraceptives can now be bought at  the chemist and the pill has been on  sale since 1963. An estimated one  in five women of childbearing age in  Uruguay uses the pill. (Spare Rib,  June 1977)  Liechtenstein  Meanwhile women in Liechtenstein  have merely voted for the first  time - on April 17.  A law adopted  by Parliament last year gave the  individual Assemblies of the principality's communes the power to  allow their women to vote on communal matters (Times 18.4.77). (WR)  Whose Freedom?  A long obscenity trial in Cincinnati  ended with the publisher of an explicit 'girlie' magazine being convicted of peddling obscene material  and engaging in organized crime.  Larry Flynt, an overnight millionaire as a result of his pornographic  publications, was sentenced to 25  years jail and fined nearly 6,000  pounds (Daily Telegraph 9.2.77).  Before sentence, Flynt said he was  proud of what he had done for the  "fight for freedom".  He must mean  his freedom to make a fortune out  of the exploitation of women's bodies.  (WR) KINESIS page fi.ve .  BREAKING THE HOLD  BREAKING THE HOLD, A Booklet About  Rape Prevention, by Diana Smith and  Veronica Woollacott has just been  published by Vancouver Rape Relief.  This superb booklet costs $1.00.and  is distributed by Press Gang Publishers . You can order bulk copies from  them at 821 East Hastings, Vancouver.  This booklet was produced by Vancouver Rape Relief with the assistance  of a federal make-work scheme, a  Local Initiative Project.  It is primarily for women, because we are the  group most affected by rape.  It is  also for men who want to work to eliminate rape.  On these pages, we precis major sections of the booklet in the hope that  you will want to buy the booklet,  The next preliminary section defines  the vocabulary of rape, setting up  the distinctions between assault/  assert; history/herstory and so on.  It offers two definitions of RAPE:  RAPE (as used in this booklet) is  any form or degree of sexual assault against a person.  RAPE (section 143 of the Criminal  Code): a male person commits rape  when he has sexual intercourse  with a female person who is not  his wife, a) without her consent,  or b) with her consent if the consent i) is extorted by threats  or fear of bodily harm...  In tracing the HERSTORY of rape,  Smith and Woollacott find that rape  is not an isolated phenomenon but  part of a whole pattern of abuse.  ty to being an abuse against collective man, the Crown.  This makes the  woman an accomplice to rape, rather  than a victim."  Accordingly, "any woman's credibility  as an honest and innocent person was  questioned and, until 1976 in Canada,  expressed legally in the judge's instructions to the jury that it is  unsafe to believe the testimony of  the woman without supporting evidence.'  Consistently throughout history,  "Rape, is and has been, also a common  tactic used to terrorize and intimidate the enemy. At the same time it  is an opportunity for the invading  soldiers to display and assert their  manhood.  }%$$$ 'wtether wmt\ sfauld &*?*&&  Ihwe, *> chotee^ *wh«n oar cWiee ia-fc>  5ft *iwi i>* p*vekc4 oH©* &)K+ Ittvefc,.  read the whole thing, and spread the  word.  BREAKING THE HOLD, with its  clear feminist perspective, is relevant continent-wide, not just in B.C.  In the Introduction, the authors explain how and why they have divided  their material into three sections:  "The first section attempts to set  the scene.  We give a brief herstor-  ical overview of sexual assault,  focusing on our sex-role conditioning as a partial explanation of this  violence against women and an account  of how some women are attempting to  stop this abuse.  "The second section deals with what  we, as individuals, can do to prevent harm to ourselves and our children. We stress the need to change  the attitudes, both our own and other  people's, that make us rely on others  instead of ourselves for protection,  thus forfeiting our own ability to  maintain, or regain control in potentially harmful situations. Also included is a short description of  what to expect 'should we be the victim of a sexual assault.  "The third section emphasizes organized group action as the only really  effective way to eliminate sexual assault. Realizing the potential of  strength-in-numbers is the first  step in effecting change."  RAPE: JUST ONE OF THE FORMS OF  VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN  Sexual assault, the authors emphasize, is only one of the many forms  of violence directed against women.  They comment: "Whether looking at  the word, the law, or the act itself, rape, historically, has been  seen as abuse of property."  RAPE IS PROPERTY DAMAGE  Rape is property damage. This is  the thinking that lies behind the  following miserable distinctions:  "...the law considers that vaginal  penetration by a penis deserves a  maximum sentence of life imprisonment, yet classifies vaginal penetration with an object, such as a  broom handle or a bottle, as a lesser offense, deserving only a maximum sentence of five years, becomes  less a mystery when we see that the  laws were designed to protect, not  women or their rights,  but the property value of chastity."  Very briefly, the HERSTORY section  looks at ancient laws concerning  rape.  "Assyrian law gave the father  of a raped virgin the right to violate the wife of the rapist.  Meanwhile Hebrew law dictated that a  raped woman be stoned to death if  she was raped within the ci£y limits; the implication being that a  "good" woman would have screamed and  been rescued or else died fighting."  Canadian law, they explain, stems  from early English law of the 13th  century, which was forged to protect  propertied virgins. In Canada today  it is still impossible for a husband  to rape his wife, in the eyes of the  law. Rape has shifted from being an  abuse of an individual man's proper-  "A recent example of mass rape committed by United States forces was seen  in Vietnam and is well outlined in  Women of Vietnam  by Arlene Eisen  Bergman.  She summarizes the chapter  on rape by the following:  'In short,  the rape which was rampant  in Vietnam   was bred in the United  States where it is not a problem of  natural biology or psychopathology or  a breakdown of law and order.    It is  part of a carefully woven net of capitalism, racism and sexism that traps  all oppressed people - but devours  women. '  From a feminist perspective, we can  understand that sex-role stereotyping  "creates men with rapist mentalities  and women with victim mentalities",  with the entire economic and societal  structure supporting and profiting  from the female/male polarization.  RAPE IS ABOUT POWER,  NOT SEX  These sex-role stereotypes are supported by a series of myths, which  are designed to mask the fact that  the "rape situation is an enactment  of...unequal power relationship."  The authors list the major myths:  nice girls don't get raped; women  ask for it; rape is a sex crime committed by men with uncontrollable  sexual drives...and so on.  "These myths, plus the ever-present  threat of rape, conspire to hold  every woman in her oppressed place."  It was not until the resurgence of  the women's movement that rape was  actively confronted for what it is. KINESIS page s-vx  The support by the women's movement  of Inez Garcia is indicative of the  kind of strong, collective confrontation which women in the movement  are capable of making. Vancouver  Rape Relief is a local example of  organized action against rape. Smith  and Woollacott conclude their first  section with a brief description of  the way the group functions; their  collective philosophy and their  community services.  The seccnd section, INDIVIDUAL ACTION FOR CHANGE, t^llc us ;:hac we  can du, individually, to break the  hold society has upon us. We can  develop a positive self-image, refusing to play the role of victim.  We can exercise our rights on the  street, combatting 'soft rape'.  Soft rape is the assault of the "hey  baby, whatchs doing, what's happening" variety.  Soft rape, or date  rape as it is sometimes called, is  as Woollacott and Smith point out,  an experience familiar to countless  women.  The suggestions which the authors  offer are realistic, useful and  simple.  For example, they write,  "it might be interesting to see how  convincing your 'no' really is, by  practising saying it in front of a  mirror cr to a friend.  If you or  they are not convinced, keep practising it until it is clear that  NO MEANS NO.  "The ultimate preventative measure  would be for many women to express  themselves freely,   to walk,   drive,  drink publicly,  and meet with men so  that it becomes so usual to see women doing these things that they  cannot possibly be defined as unusual in any way from all women. "  We're Mad as Hell  FIGHT BACK.  The booklet says: "The  most immediately effective form of  rape prevention is self-defence...  It is time for women not only to be  their own protectors but for them to  encourage this attitude in their  daughters...Self-defence courses  must be made available in their  schools as well as in the rest of  the community.  If this is not happening in your area, push for it."  "A good self-defence course will give  you a clearer concept of yourself as  well as useful techniques.  Every  course should include:  a) Using your body offensively or  defensively - punching, blocking,  kicking, jabbing, yelling (as opposed to screaming).  b) Using objects near at hand such  as furniture, umbrellas, books,  brooms.  c) Standing, balanced and ready.  d) Breaking holds and counterattacks.  e) Falling safely.  f) Attacking target areas (vulnerable points).  g) Defences against weapons.  h) Handling difficult situations,  using role playing.  i) Receiving blows and coping with  some pain.  j) Evaluating your clothing for  the freedom of movement it allows.  k) Extensive discussion through  out, and the sharing of personal  experiences.  1) Relaxation exercises and guided fantasy situations.  m) An instructor who believes  that ;;omen c<j.n, did should, defend  themselves and who has a non-sexist  approach.  RAPE PREVENTION FOR CHILDREN - On  this subject, Smith and Woollacott  write:  "If sexuality is discussed and seen  in an open, healthy way it will better enable the child to distinguish  between acceptable or unacceptable  attention and to deal v^ith it accordingly .  "Basically, consistent with the perspective throughout this booklet, we  see sex-role conditioning to be a  primary cause of sexual assault  against children, as well as women.  Consequently it is essential for  children, as well as adults, to be  free of these destructive and limiting role models.  Being assertive  and sensitive to the needs of others  are important positive qualities to  develop, irrespective of the sex of  the person.  We're Not Going to  Take It Any Longer!  "Following are a few ways of helping  children protect themselves:  - discuss with children precautions  to take in various situations and  plan ways of responding in case of  trouble.  - encourage responsibility and caring between each other.  For example  both adults and children knowing  where each other are at any given  time and respecting the concern associated with the desire for this  information.  - teach practical skills like being  able to phone emergency numbers and  to give clear, accurate information  to the operator.  - establish something like a Block  Parent Plan in your neighbourhood  where a network of trusted and safe  houses are established and identifiable to children, where they can go  in case of trouble.  - if attacked, or in danger, teach  a child to call out or to go to a  specific person.  They will be more  likely to get attention this way.  - encourage assertiveness in interactions with people.  It is unfortunate, but necessary to encourage a  discerning attitude toward strangers  with trust being earned and not an  automatic response. Adults are not  always right nor should they be  obeyed without question.  - and, finally  '...For goodness sake,   teach your  child self-defense.    Teach her how  .to use the elbows to jab,  how to  kick shins, pull hair,  slap faces,  and to show some spirit.    I have  watched one fine girl on our- street  defend herself for years.    Her parents work,  so she is alone;  she  can't go home to Mama.    When boys  pulled her pigtails,  she kicked  their shins,  chased those who hit  her with snowballs,  fought her own  battles,  but she fought.'  'Today she is tall,  stately,  strong  but,  above all,  she is respected.  'Get a book on self-defense from  the library and study it and teach  your child how to defend herself.  Give her backbone,  instead of weak  wish bone,  to fight her battles in  life. '"  The section concludes with comments  on how to deal personally with a  rape, should it happen to yourself  or one of your friends.  "It is necessary to realize that a  woman who has been sexually assaulted has been robbed of any control she has over her own existence.  During the attack the woman's overriding concern is the preservation  of her life, or that of her children, as most attackers threaten and/  or hurt their victims, either physically or verbally.'' Friends and  family must realize that women do  not always react in the expected  manner for an 'upset' woman, and  that the raped woman has every right  to express anger. Helpers are advised to be supportive, emphathetic,  encouraging the woman to express her  feelings, and to make her own decisions about what to do next.  Rape  Relief workers are there for emotional support as well as information  about possible courses of action.  The authors list, briefly, the legal  procedures which ensue once the woman has decided to report the rape  to the police.  The third and final section is entitled ORGANIZED ACTION FOR CHANGE.  Rape is just one of the threads that  make up the fabric: rape, murder,  child abuse, poverty - they are ail  related to the economic base of our  society.  Social change can only be  accomplished by working together,  and it is only this long-term transformation of the family, of the  economic system and of women's and  men's inter-relationships, which  will make rape impossible.  Women are the most affected by sexual assault; women, therefore, will  probably initiate most of the proposals for change.  The. section BY  WOMEN summarizes the areas in which  women work against rape - through  public education, through ad hoc  and protest groups, through agitating for reforms ard through support  coalitions with ether related groups  The final sections contain suggestions for men who wish to take responsibility for ending sexual assault, and for the community groups  who are concerned with rapes in  their neighbourhoods.  Buy BREAKING THE HOLD - phone your  library and ask them to stock it;  phone your school library and suggest that it be purchased; send  your friends copies.  At KINESIS  we have read a great deal of the  feminist literature on rape, and  this particular booklet is among  the very best available. KINESIS page seven  union maids  UNION MAIDS is a wonderful, moving  film.  It deals with the lives of  three women labour organizers.  These three women are marvellous:  strong, full of joy, proud of their  struggle and committed to it for  life.  Seeing UNION MAIDS lifted me right  up.  It made organizing a live and  practical thing.  It stressed that  working collectively for social  change is the only worthwhile way  of spending one's time.  Stella, from a Michigan farm, reached Chicago at the height of the Depression. Wages for women were 37  cents an hour, and for men 52 cents.  Her first job, at seventeen, was  butchering at the stockyard.  The  daughter of a socialist, she soon  became involved in the struggle for  some safety measures. With great  zest, she recalls how the packinghouse workers could shut down production; they had power and they  knew how to use it.  She describes  smuggling literature into the yards  under her blouse.  She speaks of CIO  rallies, of shutdowns, of police and  management violence, and of the  courage of her fellow workers. And  her body glows with the memory.  Kate's first job in Chicago was at  a place which made 'men's dispensaries and athletic supporters'.  She  hadn't the faintest idea what they  were. Management tried to force  her to sign a contract reading: "I  am not a union member. As long as  I am an employee of this company I  will not join the union."  Sylvia worked in a laundry.  Black,  and born in New Orleans, her father  was a militant unionist and a Gar-  veyite.  She speaks about the long  hours, seven days a week, in the  laundry.  If you missed any time,  you had to write a written explanation.  Sylvia describes how they  decided to write on their explanation slips: "tired". With energy  and pride, she describes one of the  first sit-downs of the depression  era.  "In those days all black women and  poor whites worked in the laundry.  The management hired a white woman  as a forewoman instead of one of  the workers.  The women got together  and shut down the mangles.  The  women had a confrontation with the  police and they closed down the  laundry."  ORDINARY WOM€N  These are three ordinary women.  There are no old newsreels around  about them; just a few personal  photographs. We meet them through  contemporary interviews.  But the  film makes superb use of historical  images of the period: it edits into  the interviews old film footage,  newspaper clippings, songs - the  feeling of the era is recreated.  The class confrontations are actually shown, not just reported upon.  With this skillful combination of  interviews and historical materials  we can feel the emotions of militancy - excitement, elation, fear,  courage.  At 45 minutes, the film  end much too soon; I was hungry for  it to continue.  UNION MAIDS has been criticized for  backing off from the historical perspective of the 70s.  For example,  it does not deal with the fact that  these three women worked and organized within mass employment situations,  and within the CIO, which organized  heavy industry.  Linda Gordon, in an impressive and  lengthy review/analysis of the movie  for JUMP CUT, writes: "...this respect for the reality of working-class  power in the industrial cities of the  1930s contains a misconception of  women's reality.  The film's whole  conception - the story of three women  CIO organizers - denies the larger  reality, which is that the CIO did  very little for women.  Most women  did not then and still don't work in  heavy industry; the CIO's effort to  organize the large numbers of women  in clerical and service work were  puny...most employed women did not  work in mass employment situations.  Until 1940, the largest job category  for women was domestic service! ...  the women who, like the "union maids"  were involved in the great working  class uprising of the 1930s were  exceptions.  To miss this basic fact  would be not only to misunderstand  history but also to mistake, potentially, some of the problems of  organi z ing women today."  This is an important point, I think,  which must be acknowledged.  It must  also be acknowledged that this comment in no way lessens the strength  and relevance of the film; it is no  reason to see these women as 'other',  as somehow irrelevant to the feminist tasks at hand in the 70s.  The  strength of the film is in its power  to inspire: this is what women have  done, and what women can do.  Another just criticism of the film  is that nowhere is it mentioned that  all three women were members of the  Communist Party.  Why is this concealed? The women themselves may be  careful about mentioning it, given  the harsh anti-CP propaganda of the  fifties.  Nonetheless, it is important for  viewers to know about their CP affiliations.  If nothing else, it  gives us great respect for the work  of party members at that time.  This  becomes all the more important when  we realize that many viewers are  themselves children of the 50s, and  were victims of the lies created  about communism.  UNION MAIDS is an essential and validating experience for all feminists.  It is available from IDERA FILMS,  2524 Cypress Street, Vancouver V6T  3N2 (phone (604) 738-8815).  IDERA  also has "A Guide to Study and Discussion on the Film UNION MAIDS".  This is a short guide for classroom  discussion and it's very good.  Also recommended is RANK AND FILE,  the book by Alice and Staughton Lynd  on which the film is based.  Available from Beacon Press, 25 Beacon  Street, Boston MA 02108.  The cost  is $3.95.  The cost of film rental for UNION  MAIDS is $35.00 (for you and me),  $40.00 (colleges), and $50.00 (universities) .  Acknowledgements: To the people at  IDERA and to JUMP CUT, po box 865   ■  CA 94701.  Six issues $3.00 KINESIS, page -eight  From: WOMEN AGAINST VIOLENCE AGAINST  WOMEN, 1727 N. Spring Street,  Los Angeles, CA 90012. New York  phone it   (212) 724-7400.  We are now in the process of organizing on the East Coast.  Curently, we  are organizing a boycott of record  albums produced by Warner Communications, Inc., a leader of the industry  in prestige and sales; also responsible for exploiting images of violence against women in its advertising  and promotion. SUPPORT THE BOYCOTT'.  DON'T BUY ANY.  From: WOMEN'S RESEARCH CENTRE, #6-45  Kingsway, Vancouver, B.C.  (872-2250)  This is the final report on the Workshops on Services for Immigrant Women.  There was a somewhat smaller turnout  for the last workshop, held August 6,  but the participation was very enthusiastic and productive.  This last workshop dealt entirely with strategies  for change.  Out of the small groups  arose many ideas where the participants  would like to see change.  From these  ideas three topics were chosen where  the participants felt they were most  interested in and were most willing  to spend their time and energy.  They  were:  1. Formation of an Advocacy group  that would set up booths at the airport and Immigration Office in order  to assist immigrants that are having  problems with bureaucracy.  Contact  people:  Rachel Epstein (251-3872),  Betty Lui (251-3095).  2. Set up a Task Force to ensure  that immigrant children and parents  have equal opportunity to participate in and advance within the school  system.  Contact people:  Bridie  Mcllwraith (434-7466 evenings),  Verna Mooney (874-4231 days).  3. Formation of a Central Committee  that would act as a link between  the various ethnic organizations.  Some of this group's responsibilities  could possibly involve publicity,  lobbying, communications and coordinating activities between the various ethnic groups.  Contact people:  Diane Kage (324-1254), Rita Taylor  (736-0500).  The participants broke up into small  groups around these areas.  Long  and short term strategies were  planned and contact people were selected.  If anyone has an interest in one or  more of these topics or would like  to become involved, please get in  touch with the respective contact  person.  From: LATIN AMERICAN WORKING GROUP,  Stn. P, Box 2207, Toronto  "The Dark Side of the 'Light': Bras-  can in Brazil" is a research report  on the activities of Brascan Ltd.,  Contents include an overview of the  economic and political situation in  Brazil, Brascan's operations in Brazil, Brascon and the political process, its social impact and its effect on native people.  For information contact the above address.  From: SAN FRANCISCO WOMEN'S CENTRES  63 Brady Street, San Francisco  California 94103.  0"r collective is soliciting articles  for a book about violence and women,  including emotional, psychological,  economic and physical violence. Class  and race analysis will be integrated  A  D  h  into all topics.  Proposed chapters  include medical violence, parental  stress/child abuse, abuse on the job,  violence between women, jails and  prisons, rape, prostitution, violence against women internationally,  battered women, and others.  Send us  an outline of your ideas with a self-  addressed stamped envelope to the  above address.  From: CANADIAN WOMEN'S EDUCATIONAL  PRESS, 280 Bloor St. W., Ste.  305, Toronto. (416) 962-3904.  "Population Target: the Political  Economy of Population Control in  Latin America" is now available.  Written by Bonnie Mass, the book is  co-published by the Women's Press  and the Latin American Working  Group.  The key problem, the author asserts,  is not "too many people", but an  economic system more attuned to  corporate profits than to meeting  people's needs. A 'population control establishment' comprised of  corporations, politicians and elite  scientists, has formulated multi-  million dollar family planning and  birth control programs in order  to 'solve' the Third World's problems.  Case studies and detailed charts  document the author's assertion that  overpopulation is merely a smokescreen to a much larger problem:  the need to break the pattern of  underdevelopment and create an equitable economic system.  The 320pp. book is $5.50 in paperback, $12.95 cloth.  Contact the  above address.  From: IRIS FILMS, 2130 Elsinore St.  Los Angeles, CA 90026. (213)  483-5793.  Our new film, "In the Best Interests  of the Children", is an hour-long  colour documentary about Lesbian  mothers and child custody.  It shows  eight Lesbian mothers talking about  their experiences, interactions with  their children, and opinions from  attorneys and social workers active  in the issues of custody.  Rental of the film is $60 (non-commercial) ; sale is $550. Contact us  at the above address for information.  From: THE WOMEN'S CULTURAL CENTRE  20 Victoria Street, Ste. 807,  Toronto. (416) 362-6131  The Centre was founded to provide a  showcase for Canadian women artists,  to make their skills and resources  accessible to the community, and to  provide a meeting-place for the exchange of information and experience.  On-going programming at the Centre  open to everyone, will focus on the  achievements and concerns of women  in our culture.  The Municipality of Metropolitan  Toronto has accepted the Centre's  proposal to lease 86 Lombard Street  to us at a nominal rent of $1 a year  on a 10-year lease with a 10-year  renewal option.  The building has  been designated a historic building  by the Toronto Historical Board. It  is comprised of 7,500 square feet on  three floors.  Once renovated and outfitted, the  Centre will include: an art gallery,  a reference library, a theatre, film  theatre and lecture hall, studios  and workshops, a kiosk selling prints,  posters, books, etc. and a cafe, the  core of the Centre as meeting place.  Membership is $10.00 per year and is  open to all.  From: THE OTHER WOMAN, Box 928, Stn. Q  Toronto 7, Ontario  The Other Woman newspaper no longer  exists but the Women's Archives is  alive and well as an independent project. For five years, The Other Woman  received and actively collected much  information on a growing women's  movement in Canada.  Much of what is in the possession of  the Women's Archives is invaluable,  including documents on the earliest  phase of the movement in Toronto  itself.  Newspapers, newsletters and  movement documents from both Western  Canada and the Atlantic Provinces  are on file. Montreal (French and  English) is also represented.  A personal note: DO NOT throw away  your personal journals, letters,  notes to friends, minutes of meetings, etc.  If you MUST get rid of  things, send them here.  The history of our movement is built on  many levels.  Documents and theoretical essays will not do it alone.  Pat Leslie, of the Women's Archives A  PRISON JUSTICE DAY  August 10 was NATIONAL PRISON JUSTICE DAY. A 24 hour Vigil and Fast  was held at the B.C.Penitentiary  and at Oakalla.  Women are imprisoned in the latter, so that was the  sit-in which the Ad Hoc Committee on  Women in Prisons chose for their  24 hour vigil and fast. They were  expressing support for Canada-wide  action by inmates and for the work  of the Prisoners' Rights Group.  The focus of the day was a commemoration of those prisoners who have  died in solitary confinement units  in Canadian prisons. The Oakalla  vigil remembered, in particular,  Lorie Miles. She was sixteen when  she hanged herself in the RCMP  Courtenay cells on March 14.'77.  Judi Morton, of the Ad Hoc Committee on Women in Prisons, prepared  the following address for the  vigil:  First, I would like to thank the  people who have participated in this  day.  Second, I would like to apologize for not being a famous person.  I tried very hard to get a famous  person, but they were all busy. And  now I think about it, maybe that's  not such a bad thing. Maybe it  means that you'll hear my voice  instead of just my name.  Because the reasons why we are here  today are not as easy to explain as  they might look at first glance. It  is not enough to hear a collection  of horror stories in order to understand why prisons shouldn't be here  - or anywhere.  In addition to the  injustices to individuals, we must  also see the injustice to society.  We must understand what prisons are  for.  Prisons don't protect society from  criminals. You won't find rich  people or those who commit crimes on  a massive scale (polluters, slum  landlords, etc.) behind these walls.  Who you will find is all of those  whom society has chosen to designate  as 'the criminal class': the poor,  the non-white, the dissident, the  misfit. You will find people who  are exactly like yourselves.  Prisons don't prevent crime. Prisons don't prevent those who commit  crimes from committing them again.  Statistics, for what they're worth,  overwhelmingly support this view.  So what are prisons for? Prisons  exist for one purpose, and one purpose only:  they are the enforcement  tool of criminal law. And what is  criminal law? It is a reflection of  the values and self-interest of the  dominant class in our society. And  we all know who that is, don't we?  It is rich, white men.  Prisons  exist so that those rich white men  can lock up those who do not belong  to or support their power structures.  Women in Prisons  The Most Oppressed  The Parliamentary Sub-Committee on  the Penitentiary System released  its report in the House of Commons  this spring. One of the things it  said was, "The prison system subjects human beings to the most individually destructive, psychologically crippling and socially alienating experience that could conceivably exist within the borders of  (this) country." Of course, the  recommendations in the report have  been shuffled and shelved. Those  in power already know how bad prisons are; they were made that way.  Inside these walls, people live in  cages. They are subjected to arbitrary and absolute discipline. They  have no rights.  The experience of  being in prison has no connection  with whatever 'crime' may have been  committed; it is instead a brutal  and bewildering ordeal.  Dr. Marie Eertrand has said: "Women's prisons are no worse than women's lives." And she is right. The  women inside are not only up against  their oppression as prisoners, but  they must face as well their oppression as women in a male-dominated  society.  Women are approximately  8% of the total prison population,  and a well-worn excuse for neglecting them is that there aren't enough  of them to warrant the spending of  KINESIS page nine  government money.  Someone in the  corrections department actually put  that in writing for me last week!  Sex-role stereotyping of women is  immeasurably stronger inside the  walls; aside from scanty education  programs, training consists of sewing or cooking. Period. Adopting  or submitting to any aspect of the  traditional female role (interest  in appearance, shaving legs, makeup, etc.) is considered a sign of  rehabilitation.  Labour is paid -  but only pennies a day. And, like  the men, the women live with the  daily realities of solitary confinement and warden's court.  This month I spoke to a twenty  year old ex-inmate of the Oakalla  Women's Unit.  She has been in and  out of institutions since she was  ten years old.  She's been married  and divorced.  She has children.  She has been a drug addict and a  thief.  About Oakalla, she said,  "I've felt lost a lot of times in  my life, but not like that."  Prisons don't work.  They don't  benefit anyone except those in  power.  They don't stop crime and  they don't rehabilitate those who  commit crimes.  They are an instrument of torture, pure and simple.  As feminists, we can understand the  difficulty of working towards an  ideal while trying to do something  about the world we live in right  now.  The same difficulties exist  in working to abolish prisons, to  work for a world based on restitution and responsibility, to work  for a world where people are no  longer tortured and caged, while  at the same time struggling to  alleviate the suffering of those  who are in cages now.  It is frustrating work, to say the least.  But I would like to remind you of  the words of one of our members of  Parliament:  "Politicians fear more than a den  of lions or a pit of deadly snakes  a group of determined women." KINESIS page ten  Prisoners' Rights Group :  Kingston is nearly 100 years old and out-of-date  One area in which women have equality  in Canada - without even trying - is  in the national system of punishment.  The nominal equality translates itself into injustice.  But lest the  injustice fail to be absolute, the  equality ends and reverts to outright  discrimination when it comes time to  provide constructive positives -  recreation, programs, basic facilities and space for women.  Because there are so few women in  prison (2.5%), the planners built  one federal institution to meet the  needs of the worst, those very few  who might be dangerous or violent.  This institution, built almost a  half century ago, is in Kingston,  located in the centre of Canada,  isolated from friends and family.  It has the same design as all the  maximum security penitentiaries constructed for men over the previous  100 years.  Correctional workers and  those who worked in the institution  from its inception considered it  totally unsuitable for women and  recommended that it be phased out.  In the light of today's advanced  sociological knowledge, this institution is obsolete in every respect  - in design, in programs and in the  handling of the people sent there.  While women's basic needs of medical, psychiatric and dental treatment, work and recreational opportunities are equal to those of male  offenders, the nature of their offenses and their behavior in prison  is totally different and does not  require the 1835-style of maximum  security institution.  While there  are a very small number who require  maximum security custody under the  formal definition, their offenses  are primarily against themselves -  shoplifting, prostitution, breaking  and entering, and drug-related activities.  Statistics in April 1977  showed 75% were in for non-violent  crimes.  The Sub-Committee on Penitentiaries  in Canada visited the Kingston Prison for Women and met with the  Inmates Committee.  Sandy McDonnell,  chairperson of the Inmates Committee  summed up their predicament by saying: "There are many needs here  which, in the past, have not been  dealt with.  The lack of response  has been rationalized by the fact  that we are a small minority in comparison with other federal institutions and, therefore, our needs are  not as important as those where the  numbers are greater.  The male units  require much more money to meet  their needs due to their greater population - because our count is inferior, we are not entitled to the  finances we need to fund our programs  In spite of all this, we have shown  a great amount of responsibility in  terms of coping with the situation  as opposed to other maximum security  units in Canada.  This group which  has waited so long and has been  sloughed off so long have also waited quietly and maintained their  dignity in spite of the lack of  response they have received."  0% of Kingston inm  are in on drug charges  ut there's no drug program.  The 76-77 Inmates Programs Division  annual budget was about $335,000  which includes wages and salaries.  Despite this allotment, all meaningful programs initiated are either  quickly terminated or are only  available to a small proportion of  the population.  Even though 70% of  the women in Kingston prison are  there for drug-related crimes there  are no functioning drug programs.  Often judges recommend this type  of treatment during imprisonment  but it doesn't take place.  The  one satisfactory drug program that  was working in conjunction with  the Ontario Hospital was abandoned  due to financial reasons.  There is a serious lack of meaningful work and training programs.  Formal education is only available  up to Grade 10 and those seeking  higher education must do so through  correspondence courses.  The women  receive pay for the work they do  within the institution.  The amount  is determined by a grading scale  from 1-4, receiving anywhere from  $5.50 - $9.50, every two weeks.  They are graded according to their  attitude and all-round performance.  Since they may be lucky if they manage to find two full hours of work  out of eight, they have a lot of  time on their hands to do nothing.  KINESIS page eleven  ■  WOMEN IN PRISON  Another more recent program indigenous to women in prison, that is  most appalling and indecent, is  the introduction of male guards.  A few told their story to one of  the members of the Sub-Committee  during their tour of the institution.  They stated that the reason  for their request for a transfer to  Kingston from Oakalla was because  the male security staff at Oakalla  observed them in all stages of dress  and undress, and in some cases expected favours from female inmates  and  some other cases attempted to  do so.  A few weeks ago Prisoner's  Rights Group received an anonymous  letter from an ex-guard at Oakalla,  who stated that he is still nauseat  ed when he recalls some of the events  he witnessed.  His letter verifies  these allegations on the male staff.  The presence of male guards in women's prisons is a common cause for  complaint, ranging from violation  of privacy to rape or attempted rape.  Acting in a recent suit brought by  several women prisoners on behalf of  all 400 women prisoners at New York's  only prison for women, the BEDFORD  HILLS CORRECTIONAL FACILITY, Federal  Judge Richard Own ruled that women  prisoners have a right to privacy  and that no male guards should be  assigned to the prison's housing  units. (Prison Notes by Larry Gara)  It becomes increasingly clear that  prisons can't serve any useful function.  They do not protect society,  that myth is easily disposed of when  one realizes that it is only a temporary holding place and most prisoners will return to society one day.  Prisons do not rehabilitate either,  they don't even pretend to do so anymore.  These truths become even more  blatant when we view it in terms of  women in prison.  The reaction to  women in cages is much more sensitive  and the concept of incarceration all  the more bizarre.  Is this because  characteristically women are not violent in their behavior or because historically women have not had positions  of power where it was their responsibility to make the laws and therefore put people behind bars? If  this is the logic then it is apparent that crime does not reside within  the individual but is only a consequence of the situation in which we  find ourselves.  (In other words, if  everyone had enough there would be  little reason to steal.)  Once the  consensus is reached that women  should not be imprisoned then we  must in consistent and say that no  one, male or female, should have to  suffer the indignities which prevail in the brutal prison environment.  continued in col 4...  Notwithstanding her many inconsistencies, Liberal MP Simma Holt did  take a very solid stand for our  women in prison.  She was one of  the members of the Sub-Committee on  Penitentiaries in Canada and after  her exposure to the Kingston Prison  for Women she felt that, "...the  whole system discriminates against  women and gives them the worst.of  both worlds...they discriminate in  the budget for life skills and then  on top of that, if the male prisoners cause trouble in the hospital  the women prisoners cannot get into that hospital.  It is a male-  dominated Penitentiary Service in  Canada.  Scrap the prisons and  start humanizing these places for  women and for people." Furthermore,  the Sub-Committee recommendation  #55 states: "An immediate beginning  must be made on phasing out the  Prison for Women.  Until the phase-  out is complete, facilities and  space must be provided immediately  for an activity centre and the  life skills program must be restored. As a replacement for the present prison, small cottage-type institutions or village clusters must  be established in at least three  regions of Canada, with adequate  programs to prepare women for release."  If you support recommendation #55,  then write to Simma Holt and pressure her to ensure that it is implemented.  If you are interested in  helping provide alternatives for the  women in our area, in Oakalla prison,  contact Prisoner's Rights Group (299-  7178) and we'll let you know how to  meet these women.  Mr. Burns, director of Oakalla Women's unit once  stated publicly that the women there  were a "pretty hopeless bunch". With  our involvement and encouragement we  can prove him wrong.  Is There a Life After Prison? was  published by Tightwire Press, in  Kingston Prison for Women.  From the Inside:  There a Life After Prison?  - by Caro Walters, Kingston Prison  tred, not humble enough, losing your  feminity, bla bla."  7:45 BREAKFAST'.. The call echoes down  the sleeping hallway.  The vision  fades and my body stiffens into tense  wakefulness. My mind scrambles to  sort information. What day is it?  What time? What will make today important? Later...those things can  wait 'til later.  Shuffle to the bathroom.  Stand in  the company of bleary-eyed women,  washing faces, cleaning teeth.  Row  of porcelain sinks. Stoop to peer  beneath the toilet door.  No feet in  sight indicate vacancy.  Green steel  no-lock toilet cabins.  Prison ritual.  Peeping beneath toilet doors.  8:00 Clinking-clanking fluorescent-  lit dining room. Soapy sloshings of  the dish-washing machine. Conversation? Superhuman effort to be heard  above the daily din. Cups of coffee,  smoke a ciggy, offer a nicotine-laden  prayer.  Re-count our dreams.  8:30 The work day begins NOW.  Laundry, kitchen, beauty parlour, sewing  room, cleaner or School.  Stepping  lightly off the stereo type merry-go-  round I go to the School.  The man  with the count book calls my name. I  answer "present" and my existence is  ticked.  Confirmed.  Thank God.  Latin, drawing, reading, learning?  Not today.  Spend the hours writing  mental stories, watching the movie in  my mind.  Tripping in the constellations of my fertile imagination.  Meanwhile: the tree outside the window, on the other side of the bars,  buds, sheds, buds and sheds again as  I sit watching and waiting.  Purposeful patience. Work with passion until I become mesmerized with the dizzily falling snow.  11:10 Rush, hustle, mail-time mayhem.  Join the throng of expectant women.  Tense. Anticipating.  Holding my  breath.  But the matron shakes her  head.  "Not today." Oh well, it was  nice to have known him, to have had  his baby.  My friends who have mail share their  news.  "My mother sent me money, far  out!" "The fucker, I knew he'd do  it." "They say it's cold in Amsterdam."  11:30 LUNCH!  The call is muted  through the noisy hallway. I take  my hunger to the dining-room and  try to still it with food.  But it  fails again.  Futile exercise.  For  the seven-hundred-and-thirtieth time.  Relax in room?  Close my eyes and...  "Caro, can I borrow your...?" "Caro,  will you make me a...?"  "Caro, guess  what...?"  Escape...but where to? Gotta get  away!  (But that's not even the solution. You see, I really love the  company.)  1:00 Back in the School again I try  to make the effort.  But it's hard  to work up the enthusiasm.  I'm called  to see The Man.  He says:  "We notice recently that you're be-  coming aggressive, selfish, self-cen-  I'listen patiently and think...'that's  the stuff presidents are made of,  not women; prisoners, inmates!'  Back in the School again I drift off  into my head. An idea sparks, fires  the cells that work the muscles that  boost me into action.  Get to the  typewriter, flex my fingers, crank up  my mind, and go..  3:15 Time to return to my living  area.  The work day over.  Taken care  of.  Counting days to my release.  Remember the day in '74 when I received a letter saying: "Your parole eligibility will be ^considered on January  24, 1977."  I wondered then if the world would  still be turning.  Then my vision  was a dark tunnel with NO light at  the end.  Now the light grows brighter by the hour.  Four weeks and some  days left to do. Thirty-four days.  Count them Caro; the moment grows  nearer.  I was caught in the bathroom yesterday taking photos.  Porcelain sinks,  green steel no-lock toilet. My captor shrugged her shoulders and nodded knowingly.  She knows I have only  a month left to do.  All insanity  becomes understandable at this point.  No blame.  4:00 DINNER'.  The call, screeched  above the sounds of TV, radio, voices  is barely audible. Dinner is quieter  than breakfast.  Energy has been dis-  spitated by the day. The dishwashing  machine persists.  We discuss diverse  topics. Day parole; circumcision,  five burned bodies in Stratford prison, Chanouka and bla bla. Much  discussed, little resolved. Prison  inevitability.  Four-thirty 'til six o-clock I closet myself in my room.  Gaze at the  mess: dust, books, papers, unfinished  art work.  Remnants of creative intentions.  I call my room 'my studio'  and ask if I can rent the room next  door to house the overflow.  They  laugh.  I don't.  Looking round I  understand why I was never invited  to become anyone's wife.  Cool, I  never invited anyone to become my  husband.  6:00 Wednesday evenings are the  best of the week.  International  Culture Group. We link up with members of the International Centre of  the local university.  Good people.  All men.  Makes the week worth living  through.  The group lasts through 'til  9:45.  We bid farewell at that point.  They leave.  We stay.  10:00 MEDICATION!  The call is answered by voices yelling back, "Dope,  come and get your dope." Medication  for the Nation!  For the zillionth  time.  Strange, it isn't funny any  more.  11:00 IT'S THAT TIME, GIRLS...LOCK UP'.  I don't mind locking up, but I do  mind being called a 'girl'.  I wonder  if they call the guys in the men's  joint, 'boys'? ., "  to col.3,p.!2 KINESIS page twelve  govt report  Excerpts From THE REPORT OF THE  NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON THE  FEMALE OFFENDER  The National Advisory Commi ttee on  the Female Offender was appointed  by the Solicitor General of Canada  in September 1974, with the following terms of reference.  "To study the needs of federal female offenders, and to make specific  recommendations to the Commissioner  of Penitentiaries and the Executive  Director of the National Parole  Service regarding the development  of a comprehensive plan to provide  adequate institutional and community  services appropriate to her unique  program and security needs."  Summary of findings from STATUS  OF WOMEN NEWS, NAC's newsletter  Vol 4,   #1 July  1977  Recommendations  The Report of the Advisory committee  contained many recommendations. Some  of them are listed below:  * For women not needing a secure  setting, more contact with the community should be provided.  Also a  wider range of programs, counselling  and treatment possibilities should  be available and involve persons  from the community.  * Clear guidelines for information  about and monitoring of federal/  provincial transfer of inmates should  be developed and made widely known.  * Temporary release from an institution should be part of an overall  plan for rehabilitation and release.  * The federal Prison for Women should  be closed and either the federal  government should develop regional  facilities for federal inmates, or  the provinces should take responsibility for all female inmates and  upgrade their services.  * A National Advisory Council on the  Female Offender should be established and a meeting to discuss  interim measures for the Prison for  Women should also be held.  * All criminal matters should be  brought to trial within three months  from the laying of information.  * Time spent incarcerated prior to  case disposition should be counted  as part of time served.  * Continuing education programs for  judges should be encouraged.  * The Criminal Code should be amended to include alternative sanctions  to incarceration and all mandatory  minimum terms should be removed.  * The Federal Prisons and Reformatories Act should be revised to  eliminate all provisions that discriminate on the basis of sex or  religion.  * Only the dangerous, seriously  disruptive and escape-risk type of  offender requires a secure setting.  * Institutional training programs  adapted to today's new options should  be promoted.  * The shortcomings in the available  statistics on the female offender  should be examined.  * Funds and effort should encourage  the expansion of community-based  facilities for those offenders requiring a supportive but not secure  setting.  The followup to this report is proceeding to the planning stage.  FROM THE INSIDE,(cont from p.11)  It's quiet now.  Really still. Hardly  a sound.  An occasional sleepy moan.  I sit at my table, pen in hand and  start my night's work.. Write down  some words.  Paint a picture.  Design  some embroidery.  Listen to the classical music on my radio.  Relax a  while.  Try to work it all out.  1:30 Hit the sack.  Sleep.  way to cheat the government.  like you're not  even doing time  when you're si  ing.  - Caro Wal  is}u$taKmd  'of heme for poor  people.  Special Needs  The following factors give rise to  special needs_f or women in custody  and are relevant to women at any  stage of apprehension in the criminal justice system.  1. Low self-image: increased by  society's strong condemnation of  women offenders.  2. Weak family ties and few friends  making for a vulnerable situation of  exploitation.  3. Tendency toward self-mutilation  and depreciation instead of outward  aggressive behavior.  4. Women do not usually receive  prison sentences until they have had  a number of offences.  During this  period of collision with the law  there are very limited community-  based alternatives for women in difficulty, such as hostels, residences,  accessible support services and financial help.  By the time they receive prison sentences, a great  number are severely damaged.  5. Because of the small number of  women in custody, segregation has  been viewed as impractical. This  has resulted in heterogeneous and  problematic composition of inmate  population, including those who are:  a) serving varying lengths of sentences including very long sentences  b) mentally ill  c) mentally retarded  d) violent and disruptive  e) totally institutionalized  f) from a culture and/or using a  language which differs from the  majority in the institution.  Trends  There is a significant increase in  the number of women charged with criminal offences, as shown in the following nine indicators.  A statistical  report prepared for the National  Advisory Committee on the Female Offender is available from the Ministry  of the Solicitor General, Ottawa.  1. The most obvious trend is the  increase in offences against property without violence.  a) women charged with theft offences in the course of a year, between 1964 and 1973, increased from  4,210 to 14,000.  b) women charged annually with  fraud offences increased from 938  to 3,348 in the same 10-year period,  probably due mainly to increase use  of credit cards.  2. Convictions under the Narcotic  Control Act increased from 127 in  1971 to 357 in 1972.  Proposed changes  in legislation may have a marked  influence on this trend.  3. There is a trend toward greater  involvement of younger persons in  criminal activity.  In 1968, 18.5  per cent of females convicted of  indictable offences were 16 to 19  years of age.  By 1972 there were  23.4 percent.  A revised age for  juvenile offenders could alter this  considerably.  4. Decriminalization of certain  offences and the implementation of  pretrial diversionary programs could  change sentencing for all ages of  offenders.  5. There is a significant increase  in the number of "Offences against  the person" committed by women. In  1972 these offences represented only  4 per cent of the total criminal code  offences for which women were convicted.  6. The ratio of males to females  convicted of indictable offences is  slowly decreasing, but still remains  at 5:1.  It was 7:1 in 1966.  The  ratio of imprisonment on conviction  of an indictable offence in 1972 was  15 per cent for women compared with  39 per cent for women.  7. With the pressure for equality  for the sexes is coming reduced paternalism on the part of police and  judiciary.  This could lead to increased charges against women and  longer sentences if convicted.  8. With the increased number of  women entering and remaining in the  labour force comes increased opportunities for involvement by women  in a wider range and number of criminal pursuits.  This fact, linked  with generally increasing criminality in our society, indicates an  area needing closer scrutiny.  9. A more recent phenomenon of  criminality involves females who  break the law in support of political and social beliefs and ideologies.  RECOMMENDATIONS from UPSTREAM,  July 1977. KINESIS page thirteen-  Resources  A Profile of Low-Wage Workers in  British Columbia by C. Aykroyd and  P. Stanton, Research and Planning  Branch, B.C. Ministry of Labour,  March 1977.  Presents a good profile of low-  wage workers.  Statistics on education level, citizenship and language.  Did you know that women comprise 74.1¬∞  of low-wage earners? Also, the  majority of low-wage earners are  young, from under 19 to 34 (with the  highest percentage being 20-24 years  of age).  The occupational group with  the highest low-wage earners is  clerical and related.  Take a look  at the report, it shows our position  well.  All low-paid managerial occupations, women dominate.  Women, Racial Minorities and the  Physically Handicapped in the Civic  Workforce, by Susan Bell, Kasandra  Bonn, Shelagh Day, Reva Dexter, Ann  Harley and Diana Scorety, May 1977.  An excellent report regarding the  profile of workers in the Vancouver  civic workforce.  To get an understanding of women's position and  other low-paid, low-status workers  read.this report.  Filled with lots  of statistics, profile charts, etc.  This report is an eye opener.  Legal Resource Book for Farm and  Domestic Workers, by John Borst,  Cher Dahl and Rachel Epstein, Labour  Advocacy and Research Association,  March 1977.  An excellent perspective on what  farm and domestic workers are up against.  Clearly outlines laws, conditions of employment, what can be  expected from welfare, childcare,  income tax, unemployment insurance,  immigration.  After reading this  pamphlet one has a very clear understanding of how rights and procedures  don't relate to their needs and how  they are exploited.  A good guide for  workers, immigrants, or anyone with  basic working condition questions.  Also worthwhile is a list of where  to go for information and help.  Women, Money and Power by Phyllis  Chesler and Emily Jane Goodman  (New York, William Morrow & Co.,  Inc., 1976), 256pp.  Women are conditioned to be  supportive, dependent, altruistic,  to believe that psychic rewards  are far more important than monetary.  Thus women are gulled not  only into thinking money unimportant for them, but also into being  abysmally ignorant about money and  power.  The results, say Chesler  and Goodman, are economically and  politically disastrous.  Ignorance  about money and its relationship  to power keeps women poor.  In a  money culture, money is the key to  all other forms of power.  Thus  ignorance about money and power  keeps women powerless.  Do Chesler and Goodman want  women to learn about money and  power in order to control this  society - a capitalist society  built on human exploitation? Essentially No.  Chesler and Goodman  are critical of capitalist society  as one in which money and power are  controlled by the few; as feminists  they want to see resources redistributed.  Chesler and Goodman are  telling women to get rid of the  psychological baggage that keeps  knowledge of money and power exclusively a male preserve.  L  A  B  O  U  R  "Recent Developments in Human Rights"  by Shelagh Day in Labour Research  Bulletin, June 1977.  An excellent article.  States  exactly where we are at regarding  equal pay and equal work.  Good case  examples, also good discussion on  the 'reasonable cause' clause. Good  reporting on the GATE decision and  its implications.  Other articles  in the Bulletin are also worthwhile.  Employee/Employer Rights in B.C.  by James E. Dorsey, B.A., LL.B.,  International Self-Counsel Press  Ltd., Vancouver, November 1974.  Outlines various acts such as  workers' compensation, UIC, working conditions, minimum wage, etc.  Important to know this basic information.  However, the working  situation looks bleak when you  realize the minimal rights we have.  There are other books in this  series pertaining to basic rights  knowledge in the areas of income  tax, civil rights, immigration,  credit, etc. A good way to get a  working knowledge of financial  power rights.  The Working Sexes, Patricia Mar-  chak, ed., Institute of Industrial  Relations, University of B.C.,  June 1977.  This book presents symposium  papers on the effects of sex on  women at work.  Includes international information.  There is good  analysis if you can wade through  the academic language.  Tends to  make guarded statements and conclusions.  A lot is there, but hidden  in jargon.  Equal Opportunity at Work: A CUPE  Affirmative Action Manual, CUPE  (Canadian Union of Public Employees)  233 Gilmour Street, Ste. 800, Ottawa  Ontario, 218pp.  This manual presents information  on how to set up an Affirmative Action committee and what it ought to  do and how to proceed.  The manual  addresses itself to remedying the  more hidden barriers to equal opportunity that continue to keep men and  women in job ghettos with unequal  access to training, promotions, benefits, career mobility and so on. The  manual will assist in locating these  barriers and formulating an attack  which is best suited to the circumstances.  It is the result of a focused effort during International  Women's Year.  By way of Affirmative Action  Plans, employers committed themselves  to break down job segregation and to  get more women and minority workers  hired and promoted.  In Canada,  Laura Leifer - LNS  Affirmative Action committees made  exhaustive reports and intelligent  recommendations which have, for the  most part, been applauded by management.  However, the committees often  stepped back afterwards and watched  their reports gather dust on shelves.  For as long as there is no legislation or other power to force employers to move, they will rarely change  a situation.  Women In The Labour Force, Facts and  Figures - 1976 edition, part 1. Labour  force survey, Labour Canada, Ottawa.  Again, valuable statistics stating women's position in employment.  Women have the highest rate of unemployment in all provinces of Canada.  Women part-time workers account for  20.3% of the female labour force,  male part-time workers are 5.1%.  If you need almost any kind of labour statistic on comparisons of men  and women this document will have  them.  Women in British Columbia's Labour  Force, Labour Research Bulletin, B.C.  Ministry of Labour, September 1975.  Statistics are recent from 1975.  If you want a good perspective on  women's position in the Canadian  labour force this pamphlet is worth  reading.  Women in the Labour Force: Industries,  Occupations and Earnings, B.C. Ministry of Labour, April 1976.  Statistics are old from 1970 to  1971; however, there have not been  substantial changes since then. The  analysis is good regarding why women  are lower paid and how this is maintained.  Women in the Labour Force, Facts and  Figures, Labour Canada, Women's Bureau, Ottawa, 1975.  This publication has in possibly  everything one would want to know  about women and labour.  The most  recent statistics are 1974.  The  wage differentials between men and  women are shocking.  The only change  in this area is that there are more  women in the labour market, but if  we think other changes have occurred  in earning power, managerial positions  or alternate occupations, we are wrong.  Working Paper on Equal Pay for Work of  Equal Value, Women's Bureau, Manitoba  Department of Labour, 241 Vaughan St.,  Winnipeg, Manitoba, July 1976.  This publication discusses the  problems of equal pay legislation.  Quotes statistics showing that the  wage gap is widening, not narrowing.  Discusses the problem of 'job ghettos'  continued on p.15 KINESIS page fourteen  FRANKIE  by RIKA RUEBSAAT  FRANKIE ARMSTRONG - Feminist Folk  Singer from Britain  Vancouver East Cultural Centre  September 18th at 8:30pm  Sponsored by Vancouver Folk Song  Society  Reservations: 254-9578  Whether it's a song of our times or  a hundreds-year-old ballad, Frankie  Armstrong can make it vivid and  real to us as few singers can. The  urgency and intensity of her oft-  unaccompanied singing cuts through  centuries, holds audiences spellbound.  She is an extraordinary  person in many ways.  Although recently voted England's foremost  woman folksinger, she has chosen  not to be a professional singer,  preferring her job as a social worker in drug treatment programs. And  despite the gradual loss of her sight  over the last several years, she is  now more involved than ever in her  work and her singing.  "I want to be sensitive in what I  choose to sing and why.  The songs  I care to sing are songs that people  have given something of themselves  to over the centuries...you know,  whether it was created and moved  through many thousands of mouths  over the years, or whether it was  something that somebody wrote ten  years ago.  My singing is the process of taking what is both personal and universal, what people have  given in the process of molding and  creating, welding a song together  and what I get when I put the song  through me, and through the experiences of my day-to-day life.  "Take ballads like 'Lady Diamond',  or 'Barbara Allen'; ...one could  look at them and say, 'What the hell  do they say to us in 1977?'  But I  think those things are still going  on, and they are as overt and vio  lent. You've only got to pick up a  paper every day to know that they  are... that people dx) get murdered  out of jealousy...that the oppression  of people trying to break out of old  systems and ways of thought is real,  and that all the ballads with the  servant-master relationship and the  mismatching and all those kind of  issues are real.  They may not be  as clear-cut today as they once were  but they're every bit as much with  us in terms of getting out from under controls. The oppression may  come down on us and the violence  may be done to us as a result of  trying to change.  I think it's all  still absolutely relevant!  "There's the 'Unquiet Grave', 'The  Cruel Mother'...and the number of  women I know that have been through  abortions, or feel that they've destroyed their children through neglect.  There's just a lot of that  kind of very raw stuff that's the  nitty-gritty of a lot of the ballads which is still being lived out.  I'm aware that I come from a fairly  straight, sheltered background, and  for me it's an exploration all the  time - taking me into uncharted  areas.  In my work, I try to get  into the same wavelength, to try  and understand and yet remain objective enough to be of help."  Frankie talks about "finding her  voice", the very direct, focused,  full voice that a woman can use,  as opposed to the "head" voice -  light and breathy and/or wrapped in  layers of finery.  "You see, I'd always had a deep  voice.  I was able to take my head  voice way, way down to bottom E.  At one time it was kind of contralto, then it was much more bluesy,  you know?  It was loud as well,  but still it didn't have that  strength to it."  WHY DID YOU WANT TO CHANGE?  "(The focused, full voice that a  woman can use has) a quality which  both personalizes and universalizes  ...which somehow expresses much more  aptly, much more strongly."  WHAT HAPPENED TO YOU WHEN YOU HEARD  IT?  "Oh, you actually have a sensation.  There's actually a kind of 'ear-gut'  response. You have to listen...it's  impelling...it's imperative...compelling."  DID YOU FEEL THAT YOU WANTED MORE  THAN WHAT YOU GOT FROM YOUR PREVIOUS  STYLE OF SINGING?  "It's so difficult to get away from  my consciousness of what I feel about  women now.  "Somehow that way of singing said:  'I'm a person; I have a right to say  what I am saying; I have a right to  communicate it to you.  I am compel-  ing you to listen and I have that  right to compel you to listen.'  Which I think those kind of sweet  girlie voices just never do."  Excerpts from an interview with  Frankie Armstrong in SING OUT.  STAR WARS  I went to see it.  Much against my  better judgment, my curiosity always  wins. I lined up to pay my $3.75  and I sat through two hours of all  too familiar stereotypical screen  images; only this time they were encased in that quasi-'original' form  known as 'science fiction' or the  'space age'.  I am of course referring to George Lucas' multi-million  dollar film "Star Wars".  (He both  directed and wrote it.)  I had heard that this was a production that was really different.  I  had even contemplated going down to  Seattle where I could see it on a  really big screen with a multitude  of stereo speakers, all of which  would give me a thrill! But rest assured you'll get the message without  the trip by going to your local cinema.  (Not that I'm suggesting that  you do.)  I think the best way to describe the  atmosphere of the film is 'Romantic',  as in courtly love, Knights and  Princesses, etc.  Only instead of  Dragons they have an assortment of  dull, unimaginative hairy animals.  Some are friendly, some are not.  the year's most unpopular review  ^ wwon barling  There really is no need for me to  give you a detailed outline of the  plot, because if you have gone through  childhood you must know the fundamentals of many children's stories, where  black and white equal bad and good.  The plot is therefore not interesting.  One might almost call it boring, but what is of interest is to  see how an ideological form such as  film incorporates current reactionary social controls, i.e. the return  to spirituality and individualism,  and turns them into a phenomenally  popular, accepted money-making project.  The main male protagonist stresses  we must have faith in the 'force'.  The dialogue includes such gems as  "may the force go with you".  The  method recommended for finding this  powerful force is to "stretch out  with your feelings".  I don't know  who the financial backers for this  film were, but it wouldn't surprise  me if the "I Found It" proponents  were involved.  The hero, Luke, finds  'it' and is duly rewarded by acclaim,  honour and the 'love' of the Princess  to live happily ever after in the  realm of 'outer space'.  Luke's friend is 'groovy' and 'hip'  so that the younger people can accept him as their model in case they  find Luke a little too puritanical.  He knows what's cool.  He approaches  life in much the same way as does  'Fonz' of television's Happy Days.  He moves fast and looks after No. 1  first.  Only instead of a motorbike  for a power symbol he has a space  ship that can zap around the universe at light speeds.  The princess acts true to form, except for two small scenes when she  does her token independent woman  number.  The first time she is responding to the 'Fonz' character's  jibe for 'feminine advice'.  She  gets them out of a tight situation  by crashing through an escape hatch  in a narrow passageway, only to place  them in an even worse situation, as  the escape hatch proves to be a  garbage disposal unit with collapsible walls.  The day is saved by  a combination of man and technology  via Luke and his robot.  Once  again he saves the damsel from her  own distress. oontinuned p. 15,  col. 2 KINESIS page fifteen  Provincial Government Funding  A financial and operational restructuring of Rape Relief services through  out the province is in the works, according to word out of the Attorney  General's office.  Changes include hiring a coordinator  to oversee a province-wide crisis  line network.  Plans are not yet specific and development will in part be determined  by the provision of the federal government's new social services bill,  said Mark Krasnick, director of  policy planning for the provincial  Attorney General's office.  Federal Health and Welfare Minister  Marc Lalonde has promised to provide  funds on a province cost-sharing  basis for crisis intervention services which could mean funds coming  west for Rape Relief centres.  Krasnick, in an interview, said the  provincial social services committee  in conjunction with grant funding  committees from the Attorney General's office, the Ministry of Health,  and the Ministry of Human Resources,  is considering a province-wide crisis line network intended to reach  areas currently without Rape Relief  centres.  The extension of services to all  parts of the province would also  mean an opening for a coordinator to  act as a liaison person.  Job definition and whether the person would  be a regular staff person or hired  from outside has not yet been determined, Krasnick added.  Existing services with the proposed  changes would be broadened and made  more effective.  (Joey Thompson, The  Province 20.7.77)  Last month, KINESIS printed a response to this proposal by the B.C.  Coalition of Rape Relief Centres.  Here, we present the stand taken by  B.C. Federation of Women:  "The B.C. Federation of Women, representing 52 feminist organizations  throughout the province, demands  that the government consult with  the women's groups involved before  it goes ahead with plans to restructure and expand services offered by  organizations such as Rape Relief  centres.  The B.C. Federation of Women is also  concerned that the position dealing  with Rape Relief centres is being  created in response to the new Federal Social Services Act.  Under  this act, the provincial government  can receive federal money through  cost sharing schemes without actually increasing its  commitment to  the services involved.  Only the  provincial government's treasury  stands to benefit from this federal  assistance (as happened with the  federal increase for the Handicapped  People's Allowance).  The government proposes to "expand"  Rape Relief services by:  1. creating a position which duplicates the coordinating work of the  Coalition of B.C.Rape Relief Centres,  and by  2. adding responsibility, but not  money, to the already overworked existing centres."  BCFW concluded that the move demonstrated this government's concern  for its coffers rather than any real  interest in the needs of women in B.C.  atmm  FEMINIST WANTED TO SHARE spacious  2 bedroom suite in older house.  Near Coliseum in quiet neighborhood. Rent includes utilities:  $135 a month. Available immediately. Call after 6pm: 251 3828  "* FEMINIST WANTED to share run-down  but comfortable house in Abbotsford. Half of basic expenses: $135  approx. Available Sept. 1st. Call  853 8620 or 251 3828  KINESIS distributors needed. Phone  VSW and we will send you as many  copies as you need. Drop them off  as comps. in your doctor's office,  laundromat, etc.  Ask for Gayla  at 736 3746. If your call is not  returned BUG HER AGAIN'.  GURDJIEFF OUSPENSKY CENTER Vancouver  (604) 266 7578  HELP KINESIS SURVIVE. SEND A CLASSIFIED TO GRAPEVINE. Only fifty cents  an ad. One dollar for a two-month run!  Contact Gayla 736 3746 by mid-month.  STAR WARS cont/,  rom p.14  The second aggressive action she  takes is when she has a gun in her  hand, but there is a fast cut-away  shot of her closing her eyes as  she pulls the trigger.  So much for  independence.  The film's form is very traditional.  It ends with a long drawn out airraid on the enemy.  Again our two  male heros come and save the day.  This scene is very reminiscent of  a similar situation in that old war  movie "A Bridge Over the River Kwai"  only of course this film is in colour, is faster, and takes place in  the space age - but the values behind the actions are very similar.  "Star Wars" is a film that many  would refer to as satirical and  humorous, but somehow that doesn't  work.  V^)>?  more  LABOUR R€SOURC€S  continued from p.13  where women in secretarial or clerical positions have no male counterparts to compare wage rates.  This  publication defines and describes  the problem very adequately, but does  not provide a satisfactory solution.  The Status of Women in Federal Crown  Corporations, by Louise Delude, Advisory Council on the Status of Women,  Box 1541, Stn. B, Ottawa KIP 5R5,  Free, 1977.  Areas covered are occupational  segregation, women in senior management, job access, equal opportunity  programs, maternity leave, and discrimination in fringe benefits. The  paper indicates that progress has  been extremely slow and that much  remains to be done for women to gain  equal career opportunities in federal Crown Corporations.  Rights in Employment Newsletter, Labour Canada, Ottawa, June 1977.  This newsletter announces what  changes have occurred in labour legislation or Human Rights legislation.  Also it announces new publications,  reports, etc. regarding labour areas.  Primarily concerned with women's issues.  For Women's Policy regarding labour  see:  B.C. Federation of Women's Consitu-  tion and Policy Handbook, Volume I &  II, BCFW, Box 3309, Langley, B.C.  1974 and 1975. (See Labour, p. 15)  Our Story, the Brief presented by  Women Rally for Action to all B.C.  MLAs, March 22, 1976. (Labour Standards, p. 22)  NDP Women's Policy Book "Herstory"  The price is $1.50 plus .50 postage.  Order from Robin Geary, 2121 St.  George Street, Vancouver. Z2WS£ufS,.pag'B'oa«a:%SaaV^S  WOMEN'S  STUDIES  Programs  A Sample  of Offerings  CAPILANO  The following programs are available  this fall.  They are organized by  the Women's Resources Centre at Capilano College and you can obtain  further information by phoning them  at Cap College: 986-1911, local 350.  CHILDREN AND THEIR LITERATURE  Instructor: Lois Rennie  This discussion series will focus on  today's children, their interests  and needs, and how books may enhance  their self-concept.  ASSERTION TRAINING WORKSHOPS  Leaders: Gerry Albourg and Mary  Bennett.  Four sessions.  Wednesdays, 9-llam.  CREATIVE WRITING WORKSHOP FOR WOMEN  led by S.Alberson and F.Burnstein  This workshop is for women who are  interested in exploring and/or developing their potential as creative  writers. Women in this course may  work in any of the several genres,  including poetry, drama, fiction,  and children's literature.  STRESS AND TODAY'S WOMAN  Instructor: TBA  This program takes a look at the  adult life cycles.  It is OK to be  over 301    A  physician will look at  the common remedies for stress:  All programs will take place at various locations on the North Shore.  Exact dates and course fees as well  as location information can be obtained from CAPILANO WOMEN'S RESOURCE  CENTRE.  (986-1911, Local 350)  SFU  INTRODUCTION TO WOMEN'S STUDIES:  (WS 100-3) What's the future like  for women? How will men's lives be  affected? What's the present situation?  WOMEN'S ROLES: A COMPARATIVE STUDY  (WS 200-3)  WOMEN IN CANADA: 1600-1920 (WS 201-3)  SELECTED TOPICS I: SEXUAL EQUALITY  (Phil. 231-3)  ADVANCED WOMEN'S STUDIES (WS 400-5)  RESEARCH PROJECT (WS 401-5)  INDIVIDUAL READING COURSES (To be  arranged with Faculty associated  with the program.)  DOUGLAS is offering a variety  of credit and credit-free courses  at each campus.  Credit courses include: Anthropology  for Women; Women in Canadian History;  Philosophy, Religion and Women; Images  of Women in Literature; Psychology of  Women.  Credit-free offerings include:  BATTERED WIVES: WOMEN AND VIOLENCE  4 Wednesdays, Oct. 5-26. 7.30-9.30  Fee: $10. Until recently the subject  of wife-battering was suppressed. This  series will examine social attitudes,  the policies and procedures of social agences and the law. It will also  look at the economic position of women and its relation to wife-beating. Co-ordinator: Gene Errington.  WOMEN AND WORK Saturday, Oct 29 9am  to 4pm. Keynote speaker: Shelagh Day.  For women trying to get into the workforce, for women who are trying to  stay in and for women who are considering entering it. Fee: $7.00  Other CREDIT-FREE OFFERINGS INCLUDE:  You're Only Middle-Aged Once; Assertiveness Training; On Being Single  Again; Women and the Home.  For more details, call Lillian Zimmerman at Douglas (521 4851) and arrange to receive her excellent brochure:  Events for Women.  STUDENTS  Now that the women's studies courses  have begun for another semester, we  wanted to remind you that you are  welcome to do research on the status  of women in our office.  Just drop  in any weekday from 9am-5pm.  We  have a work desk set aside for you  and a copier should you need it at  10c a page.  I'm always around to  direct you to further information  or discuss issues with you from our  experience at VSW.  Our facilities  include:  REFERENCE FILES: jammed full of  magazine articles, briefs, reports,  studies, etc. on all women's issues  from A to Z - you name it.  PAPERBACK LIBRARY: key feminist  books for in-office reading.  PUBLIC INFO DESK: free pamphlets  of interest to women.  FEMINIST NEWSLETTERS: back issues  from across Canada.  NEWSCLIPPINGS: on women's issues  dating back to 1973.  VCC-LANGARA, YW  VANCOUVER COMMUNITY COLLEGE: PERSPECTIVES ON WOMEN. Credit-course  available at YWCA and LANGARA. This  is an inter-disciplinary course with  sociology, psychology, literature  and history from a feminist point of  view. Transfer credit available.  Evening courses which begin Sept.7  Fee approx $30. For more details  phone Gayla at 736 3746 or VCC at  324 5221.  UBC  NON-CREDIT COURSES AT U.B.C.  The following courses are a sample  of what is available this fall  through the Centre for Continuing  Education at U.B.C. More information about these and other courses  of relevance to women can be obtained by phone the Centre at 228-  2181.  Quote the course number next  to the course title and they will  give you the appropriate local.  Assertiveness Training for Women  (WM 2904/477)  Instructor: Robin Cappe  6 Thursdays, Oct. 20-Nov. 24,  6:15-8:15pm. Kitsilano Public  Library, 2425 MacDonald.  $35.  Enrolment limited.  Developing Potential for Growth and  Change (WR 1916-477)  Instructors: Clare Buckland & Irene  Robinson  6 Tuesdays, Sept. 27-Nov. 1, 6:30-  9:30pm. Women's Resources Centre-  Downtown, #1, 1144 Robson Street.  $40.  Enrolment limited.  Choosing Your Life/Work (WR1915-477)  Instructor: Sandra Moe  4 Mondays, Oct. 17-Nov. 7, 9:30am--  12noon. Women's Resources Centre-  Downtown, #1, 1144 Robson Street.  ^30.  Enrolment, limited.  U.B.C. WOMEN'S STUDIES CREDIT COURSES  WOMEN'S STUDIES 222 - Women's Studies -  An interdisciplinary course  presenting multiple perspectives on  the role, function, and expression  of women in various societies.  WOMEN'S STUDIES 224 - Seminar on  Women in Literature - An analysis  of stylistic devices utilized and  invented by women writers for the  purpose of giving literary expression to a newly-emerging feminine  self-consciousness.  ANTHROPOLOGY-SOCIOLOGY 222 - Seminar  in Women's Studies -  The seminars  will explore in depth the topics of  the lecture series.  Special attention will be given to comparative  analysis (i.e. cross-cultural studies) and to the explanation of  variation and understanding of contemporary situations in historical  perspective.  Reading lists and full course descriptions are available at the AMS  Women's Committee, SUB, Room 228,  UBC (phone 228-2163), or at the  Office of the Dean of Women, Buchanan Building, Room 456, UBC  (phone 228-2415). KINESIS page seventeen  CHECK OUT  YOUR DOCTOR  The SFU Women's Centre and the Vancouver Women's Health Collective are  in the process of compiling a doctor  directory. The purpose of this directory is to provide health care consumers with information that will  help them choose a doctor that will  best meet their needs.  We are urging all women to fill in  questionnaires about their doctors.  The questionnaires can be picked up  at most women's centres, bookstores,  the Health Collective, Vancouver  Status of Women, etc.  If you have any questions or want  more information please phone the  Health Collective (736-6696).  Completed questionnaires can be left  at the same place where you got them  or mailed to the Health Collective,  1520 West 6th Avenue, Vancouver.  QUESTIONNAIRE  Would you help us by answering the  following questions.  Please try to  respond to all of the questions.  Date:  Sex:  Doctor's Name:  Address:  Phone Number:  Type:  G.P.  Gynecologist   Other (specify)  1. How long have you been a patient  of this doctor (check one):  less than one month   1-6 months   6-12 months   more than 12 months   2. On the average, how long does it  take you to get an appointment (check  one) :  within 24 hours   2-3 days   4-6 days   7 or more days   3. What is the average time you wait  in this doctor's waiting room (check  one) :  5-10 minutes   10-15 minutes   15-20 minutes   20-30 minutes   more than 50 minutes   4. Briefly, can you give examples of  what you have seen this doctor for?  5. This question applies only to  G.P.s. Answer with N/A if referring  to a specialist. Did s/he: a) take  a thorough medical history  yes or   no; b) do a thorough general examination  yes or  no?  6. What is the average time spent  with the doctor per appointment  (check one):  10-15 minutes   15-20 minutes   20-30 minutes   30-45 minutes   more than 45 minutes   7. Do you feel rushed with this a-  mount of time?  Yes  No  8. During a physical examination do  you feel your doctor is:  gentle   rough  other(specify)?  9. Does s/he explain the effects of  drugs that s/he prescribes for you  (check one):  never  occasionally   only when asked  almost always   always?  10. Do you ask for information about  your diagnoses and/or treatment?   Yes  No.  11. If yes, how are your questions  answered (check one):  clearly   vaguely  not at all  12. Is s/he open to your suggestions  about your health care (check one):   always  sometimes   rarely   never  I don't make suggestions.  13. Does s/he talk to you about the  advantages and disadvantages of alternative treatment (i.e. hypnosis,  acupuncture, etc.)?  Yes  No. If  yes, please give examples.  14. Does s/he talk to you about preventive medicine regarding diet:   Yes  No; exercise  Yes  No;  breast self-exam  Yes  No; yearly  pap test  Yes  No; other  Yes   No.  15. Does s/he suggest a follow-up  appointment to ensure that your  treatment has been effective (check  one) :  always   almost always   sometimes   rarely   never   16. We want to know what you feel  your doctor's attitude toward you  is.  On the following chart check  as you find appropriate.  1 is low  and 5 is high.  Supportive  1  2  3  4  5  Morally Judgmental  Paternalistic  Authoritarian  Takes You Seriously  17. Can you describe briefly, in  your own words, something that would  give others an idea of what it is  like to be treated by this doctor  (specific situations, treatment,  etc.)?  18. Any comments you have on this  questionnaire would be appreciated.  Pregnant  Workers  in the U.S.  Proposed U.S. legislation to protect the rights of pregnant workers  may be facing some difficult battles  as it makes its way through Congress  in the months ahead.  The bill,  which would amend Title VII of the  Civil Rights Act by extending its  definition of sex discrimination to  include discrimination on the basis  of "pregnancy, childbirth or related  medical conditions", is being backed  by a broad coalition of labour,  civil rights and feminist organizations known as the Campaign to End  Discrimination Against Pregnant  Workers.  The Campaign's legislative strategy was made necessary by  the U.S. Supreme Court's ruling in  General Electric v.   Gilbert  that  employers need not compensate workers for maternity-related absences  on the same basis as they compensate workers for other temporary  disabilities.  The bill, which at last count had  36 co-sponsors in the Senate and 113  in the House, plus support from the  Carter administration, is currently  being considered by the House Subcommittee on Equal Opportunities and  the Senate Sub-committee on Employment, Poverty and Migratory Labor.  Hearings have been held on both  sides, and the House has scheduled  an additional day of hearings for  late June.  The legislation must  still go to the House Education and  Labor Committee and the Senate Human Resources Committee - before it  is brought up before the full House  and Senate.  What happens to the bill between now  and its final reading is, of course  the crucial question.  Potential  trouble is now appearing on the horizon from two sources - anti-abortionists and the insurance lobby.  The threat from the former is fairly  straightforward and not entirely  unexpected.  The National Conference  of Catholic Bishops will push for  an addition to the bill reading:  "Neither pregnancy nor related conditions as used in this section may  be construed to include abortion."  The Bishops continue, "This addition  is necessary to protect church agencies from being forced to support  or provide abortion services in  violation of religious tenets or conscience."  As potentially divisive as the abortion issue may be, the insurance lobby  has managed to come up with something  which may prove to be even better.  Insurance coverage costs have been  rising rapidly, they point out, and  the "logical" way for employers to  save, as always, is by opting for  plans which further limit maternity  coverage.  Supporters of this legislation are  still optimistic that both the anti-  abortion and the insurance lobby  threats can be overcome - and are  predicting a final successful reading by mid-fall.  In the meantime,  as opposition from the business  community mounts, feminist support  for the bill is increasing. (The  Spokeswoman) KINESIS page eighteen  DISTRIBUTE KINESIS  !  Recently, an SFU communications  student, Liz Harman, carried out  a study of KINESIS readers as part  of her fieldwork. Here are some  highlights from her findings:  Over one-half of the members (56%)  said tl at their motivation vas  generated through being sexually  discriminated against.  The non-  members had a majority give the  same response (70%).  70% of each  group felt that their interest in  the Vancouver Status of Women is  prompted by their recognition of a  societal, rather than a personal,  need.  A large number of people heard from  friends or set out to find the Vancouver Status of Women, rather than  hearing about it from VSW media.  (Members-70%, non-members-61%)  This indicates a lack of distribution to the public at large, as only  those interested in the women's  movement in the first place would  find out about our existence.  Interesting comments were received  when the non-member subscribers  were asked why they chose to be  subscribers only. A large number  of the responses (69%) indicated  that they were not aware that there  was a difference.  The other 31%  felt they did not have time to  participate actively.  With both member and non-member  groups, the majority found the  current political issues involving  women the most interesting of the  KINESIS articles (members-78%,  non-members-54%). Of the member  group, over 70% receive newsletters  and magazines on feminism from  sources other than the V.S.W.; whereas only 28% of the non-members do.  Forty percent of subscribers mentioned they would like, to see more  locally based news items in KINESIS.  The final question asked was an open  comment on how to improve the distribution of material from the V.S.W.  office. Many felt that the membership should feel more involved with  this aspect through encouraging suggestions and articles in KINESIS,  pledges for involvement and feedback  on progress made through the drive.  Several requests were made for  KINESIS to-be made available upon  special permission in bulk quantities for distribution by the membership. One member felt that if this  were encouraged, she alone could  distribute up to 100 copies per  lecture group  Among Liz Harman's recommendations  are the following:  1. Encourage the membership to participate in distribution of material  by printing suggestions and asking  for help.  Several areas are covered  in this section:  a) Special request distribution.  This would include the printing of  several hundred extra copies above  the number required for subscriptions  Let members and institutions know  that copies can be made available  for special bulk distribution (i.e.  lectures) with adequate notification  given.  b) Library requests. Most public  libraries have a magazine section  yet none of then carry KINFSIS. Make  the membership aware that upcn several requests, this can usually be  arranged.  If this were encouraged,  the exposure to the public at large  would increase.  c) Random distribution. Mention  to members regularly that by leaving  KINESIS in laundromats and dentists'  offices, awr.reness will spread.  When this suggestion wac read ir the  June ipsue, many felt it was a  workable idea that should be printed  regularly.  m CLIP AND MAIL  ^ WITH YOUR NAME  and address to VSW 2029 W 4th Ave.  %   <f|  J!  J|  e ^end rtne:  •bulk copies or  *r  fc*^      ^      w^  9    'M _JU  ftfe PRG^OTiaW  ■u>    i) - -j; '   V; " w)  BCFW  THE B.C.FEDERATION OF WOMEN will hold  its Fourth Annual Convention October  7-10. Accommodation for delegates will  be at the Davey Crockett Motel(!) which  is about two blocks from the Fraser  Valley College, where the daily proceedings will take place.  Focus of this year's convention is  around issues of concern to B.C. women.  One day will be devoted to small group  discussion of issues such as violence  against women; single industry towns;  government funding. Women can form their  own small discussion groups for issues  which are a priority for them. We hope  that strategy and action proposals will  emerge from these workshops.  This will be a delegate convention,  with member groups sending their elected representatives to speak on their  behalf. Observers are welcome. Due to  space -limitations, however, there will  be room for only 50 observers per session. Observers and delegates alike must  pre-register by September 9.  Contact:  BCFW, 3065 Point Grey Rd.,Vancouver.  DDDDDDQDDDDDDDDDD  LOWER MAINLAND REGIONAL MEETING - BCFW  takes place 7.30, September 26th at  6-45 Kingsway. Discussion of Standing  Committee elections for local regional  rep.; convention planning information.  Details: Val Embree 228 8143  DDODDDDDDDDDDDDDD  THE WOMEN'S FILM FESTIVAL, sponsored by  BCFW and planned for October 1977 has  been postponed. If interested women in  the Vancouver region took the matter up,  Jan-March would be a possible time for  the festival, with a possibility of a  BCFW loan.  Much research for the festival has already been done. WOMEN IN  FOCUS is meeting with Cinematheque Sept.  14 to discuss future possiblities. If  you want to become involved, call WOMEN  IN FOCUS, 6-45 Kingsway, 872 2250.  A HAPPY STORY  In the fall of 1976, the Political  Action Group of the North Shore  Women's Centre monitored the local  school board elections in West and  North Vancouver. A questionnaire  was sent to all candidates, asking  the following:  1. Why are you running for office?  2. How immediate an issue do you  consider sexism in the school to be?  3. In what ways can the educational  system help change the present situation of sex-role stereotyping?  Please give concrete examples...  4. If elected, would you support  in-service workshops for teachers  and administrators to help them  deal with the problems of sex-role  stereotyping?  A committee of women phoned the candidates to ask them to answer the  questionnaire.  They delivered the  questionnaire to candidate's homes,  and picked them up again.  Then the membership list of the North  Shore Women's Centre was divided up  and every committee member phoned  twenty people to give them the results.  The political action group believes  that it was this personal contact  with both the candidates and the  North Shore Women's Centre members  that made the project a huge success.  by Shirley Freund  Because most of the candidates took,  the time to answer at some length,  it was extremely helpful in assessing  candidates' attitudes about women.  A committee member also wrote an  article concerning the responses for  the local paper.  Some of the positive results from  these actions were:  1. The candidates became aware that  there is a women's centre on the  North Shore actively working within  the community to improve the status  of women.  2. The candidates were then receptive to pressure put upon them by  the Centre and by the North Vancouver Teachers' Association when the  issue of women's studies in the  high schools was raised.  The North Vancouver School Board  voted unanimously on the motion  that, during the 1977-78 school  year, in-service education projects be undertaken as a means of  providing additional thrust in  this area.  This may include a  second short-term leave; and that,  once the work of the Task Force on  Athletics is completed, we establish an ongoing committee recommended earlier by the Status of  Women committee to monitor progress in the whole area. KINESIS, page nineteen  sisterly events  Vernon Women  Supplies are needed for Transition  House.  We are appealing for various  articles in good condition for the  children who will be in residence at  Transition House.  If you can help,  please leave goods at the Social  Planning rooms.  Supplies for an Emergency Clothes  Store  - from diapers up  Inside  - wall posters, mobiles  - blocks, wooden toys  - toys with wheels  - sturdy washable plastic toys  - chalk, crayons/paper  - dolls' bedding/play dishes  - cards, puzzles and games for  older children  - nursery guard for stairs  - nursery furniture  Outside  - jump ropes  - tricycles  - balls, frisbees  - rope ladder/swing  Two outside projects will be establishing a play house in an old shed  and putting in a sand pit.  We hope to make use of Vernon facilities - library, recreation centre,  parks, beaches, etc. and would be  pleased to hear from anyone able to  help with small excursions, etc.  Contact: Vernon Women's Centre Society, Box 733, Vernon, B.C.  Kitimat  The Kitimat Women's Centre is raising funds through the sale of  posters and T-shirts.  Cost is about  $5.00, and the shirts come in yellow  blue or red, with women's sizes in  small, medium and large, and children's sizes as well.  Slogans include: ADAM WAS A ROUGH  DRAFT  and A WOMAN'S PLACE IS EVERY  PLACE'.     Design includes the women's  liberation symbol and the International Women's Year dove.  More information is available from  Tamitik Status of Women Organization  Box 18, Kitimat, B.C.  North Shore  NORTH SHORE WOMEN'S CENTRE EVENTS  PUB NIGHT: Tuesday, September 6.  Speaker Pearl Roberts (BCTF Status  of Women Committee) will discuss  "What Is the School Doing To Your  Son or Daughter?" Location: 225  East 2nd Avenue, North Vancouver.  Doors open at 7:30, speaker at  8:00.  WORKSHOP ON LESBIANISM/FEMINISM:  Saturday, September 17 from l-5pm  at North Shore Women's Centre. To  take part, call the North Shore  Women's Centre at 987-4822 or visit the Centre at 3255 Edgemont  Boulevard, North Vancouver.  Lesbian Literary Soc  The Vancouver Lesbian Literary Society originated in 1975, with 'a small  group of literature lovers who felt  inspired by Natalie Barnie's literary salon in Paris during the early  part of this century.  We met twice  a month and discussed various numbers  of poems, novels and women's language.  Since then we have decided to change  the format of the 'salon' from a  closed group, to a more informal meeting of women every Thursday night from  7:00-9:00 at ARIEL BOOKSTORE, 2766  West 4th Avenue. We would like the  gathering to be on a drop-in basis,  with women feeling free to discuss  their favourite literature or just to  relax and listen.  B.C. Artists  Two members of Women's Inter-Art Coop  Valerie Pugh, and Phyllis Green, will  be showing their work at the Vancouver  Art Gallery in the September B.C.  Artists Show. They were among 35  others accepted under the category  of Painting, Sculpture and Graphics.  The gallery is attempting to "demonstrate the diversity of art today in  the province." Valerie invents  whimsical fantasy worlds in ceramics,  brimming with creatures out of her  unique sense of the cosmos0 Phyllis'  ceramic sculptures are sly digs at  social stereotypes and conventions  with an underlying sense of the surreal.  Resources Centre  WOMEN'S RESOURCES CENTRE  Be our guest at an Open House in our  NEW LOCATION, #1-1144 Robson Street,  September 21, 1977 from 11am-3pm.  For information, call 685-3934 or  228 2181, local 218.  Women's Studies  E.C. WOMEN'S STUDIES ASSOCIATION  CONFERENCE  Friday, October 21 from 7:30-10:00pm  Saturday, October 22, 9:00-5:00pm  Capilano College, North Vancouver  Workshops include: Women's Studies  Curriculum, Rural Women, Feminist  Counselling, Effective Media Technique, Women and the Theatre,  Women's Studies in the High Schools,  and many more.  Lunch, Wine & Cheese, good conversation, and fun also included!  For more information, contact Mercia  Stickney, 4931 6th Avenue, Delta,  B.C. V4N 1L3  Rape Relief  One of these days we'll get it right:  VANCOUVER RAPE RELIEF : 732 1613 is  the crisis line.  Women's Programming  at Co-op Radio  The women's committee at Co-op Radio  will be starting regular programming  in September.  Regular features will  include a monthly women's news programme that will highlight local  events and groups, but will also get  out information of national and international importance.  Another regular  feature will be local women's music,  most of which will be recorded live  at the Women's Coffeehouse and other  places around Vancouver.  Other programmes will focus on topics of concern for women in Vancouver and on  herstory.  We also want to be available to record conferences, meetings, festivals  and other women's events as they  happen in the community.  So, if a  group has something coming up in  the fall, let us know about it. We  are looking for ideas, suggestions  and women to help on the committee.  Call us at 879-6491.  Every Thursday at 6:30-7:00pm on  Co-op Radio.  September 1: Ferron - recorded live  at the Full Circle Coffeehouse  September 8: Women's News - featuring local, national and international news.  September 15: Connie Smith and  Kalin Wild - two local women singing  their own songs and playing guitar  and recorder.  September 22: SORWUC - a look at  the Service, Office and Retail  Workers Union of Canada.  Produced  by the women at SORWUC.  September 29: T.B.A.  WOMEN'S.PROGRAMMING AT CO-OP RADIO  102.7 FM  CITY HALL : LOBBY FOR €QUAL JOB CHANC€S S€PT€MB€R13  PHONE VSW FOR DETAILS ■  3746 - WE NEED BODIES AT THIS MEETING! voncouver status of women  2029 west 4th ovenue  voncouver, b.c. V6J1N3  736 3746  CONTENTS  RAPE TRIAL  GAY RIGHTS  FEMINIST M€DIA  WOMEN IN PRISON  BURNS LAKE WOMEN  R€VIEW of STAR WARS  BREAKING THE HOLD  LABOUR R€SOURCES  WOM€N'S STUDIES  UNION MAIDS  €VENTS  ETC.  ________       Serials Division,  ^^   Main Library,  U.B.C.  VANCOUVER, B.C.  iMtf^tttWi^M^WfCr.  .AWt'^ W&U<\qi \o Ye** 'V*** 3aM —  \t\^tie &ea£&v^ cvtoU&e~.