 April 1995  ^Dpcicri Collections Serial  Copenhagen Summit CMPA $2.25 KINESIS  #301-1720 Grant Street ■  Vancouver, BC V5L 2Y6  Tel: (604)255-5499  Fax:(604)255-5511  Kinesis welcomes volunteers to work on  all aspects of the paper. Our next  Writers' Meeting is Apr 4 for the May  issue and May 2 for the June issue, at  7 pm at Kinesis. All women welcome  even if you don't have experience.  Kinesis is published ten times a year by  the Vancouver Status of Women. Its  objectives are to be a non-sectarian  feminist voice for women and to work  actively for social change, specifically  combatting sexism, racism.classism,  homophobia, ableism, and imperialism.  Views expressed in Kinesis are those of  the writer and do not necessarily reflect  VSW policy. All unsigned material is the  responsibility of the Kinesis Editorial  Board.  EDITORIAL BOARD  Lissa Geller, wendy lee kenward  Agnes Huang, Fatima Jaffer  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE  Fatima Jaffer, Robyn Hall, Susan  MacFarlane, Janet Jones,  Dawn Simpson.wendy lee kenward,  Leah Ibbitson, Coleen Hennig,  Melissa Haynes, Elsie Wong,  Rose Baldry, E. Centime Zeleke,  Christine Evans, Heidi Henkenhaf,  Colette Hogue  Advertising: Yasmin Jiwani  Circulat'on:Cat L'Hirondelle, Jennifer  Johnstone, Linda Gorrie  Distribution: Carolina Rosales  Production Co-ordinator: Agnes Huang  Typesetter: Sur Mehat  FRONT COVER  Faith Nolan in concert  Photo by Fatima Jaffer  PRESS DATE  March 28,1995  SUBSCRIPTIONS  lndividual:$20 per year (+$1.40 GST)  or what you can afford  Institutions/Groups:  $45 per year (+$3.15 GST)  VSW Membership (includes 1 year  Kinesis subscription):  $30 per year (+$1.40 GST)  SUBMISSIONS  Women and girls are welcome to make  submissions. We reserve the right to  edit and submission does not guarantee  publication. If possible, submissions  should be typed, double spaced and  must be signed and include an address,  telephone number and SASE. Kinesis  does not accept poetry or fiction.  Editorial guidelines are available upon  request.  DEADLINES  All submissions must be received in the  month preceding publication. Note: Jul/  Aug and Dec/Jan are double issues.  Features and reviews: 10th  News: 15th  Letters and Bulletin Board: 18th  Display advertising  (camera ready): 18th  (design required): 16th  Kinesis is produced on a Warner  Doppler PC using WordPerfect 5.1,  PageMaker 4.0 and an NEC laser  printer. Camera work by Midtown  Graphics. Printing by Horizon  Publications.  Kinesis is indexed in the Canadian  Women's Periodicals Index,  the Alternative Press Index and is a  member of the Canadian Magazine  PublishersAssociation.  ISSN 0317-9095  Publications mail registration #6426  Kinesis  News  The federal budget - what's in it for women 3  by Luce Kanin  Filipina domestic worker executed in Singapore 4  by Agnes Huang  New legislation on drunkenness defense 5  by Fiona Buss  A new feminist newspaper at UBC 6  by E. Centime Zeleke  Features  IWD in Vancouver 9  by Agnes Huang  IWD in Toronto 10  bySmita Patil  Interview with Joan Ross Frankson: On the road to Beijing 11  as told to Fatima Jaffer  interview with Kahn-Tineta Horn, Mohawk Nation 14  as told to Agnes Huang  Centrespread  Interview with Miche Hill: Tribunal in Copenhagen 12  by Sue Vohanka  No lunch please: hunger strike at UN conference 12  by Sue Vohanka  Arts  Previewing Mayworks 16  by Michelle Frey  Interview with Faith Nolan: Hard to imagine 17  by Datejie  Review: By For and About Feminism 18  by Susan MacFarlane  Interview with video artist Yau Ching 19  by Wei Yuen Fong  Regulars  As Kinesis Goes to Press 2  Inside Kinesis 2  What's News 7  by Lissa Geller, Robyn Hall and Shannon e. Ash  Movement Matters 8  by Lissa Geller  Letters 20  Bulletin Board 21  compiled by wendy lee kenward  ^  t  ^§?  j   ^^TyL6  .^  \j£c~  W3^ ^»§k  ^  >^!^M^i§^£S5  Wfit  What's in the federal budget 3  The next writers' meetings  are on April 4  &May2  @ 7 pm at VSW  #301-1720 Grant St As Kinesis goes to press, the BC  budget is about to be announced. Too  late for us to report on this month. The  same thing happenend last month, with  the federal budget being announced a  couple of days before we went to press.  Parliamentarians, federal and provincial, do not respect deadlines—unless  it's to organize announcements early in  the day so that the daily mainstream  media can get it onto to the evening  news, or afternoon papers. Our roundup  of what's in the federal budget and how  it impacts on women is on page 3. The  fight against the budget is still in full  swing, with NAC organizing protests  by its members, and the Action Canada  Network, a coalition of social justice  groups and unions, launching "Days of  Anger" against the budget. To contact  NAC for more information or to get  involved, call 1-800-665-5124; to contact  ACN, call 1-613-233-1764.  Still on the budget, word is that  coalitionsare forming in various cities to  fight against different aspects of the  budget. One such fightback group, the  Coalition for the Unemployed, are looking for Canadians willing to speak out  against the social cuts at a "Candle of  Hope Vigil" to be held on May 1st in the  Niagara Area. If you'll be in the area  then and are interested in participating,  call Ed Gould at (905) 646-2684.  Other coalitions fighting social cuts  are those on the issues surrounding the  new head-tax on immigrants and refugees [see page 3]. (The last time we saw  such a head tax, it was being imposed  earlier this century to discourage immigration by peoples from India and China.)  We'll have more on the fightback against  immigration cuts next issue as well.  Women and the media was to have  been our theme this month, with a special focus on last month's International  Symposium on Women and the Media  held in Toronto. The conference was  among many to draw up documents on  specific issues that will inform the 1995-  2005 Plan for Action, to be discussed at  the United Nations World Conference  on Women in Beijing in September [see  page 11]. Due to illness and other setbacks, we are unable to bring you that  coverage this month, but it's on the  agenda for our May issue.  For those who want to know more  about the solidarity being built and discussions being held between women  from around the world, we've got a  report on what happened at the Copenhagen Summit on Social Development-  -or at least on the simultaneously held  NGO Forum in Copenhagen [seepage 12-  13]. Copenhagen also marks the beginning of the 180-day countdown to the  Beijing conference. The 180 Days/180  Ways: Women's Action Campaign is  something you or your groups may want  to participate in locally [see page 81.  Also in this issue is our coverage of  International Women's Day celebrations in Vancouver and Toronto. We  lucked out in having a Kinesis ed -boarder  attend this year's Toronto IWD to bring  us coverage of it. Truth be told, IWD is  getting harder and harder to "celebrate"  each year. The ironies surrounding this  year's celebrations were manifold Canada's federal budget, with its woman-  targetting economic restructuring  agenda, had just come down; girls in  Quebec and Paris are being expelled  from schools for wearing the hi jab (cul-  tural/Islamichead covering); feminists  in Algeria are being harassed and killed  by fundamentalists; women's wages in  Russia have fallen to 40 percent of men's  from 70 percent in the old communist  Soviet Union; the fundamentalist political parties Shiv Sena and BJP in India  ^Thanks  Our thanks to Vancouver Status of Women members and donors who support  us year 'round with memberships and donations. Our appreciation to the following  supporters who became members, renewed their memberships or donated to VSW  in March:  Louise Allen * Viviane Comensoli * Christine Cosby * Barbara Curran * Ann  Doyle * Karen Egger * Valerie Embree * Mr. & Mrs. Micheal & Connie Geller *  Heather George * Julia Goulden * Mariorie Griffin Cohen * Barbara Jo May *  Ursula Kemig * Dorothy Kidd * Barbara Kuhne * Barbara Lebrasseur * Judy  Lynne * Sheila McFadzean * Adrienne Montani * Leslie Muir * Denise Nadeau  * Neil Power * Nora Randall * Janet Shaw * Gillian Smith * Betsy Spaulding *  Ginny Stikeman * Laura Stovel * Sheilah Thompson * Wendy Thompson *  Vancouver Newspaper Guild Local 115 * Lynne Werker * Roberta Westwood *  Susan Witter * Georgia Woods * Erna Zinn  Corrections  In last month's issue, we incorrectly  reported that the Vancouver Women's  Health Collective boycotted the community forum on women's health sponsored by the BC government's New Directions in Health, (page 7). The Health  Collective decided to not attend the forum, but was not boycotting it.  We also incorrectly listed the title of  Lydia Kwa's recently published book of  poetry in the bioline of her review of  Sawagi Taiko's performance at this year's  Women in Vieiu festival (page 23). Kwa's  new book is called The Colours of Hero ines  and is published by Women's Press in  Toronto.  have just won control of the assembly in  India's richest state, Maharastra (which  includes Bombay); the United States is  forcing mothers on welfare to work; and  and and...Despite the increasingly difficult contexts of women's lives globally,  we still manage to celebrate IWD with  creativity, courage and commitment to  continuing the struggle. Heck, in the  end, IWD is one of the few times we get  to jus' plain celebrate a day for women!  Back to the issue of women and  media...we just heard that the Canadian  Women's Periodical Index is closing  shop. The Women's Index was a pioneering effort to put Canadian women's  reasearch bibliographic resources in the  hands of women working in universities, community organizations and publications. It's been a unique source of  information on women's research and  action—for example, who's writing what  about which women's issue for which  women's or feminist publication and  when. Published at the University of  Alberta, the Women's Index basically  made visible the printed works of feminists throughout the country. It's definitely a resource that will be missed—  and lacking—for many of us.  And still on the subject of media...the  weeks of April carry the themes: Freedom of Information; and Freedom to  Read. Throughout the country—actually throughout North America—the  books most often challenged are those  with gay and lesbian themes. In 1991,  there were 40 challenges to books with  gay or lesbian themes. In 1992, there  were 111 such challenges. Meanwhile,  the gay and lesbian bookstore in Vancouver, Little Sisters', continues to  await the verdict on its case challenging  Customs Canada's practice of holding  up their shipments of books. We will  bring you more on that case as soon as  the verdict is announced.  Some last-minute announcements  as Kinesis goes to press: Dancing on the  Edge, Vancouver's dance festival, is  slated to take place at a different time of  the year this time. The just-announced  dates for the festival are April 19-29. We  got the news too late to bring you a  complete schedule, but you can call  Esther Rausenberg at 689-0926 for information on dance artists and the festival  schedule.  And with minutes to make it to  press, we just got word that Black feminist writer Dionne Brand will be in  Vancouver at the end of April for the  launch of her latest book, Bread out of  Stone. If you get a chance, don't wait for  Brand to launch the book. Buy or borrow  it now. Bread our of Stone is one of the  most important, powerful statements of  our times. Read it. Read it again.  That's it for this month. Hope you  enjoy the issue. We'll be back next  month...with much much more!  It's springtime in Vancouver and  inside Kinesis too! Spring is a time of  change, of new happenings. So here's an  update on what's new and exciting with  the newspaper.  First off, have you noticed anything  new about our table of contents page?  Guess. Okay, we'll tell you...we added  back the phrase, "Kinesis means movement." We get asked a lot what Kinesis  means, so we thought we'd let all our  readers know.  Kinesis also has a new Editorial Board  member to welcome—wendy lee  kenward. wendy has been a regular volunteer for almost a year, doing some  writing and lots of production work.  We're happy to welcome you onto the  Ed Board, wendy, and look forward to a  year of changes and movement.  Unfortunately, not all change that  happens in the springtime isgood. Sometimes, spring brings about goodbyes.  This month, we have to say a sad goodbye to Shannon e. Ash, who's leaving the  Ed Board to concentrate on making a  living by freelance writing. Happily for  Kinesis, Shannon's not leaving us entirely. She promises to continue writing  the interesting and inciteful stories she's  known for in Kinesis.  This month, we also have three new  writers to welcome. Welcome to Fiona  Buss (see page 5), to Michelle Frey (see  page 16) and a big welcome to Datejie  (see page 17), who's all the way over  there in Toronto.  If you'd like to get involved writing  for Kinesis give us a call, 255-5499, or  drop by at one of our writers meetings  on the first Tuesday of each month. The  next meetings are April 4 and May 2, at  7pm at our office. Drop by and check it  out.  This month, we'd also like to welcome two new production volunteers,  Melissa Haynes and Janet Jones. If you'd  like to learn all about putting a feminist  newspaper together, call Agnes at 255-  5499. Our next production is from April  20-25 for the May issue.  We'd like to express our great thanks  and appreciation to the Vancouver  Newspaper Guild who made a generous donation to Kinesis to help us send  Fatima Jaffer to Toronto to attend the  UNESCO International Symposium on  Women and the Media. Stay tuned for  next month's issue, when we'll have lots  of coverage from the conference.  Just thought we'd let you know we're  about to embark on a new and exciting  subscription drive—our last one was  three years ago. Grace Wandolo (who,  like the editor, is from Kenya) has been  hired on a project grant to coordinate the  sub drive and has been working hard to  get things rolling.  And finally inside Kinesis, as you  probably know, we'll soon be hiring a  new editor. The application deadline  has passed and we'll be interviewing  and making a decision sometime in April.  By next issue, we'll be able to tell you  who she is.  That's it for this month. Enjoy the  sunshine...if there is any where you are.  See you in May.  APRIL 1995 JNIews  Women and the federal budget:  The wrecking ball swings  by Luce Kanin   If anyone doubts that Liberals are  actually Conservatives in thin disguise,  the recent federal budget offers some  damning evidence. Although his language was tinged a pale pink, finance  minister Paul Martin's February 27th  budget came in Big Business blue—witness the happy faces of money traders  and corporate heads when they heard of  $7 in spending cuts for every $1 in new  taxes.  But those massive spending cuts  aren't even the real story. While Martin  talked about getting Canada's "fiscal  house in order," the Liberals simply  used the deficit to demolish the shelter  of Canada's social security system.  No need to get weepy about that  shelter: women know all too well the  weakness of existing welfare, pension,  childcare and income assistance programs. Still, the 1995 budget is the wrecking ball that will collapse the present  structure—along with medicare and  education. The key is the shift in federal-  provincial relations.  Here are some details of the 1995  budget:  •Ottawa is virtually abandoning its  role in the social welfare field.  This desertion isn't simply about  less money—although the budget does  reduce federal social spending by a stunning $11 billion over the next three years.  More importantly, the feds are ending  transfer agreements with the provinces—the Canada Assistance Plan (welfare and social services) and the Established Programs Financing (education  and health care). So it's goodbye CAP  and EPF, hello CST (Canada Social Transfer).  The CST lumps together all previous transfers (albeit with much less  money) and unties any restrictions on  provincial spending. No longer will  Ottawa tell the provinces they must  spend X-amount on welfare and Y-  amount on education. No longer will  Ottawa have any control over who gets  welfare (or not), or how health care  dollars are spent.  What this means is all of Canada  could go the way of Alberta: widespread  privatization of health care and education (pay up or get lost); inhumane welfare restrictions (beware: single moms,  single anyone); and the literal disappearance of many social services (gotta  problem? fix yourself).  "The Liberals are now talking about  'principles/ not 'national standards',"  says Miche Hill of the Vancouver Status  of Women. "They talk about giving the  provinces more power, more local control, but what it means to women and  children is 'you're on your own'."  Verna Thomas is with the National  Anti-Poverty Organization. "The provinces are told to go on their own with the  [budget cuts]," says Thomas. "This  means that some basic rights and national standards, such as the right to  receive support when a person is in  need, or the right to appeal [a welfare  decision], will no longer be part of the  Canadian social safety net.  "This situation will allow provinces  to use low-income and unemployed  people in cheap labour schemes, undermining the wages and working conditions of people who already have a job."  • Although the Liberals rocked-and-  rolled to the slogan 'jobs, jobs, jobs,'  their budget offers no direct job creation.  But they came through on unemployment creation. The budget directly  axes 45,000 federal civil servants, and  $975 per adult applying for permanent  residency status. The Liberals traditionally fancy themselves on good relations  with immigrant communities. But this  measure smells distinctly Reform  Party—and definitely anti-immigrant.  The measure was quickly dubbed  the new 'Head Tax,' after the discriminatory entry fee targeted at Chinese im-  migrants earlier this century. Immigrant  and refugee groups are fighting the  measure, which will clearly block people from poorer countries—usually people of colour, especially women.  social spending cuts will undoubtedly  translate into thousands of provincial  layoffs.  Besides the immediate hardship to  laid-off workers, all Canadians can expect fewer and shabbier public services.  This is the Tower your expectations'  stanza of the 'Less Government is Best  Government' anthem.  •Meanwhile, the Liberals continue  to dismantle the Unemployment Insurance system. The budget cuts a further  10 percent from the program ($700 million) for 1996-97, on top of an earlier 12  percent cut. While the method of cutting  was unspecified, about $200 million of  the savings was projected to come from  reducing UI "abuses."  "One thing is clear," says Sunera  Thobani of the National Action Committee on the Status of Women. "Any  changes in UI benefits will have negative effects on women and youth who  make up the majority of people working  part-time or in contract jobs."  • Child care was the big orphan here:  nary a peep in the budget, despite the  Liberal's campaign promises.  "The lack of mention of.. .[child care]  is a direct violation of promises made in  the Red Book," says Thobani. "Not only  will Mr. Martin make families poorer, he  is doing nothing to better the care of  their children."  "This disregard for child care needs  will hamper severely the possibility of  poor women entering the job market."  •Immigrants and refugees were  socked with a nasty bill: a Landing Fee of  "This fee...amounts to an elitist and  racist attack on the most vulnerable people trying to attain Canadian citizenship, " says the Action Canada Network.  "When most immigrants were white,  there was never any discussion of the  costs of settlement," says Nandita  Sharma of Vancouver's South Asian  Women's Centre. "It's not a coincidence  that, when people of colour start to dominate immigration, the government begins talking about 'the burden.'  "This is a political, not an economic,  decision. The $146 million that will be  collected annually is not even directed  towards immigrant settlement services,  but will go into general revenues," says  Sharma.The Head Tax is the first stage in  the govemment'santi-immigrant moves:  within the next two years, people sponsoring a family member will be required  to post a Sponsorship Bond. The amount  is not yet determined, but Sharma says  "the figure we hear is $20,000."  •Federal support for women's organizations is on perilous ground.  For starters, Ottawa pulled the plug  on the Canadian Advisory Council on  the Status of Women (CACSW). (This  move was announced March 14 by Sheila  Finestone, the Secretary of State, Status  of Women.) The government-appointed  advisory body was an important source  of research and public information.  While never the voice of grassroots feminism, CACSW was nevertheless a modest thorn in government's side.  Now, CACSW's research and communication functions will be "folded  into" the government's Statusof Women  Canada (SWC) department. In effect,  there is no longer an arms-length research body on women's issues in this  country.  The Women's Program was also  moved into SWC from its not-so-old  home in Human Resources Development. (The Women's Program has been  bounced around and plenty weakened  in the last ten years. It provides both core  and project funding to women's groups  across the country.) Finestone says this  consolidation will streamline resources,  and "create a new synergy between research, policy and programs on women's equality issues."  The Women's Program also sustained a five percent budget cut; it's still  unclear how the cut will affect individual groups. And women's groups  have been told to expect a deeper cut  next year.  "The government says it plans to  shiftits funding away from 'established'  groups and those in urban centres," says  VSW's Miche Hill. "They say that established groups should be able to stand on  their own two feet." ,  "Of course rural women and new  groups deserve funding. But this is just  a typical divide-and-conquer approach.  And a way for the Liberals to shut up  their feminist critics."  Luce Kanin won't shut up. She's a  Vancouver writer.  An alternative budget  An alternative budget has been  released by Choices, a Manitoba-based  coalition of social justice groups and  economists, and the Canadian Centre  for Policy Alternatives, an Ottawa-  based think tank. The alternate budget  does not cut social programs, and even  improves funding for them. It increases  taxes on the rich and corporations, but  not a lot. Among measures, it would  create 1.2 million jobs by reducing  interest rates, spend $3 billion on job  creation programs, put $600 million  into social housing, make homes energy efficient, and raise the federal  minimum wage to $7 an hour. It reflects the values and concerns of the  majority of people in Canada as it details a fiscal plan that accepts the government's goal of bringing the deficit  down to three percent of the Gross  Domestic Product by 1996-7.  The Alternate Budget is available from  the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives, 251 Laurier West, Suite 804, Ot-  taioa, KIP 5J6 or by calling (613) 563-  1341; or from CHOICES, a Social Justice  Coalition, 5th Tloor, 275 Broadway, Winnipeg, Manitoba, R3C 4M6, or by calling  (204) 942-0343. News  Filipina domestic worker hanged in Singapore:  Mobilizing for justice  by Agnes Huang   Women's and workers rights grou ps  around the world are mobilizing to protest the exploitation 'and abuse of migrant workers, following the execution  of a Filipina domestic worker in Singapore in March.  In 1991, Flor Contemplacion was  charged and convicted of murdering  another Filipina domestic worker, Delia  Maga, and a young boy, who was Maga's  charge. Maga was Contemplacion's  friend. The Singaporean government  says Contemplacion had confessed to  the killings, but Contemplacion says she  was forced to confess after weeks of  intense interrogation by Singapore police.  Contemplacion's supporters believe  she was framed for the murders and that  she was not given proper advice from  her court-appointed lawyer. Her lawyer  advised Contemplacion to plead guilty  by reason of insanity. When the court  rejected her insanity plea, Contemplacion  was sentenced to death.  Her supporters also point out that  new evidence has arisen that would have  proven her innocent. A few months before Contemplacion's scheduled execution, a witness came forward with a  different story of the deaths.  Emilia Frenilla, also a Filipina domestic worker working in Singapore,  told police she had overheard a conversation between the boy's father and his  brother—her employer—which suggested that Contemplacion had nothing  to do with the deaths. Frenilla says the  boy drowned accidently in a bathtub  after having an epileptic seizure, and  that his enraged father killed Maga, who  he felt was responsible for his son's  death.  Despite a plea for a stay of the execution and a full review of the new evidence by women's groups, workers'  unions and human rights organizations,  on March 17 the Singapore government  hanged Contemplacion. Singapore rejected the plea saying there were no  grounds for believing the new evidence  was true.  Women's and workers' rights  groups say the execution of  Contemplacion brings into sharp focus  the harsh reality most migrant workers  face when working abroad. The organizers of mobilization actions in Vancouver in support of Flor Contemplacion—  Migrante-Vancouver, BC Committee for  Human Rights in the Philippines, and  the Philippine Women Centre of BC—  say they plan to "carry forward the struggle for justice for Flor Contemplacion  I    DR. PAULETTE ROSCOE    "  I      NATUROPATHIC PHYSICIAN      1  a HOMEOPATHY ■  ■ COUNSELLING ■  ■ DETOXIFICATION \  HYCROFT MEDICAL CENTER  ,       .    108-3195 GRANVILLE ST. i  ■ VANCOUVER, B.C. V6H 3K2 l  731-4183  and for the rights and welfare of migrant  workers."  More than3.5 million Filipinos work  as migrant labour abroad in 168 countries worldwide. In Singapore, approximately 75,000 Filipina women working  as domestics. Worldwide, Filipino migrant workers contribute US$2 billion  back to the Philippine economy.  At a recent mobilization action in  Vancouver, a representative of the Philippine Women's Centre said that the  Philippine government must be held  accountable for doing nothing to protect  migrant workers abroad like Contemplacion. The action's organizers say the  Philippine government has shown little  regard for the safety of its citizens working abroad. "We criticize the Philippine  government for acting late and only when  this case has become a national controversy," say the organizers.  The Philippine embassy in Singa-  poredid little to support Contemplacion  during her trial or after her conviction.  And while the Philippine government of  Fidel Ramos did eventually ask the  Singaporean government to hold off the  execution until the new evidence could  be explored, he did so only one week  before Contemplacion's scheduled hanging.  The Vancouver organizers also  called for a boycott of Singapore Airlines and Singapore products, and the  immediate ratification of the 1990 United  Nations General Assembly Convention  for the Protection of the Rights of Migrant Workers and members of their  Families.  Numerous actions internationally  have been organized and continue to  take place to protest against the brutal  treatment of Flor Contemplacion and  many other migrant workers worldwide.  Women and workers organized protests,  vigils, pickets and rallies in the Philippines, Hong Kong, the Netherlands,  Rome, Saudi Arabia, various cities in  Canada, among other places.  In the Philippines, Sunday, March  26—the day Contemplacion was buried  in her hometown of San Pablo City,  Laguna—was declared a National Day  of Protest and Mourning.  Operine  Banton  Counsellor  202 -1807 Burrard St.  Vancouver, BC V6J 3G9  Tel: (604) 736-8087  JANET LICHTY  B.A., M.Ed. Counselling Psychology, R.C.C.  COUNSELLOR  1-296 W18 Ave, Vancouver, B.C., V5Y 2A7  872-2611  Filipina migrant worker Maria Villa Cahilig, tied up with rope in the centre  of a circle of demonstrators, holds together the "tie" of coloured strands  of ribbon symbolizing the ties of solidarity between demonstrators and  migrant workers. About 35 people showed up at the Vancouver Art Gallery  on March 26 for the demonstration to protest the killing of Flor  Contemplacion and the abuse of migrant workers globally.  BRIDGING THE RACE  AND GENDER GAP  Dr. Vanaja Dhruvarajan, the Ruth Wynn Woodward Professor in  Women's Studies at SFU, is sponsoring a conference to bring  together the women-of-colour community groups and the  university to celebrate successful initiatives and achievements,  and to discuss the type of relationship between the university and  the community which will promote the interests of women of  colour.  Speakers from women-of-colour community groups in B.C. will  discuss the struggle in promoting their interests by focussing on  issues such as:  racism sexism multiculturalism      poverty  violence occupational and educational opportunities  Saturday, May 13, 1995  9:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.  Simon Fraser University  Harbour Centre Campus  515 West Hastings Street  Vancouver, B.C.  to pre-register call  291 3333  partial childcare reimbursement is available  APRIL 1995 News  Federal amendment to criminal code:  'Drunk' defense challenged  The new amendment to the Canadian Criminal Code, designed to limit the  use of the "drunkenness defense" in  sexual assault trials is being billed by the  Federal Justice department as another  step to end male violence against women.  However, it is getting mixed reviews  from feminist anti-violence groups.  Bill C-72 was introduced in the  House of Commons last February, after  much lobbying by women's groups. The  bill is designed to curb the use of the  extreme drunkenness defense in sexual  assault cases. Intoxication is a standard  excuse of men who abuse women. [C-72  legislates criminal fault in relation to  extreme self-induced intoxication and  violence.]  The amend men t comes after women  expressed outrage, and caught the public's attention, following a Supreme  Court ruling in September that ordered  a new trial for Henri Daviualt. Daviault  was convicted of the sexual assault of a  65-year-old wheelchair-bound woman.  He appealed to the Supreme Court, saying he did not receive a fair trial as the  lower courtsdid not allow him to use the  defence that he was extremely intoxicated during the assault.  In the wake of the Daviault intoxication defense, there were a number of  cases reported in the media of the drunkenness defense being used to acquit men.  Carl Blair, an Edmonton man who severely beat his wife, was acquitted on  that defense [see Kinesis, Dec/fan 95]. In  the Northwest Territories, a woman reported being beaten by her husband  while he was sober. She testified that he  held the telephone in his lap while he  drank two cases of beer. When he was  drunk, she says he threw the phone at  her saying, "Now phone the cops, you  bitch."  Women's organizations held demonstrations and press conferences to  express their concern that the intoxication defence would continue to be used  to get men off for crimes committed  against women, and would further perpetuate the myth that male violence  against women is justified and excusable under certain circumstances.  cline in women coming forward to report abuse.  Bill C-72 is the first bill amending  the extreme drunkeness defense to be  introduced in parliament since Daviault.  However, a proposal paper, introduced  earlier for discussion in the Senate (Bill  S-6), suggested creating a "dangerous  intoxication" offense. Alternately, the  paper suggests adding "intoxication" to  the offence inquestion. This would mean,  NO  EXCUSE  FOR ABUSE  Crisis workers say that, even before  the Daviault decision, women did not  report assault and sexual assault because of the high rate of acquittals and  insensihvity of the police and court systems. At its highest estimate, the report  rateof sexual assault isabout 10 percent.  However, since the Daviault decision,  rape crisis workers report a further de-  PARAGRAPH  $350 FIRST PRIZE  DEADLINE JUNE 30. 1995  S14 entry fee includes  one-year subscription to  PARAGRAPH  for detailed RULES send  PARAGRAPH CONTEST  137 Birmingham Street  Stratford, Ontario  N5A 2T1  graphic by Susie Mah  for example, reclassifying certain sexual  assault crimes as "intoxicated sexual  assault."  Bonnie Agnew of Vancouver Rape  Relief and Women's Shelter's says Bill  C-72 "is the better alternative of the two  proposals " Agnew points out that C-72  goes further than Bill S-6 because it introduces the concept of a "standard of  care" to which everyone is responsible.  Negligence of this standard (of sobriety,  of conduct) will not be allowed as a  defence for a criminal offence.  Agnew says she is pleased with the  preamble to Bill C-72, which reflects  some concerns put forth by women's  groups as well as research reports submitted by the now defunct Canadian  Advisory Council on the Status of  Women (CACSW). The preamble acknowledges the gender-based nature of  violence against women and children.  (Even according to conservative estimates, 95 percent of cases of violence  against women are committed by men.)  However, Agnew is concerned that  the bill itself does not recognize the gender-based nature of violence against  women and children. The bill uses gender-neutral language and does not speak  directly to male violence against women.  Agnew says this often allows legislation  to ultimately be used against women, as  in the case of recent anti-stalking and  anti-child abduction laws.  Agnew points out that "Gender specific legislation would redress the inequality of men and women and promote equality in the courtroom."  However, Christine Boyle, a criminal law professor at the University of  British Columbia, says it could be difficult to uphold gender specific language  as "social problems don't track gender  perfectly."  Boyle says she is "reasonably optimistic" that the bill, which she says is  well-written, will make it more difficult  for sexual assault offenders to use the  intoxication defence in the Supreme  Court. Boyle says if the bill passes  through parliament, the Supreme Court  will treat the legislation with "an element of deference," which should help  protect the law, as it is a reflection of  people's concerns and not just common  law.  ...the preamble to  Bill-C 72 reflects  some concerns  put forth by  women's  groups...  Justice minister Allan Rock may try  to ask the Supreme Court to examine Bill  C-72 to see how it would stand up to  constitutional scrutiny (a Charter challenge.) If the Supreme Court decides  that the bill violates the accused's individual rights to full answer and defence  of the sexual assault charges, they could  strike the bill down.  UBC's Boyle explains that, if Rock  tests the bill's ability to withstand a  Charter challenge in the Supreme Court,  it won't then have to be tested on the  backs of individual women after it becomes law. On the other hand, without  a real case to test, the Supreme Court  may have to look at the law without any  "fact picture" to illustrate its necessity.  Denise Tang of Vancouver's Women  Against Violence Against Women  (WAV AW) says that while WAV AW is  relieved that some action is being taken  .o curtail use of the intoxication defence  in sexual assault cases, she is disappointed at the continued need for such  legislation and at the negative stereotypes about violence against women  that continue to surface in the justice  system.  TangsaysWAVAW fights to "break  down the myths" that blame women,  and women's behaviour for men's violent behaviour. She says intoxication  should never have been allowed as a  defence in sexual assault trials in the first  place. "The intoxication defense is a direct insult to the women who use our  services."   Fiona Buss is a first time writer for  Kinesis. She is presently a grantworker at  the Vancouver Status of Women and is a  broadcaster for CFRO Co-operative Radio  in Vancouver. News  Women at UBC start up feminist newspaper:  An alternative voice  by E. Centime Zeleke  There have always been a few students at the University of British Col um-  bia who have struggled to create a students' media that reflects progressive  politics and puts women's issues on the  university's agenda. They have been  somewhat successful despite the fact  that UBC is among Canada's most conservative campuses.  But over the last couple of years, a  number of regressive measures and attitudes have led to the erosion of some of  the gains made by progressive students.  The UBC Women's Centre's funding  was cut, the student newspaper (The  Ubyssey) was closed down, and there  have been increased incidents of sexual  and racist harrassment on campus.  In response, women and other  marginalized groups on campus have  been organizing to create spaces where  this chilly climate can be discussed and  challenged.  Last September, a group of women  from the UBC Women's Centre, witnessing the lack of avenues open for  women to express themselves decided  to try and obtain funding for a women's  paper. By October, the women established themselves as a formal collective.  The historical feminist tradition established by women's papers like Hysteria, The Emily and Kinesis enabled the  collective to quickly form an advertising  policy and a statement of purpose. Despite these, and the fact that women on  thecollective were committed to putting  in long, volunteer hours on producing a  newspaper, funding was not swiftly  forthcoming.  By December, the collective had only  obtained $2,000 from a grant issued by  the Alumni Association.  Notwithstanding the inadequate  funds, the collective was determined to  go ahead with the first issue. A name  was decided on—Vs. An alternative (Vs.  is pronouced versus)—and a deadline  was set for January.  The word "versus" (Vs.) was chosen  because it suggests confrontation, "representing the challenges women's organizations face." It also "communicates the literary aspect of the paper  which includes short stories and poetry." The word "alternative" was added  to suggest that through women publishing their own paper, we are creating "an  alternative though not necessarily opposing forum to the conventional mainstream media."  The first issue appeared in February  and was distributed both on and off  campus. All the articles were by women.  It carried two paid ads, and included a  range of articles—on eating disorders, a  history of the politics of choice, a defense  of women-only spaces, reviews, art and  photo spreads.  But perhaps most significant, the  issue provided students with one of the  few spaces on campus to discuss and  debate Lloyd Axworthy's proposals  around the social policy review, beyond  merely how it affects student tuition  fees.  Since then, Vs. An Alternative continues to struggle for funding.  This is nothing new  This is nothing new. While middle  class white women struggled since the  70s to force the University to recognize  the women's centre as a woman-only  space, groups such as Colour Connected,  a group of students of colour at UBC, are  the 93/94 academic year, The Ubyssey  had special queer and women's issues,  in addition to covering issues pertaining  to women, gays, and lesbians throughout the year.  Push came to shove when the last  paper of the year (a spoof of itself) carried articles by Liz "fuck you" Van  Assum as well as an article by a group of  women called "slice," who were fight-  It is rare to hear women  and lesbian voices  beyond the womens studies' classrooms  or the women's centre.  still struggling for official recognition on  campus, or to obtain funding.  And even though women have a  centre to organize out of, some feel it is  still mere tokenism. It is rare to hear  women and lesbian voices beyond the  womens studies' classrooms or the women's centre.  Newspapers that did exist for  women and other marginalized voices  before Vs. An Alternative came along,  such as The Ubyssey and Poiv (a Chinese  student paper funded by The Ubyssey),  have remained shut since the end of.the  93\94 academic year.  The Ubyssey and Pow were both  funded by the UBC student body. While  The Ubyssey was a volunteer-run paper  open to all students, Pow was created by  Chinese and Asian students who felt The  Ubyssey did not adequately cover the  issues they wanted to see discussed.  Both papers were shut down when  the student government body, the Alma  Mater Society Council (AMS), fired all  seven of the recently elected editors of  The Ubyssey, five of whom were women.  The editors were fired on the premise  that the the paper no longer reflected  what students wanted to read. Pow,  which was funded by The Ubyssey, could  not longer continue to publish.  Some students felt that The Ubyssey  was shut down, not so much because of  what they weren't covering, but because  of what they were. During the course of  ing "the male backlash." Shortly after,  the elected editors were fired. This despite the fact, some students felt, that if  the AMS council was genuinely interested in seeing student interests reflected  in a paper, they too could have joined the  "staff" at The Ubyssey. Anyone can become "staff" after writing three articles.  Immediately after shutting the newspapers down, the AMS attempted to  write a new constitution for The Ubyssey.  In classic Big Brother fashion, the AMS  tried to appoint its own chief editor,  who would then appoint other editors.  The AMS' process, which in effect was  to make defunct The Ubyssey's traditional role as a critical voice on campus,  sent a clear message to students that it  was hardly likely then to fund a women's only paper.  In fact, the 1993/94 AMS was decidedly not women or feminist friendly.  Some of its members have stated that the  UBC Women's Centre is discriminatory  to men. In a memo sent to the Women's  Centre coordinator last June, AMS president Janice Boyle states that the Women's Centre directly contradicts the University's code of procedure. The code  maintains that "the primary function of  a service organization is to serve the  campus universally." Boyle went on to  say that she "would not advocate funding a student service which does not  serve the campus universally."  According to Sarah Dorsey, a coor-  d inator at the Women's Centre, the treatment the Women's Centre has received  at UBC is an example of what is going on  with women's groups all over Canada.  "Like so many other pro-women  services in Canada, we are constantly  battling for survival. We have been cut  back, threatened, audited, have been  stripped of our funding status, degraded  and vandalized."  Vs. fights on  In this hostile climate, women at Vs.  An Alternative know that a newspaper  for, by and about women at UBC will be  difficult to maintain, even as it makes  such a paper all the more necessary.  Because of the lack of funding, the  enthusiasm over the first issue felt by  collective members has yet to carry over  into production on the second issue.  And until the paper begins to be published regularly, it is unlikely to establish an advertising core to sustain it.  However, most recently, the paper  was given an $1,800 grant from the Engineering Undergraduate Society, which  makes it likely that women can look  forward to at least one more issue of Vs.  Meanwhile, there are signs that the  student body will have another alternate student newspaper in the near future. Recently, a student referendum  agreed to resurrect The Ubyssey with a  working budget of approximately  $150,000. If The Ubyssey chooses to fund  a paper that increases the visibility of a  group itdoesnotrepresent, some women  hope it will be Vs.  E. Centime Zeleke is a first time writer for  Kinesis and was a contributor to the first  issue of Vs. An Alternative.  Lynn Redenbach, r.p.n.  Therapy for  Adult & Adolescent Women  > relationships  »weight preoccupation & eating disorders  »trauma & abuse issues  (604) 944-2798 What's News  by Lissa J. Geller  Chilly climate for IWD  A University of Victoria (UVic)  woman professor who was chair of a  committee that drew attention to the  "chilly climate" of sexism at UVic was  suspended from her teaching position  for a week, beginning March 8th~Inter-  national Women's Day.  The suspension of Somer Brodribb,  a professor in UVic's Political Science  department, was announced less than a  week after a claim from the UVic ombudsman that there was no problem  with the way the university was treating  members of the Chi lly Cli mate Commi t-  tee (CCC).  According to Brodribb, the suspension is simply a continuation of the harassment she has endured since she exposed the treatment of women in the  department in the CCC's report. The  report was issued in the spring of 1993  and focused on the hostile climate for  women in the political science department. It also identified several male professors as having contributed to this  "chilly climate" [see Kinesis, June, 93].  Brodribb learned of the suspension  without pay in a letter from UVic vice-  president Sam Scully who indicated it  was because of her continued wish to be  transferred to another department.  "Working in [the political science]  departmenthasbecome unbearable since  the publication of the Chilly Climate  Report," says Brodribb, who had applied for medical leave earlier in the  semester.  The university has refused to transfer Brodribb and has threatened to cut  off her medical benefits unless she sees  a psychiatrist or returns to work in the  PoliSci department.  Meanwhile, former faculty association president Bill Wage says that  Brodribb's suspension is unprecedented  and outrageous. "It is disgusting. If [the  UVic administration] can do [the suspension] for a week, what's to stop them  from doing it again?" Wage pointed out.  Lesbian-owned  bookstore closes  After five years in operation, Vancouver's lesbian-owned, community  used bookstore is closing down.  Bookmantel, located on Commercial Drive, the traditional neighbourhood of lower-income lesbians in the  city, has been the site of many dreams  and visions over the last five years—  Sisters of Addiction coffee bar, lesbian-  made crafts and cards, art shows, women's music, readings, and International  Lesbian Week events. The primary focus of Bookmantel has been to serve and  support the communities that in turn  supported the bookstore.  The owners decided to discontinue  the business because the venture could  no longer provide a living for them. In  order to discharge their outstanding financial obligations, Bookmantel is liquidating all its assets. They urge the community to support them one last time by  buying off their stock of books—all books  are at 50 percent off through April.  Join the celebration!  off our backs is 25 years old  off our backs is America's foremost and  longest running feminist news journal. To  make sure you don't miss this very special  year, take out a subscription (or two) and  help us make the next 25 years even more  momentous for women. A sub to oob is two  thumbs down to Newt!  oob, 2337B 18th St NW, Wash. DC 20009  Subscription US$21  Birthday Present Sub US$30  Trial Sub (3 issues) US$6  Student sub: $2/issue, eg 6 for $12  DC residents: add $1.22 sales tax  Canada, Mexico - US $22 on US bank  Free to prisoners  by Robin Hall   Women's health  iniatives for BC  BC's ministries of, health and of  women's equality announced on International Women's Day new iniatives to  reaffirm their commitment to providing  women with quality health services in  BC.  The government's initiatives include  a new addiction treatment centre at the  BC Women's Hospital and Health Centre in Vancouver. The centre, scheduled  to open in April, will provide alcohol  and drug treatment for women through  outpatient, day program and residential  settings.  A five-year, $750,000 commitment  has been made to improve diagnostic  services for women who have abnormal  mammograms (breast x-rays for cancer), and to evaluate the outcome of  current treatment programs.  In addition, screening mammography, which can reduce breast cancer  A Unique Publication  Welfare Mothers Voice  Subscribe lo Welfare Mothers  Voice, a 24 page national  quarterly (liiiglisli/Spanish)  written by mothers in  poverty. Published by  the Welfare Warriors,  nioins fighting Tor the  lives of mothers and  children struggling lo  survive in a system not  working for them  $*  Mothers In Poverty and Oilier Victims «f Vw  $15 Oilier Individuals  $25 Organizations  ^Minister  1 draws a  Ibig blank  Ion budget!  BUDGET ACTION: GUERRILLA MEDIA PAPERS  by Shannon e. Ash  In a pre-budget action, news parodies The Glib and Stale and The  Vancouver Smug made an appearance in Vancouver-area newspaper  boxes.  On February 23, Guerrilla Media distributed over 5,000 of the papers,  wrapping them around copies of The Globe and Mail and The Vancouver  Sun. Another 3,000 were placed in public spots such as transit stations. An  estimated 70 people took part in the action—producing, writing and  distributing the spoof papers.  The papers' front and back covers satirize the Globe and the Sun's  coverage of federal budget issues, while the inside provides alternative  views and information not given play in the mainstream media.  This is not the first time Guerrilla Media has struck—it put out parody  papers on free trade (before the 1993 federal election), on Clayoquot  Sound, and on welfare issues. An updated version of The Glib and Stale,  with post-budget analysis, has just been printed and will be distributed to  several other Canadian cities.  mortality by 20 percent, is now available  through 21 screening centres across the  province.  In BC, women use the health care  system 25 percent more often than men  and are more likely to be affected by  illness, economic instability and violence.  Women are prescribed drugs more frequently than men and undergo surgery  more often than men do.  Chinese head-tax  issue goes to the UN  The Chinese Canadian National  Council has gone to the United Nations  to try to get Canada to pay redress for a  discriminatory head tax levied on Chinese immigrants early this century.  The council decided to approach the  United Nations after Sheila Finestone,  secretary of state for multiculturalism,  said there would be no redress for the  Chinese Canadians or their descendants. The fact that her statements did not  contain an apology particularly angered  many people in the Chinese community.  In its submission to the UN, the  council argues that the Canadian government is in violation of the Universal  Declaration of Human Rights because it  refuses to compensate head tax payers.  Chinese immigrants to Canada between 1885 and 1923 were subjected to  violations of their human rights. The  $500 head tax imposed on Chinese immigrants was not levied on any other  group immigrating to Canada.  In its submission, the council also  points out that the discriminatory laws  have had lasting effects, because the  Chinese Canadian community is still  seen as a new immigrant community.  The council is asking the UN Commission on Human Rights to raise the  issue of redress with Canada.  Nelson opens  new women's centre  On International Women's Day  (March 8th) the Nelson and District  Women's Centre opened its doors to the  public in celebration of the realization of  a long-time dream: a home of its own.  The West Kootenay Women's Association, parent organization of the Centre, raised money for several years to  come up with a down payment. They  worked for months to improve the house  they found, at 420 Mill Street, directly  behind Central School.  The 100-year-old house was refurbished by members of the West Kootenay  Women's Association with the assistance of four women hired under a Job  Development project, with money from  the BC government's BC-21 program,  through hundreds of hours of volunteer  labour, and with the help of generous  donations from both members and non-  members. The space is much larger than  any the centre has been in before and  will be able to accommodate many more  users, groups and activities.  For more information, call Deb or  Moe at (604) 352-9916. Movement Matters  listings information  Movement Matters is designed to be  a network of news, updates and information of special interest tc the women's movement.  Submissions to Movement Matters  should be no more than 500 words,  typed doubie spaced and may be  edited tor length. Deadline is the ' 8th  of the month preceding publication.  by Lissa Geller  180 Ways/180 Days  The 180 days between International  Womer. s Day (March 8) and the United  Nations 4th World Conference on  VVomer in September^ is being used  globally to provide opportunities before  the conference for women to highlight  the profound inequities of their lives.  This includes highlighting the growing  strength and diversity of women's networks and groups around the world  and bunding momentum for demands  to make governments more responsive  to women ana their needs.  The 180 Ways/180 Days Women's  Action Campaign '95 is being organized  around the world with a goal to creating  i80 different ways of increasing awareness of women and our need for equally-  Proposed actions include workshops  which snare women's experiences, educating students about the 4th World  Conference on Women in Beijing, campaigning to increase funding for women's organizations, and organizing and  supporting women's electoral campaigns.  For more information on the actions  being planned or to help organize in your  area, contact the Wometi's Environment  and Development Organization (WEDO),  845 Third Ave, 15th floor, New York, NY  10022, USA; by calling (212) 759-7982; or  by email: wedo@igc.apc.org.  Worldwide Day of  Women's Actions  September 6th has been designated  Worldwide Day of Women's Actions by  an international coalition of women's  organizations. The date was chosen to  coincide with the start of the United  Nations Fourth World Conference on  Women: Action for Equality, Development and Peace in Beijing, China.  Women and men from around the  world are being called on by a variety of  n on-govern mental organizations  (NGOs) to participate in actions in support of ending violence against women,  children and the planet.  This will be accomplished in a variety or creative ways, focusing on, among  other things, the impact of the global  market economy and its extremes of  poverty and wealth, the increasing concentration of power and wealth into G7  nations, and wars, militarism and violence against women and other  marginalized people.  r'<r more information on this day and  mined,please contact the  Women for a Just and Healthy  Planet Dorothy Col din Rosenberg at (416)  %0 4944 0, \m Jsla at (416) 769-5685.  bar-bara findlay  ; is now practising  Smith and Hughes  321-1525 Robson St.  Vancouver  phone 683-4176  Smith and Hughes offer a full range of  legal services to the lesbian, gay and  bisexual communities of Vancouver.  Initial consultations ere without charge.  MUNRO • PARFITT  LAWY E R S  quality legal services in a  woman friendly atmosphere  labour/employment,  human rights,  criminal law and  public interest advocacy.  401-825 granville street  Vancouver, b.c. v6z 1 k9  689-7778(ph)     689-5572 (fax)  The GASAT (meaning gender, science and technology) conference is designed to bring both men and women  researchers and grassroots practitioners together to share information, experiences and ideas on projects, programs  and other strategies for improving the  lives of girls/women in the fields of  science and technology.  The conference will also discuss the  importanceofthenorth-southand south-  south dialogue for cooperation in empowering women.  Conference information is available by  contacting SCW 1ST Resource Centre, Suite  140,515 West Hastings Street, Vancouver,  BC, V6B 5K3.  Peace Train to Beijing  The Women's International League  tor Peace ano Freedom (WILPF) is organizing a "peace train" that will cross  Europe and Asia to arrive in Beijing,  China in time for the United Nations  Fourth World Conference ur Women  and corresponding NGO Forum in September.  The Peace Train will leave Helsinki,  Finland on August 7, and will travel  through St. Petersburg, Kiev, Bucharest,  Sofia, Istanbul, Odessa, Alma Ata and  Urumchi.  At each stop, the Peace Train will  stop to visit local women's projects, historical and cultural sights, meet with  local politicians and discuss local issues  with women.  WILFF is inviting those in trade  unions, environment and development  organizations, human rights activism,  and other grassroots organizations to  join the Peace Train (at their own cost.)  For more information and/or application forms, contact WILPF through: ]oyce  Lydiard, 4020 Lions Avenue North Vancouver, BC, V7R 3S3.  GASAT Conference  Towards Sustainable Development:  Achieving the 4 E's: Education, Employment, Equality & Empowerment is a conference that will be held in Ahmedabad,  Gujarat, India in January 1996.  Race. Gender  and Construction  An interdisciplinary conference entitled Race, Gender and Construction is  currently being organized by the Centre  for Research in Women's Studies and  Gender Relations at UBC in Vancouver.  The conference will feature keynote  addressesby activist/academic Himani  Bannerji and former Canadian Advisory Council on the Status of Women  president Glenda Simms. Issues discussed may range from health policy  impacts to the historical treatment of  gender, ethnicity or class, and literary,  artistic, or film representations.  For more information on this conference, contact: Conference '95, Centre for  Research in Women's Studies and Gender  Relations, 1896 East Mall, Vancouver, BC,  V6T1Z1; or call (604) 822-9171, fax (604)  822-9169, or email: joey@unixg.ubc.ca.  NAWL Conference  The National Association of Women  and the Law (NAWL), Newfoundland  and Labrador Caucus will be hosting a  conference entitled Redefining Family  Law: The Challenge of Diversity on May  12-14, in St. John's, Newfoundland.  The conference is designed to address the changes in the outdated sot al  ideal of the small nuclear family and the  challenge this poses to lawmakers.  The conference will include panel  discussions on custody and access, family violence, women in the workplace,  child support, AIDS and the family,  same-sex couples andhuman rights, new  reproductive technologies and others  Subsidies and childcare are available as well as translation, signing and  Braile services. The conference is whee'-  chair accessible.  For more information, contact NA WL,  Ste. 401-155 Water St, St. John's, Newfoundland, AlC2B3;orbycalling(709)579-  2595.  F.R.E.D.A.  Feminist Research, Education & Development Action Centre  FREDA is pleased to announce the release of  three community action based research  reports dealing with violence against  women and children  • Spousal Abuse, A Report by the India Mahila  Association  • A Yukon Pilot Project on Men's Violence  Against Women  • A Report on the North Island Network to Resist  and Heal from Violence  Reports are available from the FREDA office.  FREDA is also compiling a database of researchers and consultants  working with various communities around issues of violence against  women and children. This database is intended to serve as a resource for  community groups and government agencies. If you are interested in  being part of it, please send your resume or curriculum vitae to:  Yasmin Jiwani/ Tanis Dagert  F.R.E.D.A.  515 West Hastings Street  Vancouver, BC   V6B 5K3  Telephone: (604) 291-5197  Fax:(604)291-5189  2 +E     Q+yy      D+E        B3+B! ^1  IWD  If  :(.:sJB  IWD marchers worked their way through Vancouver's east end, down Commercial Drive and  through residential areas, led by women from the Indian Homemakers' Association's Traditional  Parenting Skills (TPS) program.  Diana Day of the Association of First Nations  Women spoke to the rallying crowd of about  600 women, children and men.  Vancouver '95  by Agnes Huang   A smaller than usual crowd  turned up for this year's IWD rally  and march in Vancouver. About 600  women, children and men came out  to the event's new location in the  Commercial Drive area.  Usually, the IWD march proceeds through the downtown business core of Vancouver, bu t this yea r  the ad hoc organizing committee  decided to move the event to a place  where there was an cost accessible  space—definitely not downtown—  so that an information fair could be  held afterwards.  About 30 women's, anti-racist  and community groups, and women-  owned businesses participated in the  fair, which held for the first time in  many years. The fair was held in  conjunction with a screening of women's videos put on by the National  Film Board of Canada. However,  there were no signs at the fair about  the screening, so most women did  not know it was happening.  This year's IWD theme was  "Women United Against Poverty".  The rally featured the political songs  of the Raging Grannies, and the  words of Diana Day from the Association of First Nations Women,  Linda Marcotte of End Legislated  Poverty, Nandita Sharma of Women  to Women Global Strategies, and  Deborah McPherson from the BC  Nurses Union.  Unfortunately, their message  was not heard by those who most  need to hear it—government, corporations, banks—those who contribute greatly to women's poverty. The  event was virtually ignored by the  mainstream media.  This year's march was rather  low-key as the crowd proceeded  through residential areas with not  many people passing by.  Shelina Velji, Sher-azad Jamal, Yasmin Jiwani, and an IWD safety woman.  mm i  Women from Reseau-Femmes Colombie-Britannique, the Women's Social  Policy Coalition, and Nuestra Voz were among the women who marched along  with their colourful banners. About 20 womens groups, unions, and progressive organizations were visible with their banners and placards.  Photos by Fatima Jaffer and Agnes Huang IWD  Rallying in Toronto  by Smita Patil  Women who participate in International Women's Day celebrations in Toronto every  year say this year, participation was low. However, it was far from low-key.  About 2,000 women (and men) participated in the IWD 95 march through downtown  Toronto streets, with an energy and anger that, for some, was pointed.  Four days before, the Liberal government had announced the federal budget for 1995/  96, spelling out indollar terms the reality of a harshening conservative econ-political agenda  for Canada. Brutal cuts in social spending and the devolution of federal responsibilities for  social and human rights in Canada are among the harsh measures in the budget [see story,  page 3].  The loudest chants and slogans at Toronto's IWD march were directed at this rightist  agenda. Many had attended the rally, held at the University of Toronto's Convocation Hall  prior to the march, where speakers outlined the effects of the cuts in the areas of  immigration, health, welfare, education, violence against women, cultural production,  racism and jobs. Many had heard various joint-campaigns to fight this assault on women  and children announced. Perhaps many of us also renewed our commitment to fighting the  rightwing onslaught.  As we marched, women plastered newspaper dispensers and the storefronts of banks  with stickers carrying the message: "Stop the cuts, tax the rich."  Among the marchers were huge papier mache women puppets, in a creative expression  of resistance to social injustice. A large puppet of a Korean woman, a Black woman with a  huge raised fist, Kali—the Indian goddess who will create a new world—a many-faced  lesbian puppet (one face has a broad wink on it), an Irish  working woman, and a Native jingle dancer, among  others marched in a larger than life reminder that "We  exist and they can't wipe us out," as the project coordi-     v  nator Punam Khosla points out. The puppets were the  work of Toronto artist, Grace Channer, in workshop  Banners proclaimed the presence of union women,  anti-racist organizations, violence against women activists, socialists, and immigrant, women's and social justice groups and centres.  At the fair at Ryerson Polytechnic that traditionally  follows the march, many of these groups had set up  information tables and were circulating petitions. There  was also a food fair, with foods prepared by and raising  monies for various social and community groups. Workshops on issues such as Black lesbophobia were also  being held.  In the end, to someone participating for the first time  in Toronto's somewhat legendary International Women's Day celebrations, the energy of women who did  come out to participate seemed to send a message of  existing political will on Oie part of feminists and workers to continue the fight against the ever-increasing  might of the right in this country. Feature  Interview with Joan Ross Frankson:  Before Bejing and beyond  by Joan Ross Frankson  as told to Fatima Jaffer   Joan Ross Frankson is the International  Women Tribune Centre's (IWTC) coordinator of the organization's activities leading  up to and including the Beijing World Conference on Women. The IWTC is an international non-governmental organization based  in Neiv York at the United Nations Plaza.  IWTC works as a clearinghouse of information, receiving and sending out information  to women, media and development organizations globally. Kinesis spoke with Ross  Frankson at the International Symposium  on WomenandMedia in Toronto last month.  Fatima Jaffer: Could you talk about  your involvement in women's organizing, media and the IWTC?  Joan Ross Frankson: I'm a Jamaican  journalist. I've been working with  women ever since I can remember. I  worked in the mainstream media until  about 15 years ago. I got fed up and  spent the last 15 years working with  non-profit development groups in the  Caribbean, particularly with women.  When IWTC got some funds to hire  someone to run its Beijing program, I  came on board. I've only been at IWTC  six months.  However, I've had quite a long relationship with IWTC asa journalist working in the Caribbean. I know they really  help by giving the practical tools women  can use in their particular circumstances.  IWTC's material is always hands on. We  have a mailing list of about 20,000, 90  percent of whom are in the Southern  continents. We get thousands of pieces  of information—from letters from grassroots groups to documents from the  United Nations.  Jaffer: You also put out Preview 95, a  publication about preparations for the  1995 World Conference on Women in  Beijing. Are the people on your mailing  list mostly individuals or are they  groups?  Ross Frankson: They are largely women's media networks. About four or five  years ago in Barbados there was a workshop for women's media networks.  There were about 12 networks from the  South, groups like Isis [based in Manila  and Chile] and Sistren [in Jamaica]. They  were brought together by DAWN (Development Alternatives with Women  for a New Era [based in Barbados] to see  how they could advance D AWN's work.  The groups set up a fax network and  there are now 26 groups on that network. Because most of them have limited funds, IWTC sends the information  out to them.  For example, Idon'tthinklastyear's  near-million signatures on the global  campaign for women's human rights  petition [presented at the UN Human  Rights Conference in Vienna] would  have been achieved without the network getting the information out to  women, and grassrooots women getting involved from every corner of the  world.  At that initial workshop of media  networks in Barbados we drew a world  map and asked the participants to run  lines in places we send information to.  We wanted to have a slogan that said  women's media networks cover the  world. When we looked at the map, we  couldn't believe how far our material  was going. At the time, the only area that  was sparsely covered was eastern Europe.  One thing that has changed since the  last World Conference on Women in  1985 is the incredible diversity in the  women's movement.  Another change is the way grassroots women are organizing. At the recent regional conference in Dakar, Senegal, the lead taken by grassroots women  was extraordinary. They were expecting about 1,500 women, and they  Joan Ross Frankson  stopped counting after that. The estimate of how many women were there  was actually 5,000.1 have never seen so  many Black women together in one place.  I thought, "Forget the meeting. Just sitting here looking at the women is a sight  to behold....These women really ought  to be running this world."  The meeting itself was chaos in terms  of the actual content. There wasn't even  a central notice board and there was no  way to network; the disabled women  couldn't get anywhere; women couldn't  find anything; there were long places  you had to walk and if you're in a wheelchair, forget it.  Jaffer: Could you tell us a little about  the process leading up to Beijing?  Ross Frankson: It's supposed to work  in a local-to-global way. Theoretically, if  I were in any grassroots community  group, we would sit down together and  work out what's changed for us, what's  remained the same, and what we want  to change.  We would then pass that on to the  national committee, which should have  been set up in every participating country. The national committee tends to be  a government organization but should  have a lot of NGOs on it. For example,  Indonesia has more than 70 NGOs involved in the official conference.  The national committee is supposed  to take the discussion to a national level,  planning perhaps a meeting or conference. The extent to which that has been  done varies a great deal. Then, the national plans go to the UN Secretariat,  which has been set up to facilitate the  Beijing conference. The Secretariat, in  association with the national committees and the regional focal points, organ  izes six regional meetings-Asia, the  Pacific, Latin America, the Carribean,  Europe and North America, Africa and  Western Asia.  But at a different level again all sorts  of smaller subregions have been formed  by the women themselves. There have  been subregional meetings that are not  officially recognized as subregions. For  example, women in six countries near  Japan met in Japan. The countries in the  Pacific weren't satisfied that their concerns were aired in Japan so they held  their own meeting. The Caribbean met  together with Latin America, but also  held their own meeting.  There have also been other incredible things happening at the subregional  level. For example, in Cambodia women  initiated a project to weave a ribbon to  ...after Beijing things will  never be the same, just  as after Nairobi things  have never been the  same.  take to Beijing. Grassroots women were  to weave their bit of the ribbon and there  was to be a big event in the capital to  stitch them all together so it could be  taken to Beijing. What happened is that  grassroots women, a huge number of  rural women, poured into the city, many  of whom who had never been to the city  before.  I think Beijing is giving an amazing  push to the women's movement in many  countries. Beijing is like a kind of watering hole in the journey. It's a place where  we're all going to take a little pause and  see where we've reached but everybody  seems to be quite clear that Beijing is not  a panacea for anything, and that all rights  will not come to us after it. Even if we can  get the governments attending to sign a  document mat makes sense to women,  everybody is aware that the amount of  fighting that's going to go on afterwards  to get them to keep to that document is  a whole other struggle.  Jaffer: What does the IWTC hope to  get out of Beijing?  Ross Frankson: The key reason for the  IWTC to attend Beijing is to gather information to send out to women.  The other reason is that the IWTC is  among women's communication networks that are planning to organize a  space together at the NGO Forum so  that women's media networks don't get  lost in the whole. About 30,000 women,  if not more, are expected to be at Beijing,  and to get anywhere in that level of  madness if you're by yourself is crazy.  We're planning on getting a space large  enough mat the women's media networks can call it home, and whatever  activity the groups want to do can take  place within that space.  There are also other activities being  planned by media groups, such as  TAMWA (Tanzanian Media Women's  Association), which is going to build a  tentofKhangas[traditionalcoastal cloth]  to highlight their history of communica  tion through [messages printed on]  khangas.  Jaffer: We know that in 1985 at the  Nairobi conference, the impact was greatest in the NGO Forum, in that it stimulated the development of a global grassroots women's movement by giving  women the opportunity to network on a  global level in an unprecedented way.  By contrast, what officially came out of  the simultaneously held World Conference did little to help the situation of  women in the world. In fact, ten years  after Nairobi, the situation for most  women has actually worsened. So while  the documents coming out of Nairobi  provide some women with practical tools  with which to lobby their governments,  the documents themselves have done  little to change die ways states function.  What are your thoughts on what Beijing  will do to further social justice for  women?  Ross Frankson: The women's movement has indeed burgeoned since Nairobi. The networking that started in  Nairobi is now so huge that, in terms of  social movements, nobody can top the  women's movement.  I'm also one of those people who  sees things getting worse, such as the  rise of different fundamentalisms, as a  sign that things are about to get better. I  always say that when the dinosaur is  kicking and his tail is lashing as it dies, it  can do a whole heap of harm.  Jaffer: A lot of the people involved in  the pre-Beijing process have told me  that while the Nairobi conference and  NGO Forum were disorganized and  there were problems, debate and political discussion took place as never before, such as the debates between women  in the South versus the North.  So far in the pre-Beijing process,  women say the structures have been so  constraining and formal that that level  of honest and difficult debate is not  happening. Could you comment on that?  Ross Frankson: I believe it is not who  organizes things that makes things happen, it's the women.. I have no way of  predicting what 30,000 women are going to do. But I do believe mat after  Beijing tilings will never be the same,  just as after Nairobi things have never  been the same.  Jaffer: Do you see the changes as  being more positive than negative?  Ross Frankson: There's always a positive and a negative. We can all criticize  Nairobi and say maybe this or that wasn't  done right, but the thing that's left is that  there is now an amazing network of  women the world over that without  Nairobi and the ten years since would  not have happened.  I have absolute confidence in women  taking every last little iota they can get  from Beijing. We don't have any choice.  They can put constraints on us but wherever we find an opening, we're going to  use it in order to get the equality we  want.  After Beijing, everyone who's been  a part of it is going to be tired and going  to be pissed off. They're going to say all  sorts of things. But in the year 2000, let's  look back and see what Beijing means to  APRIL 1995 Social development summit in Copenhagen:  Women's tribunal:  by Miche Hill  as told to Sue Vohanka  An alternative summit was held in Copenhagen, Denmark at the same time as the official United Nations summit  on social development last month. More than 2,400 nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) participated in the  alternative summit, called the NGO forum, held March 3-  12.  One of the highlights of the NGO forum was a tribunal  on March 7th, a global hearing on violations of women's  socio-economic rights. The hearing was organized by the  US-based Centre for Women's Global Leadership, as part of  the Global Campaign for Women's Human Rights.  Miche Hill, an executive member of the National Action  Committee on the Status of Women and staff member of  Vancouver Status of Womett, was one of 10 women who  testified at the tribunal. Kinesis spoke with Miche upon her  return.  I was picked as a testifier from Canada through  NAC, to talk about the effects the North American Free  Trade Agreement and other structural adjustment  programs have had on women and children in Canada,  specifically women living in poverty. That's how I  ended up there. It was an interesting experience.  The women testified that we met every single day  before the testimony. I made some strong bonds with  them.  They tell you in the preparations it's going to be a  very emotional and stressful process. You don't really  think about it until you start meeting with the women  and talking, almost dress rehearsals of what we're  going to say.  Women from all over the world participated in the  testimonies. There was a woman from Tanzania, a  woman from Cuba, a woman from the maquilladoras  in Mexico, and a few women from the United States.  Some of them were literally risking their livesby being  there.  I basically talked about the great myth—that one of  the richest countries in the world, Canada, somehow  magically had the answer to poverty. Conditions of  poverty exist and have always existed, specifically for  women and for indigenous people in this country.  Now, with NAFTA and the free trade agreement  and this whole opening of market systems, the myth is  we have a level playing field. But what it really means  is lowering our standards to the level of the  maquiliadoras, not raising the living standards of the  workers in Mexico.  Those kind of structural adjustment programs—  which is what NAFTA is—have seriously affected our  standard of living. We can no longer guarantee that  standard in Canada.  It was ironic I had to do this testimony a week after  the federal budget came down, which is the biggest  indication so far of just how dramatic structural adj ust-  ment is going to be and how it's going to affect people.  I had to come from a personalized point of view,  which was not an easy thing to do, because I don't  consider myself a woman living in poverty right now.  I have a job. I don't make a bad income. It was hard for  me to make this a personal thing. I ended up talking  I talked about the great myth  that one of the richest countries  in the world, Canada,  somehow magically had  the answer to poverty.  about where I came from, leaving home and living on  the street, who I met, the women I was introduced to,  and the services and resources I learned about through  feminists.  The fear is that there will no longer be those  services. There won't be anybody on the other side of  the phone. There won't be the women's centres or any  organized, developed resources available to women,  especially young women, or women living on the  street, because it's all getting ripped away from us.  People were surprised when they would hear the  testimonies from people in the US and Canada saying  it's not any better here. You know, the myth is bullshit.  If you're a woman and you're living in poverty anywhere in the world you're screwed.  It is a global issue, a global fight, and we really have  to make those kinds of connections, especially with  women in the south. They've been experiencing this  kind of restructuring for many generations now. We're  only starting to understand what the fight is really all  about here.  The woman from Mexico who organizes in the  maquilladoras originally started out by working in  them, and talked about working in a maquilladora as  a young woman. She talked about how the environ  mental damage is so extreme in the maquiliadoras that  children are born missing their brains, really horrible  results of the environmental damage. And the  maquilladoras' idea of dealing with it is to not hire  women who are pregnant. They ask you as part of the  hiring process, when was your last period.  When this woman started working there, she was  too young to even have a period. She didn't know why  they were asking her that question. She thought, "if I  don't tell them a date, I won't get a job." So she lied, and  made up a date, not knowing what the ramifications  were around that or why they were even asking her  that question. Those kinds of stories tell you what's  really going on there.  The woman from Tanzania was a powerful speaker.  She had written a poem about structural adjustment  programs and the International Monetary Fund (IMF).  She talked about her experience after the revolution in  Tanzania when she was ten years old, and about the  movement to re-educate the population and send them  out into the workforce.  She went to school, took agriculture and wanted to  get into farming—not subsistence farming, but actual  market crop farming. She secured a loan from the  government, and got 15 acres of virgin land to start her  farm, not realizing at the time that her government was  getting into deals with the IMF and structural adjustment programs were being implemented in Tanzania.  Now, she's completely screwed. She has no money.  The inflation rate has gone sky high so the money isn't  worth much. Everything she tries to do to alleviate the  situation just makes things worse.  She talked about how the system is so screwed  there now that you have to build a desk for your child  to go to school. There's nothing available any more.  People are living in extreme poverty and it's directly as  a result of structural adjustment programs.  The money is going into paying Tanzania's debt to  the World Bank and the IMF and not into providing  services for the people who live there. It's that kind of  connection you can see that is being played out here in  Canada.  The woman from Cuba talked about the effects of  the blockade and its effect on women and children.  Why is it even happening? What is going on that we still  have a blockade against a country that is not a threat to  anybody. She talked about the difficulties in trying to  get health care, or medicines or basic things we take for  granted. Does anybody really understand what the  blockade against Cuba means for the women and  children and men? You don't, until you hear the real  stories from people.  A woman from the Philippines talked about the  responsibility of the US government in their military  bases there. The way of life there changed completely  with the military bases. She talked about the consequences of U.S. bases and military prostitution of  women. Women are used as prostitutes because that is  one of the only ways you can make money.  This woman became a medical doctor. Not because she wants to practice medicine, but so she would  have access to people as a community organizer. She  would be able to go into the impoverished communities and organize and have a legitimate reason for  being there, or get into the prisons and help the women  in the prisons, and maybe give them some kind of  medical attention.  These kinds of stories hit home for me. This is how  much ahead women are thinking about organizing on  a grassroots level. She was clear about saying, "I didn't  become a doctor to provide medical attention. I could  work for the rest of my life in those communities,  serving them as a doctor and work myself to death  doing it, and never change a damn thing."  But it's inspiring that someone would decide,  "This is what I'm going to do because it gives me  legitimate access to be able to organize without getting  arrested or getting beaten up." And it took courage for  her to come to this tribunal and say that publicly at a  UN forum, knowing speaking out is a threat to her, her  family and her work when she goes back.  Shannon Booker, from Massachusetts, talked about  violence against women. She went to jail because she  defended herself against her partner, who beat her  viciously. She shot him and got 18 years for it. She  talked about that experience of being a Black woman in  the States living in a neighbourhood without any  access to resources, and about how you don't even call  the cops. There you are, stuck in this situation, until  you finally use the last resort available to you for your  survival.  She ends up in a prison system that is even more  abusive. There's no medical care for people who are  HIV positive. Women were dropping dead in front of  her, dying because they weren't getting medical attention.  These stories give you an idea about just how bad  it is in the US, in the "land of plenty." It's almost that  bad in Canada. And everywhere, it's the responsibility  of the American government's policies and attitude.  The tribunal was to look at the responsibility of the US  government in implementing these policies and pushing structural adjustment programs around the world,  through the IMF and through the World Bank.  This is one of the more powerful things I've ever  participated in. It scared the hell out of me, but it was  worth doing and I would probably do it again. I came  out of it more convinced than ever of the importance of  international networking and of knowing what's going  on around you in the world. It made me feel energized.  You know all those discussions that we have constantly here as political organizers—How do you get  the coalition building movement going? How do you  strengthen it? How do you make sure all the voices are  heard?Those discussions were happen ingalmostevery  day with the women we were working with.  It was also interesting to be in a place where I'm  talking to women from all over the world who are  dealing with the same issues. How do you do the grassroots organizing and at the same time make the connections globally? How do you bring that information  back to your communities and continue to keep the  networks going? And it just reinforced the incredible  necessity of going back to the old one-on-one, find-out-  what's-going-on-in-your-own-backyard organizing  that you absolutely have to do.  When you start hearing what women activists and  organizers are discussing worldwide, you know you're  on the right track. You start to understand you are  doing the right things, moving in the right direction,  and that it is absolutely critical you continue to do it.  Because it's going on all over the world. You're not  alone.  Women's fast in  lack of UN action on poverty  by Sue Vohanka  Fifteen women went on a hunger fast in Copenhagen, Denmark during the recent United Nations World  Summit on Social Development, urging world leaders  to stop policies that force women and children to live  in poverty.  "I'm participating in this hunger fast in solidarity  with our sisters in the Third World, and with all  women and children world-wide who are forced to  live in poverty," Sunera Thobani, president of the  National Action Committee on the Status of Women,  told reporters during the five-day fast.  "One billion people go hungry every day. The  majority of them are women and children," she added.  "The issue of poverty is far too urgent for just  words," said Jean Swanson, president of the National  Anti-Poverty Organization, who also took part in the  Copenhagen fast.  The women's fast began on International Women's  Day, and lasted until the summit ended March 12.  Women from the Caribbean initiated the fast, joined by  women from Japan and the US as well as the two  Canadians, Thobani and Swanson.  Women fasting in Copenhagen  The women drew attention to the devastating  impact of Third World debt on women and children,  and called for binding measures to get rid of poverty.  "Governments world-wide are using the debt to  justify massive spending cuts to social programs," said  Thobani. "It is the debt which poses the biggest threat  to global security and social development. But the  solution to the debt crisis is not to  slash social programs and throw  more women world-wide into poverty."  During the fast, the women  called on representatives of the  193 countries attending the world  summit to meet five demands:  •Cancel the debt, including  multilateral debt.  • Allocate necessary resources  including increased spending on  social services and development  assistance.  •Redirect military budgets to  social programs.  •Ratify the UN convention on  the elimination of all forms of discrimination against  women—before the UN summit in Beijing this September—without reservations.  •Full participation of women, youth, indigenous  peoples and all civil society in government, to prevent  the return of past errors and excesses.  The women called on each government to make a  commitment at the Copenhagen summit on how much  photo by Linda Posluszny  debt they will cancel. Austria and Denmark announced  they would forgive the debts owed by poor countries.  "When this fast was organized, I thought this is the  place for me," Swanson said. "That was definitely the  best part for me. It seemed most important to try and  put some urgency."  While there was some media coverage of the fast  from different countries, Swanson said Canadian media coverage was terrible. And when celebrities showed  up to support the fasters, "the cameras always went to  the big cheeses, and what the women were saying was  ignored," she added.  The women's caucus at the world summit could  also have offered more support, said Miche Hill, a  NAC executive member and Vancouver Status of  Women staffer who was in Copenhagen to testify at a  tribunal at the alternative summit, the NGO forum.  "At the official summit, the women's caucus was  the most radical thing there," Hill said. "Yet the day  they announced the fast at the women's caucus, it was  just taken like an announcement. It was not taken as  anything more than that.  "Sunera actually went to the mike again and said,  'Our sisters from the Caribbean have just announced  they're going to fast. I think this is a really important  issue and we should be talking.' But at that point the  caucus was breaking up and people were leaving.  "So it never got discussed in any real way. And I  think that was a lost opportunity for the women in that  caucus to show support and to also deal with the issue.  Like, let's talk about what's really going on here, and  how seriously are the world leaders in this place taking  the issue of poverty. They're not taking it seriously at  all," Hill added.  Although 118 heads of state were in Copenhagen,  Canadian prime minister Jean Chretien, US president  Bill Clinton and British prime minister John Major  didn't bother to show up.  "Eliminating poverty is clearly not a priority for  the Canadian government," Thobani said. Chretien's  failure to attend the summit "shows his government's  lack of concern for the social consequences of structural adjustment policies, such as those contained in  the Liberals' February budget," she added.  "These same policies are being forced on Third  World countries, with even more devastating effect.  Instead of taking the lead internationally in efforts to  eliminate world poverty, the Canadian government is  boasting that by 1997 it will have brought social spending down to its lowest level since 1951."  Swanson pointed out that very few poor people  participated in the Copenhagen summit and NGO  forum. "There were virtually no poor people in our  own delegation," she said.  "There were lots of NGOs there and they're very  well-intentioned, but they're not accountable to poor  people," she added. These groups have their own  plans to alleviate poverty, which often mean "making  suffering more palatable" instead of ending poverty,  she said.  "We tried to get a poor people's caucus going, but  only one of the people who came was poor," Swanson  said. She added it was frustrating trying to organize  events like that during the NGO forum because it was  impossible to book rooms far enough ahead to properly publicize events.  While many of the people attending the Copenhagen summit were wrapped up in the details of negotiations to improve the language of the official statements  and documents, Swanson had other things on her  mind.  "I kept thinking about how Canada—even Canada,  one of the richest countries in the world—hasn't lived  up to things it's been signing in UN documents since  1948," she said. Feature  Feature  The Mohawk Nation and Quebec: ^- ^^ _^ ^, M .^ A 5 .—. j. _■_■  Thinking ahead - seven      generations at a time  by Kahn-Tineta Horn  as told to Agnes Huang   The government of Quebec, the Parti-  Quebegois, has said it will hold a provincial  referendum in the fall on the question of  Quebec's self-determination and separation  from Canada. In March, Kahn-Tineta Horn  came to Vancouver to speak at the University of British Columbia's Museum of  A nthropolgy on the Mohawk Nation's position on Quebec sovereignty issue. Horn is a  Mohawk analyst and longtime activist. She  is a mother and grandmother and currently  lives in the Mohawk territory of Kahnawake.  Agnes Huang: Could you tell us what  the Mohawk Nation's position on Quebec sovereignty is?  Kahn-Tineta Horn: First of all, the  Mohawk Nation is not going to vote in  the upcoming referendum on sovereignty in Quebec because of the Two  Row Wampum agreement. This was  where both the Mohawk Nation and the  Canadian nation agreed a long time ago  to keep out of each other's internal affairs. The situation between Quebec and  Canada is an internal affair which has to  be settled by Canadians. We will not  interfere with that. But once the referendum has been voted on and the results  come out one way or the other, it affects  us because they want us to seperate with  our land. That's our land so we have to  become involved.  Huang: In terms of Quebec's sovereignty bill, the Parti-Quebe^ois has said  they would consider recognizing the  rights of Aboriginal nations to self-government on lands to which Aboriginal  nations would have "full ownership."  However, they also say this right could  only be exercised in a -manner that is  consistent with the "territorial integrity"  of Quebec. It would seem the Quebec  Government is saying that sovereignty  is out of the question for First Nations  people. How do you understand what  the Quebec government is proposing  around Aboriginal rights in Quebec?  Horn: That isn't sovereignty. They're  saying: "We'll define what kind of government you have, you're answerable to  us." How can they call that sovereignty?  Why is it that Quebec is asking for sovereignty and then they turn around and  want to control the kind of self-determination we're going to exercise? That's  contradictory. It is not self-determination; it's control. So we can't even talk to  them about that.  The kind of self-determination we  want is one that's defined for us by our  own laws and supported by international laws. We want to re-establish our  nation as opposed to them defining what  we're going to do and how we're going  to do it, how high we're going to jump.  Then they in turn can tell the world,  "We're giving them self-government."  First Nations peoples are just not going  to accept that.  Huang: From what I've seen in the  mainstream media, the Quebec Government hasn't really explained its position  on Aboriginal self-determination and  sovereignty. Has the Quebec Govern  ment even talked to the Mohawk Nation  or other First Nations about what they  mean by "self-determination" for Aboriginal peoples?  Horn: The Quebec Government has  no business defining it. If Quebec wants  to be recognized as a nation in the world  community, they're going to have to  accept all the international covenants  and agree to the definitions that have  been established in international law.  That means we are going to have self-  determination. Quebec will have to sit  down with us and negotiate some kind  of a land deal so they can find a place to  put their government and their people.  First Nations are still the land owners.  Our rights exist. This is not a right that  has been created by parliament or is  going to be created by Quebec; it's an  existing right that is now recognized in  international law.  The Quebec Government's position  is pretty archaic. They're following a  colonialist position which is out of step  with modern day thinking on the issue.  They have to treat us as equals, nation to  nation. They can't treat us as a people  that they are going to subjugate or keep  their vessel or them coming into our  canoe.  And that would be the only way we  could live here is two row. Those are  also the agreements we made with other  Indian nations. They could join the  League on the condition that they would  keep their ways, but we would come  together for certain purposes—for the  purpose of maintaining peace, in warfare, and concerning any thing that would  injure or damage the relationship between ourselves. Of course, the other  nations that joined in the League with us  would have to agree to follow the Great  Law [of Peace], which is the law of nature, the law of all laws.  That is the basis of our relationship  with the Europeans. This was first agreed  to between the Mohawk Nation and the  Dutch. Later on, it was taken up by the  English and the French and called the  Silver Covenant Chain Agreement. The  chain was at first made out of iron—they  would ring the chain and we would  come and help them if something was  going to threaten this agreement. Later  the chain was made out of silver, because the iron chain would rust. This  The treaties in the east  have been mainly peace and friendship treaties...  we never ceded our land.  in a subordinate position. In fact, we're  more than equal because the land and  the resources that they want are ours.  Huang: I understand that First Nations peoples in the eastern areas have  never ceded any of the lands. What do  the treaties between First Nations and  the Canadian Government involve?  Horn: The treaties in the east have  been mainly peace and friendship treaties, where we agreed to live in peace  side by side. We never ceded our land.  There are no agreements in which we  agreed to any purchase of our lands. We  would never agree to such a thing. We  would never give up our land. We think  seven generations into the future, so we  couldn't possibly give up our land.  Huang: In your presentation you  talked about co-existence between nation and nation—Canada, Quebec and  Mohawk Nation, First Nation. Can you  talk about the Two Row Wampum. What  does that mean in terms of how we are to  live together?  Horn: The Two Row Wampum was  an agreement whereby the European  nations would have their own vessel in  which they would keep their laws, their  culture, their ways, their language, their  constitution, the way they're going to  live; we would keep our laws, our language, our ways, our constitution in our  canoe and we would travel in parallel  lines down the river of life together,  never crossing over, never us going into  the issue of Quebec sovereignty. Could  you briefly talk about how other First  Nations have responded to the upcoming  referendum on Quebec sovereignty?  Horn: I can't speak for any other  nation. There are a lot of First Nations in  the province of Quebec. Our borders are  not the provincial borders, of course,  because for example, the Mohawk Nation spans into the so-called United States  and so-called Canada. The other nations  have also expressed an unwillingness to  be involved in the Quebec referendum.  Some nations are going to have their  own referendum.  Now, [Canada's Prime Minister]  Chretien has said that if the French Canadians decide to have a referendum  and vote in favour of separation, Canada  will not stand in the way. They're not  going to send in the army. If it is the will  of the people, they are going to allow it.  agreement was re-enacted every five  years to remind each of the significance  and i mportance of it, and so we and they  would always remember what we have  agreed to.  Huang: I'm curious as to the last time  the chain was rung.  Horn: Well, it was done right up to  the 1700s. They would have to dress in  their fine old clothes and we would  dress up and get together and re-enact  the agreement.  Huang: Do you think you'd be able  to get the Quebec or Canadian government to re-enact this today?  Horn: Well, whatactually happened  with the French was that the [Six Nations Iroquois] Confederacy came and  made an agreement with the French on  behalf of the Mohawk Nation. Then it  had to go through our Grand Council.  Before that could happen, the French  broke the agreement and sent the army  to kill all the Mohawks. So we never  even had a chance to ratify the agreement with the French.  Huang: Which explains the situation  today.  Horn: Yes. You see, you can't forget  what happened in the history [laughs].  You have to know what happened in the  past in order to figure out what's going  to happen in the future.  Huang: Thereare several Indigenous  nations within what's considered the  borders of Quebec. You've talked about  the position of the Mohawk Nation on  ^k^JU  The Cree and the Inuit are going to  have their own referendum. They will  probably have the same question. I think  the first question will be, "Do you want  to be part of a separate Quebec?" and  they'll probably say No. "Do you want  to form your own nation?" and they'll  probably say Yes.  What would the Canadian Government say about those results? Would  they negate the referendum results of  the Inuit and the Cree and yet accept the  French Canadian result? If it becomes a  case of either accepting the results of all  the referendums or rejecting them all, I  think they'll be caught in a bind. Canada  will have to either say, "Yes, we accept  the results," or "No, we don't accept any  of the results."  Huang: If, after the referendum, the  majority of Quebecois vote to be a sovereign nation, how will the Mohawk  Nation respond? Will you demand your  sovereignty rights be acknowledged by  the Canadian and Quebec governments?  What happens after the referendum?  Horn: We're not going to ask anybody. We don't ask anybody for permission to exercise the rights that we have.  We are exercising them already and we  are going to exercise them, not only in  continuing to establish and set up our  government structures, but in exercising our rights in trade and commerce,  issuing our own licenses, making our  own rules and regulations, and making  agreements with other First Nations and  other nations on an international level.  We already have our own passports for  travel. We are going to go right ahead  and re-establish our Nation. It's not as if  we're doing something new. We've always had this position. All we're doing  now is telling everybody what our position is.  Huang: I want to turn a bit to your  own personal activism. You've been an  activist for quite a while now...  Horn: ...I've been an activist for over  35 years, getting close to 40 years.  Huang: Could you talk about some  of the work you've done?  Horn: I grew up on the Kahnawake  reserve and on the Akwesasne reserve.  I finished school when I was 16 and  started working in Montreal. Coming  from a matriarchal society, I couldn't  believe how women were relegated to  menial positions. I think the Mohawk  women had more freedom and more  rights than white women at that time. I  was working in a lawyer's office in Montreal and, in the 50s, the women just had  jobs as secretaries.  I was going to university at night  and working during the day. I travelled  by bus from the reserve into Montreal.  Then I started writing about the issues I  saw. At that time, the only thing Canadians saw of Indians was on the TV—  cowboy and Indian movies, Lone Ranger  and Tonto. Also, Indians would be called  upon to come and do the opening of a  supermarket or something, with a little  dance. That was it. And here I was, an  Indian who'd been raised on a reserve  with Indians but told in the education  system that we are a vanishing race,  writing about us.  While I was in university, I got into  modelling. I signed up with an agency in  Montreal and got a lot of jobs. I got a lot  of experience in public relations, which  I thought was a very useful thing to  know. Of course I was never taken seriously by the media because I was 21  years old. I was very outspoken but they  never looked beyond the fact that I was  a young person. Everything I said then  I'm saying today, except I'm older now  with a few wrinkles [laughs].  I worked at Expo 67 in Montreal as  a model at the Native pavilion in the  musical fashion show .While I was [working] there, I was hounded by some of the  press who wrote nasty articles about  me, because I guess I wasn't very cooperative. I wanted them to get beyond  what they thought was just a pretty face  and to write about serious matters. I  went down to Toronto and said, "I don't  like this. I want my side printed. They  said, "No, no, no." I got into a fistfight  with the reporter in the newsroom and  got arrested and thrown into jail for that.  I got a criminal record.  After that I got involved in an international bridgeblockade at Akwesasne.  [Ed. note: In December 1968, members of  the Mohawk Nation blockaded the road  leading to the International Bridge that  crosses the Canada-US border and the  St. Lawrence River to protest the requirement that Mohawks pay customs  duties on goods brought in from the US.]  I was arrested and charged with obstructing 23 policemen and carrying a  concealed weapon. This was pretty seri-  sent in the army to crush the resistance.]  My thesis was on the significance of the  competing ideologies on three reservations—Kahnawake, Kanehsatake and  Akwesasne. During that summer I was  doing my field research on those three  territories when war broke out. I got  stuck behind the razor wire. I got fired  by the Department of Indian Affairs as a  result of being there. [Ed note: Horn  Kahn-Tineta Horn  ous, but eventually I was acquitted of  everything. Later on, I decided to drop  out and start a family. I have five children. I raised them and got a job. I  decided to get into government to see  what's going on on the other side. I  stayed in government close to 20 years.  That was an eye-opener.  Huang: You were with the Department of Indian Affairs.  Horn: I was in all areas of that Department. I started out as a researcher,  doing policy planning and research. I  criticized the James Bay agreement. I got  into early childhood education and into  social development. I worked in the  lands revenue trusts. I also did some  work on land claims issues here in British Columbia. I got a pretty good cross-  section of experience.  I had been hired in the first place  because they were bringing Indians into  the Department to get the Indian side on  some of the policies. Everytime I gave  my side, they had a hard time with it.  I was on education leave when the  Oka situation happened. [In 1989/90,  the Mohawk Nation mounted a resistance when the town of Oka tried to  appropriate Mohawk territory and burial  grounds. The Canadian Government  challenged her firing in court, and won  at both the trial and appeal levels. The  courts ruled that her firing was racist,  and ordered the federal government to  re-instate Horn in her job. Shortly after,  she was laid off.] Since then, I've been  home on the territory taking care of my  nine-year-old child.  Huang: A friend of yours mentioned  there's a story I should ask you about. It  has to do with rats, mice and the Federal  Goverment. Since the story is very much  connected to your activism and the activism of the womeri of the Mohawk  Nation, could you tell it to us?  Horn: I was living on the territory  back in Kahnawakeand they weredump-  inggarbage from33 municipalities there.  The federal government's Indian Affairs Department said it's economic development. But it was creating a rat  problem and a big sewer right there in  the middle of the territory. So finally,  one day, I managed to get a meeting with  the administration at Indian Affairs. They  set up a meeting on the 15th floor in a  beautifully carpetted room. Anyway, the  Clan mothers found out I was going and  said, "We're going with you." We caught  a lot of rats, alive and dead, put them in  a box and took them with us.  So we're inside the meeting room.  There must have been about 60 people in  there. I started speakingabouteconomic  development and what was actually  happening to the territory. I said, "And  just to show you how bad it is..." as I  reached in and pulled out this dead rat  and laid it in front of me. The rats and  mice that were alive started to get excited. The box fell off the table and they  started running in every direction. Of  course there was complete mayhem in  that room. The deputy minister was  sitting right in the middle of the room.  People were screaming and running ou t  of the room. The rats were running all  over, climbing onto the drapes, and I  kept right on talking.  The rats and mice  that were alive  started to get  excited.  The box fell off  the table and  they started running  in every direction.  CBC to film this historic event where I  would be talking to the administration,  and they filmed the whole thing.  Huang: Seven generations ago, your  ancestors thought of you when they were  making treaties and thinking of what  they would like to see for the generations in the future. What do you wish  and see seven generations into your future, for your children's children?  Horn: Well, we have never given up  our land. We have never given up our  instructions to take care of the land, the  animals and the plants. We have to maintain the Great Law. As long as we never  deviate from the Great Law, and make  all our decisions based on that, as well as  on the Two Row Wampum, which is for  us to maintain our culture, our language,  our ceremonies and our songs, then that  will safeguard the seven generations  from now.  Everything we decide has to be based  on three criteria—peace, righteousness  and power. We have to work towards  peace. Sometimes you have to use a club  to maintain peace. Righteousness means  that everything we do has to be morally  right for us and for the seven generations. Power means we have to maintain  our people seven generations from now  so we have to make decisions today to  ensure that, seven generations fromnow,  our people will still be here. My ancestors made exactly the same decisions on  my behalf. That's why I'm here.  Agnes Huang is a regular contributor to  Kinesis and also works on a zvomen of  colour program at Co-op Radio CFRO  102.7 FM in Vancouver. Arts  Vancouver's Mayworks festival of working people and the arts:  Tune in, log on, link up!  -  by Michelle Frey   MAYWORKS:  A FESTIVAL OF WORKING  PEOPLE AND THE ARTS  April 28 to May 6, Vancouver  I'm sitting in front of a computer  typing out this article. At any time, I can  exit out of this WordPerfect computer  program and log on to the internet—  surf the so-called information  superhighway. I can do this because I  am one of the publicists for the  Mayworks festival.  To tell the truth, I have too many  projects to do to get lost in cyberspace.  Plus the fact I know very little about the  net. I am curious enough not to become  seduced by this technology. Imagine  seduction by a computer, a network of  computers! Shiver.  But there are serious considerations.  My mind boggled when I looked briefly  into the possibilities offered on the net.  The number of topics-folders-news  groups one can peruse is endless. Providing you have the time to search for  your particular interest group, then  "download" the information. If you want  to enter your own info—let's say Kinesis  wants to go "on line."—You need the  technical savvy, and the people to do the  work. Not to mention, will the readership be connected to cyberspace ie. Do  all women have the time, technology,  money to even look at the internet as an  information resource?  I'm mentioning this because "tune  in logon link up" is part of the Mayworks  theme this year. The idea came about  first from the way labour is represented  in the media and how labour could represent themselves, create their own images. This would have to include new  technologies like the internet.  It's a wired world, as the saying  goes and it's expanding at a phenomenal  rate. What is the impact of the internet  on communication and the problems  foreseen, such as manipulation of representation? Who is represented and who  has access? From this came the discussion of how women's groups, trade unionists, and community activists could  get understanding of and access to this  technology with the idea of doing serious networking and information sharing.  "Mayworks is a festival that celebrates our power to create the images,  songs and stories that give us identity  and strength, both as workers and as  part of our communities," says Erin  Mullan, this year's festival coordinator.  "Mainstream media portrays labour disputes and issues with an employer/  anti-worker slant, and with images that  have little to do with the realities of our  lives. We want workers to create their  own portraits of themselves, and to give  them a forum."  How is this to be done? "We're holding a series of workshops which will  teach people the skills to document their  workingliveswithphotographs,orwith  video. We're also reaching out to union  members, to women's groups and other  community organizations to invite them  to workshops on learning how to make  theintemetworkforthem/'saysMullan.  "There will be women-only workshops because the computer world too  often is male-dominated and oriented.  We want to sweep away that boy-toy  culture and show women how this technology can be a tremendous tool to educate, agitate and organize."  To continue with the networking  theme, an on-line cafe will be set up at  East Vancouver's Harry's (off Commercial) during the festival. Demonstrations,  access to computers, on-line assistance  and live radio broadcasts via CFRO  Vancouver Co-op Radio are all part of  this multi-media project.  ber of the BC Ferry and Marine Workers  Union and creator of Did You Do the  Napkin Tops?, a video about the horrors  of the food service industry. She has also  facilitated video workshops at the SFU  Summer Institute for Union Women.  Choma is an artist/filmmaker who has  been involved in the labour movement  in the Vancouver fishing industry.  "The focus of these workshops is on  creative story-telling relating to the  workplace," says Doyle. Video is easy to  learn and you get quick results. Doyle  noted how too often we have to be technical in our work. She wants this workshop not to emphasize the technical so  much as to concentrate on the creative  process involved, "and to look at our  Girls in the Office  What appeals to me most about  "net.work.cafe" is that there is a physical location for people to meet, drink  coffee and connect. The live radio broadcasts offer the opportunity for people to  air their views, ideas, and concerns about  the net. Some of the topics to be discussed include access, control and censorship, commercialization, social impact, and so on.  One group logging on the net and  into Mayworks, so to speak, is the Vancouver Freenet Association. They have  developed the Vancouver Freenet Labour Project. Their aim is make information from and about labour readily available to the public and to union members  through the net. Some of the topics are:  how to join a union, labour news and  history, and women and labour-articles by and about women in the labour  movement.  How else can workers create "their  own portraits of themselves?" Lisa Doyle  and Mary-Ann Choma have developed  a two-day "hands-on" video workshop  for workers to express themselves, their  work and labour issues. Doyle is a mem-  work in a playful way." All the videos  made from the workshop will be  screened during the Mayworks festival.  While on the subject of videos.. .There  will be two evenings of video and film  programming on women's health issues  at Video In, Vancouver's alternative  video studios. The program is called  "The Media-ted Body: Women Healing  and the Medical Industry," curated by  film/video maker and author of The  Woman Who Loved Airports, Marusya  Bociurkiw. Media-ted, isa play on words,  says Bociurkiw.  I looked up media in the dictionary.  Oxford tells me "media" is the plural of  medium, "the mass media collectively."  Yikes! Well, much can be said about  mass media, "collectively" and representation, but let's move on. I then looked  up "mediated." Again Oxford says, "to  serve as a medium for causing (a result)  or a transferring (objects, information).  Perfect.  Bociurkiw says "at a time of increasing regulation of the body politic by the  church, the state and right wing forces,  the videos we will be presenting exam  ine the body politic: the human forces of  desire and dis-ease that ripple beneath  the thick skin of the medical/industrial  complex. As the Canadian government  moves to dismantle its unique health  care system, we're particularly proud to  feature a program of mostly Canadian  works that speak passionately for the  concerns of women, Aboriginal peoples,  lesbians and gays regarding health, healing and the body." Bociurkiw adds, "We  want to tell the stories of real lives caught  in the fight for women's genes, wombs  and bodies."  As part of the program, Halifax  writer Julie Vandervoort will read from  her book Tell the Driver, a biography of  Dr. Elinor Black. Black was a pioneering  doctor in the field of women's medicine  and a critic of experimental hormonal  treatment from the 1940s on. The book  also deals with the contradictory sides  of being a woman in a male-dominated  profession.  Author Vandervoort says, "[Black]  for 27 years had been the only woman in  her professional group, with the very  occasional exception. The only way for  her to survive was to completely blend  in, to become invisible in terms of gender, to become just a doctor."  Three evenings of cabarets aim to  further the idea of linking up and sharing work experiences especially from a  woman's perspective. To name but a  few, Mayworks will feature performances by Helen Potrebenko, Kate Braid,  and one of the hits from last year's Fringe  Festival The Girls in the Office.  Helen Potrebenko's forthcoming  book Riding Home is written from the  viewpoint of a working class feminist  who sees herself as an active participant  in world events rather than as a spectator. Her poems come from the point of  view of the shop floor. Kate Braid's  poetry explores the joy of physical labour and the struggle of being a woman  in a non-traditional field.  Tuning in, logging on and linking  up, Mayworks wants to celebrate "our  power to create the images, songs and  stories that give us identity and strength,  both as workers and as part of our communities," and to keep us informed and  plugged into the information  superhighway. Can we use the internet  to our own advantage as a "tool," as  festival coordinator Mullan suggests, "to  educate, agitate and organize?"  In the end, I think it's up to all of us  to make it work.  To link further, Mayworks invites you,  the reader, to write about your own work.  How about your worst work experience?  Send submissions to our email address at  mayworks@sfu.ca. Submissions zvill be read  throughout the festival and on CFRO Co-op  Radio. You can reach us at the Mayworks  hotline 874-2906. Find out more about programming in the April issue of Pacific Current magazine, the May issue o/Kinesis, or  via internet—http://zuww.artivorld.com/  mayworks/ or email: mayiuorks@sfu.ca  Michelle Frey is a long-time programmer  at Co-op Radio, audio artist and first-time  writer for Kinesis. Arts  An interview with Faith Nolan:  Womon  loving womon  by Faith Nolan  as told to Datejie  Faith Nolan is a Black lesbian feminist  uttvisi songxonterguitarist singer. She was  born in Halifax, Nova Scotia, where her  family were coai miners in Cape Breton. She  later grew up in Toronto's working class  Cabbagetown. Her commitment for soc al  justice comes from her life experience tier  music is part of her political ivork.  Nolan Has released three albums of her  work—Africville in 1986: S istership in 1987  and Freedom to Love in 1989. On February  24 Nolan launched the release of her fourth  album, Hard to Imagine, in Toronto. Nolan  will be in Vancouver for the Western launch  of her album, in live concert at the Vancou-  vei East Cultural Centre on April 20. [see  ad, page 21 for details].  Kinesis spoke with her in Toronto last  nonth We begin with the lyrics to the title  song,   Hard to Imagine."  Hard to Imagine a summer's day  traffic moves and children play  you were murdered on such a day  \ora, Nora Jean  you re so many women,  so many names  He's not sorry for what he did  ■I teased you from suffering  that's what he said  Hard to imagine  hard to believe  no one heard you crying  no on heard you scream  Nora, Nora Jean  you're so many women,  so many names  It was the daytime  but sometimes its night  this decaying hatred  touches each woman's life  A war is raging  all the land  on every street  on our bodies by the men  Men hating women  can't anyone see  words have been written  how much dying do we need  Nora, Nora Jean  you're so many women,  so many names  Datejie: Can you give us a bit of  background to the song, "Hard to Imagine?"  Nolan: My Aunt Nora was murdered  in 1990 by a male aquaintance. It sent me  into shock for a while. She was living  with my sister a couple of blocks away  and, the song is just the kind of state you  go into when someone you care a lot  about is murdered ..The title is "Hard to  Imagine" because it's such a horrible  thing to imagine happening to someone,  to a woman—the kind of violence  women are being faced witii every day.  i also chose that as the album title because! t's hard trying to imagine a peaceful world, a world of equality.  Datejie: So that reflects on the music  you've chosen to wnte and produce in  your fourth recording?  Nolan: Right. I think if people share  those experiences—and I'm sure many,  many do, families who are touched by  murders of women—when they hear  that song, they'll also find some solace in  it. At least murders of women will be a  topic that is more openly addressed and  it may shed some light for women and  help them cope.  Datejie: Many other songs you've  written, such as "How Will We Find a  Way Out," speak to the notion of people  being completely ignorant of the twisted  nature of classism in the society, and  about how we ignore our own neighbors  even as we go out and talk the talk of  social justice. How did you come to  write some of that music?  Nolan: "How Will We Find a Way  Out" is something I've always wondered  about. The majority of people in Canada  are employed in social services. We're  either working to maintain a system  where we're doling out social services to  people, or we're receiving social services. These are our two options. We get  caught up in the social service system so  we are notable to step outside of it. If we  are doling it out, we somehow think we  are better than the people we're doling it  out to. Yet we're all just one step away  from having it doled out to us. It's a  vicious cycle of receiving social services  rather than finding full employment and  well-paying employment for everyone.  And obviously, people who receive  the most amount of social welfare are  huge multinational companies who get  tons and tons of money in tax writeoffs—more than is used in social services for the rest of us. It's a really weird  system.  It's also more profitable for huge  companies, which run governments, to  give welfare and UI to people than to  pay decent wages and employ people  here, rather than move jobs to other  parts of the world where people are paid  less. What we really need is equal distribution of wealth globally.  Datejie: People from the music industry side of things might be saying  now, "Well, it's been five years since  Faith produced her last album. That's a  long long time." But you are also a cultural worker, an activist, a feminist, and  Faith Nolan, performing at the launch of her new CD in Toronto  you're out there as a lesbian at a lot of  demonstrations and events. Could you  tell us about your work over the past five  years, including producing this album?  Nolan: Five years ago was about the  time my aunt was murdered. I decided  I needed to be located in Toronto, doing  work with my comrades. We began  working on buying a piece of land for  women who were in crisis to use. We  managed to get that done.  Abou t a year ago, we began Sistah's  Cafe, a cultural space and an art/politi-  ca I centre for women to use free of charge  to present their works, whether it's writing, dance, theatre, music, as well as  having political forums on various issues—the last one was on women and  world poverty.  Then two or three yearsago, I sta rted  up the Black Women's Freedom Singers  in Eastern Combers High School. We  also formed the choir in Kingston Penitentiary for Women. Those things have  been very rewarding for me in terms of  feeling really fullfilled, of feeling part of  a community and doing things outside  of the state, of not being dependent on  funding and making our communities  really vibrant. I like doing work like that  and not just singing about it.  Datejie: Even though the conditions  you describe in your music and work  indicate there is much to keep us apart  and from working with each other as  women, do you find there is still a  strength and warm sort of fabric tying us  together when we work collectively?  Nolan: Sure, I think there's a huge  fabric tying us more and more closely  together, especially when it comes to  class. I think the majority of the people  could be tied together in terms of fighting to change the economy. And the  issue of violence affects us all as women,  regardless of whether we're lesbian,  heterosexual or bisexual, transvestite,  transsexual, cross gendered. Then there's  the issues of racism as well tying us  together.  Datejie: When I firstheard the album  Hard to Imagine, I remember thinking  that all the songs have some kind of  reflection of the blues, of you as a Black  Canadian woman musician singing and  playing the blues, and tying that together  with the rhythm of other instruments  and other musicians'you play with. Because of that, even though the issues you  speak to are so hard, what comes across  strongly isa feeling of resistance and struggle and hope. What is that hope about?  Nolan I think I have an innate belief  that if people had the right information,  they would make the right choices. We're  fed so much misinformation and propaganda about how we'reall fighting down  here because of what colour we are,  what sexuality we are, and so or Wt  need to struggle with those things but  we also need to realize where <  ances can be made.  When you look at the global picture  right now. we see wars in eastern Europe but we also see what's going or ir  South Africa—the hope that people there  will overcome apartheid.  I'm 38 years old. When I think of  when I was born, segregation was sti  the law in the books in the United States  and was still in practice in Nova Scotia in  1957. We had separate Black and white  schools. Black people weren't ailoweo  in certain universities. That has changed  We can see the advancements we have  made through our struggles tor equality. We can see the advancement of  women into non-traditional trades—in  the last 20 years, women are doing construction work and entering the fire department.  When I came out as a lesbian 25  years ago, I lost all my friends and my  family. I was really isolated. T» ? were  about three out Black lesbians in Toronto. Now, I see this vibrant Black lesbian community, with women from al!  around the world .I'm not the only Black  lesbian.  We can see hope and we can see  movement around the world. We never  patourselveson thebackand say, "Look  how far we've come." I always look to  see the positive things, even as I fight  against the negative. The whole point of  life is to keep on making the world better  for everyone so we can all, one day, live  in harmony and peace, and I believe that  is possible.  Datejie: What would you say to  women coming out to hear you live in  the launch of your new album?  Nolan: My message to women is tha t  they should come out and celebrate our  differences and our unity and our  strength, so we can start to really love  each other and understand we are all  oppressed as women regardless of who  we are or what color we are. I hope  women come out out of love for woman  and out of a love for themselves too.  Datejie is a Black lesbian activist who  works at CKLN 88.1, the community  radio station in Toronto. Arts   Review: By, For and About Feminist Cultural Politics;  Breaking out of old orders  by Susan MacFarlane  BY, FOR & ABOUT: FEMINIST  CULTURAL POLITICS  Edited by Wendy Waring  Toronto: Women's Press, 1994  By, for & About: Feminist Cultural  Politics is a collection of essays, memoirs, stories and prose fragments by 19  women about the ways women are (not)  seen and written about.  Creative, intelligent, diverse-By, For  & About is an easy-to-read collection  that will introduce some women to the  issues of identity and the politics of how  stories are told. Others may find the  creative approaches taken by the various authors opening up new issues or  presenting them in new ways.  Whether you find "Feminist Cultural Politics" a bit heavy and even scary,  or want to read it all the time, By, For &  About has something for everyone.  A lot of topics are covered in the  book. They include how one woman's  Jewishness informs her writing; how  narratives of child sexual abuse and  "speaking out" expose the writers to  further exploitation and trauma; how  cultural images of First Nations people  misrepresent them; how coming out as a  lesbian causes a woman to redefine her  identity and community; and how the  Body Shop exploits images of the Third  World to sell its products.  A number of the pieces carry a lot of  anger in the writing. For example, Joy  one that requires analogous thinking."  In her piece, small stories are set in  italics, as parables the reader interprets  and applies to the narratives that follow,  which chronicle instances of racism and  appropriation.  Like Fedorik's, several of the pieces  combine writing styles. Leila Sujir's "The  Dreams of the Night Cleaners" intersperses poetry with prose in a tale of  We begin to see the way these issues are  presented as a large part of what is being said  about proper forms of expression...  Asham Fedorik's "Fencepost Sitting &  How I Fell Off to One Side" is, she says,  "a statement of revolution." She writes  that she is fed up with the appropriation  of Aboriginal stories by white writers  and her anger has changed her writing.  She doesn't use the usual essay syntax,  but offers instead "a storytelling style,  South Asian immigrants, racism, menial  labour, hope and despair. Margaret  Christakos' "Post-Cards" shows art  prints and the letters on the reverse of  the cards, letters by a fictional scholar  about Christakos' own work. And  Himani Bannerji gives us a fable of rebirth followed by an essay about the  fable in which she argues for the integration of form and content, life and art. We  begin to see the way these issues are  presented as a large part of what is being  said about proper forms of expression  and the need to break out of old orders  to discover new identities.  There is much variety in By, For &  About but, on the whole, all the pieces  presume that some basic identity (female, lesbian, Aboriginal, Jewish, etcetra)  is masked by, and perhaps attainable  through, writing and language.  Some writers are uncomfortable with  this essentialism. In her introduction,  the editor of the book, Wendy Waring,  qualifies this by saying that "what is at  issue is not some theological Truth or  pure identity," but the "need to bear  witness."  Thisbookbears witness toa rangeof  experience and cultural expression, a  range which challenges mainstream notions of culture, and so is political at its  root.  Susan MacFarlane is a volunteer writer  for Kinesis.  20 years of radio by women  April 14 1975-April 14 1995  Spring Marathon Highlights  OBAA  Media & Activism  Tuesday April 25, 7 - 8pm  Womenvisions  Talks Sex\No Sex  Monday April 24, 7 - 9pm  Lesbian Show  Soap & Comedy  Thursday April 27, 8 - 10pm  OBAA  Land & Sovereignty Rights  Thursday May 4, 8 - 10pm  Womenvisions  Music Special  Thursday April 27, 9am - noon  Lesbian Show  Retrospective  Sunday April 30, 5 - 7pm  Blue Monday  Women's Jazz, Blues & Rock  Saturday April 15, 2 - 4pm  Ruby Music  Hymn to Her  Friday April 28, 8 - 11pm  Rewinding...Fast Forwarding...Play  Saturday April 29, 5pm - 11pm  Simmin Tabrizi ~ Janet Duckworth ~ Rani Gill ~ Louie Ettling ~ Hildi  Westercamp ~ Janisse Browning-Leveque ~ Kerry Charnley  Sandara Macpherson ~ Ina Dennekamp ~ Janie Newton-Moss  Andrea Fatona ~ Florence Debeugny ~ Mulu Beiene ~ Sudesh Kaur  Dorothy Kidd ~ Gwen Stevens ~ Jasmin Miranda ~ Connie Kuhns  Delaney ~ Emma Kivisild ~ Jackie Goodwin ~ Surjeet Kalsey  Gabriella Moro ~ Patrice Leslie ~ Elaine Arrowsmith ~ Jane Williams  Katrina Dennis ~ Bridget Rivers-Moore ~ Stark Raven Collective  Vancouver Co-operative Radio  CFRO 102.7 FM (604) 684-8494  tune in April 14 through May 7 to pledge your support  VANCOUVER  WOMEN'S  BOOKSTORE  315 CAMBIE ST.  VANCOUVER, B.C. HOURS:  V6B 2N4 MONDAY - SATURDAY  TEL: (604) 684.0523 10 AM - 6 PM  WOMEN  IN PRINT  BOOKS & OTHER MEDIA  Discounts for  book dubs  3566 West 4th Avenue  4  Vancouver BC  Special orders  Voice   604 732^1128  welcome  Fax       604 732-1129  10-6 Daily 'ô¶  12-5 Sunday Arts  Interview with video artist Yau Ching:  A change of destiny  by Yau Ching  as told to Wei Yuen Fong   Yau Ching is a Hong Kong born, Nezu  York based video artist. Her work interrogates thepolitics or representation, particularly in relation to questions of gender, exile,  and cultural translation. Her videos have  been exhibited internationally. Yau Ching  was in Vancouver in March for a screening  of four of her videos at the Video In.  Wei Yuen Fong: Could you talk about  how you got started in video making?  Yau Ching: I was born and raised in  the British colony Hong Kong. I was  involved in the local art scene as a writer  and performance artist. I started making  videos just before I left the colony, and  then went to grad school in New York, to  study film and video. I made films and  videos in school, then got grants to continue my work, and eventually started  teaching film and video.  Wei: In your work, what are you  trying to do or explore?  Yau: Becauseof my background and  my experiences, I have been obsessed by  a couple of themes, such as diaspora,  dislocation, exiles, and negotiating between my different identities.  Ethnically, I am Chinese but as I was  born in Hong Kong, I don't really identify with people in mainland China. As  well, I was given a lot of British education, and now I'm living in New York.  [In terms of my] sexuality, I'm negotiating being a Hong Kong lesbian, being  brought up in the colony where a woman  doesn't really have an identifiable voice  or a vi sible community of women, not to  mention a community of lesbians. So a  lot of my work is about negotiating  among these marginalized identities.  Wei: A lot of women of colour I  know in Canada who work in video  choose video because it is much more  accessible to them than, say, film. Is that  also the case for women in Hong Kong?  Yau: Yes. More and more video artists are women, and the video artist  community is pretty well woman-based.  On the other hand, Hong Kong has a  huge film industry, which is very male-  dominated. That's why we have a lot of  gangster films and Kung Fu films.  There is a real dichotomy between  the commercial film industry and independent videos. Independent video artists really haven't any resources or support systems to make films—that's why  a lot of them become video artists.In  New York, it's not only women who use  video, but also other marginalized  groups, such as people of colour and  gays and lesbians.  Wei: Could you talk about the four  videos by you—Flow, Ideal Na(rra)tion,  Videos Letters, and Is There Anything Specific You Want Me to Tell You ?—that were  screened at the Video In?  Yau: Flow is the longest work. It is an  experimental documentary on a Chinese woman artist I know who grew up  during the Cultural Revolution and was  exiled in New York after the Tienanmen  Massacre [in 1989, when the Chinese  government sent in the army to crush a  student democracy demonstration in  Beijing]. Flow basically uses her experiences, histories and stories to reflect on  a period of contemporary Chinese history. It also tries to deal with some of the  issues I am concerned with, like dislocations, American multiculturismand gender roles in the Chinese culture.  Ideal Na(rra)tion was initiated as a  trailer for Flow, because at one point, I  was desperately trying to get more funding, especially to pay. for sub-titles for  Flow. Floiv sat on my shelf for two years  while I tried to get it sub-titled. I did Ideal  Na(rra)tion, in three days, but it turned  out to be a completely different piece—  a music video for The Internationale [the  anthem of the Communist Party].  I was also travelling to do artist-in-  residence gigs, a short visiting-teaching  gig, in order to raise money to get Flow  finished. In the process of travelling, of  going to a different country overnight  and waking up in yet another room, I  began to think that writing video letters  to people I miss would be an interesting  project to do. I finished three of them  and then I stopped. I couldn't go on.  That's the series of Video Letters.  come from, that we may want to go back  there to find out who we are. But because of my experience of growing up in  a colony, and [because] Hong Kong culture has always been marginalized by  the dominate Chinese culture—people  from mainland China always say Hong  Kong is a bastardized colony that can't  really be recognized as legitimate Chinese culture—it's hard for me to believe  that there is a origin that you can claim  as your own or that can construct your  identity immediately.  I always feel like I am in a struggle of  inventing and reinventing my own identity. In this whole process of searching  for a home, I think I am reinventing my  identity as I go along. That of course has  to do with where I come from, but also  to do with my active agency of how I  make my own history up. I usually don't  see [identity] as something that is already there, that I can go back and just  dig up. Perhaps it has something to do  with being an artist, because I also consider that process of reinventining history and being an active agent as art  making.  In this whole process of  searching for a home, I think I am reinventing  my identity as I go along.  Is There Anything Specific was the  film I made just as I got to New York, so  I was thinking back and forth between  Hong Kong and New York city, and  about the feeling of being different and  how I deal with cultural differences.  Wei: The theme of home and dislocation from that home comes through in  a number of your videos. How do you  define "home" and your relation to  whatever your home is?  Yau: Well, it is really hard to tell  what home is. Growing up in a colony  basically means that your education  teaches you this is not your place, you  are not supposed to be here, that Chinese is not the best language. If you want  to be educated, you have to learn English. But at home, you talk to your mom  in Chinese. So you're constantly undergoing an identity crisis.  New York is another story. Nobody  feels New York is a home to start with.  Everyone just comes and goes—it's a  place of flux. So "home" has always been  this constant struggle, an illusion. The  promises home carries for some people  never really existed for me, and a lot of  my videos, films or writings actually  epitomizes my struggle with that notion. I always try to search for one, but  never quite get there.  Wei: I find your link between home  and identity interesting. I am Chinese  and was born in Hong Kong but have  lived here virtually all my life. So I don't  feel I can claim Hong Kong or China as  a home. How do you see home linked  with identity?  Yau: It's interesting to me that the  way you talk about it, as if sometimes we  have the illusion that home is where we  Wei: You now live in New York. Do  you often return to Hong Kong?  Yau: Yeah, I have actually gone back  once to teach. I have a lot of friends there  and we talk a lot on the phone.  Wei: You talk about history and how  our perception of history is not static. Do  you find when you go back to Hong  Kong or when you talk to your friends  there that your understanding of Hong  Kong changes?  Yau: I think so. Hong Kong is a place  that is undergoing rapid changes anyway, so my conception of what Hong  Kong is changes day in, day out. But the  fact that I'm not in Hong Kong also  changes my conception of how I can  make up my own history, because in a  colony like Hong Kong, the process of  colonization is also about telling people  they don't have any control of their own  history. All your histories are destined  and made up for you by your colonizer.  I kind of had to unlearn that colonization  when I got to New York.  What you may also want to know is  that there has been a historical struggle  within Hong Kong to claim Hong Kong  as their home and build up this identity  called Hong Kong people. There has  been this whole process of, for example,  legitimizingChinese against British colonization. There were demonstrations,  strikes and riots in the 60s. That resistance has been so suppressed in history  books and in the international media  that a lot of that activity is never heard  abouteveninHongKong. Butif you talk  to people about their verbal histories,  it's all there.  Wei: Do you feel, as an Asian lesbian  artist, that there is an expectation that  you should produce films thatare representative of your communities—Asian,  or Asian lesbian, or Hong Kong Chinese?  Yau: Yes, and that has always been a  problem for me. Flow was more about  my relationship to a period of Chinese  history, not specifically about Hong  Kong. My identity of being a Hong Kong  person kicks in because I was the mediator and translator. The video is seen  through my eyes, but it was not entirely  about me. It was about a woman who  grew up in China. I was criticized within  the Hong Kong community for it not  being Hong Kong enough and, on another level, by the lesbian community as  not doing anything about lesbianism at  all. The woman in the video was straight,  but the video talked a lot about her  struggle with her sexuality and also the  fixation with gender roles within Chinese culture, for example.  I'vetriedtodealwithdifferentthings  in all my work and sometimes I can't do  everything at one time. For example, the  film I'm doing now, which deals with  my Hong Kong-ness, also deals with my  lesbianism. But there are obviously other  things I can't deal with, like the fact that  more and more, I'm identifying as a  New Yorker.  Wei: Could you talk about the current projects you're working on?  Yau: I have been fundraising and  writing a script for this feature-length  film called Building a Neiv Stove, which is  basically about my family history, about  migrating from China to Hong Kong in  1949 when the communists took over in  China, and about how family members  are now migrating from Hong Kong to  other parts of the world. I am trying to  use that to also talk about some issues  such as the difficulty of identifying as a  Hong Kong-born Chinese, because it's  always a place in flux, and how to deal  with my relationship to Hong Kong and  the Hong Kongdiaspora. I've been working on that for a very long time, longer  than I want.  The CD-Rom project I am working  on is called The International Tea House,  and is an interactive project that people  can click and trigger on something. [I'm]  trying to use aesthetics and the history  of tea to talk about European colonization.  I'm also working and teaching at a  cable television station called Dyke TV,  a community-based organization in New  York now growing in the States. I will be  doinga production workshop. They first  asked me if I wanted to work with them  producing skits. I proposed to do a tape  on relationships between "dykes and  dicks." Then I said, "I've got to have a  crew. It's got to be more than me talking  about that." So I proposed the idea of  teaching a workshop so the younger  generation can learn the technology and,  in the process, also produce a tape. We  start on that as soon as I get back to New  York. __  Wei Yuen Fong is a Chinese lesbian  activist living in Vancouver. Thanks to  Kumvana Gomanifor transcribing this  interview.  APRIL 1995 Letters  Kinesis loves receiving mail. Please  get your letter to us by the 18th of  the month.  If you can, keep the length to about  500 words. (If you go way over, we  might edit for space.)  Hope to hear from you very soon.  Love.  Kinesis  ILW Committee  donates resources  Kinesis:  I am writing this letter to Kinesis  readers, especially those in Vancouver,  on behalf of the 1995 International Lesbian Week Committee.  We wish to thank everyone who  helped and came out for this year's ILW  events. We felt it was once again a great  vveek with new and repeat events from  as sear. And believe it or not, we're  rti»-eady planning for next year's ILW—  iu iOth Anniversary! So, if you live in  v ani >uver and want to be in on the  Dianning and decision making, mark  thi s date in you r book—Sunday October  1,6 pm,. Charlie's Lounge—for our first  meeting.  The traditional "Dykeson the Drive"  march moved downtown this year, organized by the Lesbian Avengers. Although there were some kneejerk reactions when some of the oldtimers heard  this plan, it was a positive move in many  ways. The march went from Davie,  Burrard, Robson and back to the Art  Gallery. Visibility, spirits and celebration were high, and yes, it does seem  important to have the march in diverse  areas, for different crowds to see and  join. Stay tuned to next year's parade;  who knows what the Lesbian Avengers  will think up next.  Thanks to Janski, we are now the  proud owners of several flourescent security vests, which will be available to  other lesbian groups to borrow for their  events requiring security.  We are happy to announce that the  ILW Committee agreed to disburse surplus funds this year to the following  organizations: $250 to Little Sisters'  Defense Fund; $250 towards childcare  subsidies for lesbian mothers volunteering on the Gay and Lesbian Centre  helpline; $300 to 1995 Out on Screen  Film Festival, Co-sponsor of one of the  Women's Program films: Retro-Sex: a  retrospective of sexy lesbian videos (past and  present); and $200 to subsidize fees for  lesbian groups or organizations entering the 1995 Gay and Lesbian Pride Parade, which takes place on August 7. To  request subsidies, please call me at 253-  7189.  For your information, the 1995 ILW  Committee members are Mary Brooks,  Liz Tevaarwerk, Jenn McGinn, Aviva  Lazar, Storm, Bonnie Murray, Kathy,  and myself.  Sincerely,  Pat Hogan  ILW Committee  Vancouver, BC  NAC story not an  easy read  Kinesis:  I am writing to congratulate you on  an excellent issue last month [see Kinesis,  Mar. 95J.  I was particularly glad to see something (lots) on the National Action Committee on the Status of Women, the falling through of the book/fundraising  deal, and the mainstream media's pronouncement of NAC's impending death.  KARATE for WOMEN  * £ I. .f:  *s§|> Mon., Tues., Thurs. 7 pm  %> " . Fitness, self confidence,  self defense  ASK ABOUT BEGINNER CROUPS  EH3 734-9816  EastsidE DATAGiiAphics  ^^_  1460 CommerciaI Drjve  fgg^      teL 25^9559 Fax: 255^075  A  New!  V     ^  Fabric Paints  I was glad because I wanted to know  what was really going on and knew the  mainstream papers weren't going to tell  me much of the real story.  But 1 have to say that while I got a  better sense of what is going on, I still  had a hard time following what the  issues were. It seems like there was a lot  more going on between the lines than  was coming through. I got the sense  perhaps that it wasn't justa matter of the  reporter not asking the right questions  as a case of no one really knowing what  the right answers are. So while I commend you on your timely coverage, I am  still puzzled.  I don't necessarily want to see more  on the issue. What I think would be  interesting are some perspectives in  Kinesis that explore some of the issues  raised by the NAC women. For example, how do women's organizations deal  with governments' increasing reluctance  to fund social justice groups; how do  women approach the issue of funding  from corporations, companies and communities; how do women organize with-  outaccess to the funding wehave fought  for for so many years; what happens to  women in organizations and to our social justice campaigns and politics as  women's organizations (and others) are  squeezed tighter and tighter from the  outside?  I'm sure these debates must be raging in many organizations at the moment. I think it would be nice to have a  venue (like Kinesis) where some of that  debate can be opened up to women in  different communities, in different parts  of the country.  I thought I could start it off briefly by  pointing out that where I work, fewer  and fewer women who volunteer with  us have an idea of what it has taken to  get us where we are now, or of the kind  of politics we represent.  Theprofessionalization of the movement is not just about women leaving  the movement for high-paid consultancy  jobs that tackle, from a liberal perspective, issues such as violence against  women, racism and workplace reviews,  but also from young women with increasingly conservative ideas (from education, from the media) joining the movement. They usually have a completely  different reason, it seems, for volunteering at women's organizations than the  people who work there, and often end  up resisting or being unable to deal with  the hard discussions we need to be having in the 90s.  Wecan'tdiscuss those crucial issues  until everyone has been brought up to a  somewhat consistent level, and we all  know we're basically on the same side  We need a basic definition of feminism  before we can move on and work together. Bit by bit, we're getting there. If  anyone has similar or different experi  ences, I'd be happy to hear from you  through or in Kinesis.  Sincerely,  Feroza Sheikh  Edmonton, Alberta  INA DENNEKAMP  'Piano Service            .^^■■1  • Piano and Harpsichord              ^^M  Tuning             ^^B  • Repairs and                          ^^H       ^Hl  Reconditioning             _^^H  • Appraisals ^^^^^^M  p  1   |  New Westminster, B.C. V3M 2P8  (604) 520-3395  I    —  w  *.#>  Union Shop  Call or fax and we'll send you our monthly  flyer of great office supply specials. Bulletin Board  EVENTS  EVENTS  EVENTS  Bulletin Board listings have a maximum of 50 words. Groups, organizations and individuals eligible for  free space in the Bulletin Board  must be, or have, non-profit objectives.  Other free notices will be items of  general public interest and will appear at the discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $8 (+$0.56 GST) for  the first 50 words or portion thereof,  $4 (+$0.28 GST) for each additional  25 words or portion thereof and  must be prepaid.  Deadline for all submissions is  the 18th of the month preceding  publication. Note: Kinesis is published ten times a year. Jul/Aug and  Dec/Jan are double issues.  All submissions should include a  contact name and telephone  number for any clarification that  may be required.  Listings will not be accepted over  the telephone.  Kinesis encourages readers to research the goods and services advertised in Bulletin Board. Kinesis  cannot guarantee the accuracy of  the information provided or the  safety and effectiveness of the services and products listed.  Send submissions to Bulletin  Board, Kinesis, #301-1720 Grant  Street, Vancouver, BC, V5L 2Y6.  For more information call 255-5499.  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis'? We want to get involved with  you too. Help plan Our next issue. Come to  the Writers' Meeting on Tues Apr 4, 7pm at  our office, 301-1720 Grant St, Van. If you  can't make the meeting, but still wantto write,  call us, 255-5499. No experience is necessary, all women welcome. Childcare subsi-  dies available.   CALLING ALL VOLUNTEERS  Are you interested in finding out how Kinesis  is puttogether? Well...just drop by during our  next production dates and help us design  and lay out Canada's national feminist newspaper. Production for the May issue is from  Apr 19-25. No experience is necessary.  Training and support will be provided. If this  notice intrigues you, call Agnes at 255-5499.  Childcare subsidies available.  VSW WANTS YOU!  Wanttoget more involved but not sure where  to begin? Join us—become a volunteer at  Vancouver Status of Women. VSW volunteers plan events, lead .groups, raise funds,  answer the phone lines, organize the library,  help connect women with the community  resources they need, and other excitingtasks!  The next volunteer potluck and orientation  will be on Wed Apr 19, 7 pm at VSW, 301-  1720 Grant St, Van. For more info, callJennif er  at 255-5511. Childcare subsidies available.  HEY VSW VOLUNTEERS  All VSW and Kinesis volunteers are invitedto  gather at VSW.301-1720 Grant St, Van, on  the first Thursday of every month to share  stories, make new friends, and listen to  interesting speakers from our communities.  Invite other women who maybe interestedto  join us. Here are some of the upcoming  gatherings: Apr 6f rom 7-9pm speakers from  Womenfutures on Women and Economic  Development; May 412-1 pm speakers from  Vancouver Housing Registry on services for  women including advocacy and education  against sexual harassment. Bringyourlunch!  For more info call Jennifer at 255-5511.  POLITICAL ACTION GROUP  The Women of Colour and First Nations  Women's Political Action Group meets once  a month. For more info please call Miche at  255-5511.  SEXUAL HARASSMENT SUPPORT  The Sexual Harassment Support Group  meets twice a month at the VSW, 301 -1720  Grant St, Van. For more info call Miche, 255-  5511.  FEMINIST NETWORKING  Meets once a month. Call Miche for more info  at 255-5511.  PRISONER RIGHTS  Books 2 Prisoners presents af our part series  to help raise awareness on prison issues  from women in prison to abolition. Thurs Apr  6 First Nations Prisoners, and Apr 20 Bending the Bars Blow Out Bash: Music and  Poetry. All events are by donation and will be  held at 8pm at LaQuena Coffeehouse, 1111  Commercial Dr. Van.  HERSPECTIVES  Herspectives writers will be presenting a  reading at the Burnaby Writers Society's  regular monthly meeting on Sun Apr 23. The  reading will begin at 1:30 and will take place  at the The Burnaby Art Gallery at 6344 Deer  Lake Ave.  COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT  The Community Development Institute (CDI):  Local Leadership for Sustainable Communities, a conference sponsored by The Social  Planning and Research Council(SPARC) of  BC, will be held in Salmon Arm.BC from Aug  14-18. The CDI is an annual educational  forum to develop skills and enhance knowledge in social, economic, and environmental  issues. For more info contact Leslie Kemp of  SPARC at 736-8118.  EROTIC ART SHOW  The Erotic Art Show is a play that follows the  lives of three women as they hold a candid  and hilarious discussions on sex, relationships, men and careers. The show runs until  Apr 8 at the Firehall Arts Centre at 280 East  Cordova St, Van. For more info call Touchstone Theatre at 687-8737.  CO-OP RADIO  Vancouver Co-operative Radio is celebrating 20 years of broadcasting, and as part of  their celebrations, they present, Memory In  The Present, a show on women's initiatives  at Co-op Radio over the last twenty years.  The show will be aired on Co-op Radio, 102.7  FM on Sat Apr 29 from 5-11 pm. They invite  all women programmers, listeners and supporters to join them at 337 Carrall St during  the show. Tune in or call at 684-8494.  KAREN MCLAUGHLIN  Artist and writer Karen McLaughlin will be  showing her visual art and reading from her  novel Choral, published by Press Gang Publishers, on Sat May 13, 8pm at Artspeak  Gallery, 401 -112 W.Hastings, Van. The event  is wheelchair accessible. For more info call  Shamina at 876-7787.  ANTI-RACISM CLEARINGHOUSE  An Anti-racism Clearinghouse will be held in  Toronto Apr 7-8 from 9am-5pm at Rm 308  Metro Hall, 55 John St. The event will include  displays by over 20 anti-racism organizations in Metro Toronto, workshops, and video  presentations. The clearinghouse is a part of  1995 Metro Ethno-Racial and Aboriginal Access Month events. For more information  contact Chris Louis at (416) 392-5580.  WORKSHOP WITH WARLAND  Betsy Warland will lead Inside the Writing  workshop for women writers Sat Apr 29,  10am-5pm atthe VancouverWomen's Health  Collective, #219-1675 West 8th Ave. Van  V6J 1V2. The cost is $75 and registration is  limited to twelve women. To register, mail  written confirmation and fee by Apr 14 to  West Coast Women and Words at the above  address. For more info call 730-1034.  VOICES OF MIXED RACE WOMEN  Vancouver contributors to the anthology,  Miscegenation Blues: Voices of Mixed Race  Women, edited by Carol Camper (Sister  Vision Press) will be reading and performing  Sat May 13,7:30-10pm at the Native Friendship Centre, 285 East 5th. Admission $2-5.  Sponsored by West Coast Women and  Words. For more info call 730-1034.  NICE GIRL BAD GIRL  Vancouver artist Sheila Norgate will present  her scripted slide show, Nice Girl Bad Girl on  Sat Apr 1, 8pm at the David Lam Theatre,  McLaurin Building at the University of Victoria. Advance tickets are $7 and can be  bought at Everywoman's Bookstore, 635  Johnson St in Victoria. This event is sponsored by Blind Date Productions and the  UVic Women's Studies Department.  qfra  Book&  Art Emporium  Western Canada's  Lesbian & Gay  Bookstore  Open Daily 10am to 11pm  Our Books/Our Issues  Gay Fiction  Lesbian Fiction  Our Magazines & Journals  AIDS/Health  Humour  Erotica  Queer Theory  Feminist Theory  Biographies, Essays, Poetry  Religion & Spirituality  Art & Photography  Community  tJtjjnx:r!Sci.»,y ^jcmtA!  1221 Thurlow(at Davie), Vancouver, B.C.  Tel:(604)669-1753 or   Fax:(604)685-0252 Bulletin Board  EVENTS  EVENTS  LEE PUI-MING  Lee Pui-Ming and Sal Ferreras will perform  Monkey King Suite, a musical rendition of the  ancient epic of the trickster monkey. This  concert, part of the Saturday Afternoon Live  Kids' Series, will take place Sat Apr 1 at 2pm  at the Vancouver East Cultural Centre, 1895  Venables St. Tickets are $3 for children, $4  for adults and $12 for families. For more info  call 254-9578.  BECKYLANE  Beckylane will be reading from her new book  Where the Rivers Join: A Personal Account  of Healing from Ritual Abuse published by  Press Gang Publishers Thurs Apr 20, 8pm  at Bookmantel, 1002 Commercial Dr, Van.  The Bookmantel is wheelchair accessible.  For more info call Shamina at 876-7787.  BETSY WARLAND  Betsy Warland will be reading from her new  work Fri Apr 28, 7:30pm at the Vancouver  Women's Health Collective, #219-1675 West  8th Ave. Admission is free. Sponsored by  West Coast Women and Words and the  Canada Council. For more info call 730-  1034.  HEALTH AND SAFETY CLINIC  An Occupational Health and Safety Clinic in  BC: Why and When, a conference sponsored by the Labour Studies programme of  Capilano College will be held May 12, 7-  10pm and May 13,9am-4:30pmatthe Sheraton Inn Plaza 500, 500 West 12th Ave, Van.  This conference will bring together workers,  health and safety advocates, union leaders,  doctors and nurses, and other professionals  to discuss such a facility in BC.  MARJORIE BEAUCAGE  Marjorie Beaucage, Metis video/filmmaker,  community worker, writercuratorandteacher,  will be leading an advanced workshop aimed  at creating alternative forms of cultural expression by encouraging individuals and communities tofind their voice.The workshop will  be held Sat Apr 29 at Video In Studios, 1965  Main St, from 11am-6pm. The cost is $15-  25. To pre-register or for more info call 872-  8337.  P.K. PAGE  Award winning author P.K. Page will be  reading from her newest collections of poems, Hologram, Tues Apr 25 at 7:30 pm at  Women in Print, 3566 West 4th Ave, Van.  The reading is free. For more info call 732-  4128.  STARHAWK  Starhawk, witch, ecofeminist and author will  be speaking in Vancouver on Building Communities to Sustain Us Through Hard Times  Thurs Apr 6 at 7:30pm at the University of  BC Grad Centre Ballroom. Tickets are $10-  20 and can be bought at Women I n Print and  BookMantei. Partial proceeds to benefit BC  Witchcamp Financial Assistance Fund.For  more info call 253-7189.  BRIDGING THE GAP  Representatives of women of colour community groups and Simon Fraser University  members will come together for a conference to discuss initiatives and achievements,  and to focus continued efforts on placing  women of colour at the centre of the production of knowledge within the university. The  conference will be held Sat May 13 from  9am-4:30pm at Simon Fraser University,  Harbour Centre Campus, 515 W. Hastings  St, Van. Daycare vouchers are available. To  pre-register please call the Women's Studies  department at 291-3333.  SMALL PRESS BOOK FAIR  The Small Press Action Network presents  the Spring'95 Small Press Book Fair at the  Western Front Lodge, 303 East 8th Ave,  Van, Sat Apr 29 from 12-5pm. Between 40-  50 independent, non-commercial, small  presses will participate in this fair including  those whose production focus on unusual or  experimental literary works, artists' books,  zines, adult comicbook art, and regional  publishing in every genre imaginable.  UNION WOMEN  The 1995 Summer Institute for Union Women  will be held at Simon Fraser University,  Burnaby, BC Jun 3-7. Courses and workshops will cover topics such as international  labour solidarity, dismantling racism,  homophobia, and leadership for women. For  registration info call Christine Skrepetz at  (604) 430-1421 or Brenda Makeechak at  (604)524-0391.  EQUALITY DAY  Celebrate the 10th Anniversary of Equality  Day with the West Coast Women's Legal  Education and Action Fund Thurs Apr 20,7-  10 pm at Heritage Hall, 3102 Main St, Van.  Special guests are comedian Janice Ungaro,  acappella singing group Aya, and the Arts  Umbrella Youth Dance Group. Tickets are  $15 or donation. For more info, call 684-  8772.  GROUPS  OUT ON SCREEN  Out On Screen, Vancouver's lesbian and  gay film/video festival needs volunteers to  help mount this year's 7th annual festival. If  you can help, please phone Chloe at 685-  1159.  SCRAPS  (SCRAPS), the Society for Children's Rights  to Adequate Parental Support, is looking for  people to volunteer for their Board of members. They are seeking individuals who are  committed to the well being of children in  single parent families and who have the time  and energy to share. If you are interested  please contact SCRAPS at 986-8468.  MATURE LESBIANS  Are you starting or continuing the coming out  process? Are you looking for friendship and  support? Come out and join us for lunch, and  help plan some social activities. We're Just  Out. Please call Geri at 278-8497(evenings).  GROUPS  SINGLE MOMS HOMESHARING  The YWCA Single Mother's Homesharing  Network is having info sessions for single  moms who want to find out more about the  Y's homesharing service, network and socialize with other single moms. The next  sessions are: Mon Apr 3 at 7pm, Thurs Apr  6 at 9:30am, Mon May 1 at 7pm and Thurs  May 4 at 9:30am at 501 East Broadway,  Vancouver. Free childcare is available. Tran-  sitfarecan be reimbursed. Please register in  advance. For more info call 873-1189.  VLC HAPPENINGS  The Vancouver Lesbian Connection (VLC) is  open on Tues and Thurs 12-7pm, and Sat  12-5pm. Every Mon from 9-4pm, there are  free reflexology drop-in sessions. Working  groups on Issues of Race and Accessibility  meet on the 1st and 3rd Mondays of the  month at 7:15pm. A new Coming Out group  will be starting May 4. Call 254-8458 to join.  The VLC is seeking someone interested in  running an over 30's and under 30's group.  If that's you, please call the VLC Lesbian  moms interested in possibly participating in a  Lesbian Moms group please contact the VLC  regarding the Lesbian Mom survey. The VLC  is located at 876 Commercial Dr. For more  info contact the VLC at 254-8458.  VLC WRITERS GROUP  Do you write? Would you li ke to? Do you want  critiques and helpful suggestions while pursuing your endeavours? The Vancouver  Lesbian Connection is starting up a new  writer's group. Come join us as we write,  share techniques, critique and work with  each other. First meeting is Sat Apr 22 at  7pm at the VLC 876 Commercial Dr. For  more info call 254-8458.  WILPF MEETINGS  The Women's International Leaguefor Peace  and Freedom (WILPF) founded on April 26,  1915 at The Hague, Netherlands. The Vancouver group holds meetings every first and  third Sat at 10am at the Unitarian Church,  49th Ave and Oak. All women are invited.  PRIDE PARADE MARSHALS  The Vancouver Pride Society is seeking  nominations for two grand marshals for this  year's pride parade. Nominees should be  publicly known for their work and support  within the gay community. Nominations must  be in writing and be submitted before the end  of April. Send nominations to Vancouver  Pride Society, 300-1195 Davie St, Van V6E  1N2.  SUBMISSIONS  COUNTERING FMS  Daniela Coates, a ritual abuse consultant, is  seeking submissions for a book exposing the  detrimental effects of False Memory Syndrome. Submissions should be 1000 words  or less. Requests to use an alias will be  respected. Submissions cannot be returned  so keep a copy for your records. Send submissions to Daniela Coates, PO Box 29064,  Delamont Station, Vancouver, BC, V6J 5C2  or call 731 -5243.  ESSAY COMPETITION  The National Association of Women and the  Law is seeking submissions for its ninth  annual essay competition: Redefining Family Law: The Challenge of Diversity. The  competition is open to all students at post  secondary institutions. Essays in either  French or English should be between 2,500-  10,000 words, typed, double spaced. Please  send three copies to: National Association of  Women and the Law, 1 Nicholas St., Suite  604, Ottawa, Ontario, K1N 7B7. Deadline is  May 31.  CARIBBEAN LESBIANS  We are a collective of Carribean-born lesbians compiling an anthology on fictional or  autobiographical stories by lesbians who are  Carribean born or of Carribean parentage.  We want to hear from women who are poor,  don't considerthemselves lesbians, who hate  the word lesbian, who are not political, who  are fifty and over, who are belowtwenty, who  are out lesbians. Any topic. We will, accept  stories on tape. Writers may use pseudonyms, anonymity will be assured. Send to  Carribean Women's Anthology c/o Women's  Press, 233-517 College St, Toronto, On,  M6G 4A2. Deadline is Aug 31.  czos/cf^  Canadian 'Woman Studies/les cahiers di (a femme  CWS/cf'is a bilingual feminist quarterly packed with accessible writing on current issues, advocacy,  action and theory. Each issue is  dedicated to a theme you care  about. Recent issues include:  Growing Into Age, Gender Equity  and Institutional Change, Women  in Poverty, South Asian Women  and Women in Science and Technology.      Subscribe nowl  Subscription Rates  Canada  Individual  $30 + GST  $32.10  Institution  $40 + GST  $42.80  Foreign  Individual    $30 + $6 postage $36.00  Institution    $40 + $6 postage $46.00  All orders must be prepaid.  City              '     Prov  Postal Code  Please enclose cheque or money  order made out to CWS/cf.  Canadian Woman Studies  212 Founders College  North York, ON   M3J1P3  Bed & Breakfast  A Beautiful Place  Centre yourself  in the comfort and tranquility  of B.C.'s Super Natural  Gulf Islands.  Healthy Breakfasts  Hot Tub & Sauna  5 acres of forested  foot paths with ponds  ocean and mountain views  A Memorable Escape  (604) 537-9344  1207 Beddis Road,  Salt Spring Island, B.C. V8K 2C8 Bulletin Board  SUBMISSIONS SUBMISSIONS  WOMEN OF COLOUR   .  Sister Vision Press is inviting women of  colour under 30 to submit poetry, stories or  journal entries on experiences of incest and  sexual abuse for a new anthology. Please  send hard copy or work on IBM disk with  SASE to Sister Vision Press, PO Box 217  Stn. E, Toronto, ON, M6H 4E2. Deadline is  Sep 30.  ABSINTHE  The Women of Colour Collective is accepting  submissions for a special edition of Absinthe  literary arts magazine for summer 1995. We  especially encourage non-published women  of colour as well as published women of  colour to submit stories, black and white  photo essays, black and white artwork, abstract thoughts, interviews, journal excerpts  and critiques. Please send copies of your  work along with a short biography to the  Women of Colour Collective, #321, 223-12  Ave SW, Calgary, Alta, T2R 0G9. For more  info call (403) 232-8458. Deadline is May 31.  EYES ON THIS  Submissions are being sought from Black  writers and artists for the anthology eyes on  this: africanadian perspectives on art, media, politics and culture. Students and unpublished writers are strongly encouraged to  submit non-fiction work: interviews, tran-»  scribed radio programs, criticism—on music, media, step & rap culture, technology.  Max 5000 words. No fiction or poetry. Visual  artists may send slides, photographs, photocopies of artwork, including graffiti, comix,  phototext.. For more info call Karen Augustine at FUSE Magazine, (416) 367-0159, or  write eyes on this, PO Box 317, Stn P,  Toronto, Ont, M5S 2S8. Deadline Dec 1995  1  PRESS  GANG  PUBLISHERS  Bool*  Launches  Where the Rivers Join  A Personal Account of  Healing from Ritual Abuse  by Beckylane  '... a gift and beacon for survivors.'  — Shirley Turcotte  8 pm   Thursday, April 20  Bookmantel  1002 Commercial Drive  Choral  by Karen McLaughlin  "... a breathtaking novel that will  mark every reader's memory."  — Aritha van Herk  8 pm   Saturday, May 13  Artspeak Gallery  #401 - 112 W Hastings  for more information call  Shamina     876-7787  CALLING PINAY LESBIANS  If you have written stories, essays and poetry, have illustrations, drawings or graphics,  comicsjournal writings etc, we want to hear  from you. We are a group of Pinay lesbians  working towards our visibility. Send submissions to Sister Vision Press,c/o Pinay, PO  Box 217, Stn E, Toronto, Ont, M6H 4E2.  Include your name or penname, telephone  number and address. Deadline is Aug 31.  PREGNANCIES OF INCEST  Have you been pregnant by incest? Are you  achild born of incest? Little is written of incest  from the point of view of the women and  children themselves. It is my intention to  gather more stories and publish them to end  the silence and shame and to provide a !  resource for those nqt ready to tell their  stories. Send essays, poems, or line drawings to Claiming Our Whole Lives, P.O. Box  204,125A-1030 Denman St, Vancouver, BC  V6G 2M6. Deadline is Jun 30.  HARVARD EDUCATIONAL REVIEW  The Harvard Educational Review is seeking  submissions for a special issue devoted to  exploring the lives and experiences of gay,  lesbian, bisexual, and transgendered students and educators. The review is looking  for papers that explore day-to-day experiences, and particularly issues where race,  class, gender, and sexual orientation intersect. Papers can range from 10-30 pages,  but not more than 35. Reviews of books also  welcome. Send three copies of manuscript  to: Attn: Vitka Eisen/lrene Hall, Special Issues Editors, Gutman Library Suite 349, 6  Appian Way, Cambridge, MA, USA, 02138.  For more info call (617) 495-3432. Deadline  is Sept 1.  CLASSIFIEDS  OUR COMMUNITY BIKES  A community based non-profit bike store is  offering womyn only workshops in bicycle  maintenance and repair. 3 hour session covers tools, proper bicycle fit, and tune-up  techniques. Held on Monday evenings in  April and May at OCB, 197 East 17th Ave  Van. Cost $25. For more info contact Jill at  879-BIKE.  APPRENTICESHIP OPPORTUNITY  Woman-run organic mini-farm on beautiful  Lasqueti Island offers 8-week apprenticeships. Short-term work exchangers alsocon-  sidered. Write to Rainwalker Farm, Lasqueti  Island, V0R 2J0, or call (604)333-8644.  SPINSTERVALE WORK PARTY  Work-party and ritual dedication of "Circle of  the Singing" April 8-9. Accommodation and  food supplied. Circle of the Singing is women's work-exchange and workshop space  and is located on Spinstervale land in Coombs,  Vancouver Island. Also, May 14teepee raising and full-moon ceremony at Spinstervale.  Phone (604)248-8809 for more information  on these gatherings, work-exchange on this  women's farm or to rent the WEB cabin  ($7.50 nite/person).  Dry Lips Oughta Move to Kapuskasing, a mystical and comic play  about the creation of a women's hockey team and the reaction of  seven men, is being performed in Vancouver until April 15 atthe Arts  Club Theatre, 1585 Johnston Street. The play, written by Highway and  directed by D. Maracle, features Marie Humber Clements and Denise  Lonewalker. Showtimes are Monday-Saturday 8pm, and Wednes-  days and Saturdays at 4pm. For more information call 687-1644.  CLASSIFIEDS CLASSIFIEDS  ROOM FOR RENT  Condo in the clouds at Metrotown. I'm a NS  businesswoman and I'm lookingforatidy NS  working gal with whom to share my large  bright 2 BR 2 BTHfurnishedcondo. Fantastic  view of mountains, city, ocean, solarium,  dishwasher, ensuite laundry, has fireplace,  large balcony, whirlpool and sauna are some  of the many extras in this deluxe 1400 sq. ft.  apartment close to shopping, skytrain, bus  and rec centre. This would be suitable for a  long term tenant. Available May 1/95. $630  includes utilities & cable. Secure parking and  storage extra. Leave message at 430-5380  or call after 6pm.  SUSAN DALES R.P.C.  Counselling for women. Taking a feminist  approach to healing from painful childhood  experiences, battering, loss, and other personal problems. Sliding fee scale, free initial  half-hour consultation. Call 255-9173 for an  appointment. Canadian Guidance Counselling Association member.  THE ART OF HANDKNITTING  Rediscoverthe lost female art of handknitting  while enjoying the beauty and quality of our  100 percent natural fibre yarns: wools,  mohairs, alpacas, cottons, linens and silks.  Patterns, kits and how-to books—whether  you're a beginner or an expert, we have  something for you. Catalogue and complete  yarn samples $4 (refundable with purchase).  Elann Fibre, PO Box 771, Cranbrook, BC,  V1C 4J5. Toll free fax/voice mail: 1 -800-720-  0616. Visa accepted. All female owned and  operated.  INCOME TAX PREPARATION  Preparation of income tax returns for individuals, self-employed, small businesses,  partnerships. Electronic filing. Sliding scale.  Call Yvonne at 879-9167.  LYDIA KWA, PSYCHOLOGIST  I'm pleased to announce the opening of my  private practice in clinical psychology  (Granville Island off ice). I'm a feminist therapist and I work with clients on a variety of  issues. I welcome new clients, especially  survivors, gays and lesbians, women of colour, artists and writers. Call Lydia Kwa at  255-1709.   GENERAL PRACTITIONER  Joan Robillard, MD, Obstetrics, General  Practitioner for all kinds of families is now  located at 203-1750 E10th Ave, Van. Phone  872-1454, fax 872-3510.  ATTENTION ASIAN WOMEN!  I am a UBC Counselling Psychology graduate student. For my Master's thesis I am  conducting a study of the experience of an  Asian sexual abuse survivor's healing process from victim to survivor. If you (or someone you know) are a survivor of childhood  sexual abuse and are of East, South East, or  South Asian descent and you would like to  empower yourself and others by confidentially sharing your story, I would like to talk to  you. Or if you simply want to know more  about the study (without any obligation to  participate), I would like to hear from you.  Please contact me, Pascale Best at 689-  8204. Any message you leave will be confidential.  LESBIAN OCEAN KAYAKERS  Lookingfor lesbian ocean kayakersforshorter  or longer trips. Interested? Please call 254-  1018.  Seeking travel companion for NGO Women's Forum and 10-days pre-Forum China  Do typos turn you into  a raging monster?  There is a vocation for  you  - proofreading  Kinesis.  Please call  V WrH-l-flHM-1 ■ ;   —  .. U.B.C.  VANCOUVER, BC %T 1Z8  One year D Cheque enclosed  □ $20 + $1.40 GST □ Bill me  Two years □ New  □$36 + $2.52 GST □ Renewal  Institutions/Groups □ Gift  □$45 + $3.15 GST □ Donation  Name_  Address—  Country   Telephone.  If you can't afford the full amount for Kinesis  subscription, send what you can.  Free to prisoners.  Orders outside Canada add $8.  Vancouver Status of Women Membership  (includes Kinesis subscription)  □$30+$1.40 GST  Postal code_  Fax   Published ten times a year by the Vancouver Status of Women  #301 -1720 Grant Street Vancouver, BC V5L 2Y6