 FEB. 1990  REAL Women go for real dough  $2.25 Kinesis welcomes volunteers  to work on all aspects of  the paper. Call us at 255-  5499. Our next News Group  is Thurs. Feb. 8, at 1:30 pm  at Kinesis, #301-1720 Grant  St. All women welcome even if  you don't have experience.  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE:  Shelly Quick, Gladys We, Jean  Lum, Terrie Hamazaki, Colleen Penrowley, Sarah Or-  lowski, Marsha Arbour, Lisa Schmidt, Faith Jones, Tarel Quandt, Linda Choquette,  Joni Miller, Winnifred Tovey,  Nancy Pollak  FRONT COVER:  Audrey McLaughlin in a rather  good    mood,    December    2,  1989. Photographer unknown.  EDITORIAL BOARD:  Marsha Arbour, Gwen Bird,  Winnifred Tovey, Nancy Pollak, Noreen Shanahan, Michele Valiquette, Terrie Hamazaki  CIRCULATION AND DISTRIBUTION: Joni Miller, Esther  Shannon, Cat L'Hirondelle  ADVERTISING:  Birgit Schinke  OFFICE:  Esther Shannon, Cat L'Hirondelle  Kinesis Is published 10 times  a year by the Vancouver Status of Women. Its objectives  are to be a non-sectarian feminist voice for women and  to work actively for social  change, specifically combatting sexism, racism, homophobia and imperialism.  Views expressed in Kinesis  are those of the writer and  do not necessarily reflect VSW  policy. All unsigned material is  the responsibility of the Kinesis Editorial Board.  SUBSCRIPTIONS: Individual  subscriptions to Kinesis are  $20 per year or what you  can afford. Membership in the  Vancouver Status of Women  is $30 or what you can afford,  includes subscription to Kinesis.  SUBMISSIONS: Women and  girls are welcome to make submissions. We reserve the right  to edit and submission does  not guarantee publication. If  possible, submissions should  be typed double spaced and  must be signed and include  an address and phone number.  Please note: Kinesis does not  accept poetry or fiction contributions. For material to be  returned, a SASE must be included. Editorial guidelines are  available on request.  ADVERTISING: For information about display advertising  rates, please contact Kinesis.  For information about classifieds, please see the classified  page in this issue.  DEADLINE: For features and  reviews: the 10th of the  month preceding publication;  news copy: 15th; letters and  Bulletin Board listings: 18th.  Display advertising; camera  ready, 18th; design required:  12th.  Kinesis is produced on an  IBM PC using PC TeX and  an LC-800 laser printer. Additional laser printing by East-  side Data Graphics. Camera  work by The Peak. Printing by  Web Press Graphics, Burnaby  BC  Kinesis is a member of the  Canadian Magazine Publishers  Association.  00^  Fourteen women were murdered in Montreal because it's okay to  hate feminists 7  iMQinr  Author Bharati Mukherjee has angered many  women 15  REAL Women go for real money  .. 3  Bank branch cut off 3  Abused women face evictions 4  Valparaiso: a beehive of feminist activity 7  fa  In the fathers1 best interests 8  by Erin Shaw  Reflections on McLaughlin's win 5  by Margaret J. Priestley Birrell  Marjorie Cohen on the GST 9  as told to Chris Meyer  An interview with Audrey McLaughlin 12  as told to Nancy Pollak  Bharati Mukherjee distorts Third World women 15  by Jyoti Sanghera & Sunera Thobanl  In which animals appear as themselves 16  by Susan Prosser  Evelyn Lau: running to write 17  by Jean Lum  RBqOMRS  Movement Matters 2  What's News? 6  by Linda Choquette  Commentary 14  by Debby Gregory  Periodicals in Review.... 18  by Michele Valiquette  Making Waves   19  by Lauri E. Nerman  Letters 20  Bulletin Board 21  compiled by Donna Dykeman  Kinesis is indexed in the  Canadian Women's Periodicals Index, and the Alternative  Press Index.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status of  Women, 301-1720 Grant St.,  Vancouver, B.C. V5L 2Y6  Second class mail #6426  ISSN 0317-9095  KINESIS Movement Matters  \SSxxxx>S$SSS^^  lovement  tatters listings  information  Movement Matters is designed to be a  network of news, updates and information of special interest to the women's  movement. Submissions to Movement Mat*  jters should be no more than 500 words,  rped, double-spaced on eight and a half byj  [even paper. Submissions may be edited for  tgth. Deadline is the 18th of the month  " ig publication.  Moving  Forward  Moving Forward: Creating a Feminist  Agenda for the 1990's is a conference aimed  at bringing together femimst activists and  academics to facilitate the sharing of research and resources to be held on June 15-  17,1990, at Trent University, Peterborough.  The conference will focus upon four  areas: Women and Work, Social Justice,  Women's Culture, and Health: Control and  Safety of Our Bodies. Specific issues within  these four areas will be addressed through  panels and workshops. The emphasis will  be on exchange of information, discussion  and planning. Questions of class, sexuality,  race and ethnicity will be addressed through  integrated and separate panels and workshops.  If you would Uke to receive an agenda and  registration details, please send your name  and address to the following: Women's  Studies Conference, c/o Philippa McLough-  lin, Trent University, Peter Robinson College, Box #161, Peterborough, Ont. K9J  7B8  BECKWOMAN'S  1314 Commercial Dr.  • Greeting Cards • Incense  • Crafts • Helium Balloons  • Political Posters & Buttons  • Earrings • Ethnic Clothes  • Ear Piercing  100% Wool, Handknit,  Wonderful,  Heavy,  Sweaters.    Now Only  <95  Handmade Batiks  frxm Indonesia  $20 - $65  Open 7 Days a Week  m     CAROS*  K2 ^RECORDS  OCTOPUS EAST  "irj  WAVAW needs  fundraisers  The Women Against Violence Against  Women Rape Crisis Centre (Vancouver) is  looking for experienced women to organize  and implement a fundraising campaign.  WAVAW finds that they have too much  work to be able to do any effective fundraising. They also know there are a large number of people who are willing to give financial support to WAVAW if they are approached. Last year, they had a successful door-to-door campaign that was run by  an outside company. They would like to  do something similar this year, but want  to have women in the community share  the benefits as opposed to a mainstream  fundraising organization.  Women who are interested should contact Ruth or CoUeen at WAVAW (875-1328)  during their office hours, which are Monday  to Friday, 10:00 am to 5:00 pm.  Making A  World  of Difference  Making a World of Difference is a directory of women in Canada specializing in  global issues. It is a comprehensive resource,  with in-depth profiles of over 200 women  from across Canada with experience and expertise in the areas of development, environment, peace, and related social justice and  economic issues.  One of the goals of the directory is to  help fill the existing gap in conferences, seminars, programs, etc., by providing access to  a bank of women with expertise in areas  such as trade, human rights, ecofeminism,  ocean pollution, international law and much  more.  The directory is published by the Canadian Council for International Co-operation.  Copies of the directory are $15.00 each,  plus $2.00 for postage and handling, and  are available from: The Women's Directory  Project, CCIC, 300-1 Nicholas St., Ottawa,  Ont. KIN 7B7  "Rights";  the game  The B.C. Human Rights Coalition has  recently developed a board game, called  "Rights" for human rights education. Designed primarily for adult Enghsh as a Second Language classes, "Rights^ is also a useful tool for any group interested in learning  about or reviewing Canadian human rights  law.  "Rights" can be played in the classroom  or at home, and be played by 3 to 12 players.  In addition to material on human rights, the  game also includes information about other  laws concerning employment, housing and  equity issues.  Copies of the game are $12.00 each (plus  $4.00 postage and handling) from the B.C.  Human Rights Coalition, Vancouver Region, #107-96 E. Broadway, Vancouver, BC  V5T 1V6. Telephone number is 872-5638.  Education Kit  about refugees  "Behind Closed Doors" is a practical,  powerful, professional information package,  including a video and an education kit,  about refugees in the Canadian context. It  is designed to help clarify just what refugees  mean to Canada.  The kit is intended for use by everyone,  from teachers of social studies to people in  the social services who work with refugees.  "Behind Closed Doors " aims to counteract  negative publicity in the media and the pubhc mind about refugees.  To order copies of "Behind Closed Doors"  write to Inland Refugee Society of B.C.,  1720 Grant Street, Vancouver, BC V5L  2Y7, or phone 251-3360. There is a scaled  cost for the kit, ranging from $32 to $159.  Correction  In our December/January 1990 issue, we  mistakenly reported that Sassy had ceased  publishing ("Afs. sells out for the last time).  Inside  Kinesis  Our sincere thanks to the following supporters who generously contributed to the  Vancouver Status of Women via our recent  donation campaign. In this time of government cutbacks to VSW, donations are vital  to our financial health and, as importantly,  they are a concrete vote of confidence in  VSW's efforts on behalf of women's rights.  The majority of our donors hve in Vancouver, but supporters from across the  country also sent contributions. From all  of us here at VSW—board, staff and  volunteers—our thanks for your support:  • Sam Archer • Barbara Bell • John Black  • Jan Colwell • Dayna Beth Daniels •  Ann Doyle • Margo Dunn • Janet Fraser  • Kathe Freebury • Teresa Gibson • F.  Frost-Richards • Elizabeth Fry • Barbara  1146 Commercial * 253-0913  UPRISING  BREADS  BAKERY  Uprising's own 100%  cotton/canvas shopping  bags $13.75  1697 Venables Street  Vancouver 254-5635  A part of CRS Workers' Co-op  Karmazyn • Alleson Kase • Ros Kellet •  Kris Klassen • Lorraine Kuchinka • M. Le-  siuk • Judy Lynne • Glenda MacPherson •  Pat McMahon • Anne Miles ♦ Carlin Mi-  raslaw • Angela Page • Edna Polston •  Harley Rothstein • Noreen Shanahan ♦ Judith Snider • Betsy Spaulding • Alice Starr  • Hilda Thomas • Verna Turner •  Our thanks also to VSW members, who  support us year 'round with memberships  and donations. Our appreciations to the following supporters who became members or  renewed their membership in December and  January:  • Cathy Alpaugh • Elizabeth Choquette  • Alan Coffins • Amy Dalgleish • Nancy  Dickie • Emma Dickson • Ann Doyle •  Adrienne Else • Sharon Fedarak • Pat Feindel • Janet Freeman ♦ Marilyn Fuchs •  Christopher Gainer • Sam Gale • Sally  Hammond • Carol Hodgson • Cate Jones  • Valerie Laub • Kathryn McCannell • Leo  McGrady • Sara Menzel • Betsy Nuse •  J.Y. Pentland-Smith • Tracy Potter • Sher-  rill Rowland • J. Rulingh • Alison Sawyer •  Patrice Snopkowski • Catherine Soubliere •  Virginia Strikeman • Janna Taylor • Gisela  Theurer • Sally Thicke • Peggy Ward •  Lorna Warlow • Patricia Webb • Karen  White • Elaine Young •  And, finally, VSW held a lively Holiday  Gathering on December 14th, with lots of  goodies (including ice-your-own-cookies)  and a raffle. We would hke to thank all  the merchants and groups whose donations  helped make the 14th a success:  • Vancouver Women's Bookstore • Horizon Distributors • East End Food Co-op •  Dairyland • Beckwoman's • Joji's Hair Parlor • Ikea • Tommy O's • Santa Barbara •  Safeway Canada • Alma Street Cafe • Festival Records • Que Pasa? • Vancouver Parks  Board ♦ Sally Wilson • Western Wilderness  Committee • Muffin Works # Perry's Meat  Market • Shoppers Drug Mart • Isadora's  We are doubly happy to report we gained  a heap of new subscribers in the past few  months: happy because we love being read  and happy also because every new subscriber gives us a much needed financial  boost. The new subscribers came from two  sources. Kinesis participated in a mass  mailing with 11 other Canadian feminist  publications sponsored by the Canadian  Magazine Periodicals Association and judging, from the results, sisterhood was powerful.  Locally, we conducted a person-to-person  sub drive in which various 'Friends of Kinesis " seduced, cajoled and otherwise persuaded whoever they encountered to become Kinesis subscribers. Again, the results were uplifting, and we are very grati  ful to our following "Friends:"  • Bonnie Waterstone • Janet Berry • Cat  L'Hirondelle • Barb Bell • Sherrill Rowland • Louie Ettling • Niamh Hennessy •  Terrie Hamazaki • Johanna Pilot • Irish  Webb • Nora Randall • Donna Dykeman  • Linda Choquette • Joni Miller • Michele  Valiquette • Gwen Bird ♦ Megan Ellis •  Alex Maas • Noreen Shanahan  We are also grateful to our new and  renewed subscribers: thanks for coming  aboard, and please feel welcome to offer  us suggestions, criticisms, contributions .  and praise. We never get quite enough Letters To The Editor, so don't be shy.  As always, we have some comings and goings to report. Our latest coming is Birgit  Schinke, our new advertising coordinator.  Birgit will be beating the bushes for new  advertisers, so expect to hear from her if  you're in the sellers' end of the market. Our  soon- to-be-latest going is Winnifred Tovey,  our production coordinator. Winnifred will  be retiring at the end of February and we'll  say a proper goodbye to her then. For r  please note the advertisement on page 23  this issue re: Job Opening/ KINESIS.  KINESIS ///>y///////////////////^^^  ^////////////////////^^^^  news  What about feminists?  vvnai acorn TeminisiSY  REAL Women go for  real money from gov't  by Terrie Hamazaki  REAL Women's "back-to-the-  kitchen" mandate is contrary to  the Secretary of State's (SecState)  Women's Program's criteria and  they should not be funded, say  representatives of feminist groups  in the lower Mainland.  "Equahty Revisited" conference  which gave free rein to anti- choice  and homophobic sentiments, even  though action on abortion and  sexual-orientation issues are expressly forbidden in SecState funding criteria. Feminist organizations have been warned by SecState not to address those issues  or risk losing funds.  Last year, the Conservatives cut funding  of women's groups by 15 percent  Grieving Together  In Vancouver, as in many cities and towns across Canada, women  gathered in vigils to mourn and protest the murdering of 14  women in Montreal on December 6, 1989. See page seven for  more coverage.    REAL (Realistic, Equal and Active for Life) Women has applied  to SecState for $260,070 in 1990  core funding and an additional  $130,500 for an April conference in  Vancouver.  This funding request is the latest attempt in their 6 year fight for  operational money from the federal government.  REALW's first and only grant  went towards their 1989 Ottawa  Bank branch cut oft  union women lose out  by Nancy Pollak  Bank workers in the northern  BC town of Houston have recently  learned how far their employer will  go to punish unionization.  In early January, the Bank  of Montreal (BM) announced its  decision to close their Houston  branch, one of only three unionized BM banks in the province.  While the bank cites economic  reasons for the proposed March  shutdown, the five women union  members claim otherwise. "We're  convinced the closing is because of  the union," says Jill Olesen, the  bank's assistant manager.  Certified two years ago with Local 2100 of the federally chartered  Union of Bank Employees (UBE),  the Houston branch moved over  to the BC Government Employees  Union (BCGEU) on December 1st,  1989.  The move to the BCGEU was  part of a province-wide dismantling of the UBE, and Olesen beheves their move triggered the  bank's decision.  "Prior to joining the BCGEU  we were quite quiet," she said.  "The BCGEU is stronger, more  powerful, and they have a strike  fund. The UBE had been losing  money."  Bank officials claim the decision to close the bank was made  over the past nine months. "Houston has for several years been a  low performer," says George Hick-  ing, the district vice-president for  north-central BC.  Six months ago, the branch  was renovated, painted and installed with new filing cabinets—  hardly a sign that closure was  under consideration, says Olesen.  BCGEU official Cliff Andstein beheves that, over a number of  years, the area manager in Prince  George "made management decisions which would reduce the economic viability of the branch" in  order to justify its closure.  Ironically, the union hasn't cost  the Bank of Montreal a cent in  improved wages or benefits. Like  their counterparts in the nine  other unionized banks throughout  BC, the women in Houston were  unable to negotiate a contract that  went beyond the bank's own renu-  meration pohcies.  Unionization did, however, provide them with some protection from the bank's appalling  labour practices—practices shared  by "The Big Five" who dominate the Canadian banking scene:  the Royal Bank, Scotia Bank,  the Commerce, Toronto-Dominion, and Montreal.  Prior to unionizing, says Olesen,  staff were often paid at a lower rate  than their job merited, and benefits were denied. Vacations and  statutory holidays were also disputed.  As weU, when area manager  Don Bassett visited, he was  not simply rude, "he blamed  [the women] for problems in the  branch," says Olesen.  "He would always comment, 'If  the girls [sic] aren't puffing their  weight, get rid of them' ... he's a  male chauvinist."  The decision to unionize was  While the union contract gave  the staff in Houston a tool to keep  the bank playing by its own rules,  the women have been unable to effectively challenge the merit system which controls wages and advancement. (A teller in Houston  earns $8.51/hour.)  According to this system, a  worker's job performance is numerically rated and then placed  on a grid. However, the bank presets the percentage of workers—  five percent—who may appear in  the upper end of the performance  scale. "Not matter how you're excelling," says Olesen, "if they're  over their five percent, you're  dropped.  "None of the unionized branches, ourselves or Chnton or Kim-  berley, were able to get the bank  to budge [on the merit system]."  Peggy Steacy, president of the  BC chapter of REALW said that  last year's conference actually cost  more than the $21,212 they received from SecState.  "The money we've asked for this  year will allow us to bring more  speakers in ... and it'll cover costs  such as space rental, travelling and  childcare", said Steacy.  The proposed conference, entitled "Towards 2000: Equahty  in the Information Age" will include topics such as the Canadian Justice System; Reproductive Choice; Educational Opportunities for Mother and Children;  and Images of Women in the Media.  (As Kinesis goes to press, MP  Dawn Black, NDP women's critic,  is applying for the complete conference agenda under Access to Information regulations.)  Steacy said the core funding  they requested would finance REALW's planned national office in  Ottawa.  "And if we don't get the money  for the conference, we'll go ahead  with it anyway with money from  our membership and donations,"  said Steacy. "But why shouldn't  we receive the funding ... we meet  the same criteria as other women's  groups."  Claiming to speak for women in  the home, REALW has gone on  record opposing choice on abortion, universal day-care, no-fault  divorce, pensions for homemakers,  equal pay for work of equal value,  and human rights protection for  lesbians and gay men.  Current SecState program eligibility requirements include the  "promotion of understanding and  action on status of women issues,"  and "projects concerned with better educational and job opportunities, quality day care, equal  pay, improved pensions, maternity  leave, and women's needs in the  home and in the work place."  Diane Thome, regional representative of the National Action Committee on the Status  of Women (NAC) said, "REALW  don't meet the [funding] criteria as it stands now—so if they  [SecState] give them the money,  does that mean they're going to  change the criteria in order to fund  them?"  Trisha Joel of the Vancouver  Status of Women said, "H SecState puts this money out, they  are funding an organization that  is virulently anti-choice, women-  blaming and unaware of the realities of hfe for all but the smallest minority of white, privileged  women."  Last year, the Conservatives cut  funding of women's groups by 15  percent and singled out the National Action Committee on the  Status of Women (NAC) for a 50  percent cut over three years.  Len Westerberg, press secretary for Secretary of State Gerry  Weiner thinks people are making  mountains out of molehills. "All  applications, including NAC's, are  looked at in accordance with the  funding guidelines ... no group  receives any more or less scrutiny  than the other," said Westerberg  in January.  Westerberg could not offer any  details on either REAL W's proposed conference or operating expenses. "I haven't got that information ... and I'm not willing to  speculate at this time on any government decision ... you'll have to  wait until April," he said.  Said Joel, "What could raise the  costs of a conference from $21,212  last year to $130,500 this year—  a figure that represents the entire  annual budget for a minimum of  three women's centres in British  Columbia?"  Meanwhile, representatives of  various Lower Mainland women's  groups met with the BC region  of NAC in November to strategize  around protesting further funding  cutbacks and restrictions on their  activities.  In addition to protesting further cutbacks, discussions focussed  on the urgency to gain access to  better funding and support from  the provincial government, especially in hght of the new provincial  women's ministry.  Women's services have rarely  been under attack as much as they  are today and we beheve that it's  critical that we respond with one  voice, said Thorne.  The BC Region of NAC has  called a meeting for all lower mainland women's groups to strategize around funding cutbacks on  Wednesday, February 21st at First  United Church, 320 E. Hastings,  Vancouver, at 7:00 pm sharp.  Letters protesting the support of funding R.E.A.L. Women can be sent to Gerry  Weiner, Secretary of State,  Parliament Buildings, Ottawa,  Ont., KlA 0A6. Letters should  also be sent to Barbara McDougall, Minister Responsible  for the Status of Women,  Parliament Buildings, Ottawa,  Ont, KlA 0A6. No postage required.  KINESIS ACROSS  B.C.  \XXNXNN\\NNX\NXX\NX\NXXXXNXXXXX\\^^^  In BC's desperate housing climate, 'domestic violence' means  women are receiving blows not  only from their partners but from  their landlords as well.  In some cases, eviction notices  are flying faster than fists, often  resulting in homelessness.  Sue Stokvis moved to Langley  BC with her young daughter after  leaving a violent marriage. She recently arrived home to find a 'Termination Notice to Tenant' posted  on her door. Because of her ex-  husband's threatening presence in  the building, the notice explained,  she and her daughter had 30 days  to move out.  Says Stokvis, her ex-husband is  not permitted on the premises by  [her. In fact, she holds a restraining order against him which she  doesn't hesitate to enforce whenever he shows up.  'According to the order, he is  legally forbidden to harass, molest, or communicate with us in  Abused women face evictions  by Noreen Shanahan  any way except by telephone," she  says.  "But he gets into the building  anyway when I'm at work. He just  sits in the lobby reading a newspaper or something, daring the landlord to throw him out.  "He's hke a four year old child  wanting attention, wanting to provoke the landlord."  Stokvis says it started last summer, when her ex-spouse physically threatened her landlord. No  charges were laid, but it has since  escalated into intense animosity  between the two men— resulting  in her eviction.  Stokvis' example isn't unusual,  says Jennifer Bradley of the Tenants Rights Coalition. "Whereas  in Stokvis' case, it was relatively clear she didn't 'invite' the  man into her home, other abused  women feel no other option—when  the husband comes knocking—  than to open the door. In doing so,  he has legally become her 'guest',  thereby making the eviction valid.  "In   any   case,   the   harassed  Organizing for  same-sex benefits  by Diana Smith  The Vancouver-based Lesbian  and Gay Benefits Committee formed in the spring of 1989 to discuss the issue of pension, medical  and other employment benefits for  same-sex partners.  Across Canada, several individual lesbians and gay men had  been fighting separate battles for  spousal coverage and there was  a need to determine what could  be done locally. Since its inception, the LGBC has gathered information about cases, started a  resource file, sent letters to insurance carriers asking about their  pohcy on same-sex coverage, and  taken the issue to the larger community.  To date, only one insurance  company has responded to the  LGBC's letter: CU&C Health Services Society—and they do cover  same-sex benefits. Anyone with  any influence over the choice of  insurance carrier for their benefit package is requested to support  this more progressive company.  From the outset, the LGBC  knew that, despite their narrow focus of workplace benefits, everything would ultimately come back  to the broader issue of homophobia. In order to confront the issue first-hand, the group deliberately included the words "lesbian  and gay" in its name.  And already there have been experiences of homophobia. At the  LGBC hospitality suite during the  BC Federation of Labour convention in December, a member of  the Four Seasons Hotel catering  department asked that the group  be listed differently on the hotel's  announcement board—because of  the "sensitivity" of the hotel's  guests.  The LGBC said there was absolutely no other way and the name  was duly hsted on the board—the  only remaining problem was getting hotel staff to correct the room  number so that delegates could actually find the suite  This hospitality suite was the  LGBC's first pubhc event. Over  80 trade unionists attended and it  proved a great forum for discussion. Articles and a shde show on  homophobia were presented. Resolutions were passed at the convention regarding member education  and lobbying for legislation that  outlaws discrimination against lesbians and gay men. A background  paper, including resources, was  circulated to the 1,000-odd delegates.  The LGBC is open to all people:  gay and straight, union and nonunion, women and men. Meetings to date have mainly involved  unionized lesbians. The groups has  three areas of focus: 1) Assisting individuals in specific cases  through research, moral or financial support, or publicity; 2) Increasing awareness through education of Committee members, the  lesbian and gay communities, the  labour movement, and the general  pubhc; and 3) Developing strategies for change.  The Lesbian and Gay Benefits Committee is organizing a  fundraiser: a pancake brunch,  with a valentine's theme, on  Sun. Feb. 11th from 11 am  to 1 pm. Doorprizes and toppings to make your knees weak.  Location: Sitka Housing Coop  Common Room, 1550 Woodland Dr., Vancouver. Tix: $5-  $10 (kids free) available at  the door and at Ariel Books,  Women's Bookstore, Octopus  Books, VLC, R2B2 Books, Little Sisters, and the GLCC. For  info call Diana Smith at 876-  1465.  woman is facing tremendous barriers in creating a safe home for herself and her children."  Under the Residential Tenancy  Act, a tenancy may be terminated  if: " ... the safety or other lawful right or interest of the landlord or other occupant in the residential property has been seriously  impaired by an act or omission of  the tenant or a person permitted [emphasis added] in or on the  residential property or residential  premises by him (sic)."  Upon receiving her notice, Stokvis had two options: to file a dispute at the Residential Tenancy  Branch within ten days (and have  an arbitration hearing to decide  whether the eviction can be upheld) or to pack her bags and move  out. She chose arbitration.  "I started gathering evidence,  proof that I never permitted him  in the building. I took photographs  of the [building's] front door,  showing that it was broken, allowing him to shp inside.  "Then I went around to my  neighbours, getting them to sign a  letter saying they've never seen me  let [my ex-husband] in."  As the arbitration date came  closer, Stokvis began doubting her  evidence would satisfy an arbitrator. She felt pressured to let the  eviction stand.  "For one  thing,  I knew  how  much my landlord wanted to 'get  back' at [my ex-husband]. It was  hke a power struggle between two  huge male egos. Then I began feeling persecuted and trapped, with  no resources, nowhere to turn,  with both the landlord and my  husband threatening me."  As Kinesis goes to press,  Stokvis has decided not to contest the eviction; instead she plans  moving away from Langley and  keeping her new address confidential.  "It's archaic!" says Stokvis.  "What the landlord is free to do  is lay the blame on women, as  though she is invitational—letting  an abusive man into her home."  Jl&ues vYwn&ifacetn tfo 90s  by Terrie Hamazaki  Like surprises? Then make  plans to attend the "Gathering  Strength, Gaining Power" events  sponsored by the Vancouver Status of Women (VSW) to be held  on four Wednesdays this winter.  "VSW's work consists mainly of  public education on issues of concern to women, and we wanted to  start off the 90s with something interesting," said event co-ordinator  Bonnie Waterstone.  Via readings, plays, music and  panels, women of diverse cultural,  class and sexual identities will be  leading the experiential events.  "Unfortunately the first event  entitled 'Out of Sight, Out of  Mind NO Longer' will have already been presented by Kinesis press time," said Waterstone.  "This event was an opportunity to  experience the gathering strength  of Native women."  In "Making Ends Meet—the  90s" (Feb. 7) the hves of domestic workers in Canada, over 50  percent of whom are women from  the Phihppines, will be highlighted  in the play "House Maids" presented by women of the Phihppine  Women's Centre.  "Some issues they'll focus on  will be oppressive immigration  laws and sexual harassment," said  Waterstone.  SFU professor Marjorie Cohen  and Melanie Conn of WomenFutures will then talk about the effects of global economic trends on  women. Also present will be an information table set up by the Domestic Workers Association.  "New Ideas For A New Decade"  (Feb. 14) promises the most surprises. "This particular event was  sparked by a conversation I had  with Jyoti Sanghera of the India  Mahila Association who described  how she knew women of colour  who were attracted to the women's  movement, but felt outside of it,"  Waterstone said.  In addition to Carmen Rodriguez of Aquelarre presenting  a short reading of her works,  a South Asian women's group  and a group which calls itself  "Colours" will look at feminism  from their perspective—as women  of colour—through role plays and  skits.  The last of the series, entitled  "New Reproductive Technologies"  (Feb. 28) was created to coincide  with the upcoming Royal Commission on Reproductive Technology.  "This topic lends itself to absurdity, so there will be a comedy in-  tro skit by Karen White who performed at this year's Women in  View festival," said Waterstone.  Set up in workshop format and  led by speakers Sue Cox, Allison Rice and Joy Thompson, this  event will offer women the opportunity to brainstorm on ideas  around future reproductive technologies.  "We know what we need as  women. We just have to decide  what the focus should be," said  Waterstone.  By setting the stage and creating the space, VSW hopes to initiate continuing dialogue on issues  women face in the 90s.  "The element of surprise alone  should allow us to take off and go  further than this series," she said.  All events are at 7:30 pm at  the Vancouver Indian Centre,  1607 East Hastings (at Commercial). Wheelchair accessible. Admission by donation  (proceeds going to cover costs  of event). Childcare subsidy  available—please phone ahead  to arrange— 255-5511.  4 KINESIS SSSSSS//SS/SSSSSSSSSS/SSSSS/SSSS/fS/SSSSSSSS/SSSSSSSSSS/SSSSS//SS/SSSSSSSSSSSSSSSS/SS/SS/SSS/SSSSf  ///////////////////^^^^^  /////////////////M^^^  Across Canada  Reflections on McLaughlin's win  by Margaret J. Priestley Birrell  The NDP federal leadership campaign'  was an historic event not only in the election of the first woman to lead a major pohtical party, but because of the four key elements which secured the victory.  For the past decade, the cry has been that  we must get more women involved in pohtics and more women elected, and a great  deal of energy, money and tears has gone  into this process. In too many cases, women  who are not feminists have been getting  elected at the party level and the public  level.  Indeed, some women were being appointed and elected because they were not  feminists. This put politically active feminists in an untenable position—they either  had to hold back criticism because of the  sacredness of gender identification or be labelled as radical purists.  the anti-women  tone has changed...  setting the stage  for a more receptive  convention  Audrey McLaughlin is a woman who is  a feminist. She talked publicly of a feminist  agenda that would address major pohtical  issues in a holistic manner. There was no  need to form a pressure group to keep her  on the straight and narrow or to make sure  women's issues were not quietly placed on  the back burner in the drive for power. Feminism and the current questions facing the-  women's rights movement were fully incorporated into her speeches.  McLaughlin's feminism is internalized.  She is able to communicate that women's  issues are in every issue and every issue is  a woman's issue. In this way, delegates who  normally would be cautious about aligning  themselves with feminists found themselves  attracted to her holistic problem-solving  theory.  Secondly, gender parity in the selection  of delegates was also crucial to the outcome. The federal NDP has a pohcy of gender parity at all levels of the party structure, except in the selection of candidates.  Over the past few years, this pohcy has  meant that some women have had equal  say in the decision-making process. Prejudices concerning women's competence have  weakened and women are getting the long-  deserved party recognition for the responsibilities they have undertaken.  Thirdly, the anti-women tone has changed in general, setting the stage for a more  receptive convention. Gender parity at the  delegate selection level translated into a  large block of women delegates. Since this  was not paralleled in the trade union affiliate delegates, there was not total gender  parity on the floor. Nevertheless, the convention began with an unprecedented atmosphere of potential acceptance of a woman  leader.  Lastly, an unprecedented factor at the  December 1989 convention was the non-  brokered balloting. In the past, leadership  campaigns were won when large blocks of  votes were directed by the party establishment and union leaders, with negotiations  made in a confined, rarified atmosphere.  The hard work done at the grass roots level  in building support for particular candidates would be automatically cancelled in  the block numbers games that is the brokerage system.  In this leadership race, there was no establishment candidate and the trade union  movement could not consolidate its support  around any one candidate. Yet the mass media's convention coverage concentrated on  the brokerage system, in spite of the fact  that the real building action was happening  on the floor with one-to-one delegate lobbying. Indeed, all campaigns fed into this perception by constantly promoting their latest  VIP endorsement and openly speculating  which new high profile name was about to  jump on board, implying they would bring  a block of votes.  There were also two sub-factors that  played key roles: the high percentage of  first-time delegates to a leadership convention, and the large pool of genuinely undecided delegates. Therefore, the McLaughlin  delegates had a large lobbying pool to work  on and did so with the refreshing naivete  that all the hard work would automatically  pay off.  Finally, history was on McLaughlin's  side. Women's issues are on the top of the  pohtical agenda. This has been achieved by  the thousands of feminists who slogged in  the trenches raising issues, writing briefs,  signing petitions, demonstrating, marching,  lobbying, taking leadership roles in their  communities and running for pubhc office.  Through this labour, there is no sector of  our public or private hves that has not  been analyzed from the feminist perspective. Feminist theory is now a legitimate  component of our sociopolitical culture.  The Audrey McLaughlin victory holds  more than one significant message for feminists today. The past strategy of electing  women simply because they're women has  only created disillusionment with women  in the pohtical process. We must recognize that the hberal guilt-tripping of uncritical support for women has actually set our  movement back. We must be assertive, scrutinize potential candidates and use our pohtical vote wisely.  The gender parity structure means that  feminists must work with men. The challenge now is in building strong coalitions  with them without altering the feminist  agenda. This is imperative because we can't  win on the pohtical issues or gain real pohtical power on our own.  The time is right for us to reap the benefits of our consciousness-raising work and  moral victories. We now have real pohtical  power at the grass roots level. We must recognize the legitimacy of our position and assert our right to be integral to the pohtical  decision-making process.  Margaret Birrell was an organizer in  the McLaughlin leadership campaign.  Do typos turn you into  a raging monster?  There is a vocation for  you   - proofreading  Kinesis.  , Please call  The Royal Commission on Us  It was 20 years ago.,  by Kinesis Staff Writer  What received 468 briefs, 890 witnesses  and over 1,000 letters of opinion?  The Royal Commission on the Status of  Women in Canada, that's what. Established  by the federal government in 1967, the  RCSW staged 37 pubhc hearings across the  country, commissioned dozens of research  papers and eventually released its historic  report of the same name in 1970.  Now, women throughout Canada are  gearing up for a series of 20th anniversary  celebrations.  The Report of the RCSW contained 167  recommendations which became a benchmark against which Canadian women's  progress in achieving social, legal and economic equahty could be measured. "The  Report is awesome," says Janet Berry of the  Vancouver Status of Women.  "The Commission did an incredible job  of gathering information, and its recommendations were very good. If more had been  acted on, the changes for women would have  been significant."  The Report's many recommendations included a call for a guaranteed annual income  for single parents, an end to discrimination  against Native women on the basis of marital status under the Indian Act, and major  overhauls to the Divorce Act and pension  regulations. As well, a national Day-Care  Act was advocated, complete with most  of the features contemporary day care activists demand.  Successive governments have ignored  more recommendations than they have accepted. The Report, which the RCSW made  a point of releasing in an affordable and  readable format, is out of print.  The impetus for the Royal Commission  grew out of the Women's Liberation Movement of the day and the Report reflects  some of that movement's priorities. "The  women crying out for action came from a  certain segment of society, and the Report  shows what mainstream society was willing  to look at," says Berry.  While the Report takes an exhaustive  look at legal and economic discrimination,  the words lesbian, disabihty, racism—and  sexism—are nowhere to be found.  In Vancouver, an ad-hoc group— "Th<  1990 Group"—is meeting to plan a series  of events throughout the year. "We want to  use the anniversary to talk about the issues  that were raised [by the RCSW] and the issues that were not raised," says Khatun Siddiqi, one of the group's coordinators. The  1990 Group is aiming for a fall symposium  and encourages local women's groups to join  up, or plan their own celebration.  The 1990 Group may be contacted at  7S8-1S51 or 684-1546.  i  You've Always Delivered  Now, help deliver Kinesis. We need a  woman to distribute the paper, by car  to local bookstores and by mail to our  national distributor and foreign  outlets.  You will be paid for the  approximately eight hours/month this  job entails. A driver's license and an  ability to maintain records required.  The Goods  -6  Please call 255-5499.  KINESIS Across Canada  by Linda Choquette  Innu vs. Nato:  to be continued...  The Innu people, strenuously protesting  that their way of life would be destroyed  by a proposed NATO flight-training base  in Labrador, have gained support from a  panel of scientists hired by the Federal  Environmental Assessment Review Office  (FEARO). Strongly critical of the Defense  Department study of the effects of the proposed low-level flights, the scientists found  more than 100 major flaws.  "Inadequate by all conceivable standards  of assessment" is how an expert on the effects of noise on migratory birds characterized the study. "One cannot escape the impression of some sort of cover-up," said another noise and wildlife expert.  Sylvie Vincent of a Montreal-based social  sciences research company called the study  "extremely disappointing" in its treatment  of the impact on humans.  The training centre would be used for  low-level flights, high-altitude dogfighting  and bombing practice with hve explosives. Already, Britain, West Germany, the  Netherlands and Canada carry out low-level  bomber training flights in the area. If the  centre is approved, the number of military  flights would increase from the current 7,000  to 40,000 annually.  Turkey is also under consideration for the  base. NATO's recommendation is expected  in May.  Abuse reports  routinely ignored  Many of Ontario's professional child custody case assessors are neglecting to report,  aUegations of sexual abuse by parents, or to  complete their assessments before such allegations have been investigated and resolved,  according to a study presented to the Law  Society of Upper Canada.  Dr. Paula Caplan, a psychologist, surveyed 220 of the assessors who prepare  the child custody reports for family court  judges. The reports carry considerable  weight since 98 percent of judges accept  them.  Caplan's report revealed that one in  seven assessors ignored sexual abuse allegations, and 19 percent do not report allega  tions of physical abuse or child neglect to  children's aid organizations.  Also revealed in Caplan's study were  other biases and worrisome attitudes. Seven  percent of assessors said they beheved children should hve with their fathers, only  75 percent regularly obtained information  about children and parents from third parties, eight percent do not see the child involved, and one in five see the child, but not  in the company of either parent.  Caplan said the statistics are "alarming  in what they imply about some clinicians'  failure to take [abuse] reports seriously or  to consider the impact of abuse and neglect  of the child."  Assessors are hired by the couple disputing custody of the children.  Ojibway woman  vindicated  Mary Pitawanakwat, an Ojibway, was the  victim of "ongoing racial insults" from her  employer and had to work in an atmosphere  with a "clear lack of understanding of Native culture ... severe enough to create a  poisoned work environment," according to  a recent report by the Canadian Human  Rights Commission.  Pitawanakwat, who is seeking compensation and job reinstatement, was employed  in Regina by the multiculturalism branch of  the federal Department of the Secretary of  State.  She first complained of racial and sexual harassment to the human rights body  in 1984. After she was fired in 1986,  she obtained an order to investigate.  Pitawanakwat's complaint of sexual harassment was found justified: investigators said  she was subjected to special monitoring by  the Regina office.  Canadian Human Rights Commission investigators were told of several racial insults  directed toward Pitawanakwat by department officials. Included were remarks about  the laziness of Natives, jokes about scalping and a reference to "les sauvages"— interpreted by the speaker as the old-French  term for Indians but translated in most  French-English dictionaries as "savages."  "I feel immensely reheved that an objective evaluation has confirmed my aUegations," Pitawanakwat said, adding that she  felt vindicated by the investigator's report.  The multiculturalism branch of the Secretary of State's Department is currently  The Vancouver Folk  Music Festival  is pleased to present  An exciting International Women's Day concert  featuring two of the finest singers and writers to  emerge from the women's music scene.  And, they're both Canadians, from Montreal and  Calgary respectively.  supervising a national campaign to eliminate racial discrimination in Canada. The  Regina branch of the department issued a  thirty-page response to the CHRC's report,  defending their record.  Sexism, racism  abounds on bench  There is no lack of examples when judging Canada's judiciary racist and sexist.  In December, a Northwest Territories  judge said sexual assault among Native people is sometimes less violent and cannot always be judged in the same hght as southern Canadian cases.  "The majority of rapes in the NWT occur  when the woman is drunk and passed out.  A man comes along and sees a pair of hips  and helps himself," said Michel Bourassa, a  territorial court judge.  Women's and Native groups strongly  protested Bourassa's remarks, and it wasn't  the first time. Bourassa incensed Native  women's groups in 1984 when he gave  hght sentences to three Inuit men convicted  of sexual intercourse with a "consenting",  mentally handicapped 13-year-old. In the  Inuit culture, interpreted Bourassa, "when  a girl begins to menstruate, she is considered ready to engage in sexual relations."  Elsewhere in the country, the New  Brunswick Advisory CouncU on the Status of Women released a study in December which found that sexist attitudes among  pohcemen and judges are shielding men  who beat their wives. Chairperson Jeanne  d'Arc Gaudet presented the study which  contained the foUowing quotation, based on  interviews, among others:  "Assaulted women hke being beaten"  said one unidentified pohce officer. "Often  they deserve it... If they go to court, these  men have no chance. There is no justice.  Feminists and Stalinists have influence on  the judges."  In Vancouver, criticism was immediate  and harsh when the BC Court of Appeal upheld Judge Peter Van der Hoop's sentence  for Delbert Leeson, the drunk, tired 33-year  old convicted of sexuaUy assaulting a three-  year-old girl.  Judge Van der Hoop referred to the chUd  as "sexuaUy aggressive" as a mitigating factor in sentencing. Largely in response to a  feminist public outcry, the suspended sentence was appealed, but the higher court  upheld the decision. In the Court of Appeal's opinion, the only flaw in Van der  Hoop's sentencing was the word "sexually"  in reference to the chUd's behaviour.  Farmwomen's  numbers come up  That women run farms and that farm hfe  is less than bucohc wUl come as no surprise  to generations of Prairie women, but Statistics Canada has suddenly found the number of women farmers statistically significant. It's ah in how you ask the question.  Now that federal regulations require  gender-neutral and non-exclusive language  in government communications, women are  literally appearing as individuals, not only  as wives or widows. A Statistics Canada report, released early January, cites an 18 percent increase in women running farms between 1981 and 1986.  The same report suggests that farming  is extremely stressful work. Contributing to  stress are frequent financial difficulties and  the need for many farm workers—up to  39 percent—to hold off-the-farm jobs. For  women, add another job—housework and  chUdcare.  On average, women farmers are better  educated and older than their male counterparts.  Kids, parents  run out of time  Serious backlogs in Ontario's family  courts have produced a cruel deciding factor  in chUd custody cases—time. Judges now  must consider the effects on chUdren of separation from foster parent or agency custodians since chUdren, especially young ones,  form bonds with these short-term caregivers. In the words of one judge, temporary custodians are winning by default.  Legal proceedings taking up to two years  are resulting in situations where children  are being "wrenched" from foster care and  returned to natural parents, said Associate  Chief Judge Walmsley.  "It is an unfairness to the [natural] parents, to the foster parents and to everyone  involved..." said Walmsley.  "The time delays now experienced wUl  only worsen," said another Ontario family  court judge who cited an increased caseload  of 12 percent over the past 10 years. A report released early January revealed there  were sixty-nine family court judges in 1979  whUe today there are only sixty-eight.  Federal AIDS  poUcies unfair  The announcement mid-December that  persons with ADDS who contracted the virus  through contaminated blood and blood  products wUl receive tax-free benefits totalling $120,000 each wUl ease financial and  emotional burdens for recipients, but the eligibility requirement shows greater concern  for good pohtics than good health care.  In making the announcement, Health  Minister Perrin Beatty framed the benefits  as "disaster relief" and said the aid would  restore public confidence in the blood supply system. Spokespersons for hemophUic  organizations were pleased by the government's move.  Pat Kowalski, chair of the Vancouver  Persons With Aids (PWA) Society welcomed the announcement but expressed  concern for those groups who wUl not meet  eligibility criteria.  "I wonder about the rest of the people infected with HIV...how can the government  justify the lack of services for the rest of the  people?" she said.  UntU Canada has an urgently needed national strategy to combat AIDS, no one  knows if Ottawa wUl spend more time or  commit more funds to the fight. Community groups supporting people with AIDS  are running out of money and activists, who  expected to wait untU February at the latest for the promised federal action plan have  now been told they must wait untU the summer.  People "certainly wUl lose faith in the  commitment of the government to act  quickly and treat AIDS as an urgent priority," said the executive director of the Canadian AIDS Society in Ottawa.  KINESIS Sorrow, anger after Montreal  by Lisa Schmidt  CaU it the massacre, the tragedy, the  murders. Or simply call it the 6th—  December 6th.  That was the day in Montreal when fourteen women were murdered—for being feminists (which they may have been), for being engineering students, for simply being  women. At the engineering pavUlion of the  Universite de Montreal, fourteen women  were gunned down and thirteen other female and male students wounded by a man  who hated women.  The women who died were Genevieve  Bergeron, Helene Colgan, Nathalie Croteau,  Barbara Daigneault, Anne-Marie Edward,  Maud Haviernick, Barbara Maria Klucznik,  Maryse Laganiere, Maryse Leclair, Anne-  Marie Lemay, Sonia PeUetier, Michele  Richard, Annie St-Arneault and Annie Turcotte.  Hundreds of stories flooded Canadian  media in the days that foUowed the slaughter. Some described how the murderer  jumped from desk to desk, shooting at  women; others weighed the merits of nationwide gun control against the risks of hving  in a 'free' society.  Yet, the most distressing aspect of the  rampage remains the fact that the murderer's actions were directed specifically  against women. He made this clear in the  moments before the first women fell, shouting, "You're all a bunch of feminists, and I  hate feminists" to the classroom of women,  having first ordered the men to leave.  A letter was later found on the gunman's  body—he committed suicide—in which he  claimed feminists had ruined his hfe. In  spite of this evidence, the view that the  massacre was 'an isolated act of a madman'  was prevalent in the mainstream media. A  Vancouver Sun article, for example, concluded that the victims just 'happened to be  women.' Editor Barbara Yaffe stated that it  is "extreme for women to use the murders  as a raUying cry for feminists."  this view would hold up if we  hved in a world where violence against  women was rare. Events occuring across the  country in the aftermath of the massacre  point out this is definitely not the case:  • While waiting for a bus in Point-Claire,  a town just outside Montreal, a 16-year  old woman was "shot" in the head by  an unidentified man with what seems to  have been a starter's pistol—a few days  after the massacre.  • On December 10th in Orillia, Ontario, a  boy walked into his grade 12 electronics  class and pointed a water pistol at the  only female classmate. "You're a feminist," he said, puffing the trigger.  • In Edmonton, four weeks after the  6th, male engineering students chanted  "Shoot the bitch" when a female student took the stage in a university  skit. An engineering student herself, she  had recently—and publicly—criticized  the engineering department for its sexism.  Women's Centres throughout Canada  were also targetted and the harassment  came mostly in two forms: hostUe opposition to women-only vigUs mourning the  Montreal deaths, and threatening phone  calls from furious men.  The decision to hold a women-only vigU  in Thunder Bay, Ontario resulted in the organizers, the Northern Woman's Centre, being severely berated. Some claimed the vigU  was a repetition of the murderer's actions  of separating women and men, and the ceremony was portrayed in the media as a hostUe rant against men.  In Vancouver, the request to have men  form a circle around the women at the  Robson Square vigU roused angry comments from some men in attendance. Ruth  Gilhngs, a staff worker at WAVAW (Women  Against Violence Against Women) who addressed the crowd attending the vigU, commented that this reaction came as a kind of  shock to the women at WAVAW and as a  result, women there became concerned for  their own safety.  At the vigU held in Victoria, some men  were also angered at being asked to stand  outside the group of women. More alarming  though, were the half dozen or so threatening messages left on the answering machine  at the offices of Victoria's Status of Women  Action Group (SWAG). All the calls were  from men and expressed in one form or another the need to 'finish off the gunman's  work.'  According to Maclean's, the rifle used  by the murderer has become more popular since the assault. A gun salesperson in  a Toronto sports store said that on the  day foUowing the massacre, he sold four of  the rifles and received several telephone inquiries about the gun. Before the 6th, the  store usuaUy received no more than two  such calls a week.  The tragedy in Montreal shed hght on  the issue of violence against women in a  way that httle else can parallel, and we have  mourned as a nation, as women and as individuals.  When the Universite de Montreal was  buUt a number of years ago, students there  gave a nickname to the main buUding. They  called it 'le phallus' because of it's long, thin  shape and domed roof. The view of the campus from the top of Mont-Royal is through  a cemetery and I can no longer think of the  school without seeing that buUding rising  above the tombstones.  Kinesis received a number of letters and comments from women in BC and  throughout Canada expressing grief and anger in the weeks that followed the murders. Here is a sampling of the response:  Something never to be forgotten occurred in the city of Montreal last month: an attack,  an assault, a calculated brutal slaying of fourteen university engineering students—killed  for only one reason—that they were all women.  When one part of our culture takes a direct, focused action against another group—in  this case, women—this is a serious, growing illness within our culture. The issues cannot  be watered down or ignored anymore: the price is becoming higher and higher. Attacks on  women have always been going on but a bloodbath such as in Montreal should tell us something ... The hves of these fourteen women are not in vain. May the legacy, the horror,  the memory of these women of vision hve on.  — Kato Perdue  Etobicoke, Ont.  Every morning I woke up feehng UI. My first morning thoughts were always the same—  fourteen women had been massacred in Montreal. Even now, two weeks later, the horror  remains. Yesterday in the supermarket, I saw their faces on a tabloid magazine. I realized  that I was staring compulsively at them. They were very young and most of them were  smUing. I also realized that the woman behind me was staring at them too. We just shook  our heads at each other—a universal gesture of distress.  I know that I am not the only woman who is stiU grieving, still in shock. At the school  where I teach, women stiU talk about it. At a house party, the conversation turned to the  Birk's ad in Macleans that ran alongside the massacre story—the naked neck and shoulders of a woman with grey blue skin wearing a heavy gold chain around her neck. The  caption said, "Knock her dead."  —Joan Baril   Thunder Bay, Ont.  Like most of you, I've spent the last few days spinning between sorrow, anger, fear and  a sense of apocalyptic change. I've been thinking about those poor dead women, their fam-  Uies, friends and lovers; and I've been thinking about all the women, everywhere in the  world, who die every day—less dramatically but no less just because they are women.  I've been thinking about the night last September when 800 women marched from Centennial Square down Government Street to Take Back the Night, and The Times-Colonist  wouldn't even cover it. And I've been wondering what good it does to Take Back the Night  when they are killing us in broad dayhght.  I've been thinking about all the women who call themselves feminists and those who  don't, and about what we have in common. The writer Rebecca West said she'd never  been able to figure out what a feminist was, only that people called her one whenever she  expressed sentiments that distinguished her from a doormat.  What is absolutely clear since these killings is that under patriarchy it doesn't matter if  we call ourselves feminists or not—we are aU absolutely vulnerable to male violence. Loving men won't save us, loving women won't save us, just minding our own business won't  save us, power dressing won't save us, getting more women elected to high office won't save  us ... under patriarchy nothing wUl save us.  But this dreadful knowledge doesn't make me feel all hopeless and depressed. On the  contrary, it gives me hope and a great sense of freedom. Because if men are going to kill  us as feminists just for being women and alive and not doormats, then we have nothing to  lose. We might as weU aU be feminists, and the wUdest, biggest, most outrageous feminists  we can manage.  So I've made myself a promise. To honour the memory of those fourteen women kiUed,  I've promised myself that in the coming year I'm going to commit fourteen extra acts of  feminism. And I invite you all to join me in this, especially those of you who have never  before thought of yourselves as feminists, and also those of you who have been active feminists for many years and had been thinking lately you'd done enough and it was time to  let others take your place.  H we all, each in her own hfe and in her own way, next year and every year thereafter,  commit fourteen extra acts of feminism, we can help create the kind of world where no  women ever again will be killed just because she is a woman and alive and not a doormat.  We have the power to create some good from all this. Let's work together and use that  power. And if it gets too scary, I'U leave you with some wise words by Gertrude Stein.  Old Gertrude looked out at the world and said, "Considering how dangerous everything  is, nothing is really very frightening."  —Debby Gregory  Victoria, BC Across Canada  In the fathers' best interests  by Erin Shaw  After divorce, Canadian women are  granted custody of their chUdren in three  out of four cases. This statistic, however,  includes cases where men have not pursued  custody.  When men actually seek custody, they  succeed about 50 percent of the time.  Yet, based on the fact that women have  sole custody of chUdren in the majority of  all cases, "lathers' rights" activists— bolstered by some legal academics and social  scientists—claim the legal system is biased  against men as custodial parents.  To correct this "bias", fathers' rights  groups are seeking changes to family law  which would require a judge to impose joint  custody in every case unless there are good  reasons not to: in short, mandatory joint  custody.  Joint custody simply means each parent  has an equal right to participate in major  decisions about their chUd. It does not necessarUy mean both parents wUl Uve with the  chUd a substantial amount of the time or  applying for custody to "fulfill their custodial obligations" as weU as the health and  emotional weU-being of the chUd.  Fathers' rights groups are the most extreme advocates of replacing the "best interests" model with mandatory joint custody. One Ontario-based group, In Search  of Justice, maintains that women have not  been treated unfairly in the past. Other fathers' rights activists assert that women's  sponse to the establishment in a number of  Canadian provinces of programs to enforce  maintenance payments. (About eighty percent of maintenance orders are in arrears  nation-wide.) Fathers' rights groups complain that these programs provide women  with a "free" legal service whUe fathers' access rights are virtually unenforceable.  Services to enforce access are necessary,  they argue, because denial of access is a  ... fathers' rights  activists assert that  women's liberation is  one of the primary  causes of  juvenile delinquency...  of men and women, and perhaps most significantly, do not focus on chUdren.  Legal academics, who favour mandatory  joint custody, draw heavUy on these studies to make claims about the best interests of chUdren. They also hold to a major,  problematic premise: the "equahty" of the  parents, arguing that men and women have  equal authority over their chUdren both  during marriage and after marriage breakdown. The power imbalance in many marriages and the abihty of a father with joint  custody to control his former spouse are  rarely addressed.  share in the day-to-day work of raising the  chUd.  In fact, joint custody arrangements most  often result in chUdren hving with their  mothers, hence the frequent criticism that  joint custody gives decision-making rights  to fathers without imposing responsibilities.  Currently, the test used by B.C. courts  for determining custody is the "best interests" of the chUd: the courts consider a number of factors including the abihty of those  hberation is one of the primary causes of juvenUe delinquency and that chUd abuse has  dropped 42 percent in the US since the introduction of joint custody. In Canada, lobbying for mandatory joint custody legislation is one of their main priorities.  What is even more frightening than their  rhetoric is their impact. When fathers'  rights groups talk, some legislators hsten.  These groups claim to have been instrumental in the passage of 1989 Ontario legislation which entitles the non-custodial parent  to a court hearing within 10 days of an alleged denial of access.  The lobby for this legislation arose in re-  WOmj'5 WORK f CKZBN PRINT  261 6. l«Tsnu=sr. north v/vdcouvgR.   - (bof) 98Q-»*3S-   1 The "primary caretaker"  role... would recognize  the predominant role  women play in raising  children  problem of equal magnitude to faUure to  pay maintenance. In fact, some claim denial  of access often causes the failure to pay.  So far, fathers' rights groups have been  unsuccessful in convincing any Canadian  province to bring in mandatory joint custody legislation. Thirteen US states, however, have such laws and, undoubtedly  buoyed by their victory in Ontario, fathers'  rights activists wUl continue to press for  similar legislation in Canada.  Social science studies are often used by  supporters of mandatory joint custody—  lathers' rights groups and legal academics—  to bolster their claims. This literature may  focus on the effects of the absence of the  father (father-absent studies) or the presence of the lather as the primary caregiver  (father-custody studies).  Feminists criticize these studies on phUo-  sophical as weU as methodological grounds.  Many feminist theorists attack the phUosophy underlying traditional social science  methodology: not only is it sexist, but its  foundation in rationality and objectivity ignores experiential and emotional values.  There are also compeUing methodological critiques of the studies. Law professor Martha L. Fineman of the University  of Wisconsin criticized joint custody studies for their small samples, non-random selection and their almost exclusive use of  white middle-class parents who have voluntarily chosen joint custody. Father-absent  and father-custody studies are also condemned for their reliance on self-reporting  and a single interview or questionnaire.  Furthermore, studies fail to take into account the very different social expectations  The formal equahty regime that governs  existing custody rules is rooted in a notion of "gender neutrality", yet feminist legal academics are quick to point out that  gender neutrality is not always the road  to equahty. They argue that the best interests test—supposedly gender neutral—  results in women losing custody for sexist reasons. These include the economic resources of the parents, the disparate treatment of employed women and the preference  for two parent heterosexual families (men  are more hkely to remarry).  Feminists, such as Canadian law professors Susan Boyd and Susan Holmes, advocate a new rule based on the notion that the  parent who has been the principal caregiver  during the marriage be preferred in custody  disputes.  The "primary caretaker" rule, whUe being strictly gender neutral, would recognize  the predominant role women play in the  raising of chUdren and wouldn't allow that  to be traded off against economic factors or  the father's new wife. The rule would be  capable of being applied fairly to situations  where shared parenting has taken place during the marriage or where the father has  been primardy responsible for chUd care.  Advocates of mandatory joint custody,  however, see their own approach as one that  will foster greater participation by divorced  fathers in the care of their chUdren. This  reflects an idealistic desire to achieve social  transformation through the application of  law.  The primary caretaker rule, on the other  hand, whUe acknowledging and valuing the  current role of women in our society, does  not deny the value of shared parenting and  is open to the possibility that the father may  be deserving of custody.  That the primary caretaker rule fails to  satisfy fathers' rights activists exposes the  ideological nature of their demand for a presumption of joint custody: a demand which  is based on power and patriarchy, rather  than on any interest in chUdren or true  equahty.  KINESIS Across Canada.  Marjorie Cohen on the GST:  "A miserable tax  to replace a tax  that isn't any  good"  Marjorie Cohen  5 told to Chris Meyer  Feminist economist Marjorie Cohen currently holds the Ruth Woodward Chair of  Women's Studies at Simon Fraser University. In 1988, Cohen was a leading feminist  critic of the free trade deal and whUe she  continues to monitor the effects of free trade  on women, much of her attention is now devoted to the federal government's proposed  Goods and Services Tax (GST). As Kinesis goes to press, the Conservatives are attempting to move this unpopular tax bUl  through Parhament.  Chris Meyer: You are a feminist and  an economist. Is this a good mix?  Marjorie Cohen: I love it. It's been important for me to be able to help women see  how much they really do understand about  economics—how much we intuitively know  about economics—and to try and not make  them anxious about the terminology, and  not be afraid to enter the debate.  It's been very satisfying that the women's  movement has become so involved in economic issues. We used to confine our arguments largely to those having to do with  equal pay and getting jobs and keeping  them, which, of course are very important.  What we're recognizing more and more is  that aU of these issues wUl be beside the  point if we don't have jobs to go to.  You have to look at what the larger economic problems are and how public pohcy  decisions affect us differently from men, because we are in different circumstances.  This is what the women's movement has  become more and more interested in, and  I'm absolutely delighted to be part of making that a focus.  Chris: Why is the proposed Goods  and Services Tax a negative tax for  women?  Marjorie: Probably the most significant  way [the GST is negative] is that it is a major shift in the principles of taxation. Although we've never had a truly progressive  tax system in Canada, we do have this notion that people who are wealthier have a  better abihty to pay tax on income. So we've  tended to say that people with larger incomes should have a larger proportion of  their income go to tax, just based on abihty  to pay.  The GST is a shift away from that principle toward more of a flat tax—now everybody is paying the same percentage. For  people in the lower income bracket, which of  course includes women, this means we will  be paying a larger proportion of our income  on tax than will wealthy people.  ... it is a major shift  in the principles  of taxation  Let me give you an example. It's estimated that families with income of less  than $20,000 a year wUl be spending about  74 percent of their income now on taxable  items. Whereas a family with an income  around $100,000 a year wUl be paying about  47 percent of their income on taxable items.  At any one particular time in Canada, the  majority of adult women have no income.  What [the government] is doing now is imposing a tax on people who have no abU-  ity to pay. Other women who work—if we  take part-time and fuU-time together—their  average income is something hke $15,000 a  year. These people will be spending a large  proportion of their income on items that  wUl be taxed.  This is the major problem with the GST  and why we should be fighting it: ideologically, the whole shift in principles of taxation.  There are other ways it wUl affect women.  For example, one of the items which will be  tax-free are basic groceries. But any kind of  prepared food is going to be taxed. You're  quite famihar with this notion of the double and triple work day that women have.  Now, a woman wUl be taxed for trying to  alleviate that burden.  We're going to really notice the effect  on raising chUdren. Normally, when governments institute a tax hke this, they exempt  things hke books and chUdren's items, but  the GST doesn't. It's going to be more expensive to raise chUdren because there will  be a tax on anything we buy for kids: kids'  clothes will be much more expensive.  It will also affect daycare rates. Goods  and services wUl be divided into three categories. Those which are "tax free": things  hke medical devices, basic groceries and prescription drugs. (It's very limited what falls  into that category.) The consumer pays no  tax and the producer and the seUer gets to  . deduct all the taxes that they pay, so there  really is no tax to pass on to the consumer.  Then you have another area which is fully  taxed, which is all good and services. Here,  the consumer pays seven percent. But the  seUer gets to deduct all the taxes that they  have paid, so this is an important gift to  business because they won't be paying any  taxes.  The third category is a very deceptive  category called "tax exempt." This includes  things hke health care, education and day  care. The seven percent isn't on the consumers bUl but the seUer of the service  doesn't get to deduct the tax they pay for  the service. So, the seUer is going to have  something increases substantially in a year,  people wUl tend to hang on to their old stuff  or repair their old stuff and not buy it new.  This is particularly true of clothing.  Women are concentrated in manufacturing things hke clothing and textUes, shoes-  industries which are quite sensitive to price  increases. Quite soon after the introduction  of this tax we're going to see a decrease  in the demand for these items. People have  only so much money to spend and if they're  spending it on tax they won't be spending  it on things.  H there's a reduced demand and the producer can't seU, they aren't going to keep  up the same level of production, so they'll  start laying off workers.  Also, because it raises prices, it's a very  inflationary tax. This will have further implications on the weU-being of people in this  country because the government is quite  fixated on fighting the threat of inflation.  They're quite worried that workers are trying to catch up with wage losses they've had  in the past.  What the government is doing now is  raising interest rates under this assumption  that when interest rates are high people  don't borrow money to buy things. That's  the idea around it, anyway. What I anticipate happening as the rate of inflation in-  We're going to really notice the effect on children  increased costs. A daycare centre is going  to have to pay seven percent for all the supplies they buy. And so they are going to pass  the price on to the consumer. This wUl also  happen in education and health care.  The government says that any daycare  centre which gets 50 percent of it funding  from government wUl be able to get tax  credits, but virtually no daycare centre gets  50 percent of its revenues from government.  A third way the GST is going to impact •  on women is on jobs. There are certain manufactured items, hke clothing, which have  never had any federal sales tax. Some of  these things are very sensitive to relatively  small changes in price. That is, if a price of  creases because of the sales tax is that we  wUl have interest rates even higher.  The problem with high interest rates is  that they discourage people from spending  and once again there is a ripple effect. If  people don't spend, then producers aren't  able to produce, so they lay off workers.  Workers have lower incomes and they have  less money to buy things, so you see a downward spiral or what the government hkes to  refer to as a "cooling off" of the economy.  But I think we are more hkely to see more  unemployment as a result of this tax.  See GST p. 10  KINESIS Across Canada  GST continued from p.9  Chris: What about the tax credit for  lower income earners the government is  offering? WiU this not alleviate some  of the problems associated with the new  tax?  Marjorie: There are problems with the  tax credit as weU. Since they're [planning]  to institute the tax rate at seven percent  rather than nine percent, they've lowered  the tax credit they were going to give. So,  the tax credit will now be $190 per individual who has an income of less than $20,000 a  year. And people who hve alone in individual households wiU get another $100 credit.  This seems good, but I have done calculations which show what it really looks hke,  how much more tax these people will pay  and how the credit is only a small proportion of the increased tax.  The government, when selling the benefits of this tax to poor people, makes one  very erroneous assumption about the existing sales tax which they're trying to replace  (the manufacturers' sales tax of 13.5 percent  on one-third of the manufactured items in  the country.) They assume that when they  get rid of it, the prices that manufacturers  charge wUl go down an equivalent amount  of money—13.5 percent.  ... the [tax] credit is only  I a small proportion of the  I  increased tax  G^Y90s  «• ▼   Feb.  Tyio  Valentines Dance  for Women  Vancouver Lesbian Connection  at: Grandview Legion Hall 2205 Commercial at 7th  8pm to 12:30 am  Tickets $4-6 from VLC, Ariel Books, Little Sisters, Women's Bookstore  Off-site childcare  Sorry, no disabled access  NEW r *  History shows this does not happen, that  in fact because we are all used to paying  a certain price for something, most people  don't even know a tax is involved—in fact,  most seUers don't know a tax is involved. So  the possibihty of prices going down before  this seven percent is put on it is extremely  remote.  There's another problem with this tax  credit: it's not fully indexed to inflation.  The first three percentages of inflation every year wUl not be taken into consideration  with this tax. This means the credit wUl be  worth less and less each year assuming that  we have any, even modest price increases,  and we always do. This is an inherent way  to make this tax more regressive.  The government is very clever too.  They're planning to send out this credit four  times a year and this year, they're sending  it just before Christmas, so people wUl be  very pleased to get that amount of money—  just before the tax is actually introduced.  Chris: What kind of strategy is there  to fight this tax?  Marjorie: WeU, this is very hard if we're  thinking about what we can do to stop  this. There is absolutely wide-spread hatred  of this tax but, unfortunately, there hasn't  been very good leadership in the opposition  of it. Everywhere I go people say they want  to get involved with this and ask what they  can do. I'm pretty much limited to saying,  join with others in complaining to your local MP, because even the Conservative MPs  are worried about the effects this is going to  have.  Also, contact the Pro-Canada network,  the national anti-free trade group—they are.  now concerned with the sales tax. There will  be a national day of action in AprU against  the tax, and a pubhc referendum.  Chris: What are some alternatives to  the GST?  Marjorie: To institute a miserable tax to  replace a tax which isn't very good is not a  solution. There has to be a general review  of tax pohcy in this country, to restructure  There have been massive tax changes since  the Tories came to  power  taxes sanely. There have been massive tax  changes since the Tories came into power—  if we just went back to what we had in '84,  we would be better off. For example, we had  10 income tax brackets then, now we have  three.  If we just [restored] the highest income  tax bracket of those earning above $60,000  a year to what it was three years ago, we  would be able to raise several bUhon dollars in income tax. We could go to a luxury  tax on very high ticket items that only very  wealthy people buy. It wouldn't hurt me, I  wouldn't mind if silk blouses going for $500  were taxed.  End Legislated Poverty, the lower  mainland contact for the Pro-Canada  Network, is willing to assist groups doing public education around the GST.  CaU ELP at 321-1202, or write Suite  104-2005 E. 43rd, Vancouver BC V5P  3W8.  KINESIS  "Waiting which addresses the root assumptions. . .  (be very ground on which we're standing.  Radical Feminist Theory  Experimental Prose  Translations  Reviews  M Trivia  A  Journal  of Ideas  I.ee Maracle - Moving Over • Susanne de  I.othinlere-IIarwood - I Write Le Hotly  Bilingual • Jeannette C. Armstrong -  Cultural Rohbery, Imperialism: Voices of  Native Women • Conversations at the  Book Fair - Interviews with Lee Maracle  and Gloria Anzaldua • Gloria Anzaldua -  Border Crossings • Michele Causse - ( ):  Interview • Ruthann Robson - Nightshade •  Verena Stefan - Literally Dreaming •  Jewelle L. Gomez - In Review: Chrystos'  Not Vanishing • I.lnda L. Nelson - After  Reading Gloria An/.aldua's  liordcitantis/La  I TRIVIA P.O. Box 606 N.Amherst, MA 01059  TRIVIA is published three times a year.  I Jlfyyear • individuals. $20/year - institutions, Sl6/year - out of U.S.  SAHPLE COPT: J6.00/J7.00.  fcL  VANCOUVER  WOMEN'S  BOOKSTORE  INVENTORY SALE!  315 Cambie Street  Vancouver, B.C. V6B 2N4  (604) 684-0523  Hours: Monday - Saturday  11:00-5:30 pm  !iR  J  Personal Management  Services for Artists  fndtvWuats Resumes  Arts Organisations Career Counselling  Grant and Proposal Writfcg  ¥ FIRST CONSUUTATION FREE?*  By Appointment Only  Jackie Crossland  682-3109 International  Valparaiso, Chile  A beehive of feminist activity  by Ann Thomson  My friend and translator Eliana led me  up the stairs to the rambling, old apartment that serves as the women's centre in  Valparaiso. This city of hills, with 800,000  people, is the major port in Chile. It was  mid-December, 1989—early summer in the  southern hemisphere—a few days after the  first elections in 19 years.  As we entered, I glimpsed 10 women leaning against cushions on the floor in an adjoining room. It could have been a meeting  of any women's collective in Vancouver 15  years ago.  "Here, we do not have a feminist movement," we were told by the woman in the reception area of what turned out to be a beehive of feminist activity. Meaning that feminism has not yet penetrated the popular  consciousness. And meaning that feminist  activists in Chile also work in the broader  resistance movement against the dictatorship of General Pinochet.  Life under brutal miUtary rule teaches  those who work for a better society not to  waste their energies, wits or time. The tasks  are immense and the price of carelessness  or bravado can be death. Despite their limited finances and the fragile legality of their  three-year-old centre, the women of La Casa  de la Mujer—The House of Woman—are  skilled organizers, used to the hardships of  political activity under a dictatorship.  ...the wages of women  are cut by 50 percent in  their seventh month of  pregnancy...  Mireya Zuleta and Renate Francia, two  members of the collective, described their  work. With the help of sporadic donations  from feminists abroad, they have focussed  on awakening people to the conditions of  women's Uves. A Summer School is planned  for January, 1990, the seventh time they  have put together a week-long series of  classes. Last term, 140 women enrolled in  the Winter School.  They told me every effort is made to draw  in women from the poorer districts to the  schools held at the Casa itself. But throughout the year, day-long workshops are taken  to the various neighbourhoods of the city,  and also to other parts of the province.  As often as possible, workshops are led by  women who are professionals in their fields.  There is a holistic range of topics, including workshops on the legal rights of women,  on health issues—breast self-examination,  pregnancy, midwifery—on personal development, poUtical consciousness-raising, and  the work of artisans and artists. There are  also Uteracy classes and in the past year, the  centre has begun offering support to battered women.  A financial break came in late 1988  when a Dutch agency granted funding for  the Casa's Global Project. Presently, the  Casa's main emphasis remains on supporting women's self-organization, but activities  also include research and publicizing of the  centre's work.  In 1989, while dividing their time between the work of the women's centre and  participating in the vast popular campaign  to elect an opposition to the dictatorship,  Casa de la Mujer undertook a new project—  to focus on the hidden issue of domestic violence against women. In the months lead-  Breathing Space  Now, with the victory of the anti-Pinochet  candidate Patricio Aylwin, a breathing  space is expected. Social organizations will  no longer be semi-clandestine. The women  of Casa de la Mujer see the opportunity to  begin fighting for legal rights for women.  Although women have some rights on paper, in practice discrimination is widespread  At the anti-Pinochet candidates' forum on violence against women.   Organizer  Mireya Zuleta of la Casa de la Mujer is second from left.  ing up to the December 14 national elections, a series of activities were organized  on this theme in Valparaiso. One was a forum in November, with a panel of anti-  Pinochet candidates speaking on violence  against women. More than 200 people attended. This was foUowed by a cultural and  artistic event that drew out 300 people.  In Santiago, the capital city, the growing  feminist movement coordinated its efforts  and held a major demonstration protesting  violence against women in November, 1989.  Its theme was "Women don't cry, speak  Although plans were weU advanced for  a similar demonstration in Valparaiso, the  women decided not to hold it and to re-  channel their energies into election work.  StiU, a striking poster for the event had already gone up and was visible around the  city during my stay.  The previous year, however, before the  ban on public actions had been Ufted, 60  women joined those from Casa de la Mujer  in a protest on women's issues. "Due to the  repression, it was a sUent march," recalled  Zuleta. "It was very carefully timed and after half an hour, we dispersed. But our signs  were observed by many people."  in education, employment and wages, as  weU as in such basic matters as having no  right to divorce, no right to contraception or  abortion. "We must begin to totally change  ChUean law," I was told.  Under the dictatorship, countless women  have been arbitrarUy imprisoned, tortured  and disappeared. Women poUtical prisoners are more isolated than men prisoners,  because they are incarcerated far from any  population centre. Their visitors are routinely strip-searched.  Further, under the Law of Buchi, the  wages of working women are cut by 50  percent in their seventh month of pregnancy, and there is no paid maternity leave.  This law was drafted by Hernan Buchi,  Pinochet's former Minister of Finance, who  was the regime's candidate for president in  the December elections. While Buchi lost,  the law wUl be hard to change.  In an extensive campaign against abortion, the Pinochet government has distributed to schools copies of a video we  are famiUar with in North America— The  Silent Scream. It has also been shown repeatedly on national tv. Some years ago,  in a move reminiscent of Nazi Germany,  Pinochet decided that women should be  forced to populate ChUe and the practice  of distributing contraceptives in polycUnics  Women don't cry - speak out  Since beginning to educate people about domestic violence, La Casa De La Mujer in  Valparaiso has been visited by many women seeking help. Members of the collective have  gone to Santiago for training in monitoring, or offering guidance to these women.  But because the stories are so many, and public recognition of the problem so sUght,  there is a great need for wider dissemination of the facts.  Renate Francia of La Casa de La Mujer wants to make a video about the battering of  women. Canadians who can help are asked to send donations to: La Casa De La Mujer,  Calle Victoria 2968 - 3er Piso, Casilla 4315 - Agenda 2, Valparaiso, Chile.  was ended. Moreover, health care workers  were ordered to remove IUDs torn women  who were wearing them. This was often  done without the woman's knowledge or  consent.  The dictatorship's offensive against women has been so successful that even candidates on the left did not raise the issue  of abortion during the recent election campaign. In this context, the candidates' forum  on battering organized by Casa de la Mujer  in Valparaiso was aU the more exceptional.  No one I met in ChUe, of whatever social class, beUeves that one election means  democracy has returned. An uphiU fight Ues  ahead to make the most of the opening that  Aylwin's victory wUl provide.  "This electoral process and its results  were not particularly beneficial to the social classes most discriminated against and  most marginalized in society," was the assessment of the women of Casa de la Mujer.  But, as feminists, they have already bent  their shoulders to the tasks ahead.  A facade of  democracy  In the December 14, 1989 national elections, the ChUean people registered their  opposition to the 16-year rule of General  Augusto Pinochet. The president-elect is  Patricio Aylwin, a Christian Democrat, who  headed a 17-party coaUtion with the slogan  'Gana la Gente'—The People WiU Win.  At the invitation of the teachers' union in  Valparaiso, I went to ChUe as an observer of  the elections. With ChUean friends, I toured  the poUing places, talking with and photographing voters and officials. Although  dozens of armed soldiers were stationed at  each poU, the returning officers were civU-  ians, the voting process rigorously honest,  and the counting of ballots open to the pubUc. There were no charges of vote fraud.  But, from the viewpoint of the miUtary,  fraud wasn't necessary. For, under the terms  of the Constitution re-written by Pinochet  in 1980, the dictator remains head of the  armed forces. He has openly threatened  other coup should the new government fail  to please him.  Less than a week after Aylwin's victory,  Pinochet used Constitutional powers to appoint 6 new members to the 44 member  Senate. Most of them are from the miUtary. And a complex weighting system in  the Electoral Law wUl ensure that victorious candidates who are in agreement with  Pinochet wUl be seated, while those on the  left who received twice as many votes from  the people, wUl not.  Although most ChUeans I met predicted  that the new government wUl be hamstrung,  that Pinochet forces wUl control the two legislative houses and wUl prevent significant  reform, there was a triumphant mood in  the country. At midnight on December 14,  when Aylwin's victory was certain, tens of  thousands of people burst into the streets in  unauthorized demonstrations. They stared  back at the guns, warships and poUce vans  aU around them and called out their determination to keep fighting. As one banner  put it, "Chao, dictadura"~Good-bye, dictator.  A.T.  KINESIS SOMETHING IMPORTANT TO  SAY  as told to Nancy Pollak  When Audrey McLaughlin won the leadership of the federal New Democratic  Party last December, she became the first  female— and avowedly feminist—leader of  a national poUtical party. Prior to becoming the MP for Yukon in 1987, McLaugh-  Un's experience ranged from being a single  mother in Ontario, to a teacher in Ghana,  and a consultant on social poUcy in Whitehorse.  Audrey McLaughlin spoke with Kinesis  early in January.  Kinesis: Could you reflect on the sig-,  nificance of being the first woman leader  of a national party, and what that tells  us about the NDP, about women in the  political process and about yourself?  Audrey McLaughlin: I hope that it says  there can be a real change in poUtics in  this country, that [despite] the cynicism that  pervades politics today, it is possible to have  a change. Also, that my [gaining of] the  leadership indicates to women in general  that we do have something important to say,  that we can say it. We can use the experience that so many women have from very  varied backgrounds, and that it is important experience in the poUtical Ufe of this  country.  I think what it says about the NDP are  two things. One, that there was a receptivity and an openness to changing poUtics  in this country—I think clearly it does say  that.  Secondly, several years ago the NDP instituted a poUcy of gender parity in our organizational structure. We wanted half men  and half women on the executive, in senior positions, and so on. We've had several women presidents—but that's not so  unusual these days—we've had women at aU  senior levels of the party. But we also took  the affirmative action of gender parity at  the federal level and, as you know, actions  speak louder than words.  Personally, I resized when I took this on  that it would be a lot of work and that,  were I successful, this is what I would be doing with my Ufe for some years hence. I saw  it as a tremendous responsibiUty and nothing that I've done in the first 6 or 7 weeks  changes my mind about that (laughs).  Kinesis: Throughout the campaign  and the convention, did you feel any  pressures to downplay the significance  of being a woman, with all that entails  in our sexist society, and how have you  dealt with those pressures?  Audrey: Did I feel I had to downplay being a woman? WeU, absolutely not. I've always said that I'm a feminist and I've always said that proudly, and I've always explained what I mean by it.  The reason I'm in this party is because I  beUeve very strongly in the goals of social  and economic justice. You cannot separate,  in my view, the goal of justice from feminism, and feminism and democratic socialism have always been part of each other [as  movements]. I see feminism in terms of social and economic justice.  It was made a very big issue in the campaign that I was a woman, that people  would just vote for me because I was a  woman, or wouldn't vote for me because I  was a woman.  Frankly, I've been through aU this before.  In the Yukon when I first ran—and I said  I was a feminist then, as weU—they said,  weU they won't vote for someone who says  they're a feminist, this is the North, rough  n' tough, and only women wUl work for you,  and you'U only talk about women's issues  .... WeU, women's issues are the economy,  international affairs—but the reaUty is that  women often get seen in one-dimensional  terms.  I wouldn't say there was any pressure to  downplay [being a woman]. Hyou're looking  at a poUtical office, you're obviously looking for people who share the goals you have,  and that's men and women. It's not at aU a  matter of downplaying your feminist roots,  but at the same time obviously you want to  talk to other people as weU.  Kinesis: Many feminists were happy  to see you were not, evidently, just one  of the guys. Your emphasis on process,  consensus and attention to the grassroots resonated with feminist political  values, as well as socialist ones. What  exactly does all that mean and do you  have any measurable goals relating to  "process" for the NDP?  Audrey: You're right: they can tend to  be terms that roU off the tongue very easUy  but, what do they mean? In terms of goals,  it's measured in terms of the kind of inclusion people feel in the poUtical process.  I see the poUtical process now as a very  exclusive process. The consequences of this  are grave because it means fewer and fewer  and fewer people have their voices heard.  This government didn't want to Usten to  NAC. There wUl be no consultation, as has  been done before, before the budget comes  out.  The central issue here is a democratic  one. Democracy is when people feel they  have a place, and a vote and a reason to  vote. H you look at the American election  for president, only 50 percent of the people  felt moved enough to go out and vote. That  [reveals] the exclusivity of poUtics.  What else excludes people from poUtics?  Money. I couldn't possibly have run for the  leadership of the Liberal party—$1.7 mil-  Uon. There's only one place you can get that  money because you're not going to raise  $1.7 million from individuals in this country. There's only one place and that's the  corporate sector. This excludes many, many  women who have even fewer financial resources [than men] at their disposal.  With this exclusivity, poUtics becomes  something "out there" that somebody else  knows something about. It's a cultural class:  it has a language aU its own—which excludes people, it has its own customs and  mores, and its own style which is accepted  as the poUtical style—and it's male.  Our [the NDP's] measurable goals are  that we'll see more people included, both  ... women who work in  the home do a job. I  happen to have done it:  it's hard work.  within our party and its processes, and  elected; that we'll be able to sincerely give  people the message that we want to Usten,  that we've done it in our own party, and we  want to do it in society in general.  It's also a way of doing things. Leaders,  of course, have to lead and I've got to be  very careful and not say I never have any  ideas. Quite the opposite: I've have lots of  ideas. But it's how you develop, bring people with you, change your ideas if you have  to. I mean, sometimes you can be wrong.  We've developed this culture where poUtical  leaders can never say, it is wrong. But most  of us have worked in systems where [being  wrong] is actually quite human, and so it  doesn't mean you can't be a leader, or that  leaders can't be compassionate or human.  So the measurabUity of this is somewhat  difficult, but the people around you wiU  know and the interest you can generate from  the pubUc wUl teU you whether in fact that's  what people want. Do people want more of  a say over their own Uves, do people want  their own expertise and their own voices acknowledged? I hope so, because that's what  empowerment is aU about.  Having come through the women's movement, these are the principles we've talked  about. These are also the principles when  I've worked with Aboriginal people, when  I've worked with poverty groups. [I'm talking about] the dynamics of powerlessness,  and you don't have a true functioning  democracy when measures are in place that  keep people out.  Kinesis: You've been described as being "weak" on economic issues and of  not having the traditional connections  to the leadership of the labour movement. Yet, it's fairly obvious you got  significant support from labour delegates.  Where do you see yourself in relation  to the labour movement, and what do  you see as the major issues facing working women in Canada, both inside and  outside the home?  Audrey: First of all, I don't accept that  I'm weak on economic issues. I've sat on the  Finance Committee of the House of Commons, I've been the Revenue Canada critic  and, let me teU you, you can't know about  tax poUcy and the income tax system in this  country and know nothing about economics.  Secondly, in terms of the labour movement, I would say the same thing about the  labour movement that I've said about the  feminist movement: we share the same goals  of social and economic justice. I've worked  with unions, I've worked developing unions.  The labour movement is absolutely central to the development of those goals in  Canada, as it has been in social democratic  countries Uke Sweden, which has 90 percent  unionization. As it has been in Poland. As  it has been in many developing countries.  It's not a coincidence that it is often  labour leaders who are kUled in a developing country, because they are seen as the  people fighting for a better Ufe for working  people. To me, it's just as natural that one  would be associated with the labour movement as with the feminist movement.  The challenges facing working women inside and outside the home: weU, we get back  to the definition of work. This may be why  some people think I don't know anything  about economics. I happen to think that  women who work in the home do a job.  I happen to have done it: it's hard work,  besides. Our society does not acknowledge  [women's work] as work. If the amount of  work that women do in the home was in the  Gross National Product, there would certainly be a different GNP.  For women in the home, there are very  outstanding issues. Having said that—it's  a nice sentiment, but what do we do?—  weU, we ensure that women who work in the  home have access to a pension. If we're pre-  ... women do bring a  more holistic perspective to problem-solving,  which is really what politics is all about  pared to say that this is important work,  whether it's raising chUdren, looking after  elderly relatives or whatever, we have to acknowledge it by giving access [to pensions].  Pay equity is obviously a major issue.  Women stiU get paid sUghtly more than two-  thirds on the dollar men get paid. We can't  buUd a society on that basis of inequity.  Whole areas of privatizations, Uke the Post  Office, have had very serious ramifications  for women—going from $13-$14 an hour  jobs to $5 an hour, which also affects their  pension benefits.  Society is going to have to deal with that  down the road: it may look very nice to the  planners [today] but it's not going to look  so nice twenty years down the road.  The high cost of education is very Um-  iting and access to education is [crucial].  More people in the US have access to post-  secondary education than do in Canada, a  considerably larger percentage. What does  that mean for the future economic capability of that person? We know that more and  more people need different skiUs, higher degree of skiUs.  The present government insists they're  there to "manage" change: that's exactly  the problem, in my view. Perhaps if we'd  planned for change we wouldn't have the  crisis we have in fisheries and forests and  the environment in general. Perhaps if we'd  planned for change we'd have a real retraining system in place, and we wouldn't  have this degree of UUteracy.  H you look at other economies, such as  Japan—and Sweden, Norway, Denmark, social democratic economies that have done  very weU— they have planned for change.  They have instituted a labour industrial  strategy that takes into account the fact  that, with technologies, we'U have to change  the way we do things.  The environmental issue. One hates to  generalize, but I think women do bring  a more holistic perspective to problem-  solving, which is reaUy what poUtics is aU  about. PoUtics is about solving problems.  The Conservatives have one kind of solution, the Liberals have another, the NDP  have another. Women in general bring a  somewhat more holistic approach.  There's been a history, a culture in politics of segmenting things: the economy's  here, the environment's there, then we'U  talk about social poUcy, then we'U talk  about immigration poUcy and Third World  development and defence. But they're very  interrelated.  You cannot talk about the Innu in  Labrador without talking about low-level  flights without talking about Aboriginal  rights without talking about sustainable  economies in a region in the country that  is traditionally underdeveloped. And you  can't talk about it without talking about  the environmental consequences.  Our country is coming to realize, with the  increasing environmental concerns, that we  have to look at things in this holistic sense.  Coming fiom the north I know that the pollution in the eastern Arctic doesn't come  from Canada: it comes from Europe and  Russia. We're coming to see that we can't  just talk about "the economy," but about  the economy in relationship to how we can  have clean air, clean water, etc.  There's only one way to do planning  as though women mattered, and that's to  have decision-making and planning bodies that reflect the perspectives of women.  By women, we have to break that down  a bit to visible minority women, ethnic  women, Aboriginal women, francophone  women, anglophone women. You only get  good decisions when different perspectives  are brought to bear on those decisions.  I'U give you one smaU example of what I  call perspective on a problem. This government has aUocated fish [in Atlantic Canada]  to companies. They have not aUocated fish  to communities.  That summarizes a perspective on how  you plan and problem solve. People have  something to say and people know something. Often the experts are the people who  actually do the work: people who fish know  a lot about fishing and whether there are  any fish.  Now, I understand that the Free Trade  deal is sending jobs south of the border.  You don't have to be brUUant to understand that. Ask the women who work in the  fish processing plants in BC. Those women  could teU you a heck of a lot about economics.  So, economic planmng as though people  mattered would be a wonderful start. And  because we make up over 50 percent of the  population, I assume we would be take part  in over 50 percent of those decisions. Now,  the colonialist attitude that someone can  plan for you is [thoroughly] entrenched in  the poUtical and power structures of this  = country.  | I'm not saying it's a malevolent design  = or that someone sat down and said, I'm go-  I. ing to do this terrible thing. It's history, it's  §> the way things have grown up. And it can  I change.  2 KINESIS  KINESIS Commentary  Do the right thing - Sonia-style  by Debby Gregory  It's hard to dismiss author Sonia Johnson's vision of feminism altogether. She is  so enthusiastic and it's such a lovely vision.  She sees smaU communities of women,  economically based on a gift-giving paradigm: everyone would just do what she  wanted, and it would aU balance out—like  a feminist pot-luck supper. Everyone would  have aU she needed, nobody would be frazzled or rushed for time, there would be no  hierarchy, competition, violence or greed—  and no oppression. There would be no need  for legal systems, as everyone would natu-  raUy do the right thing. Feminist anarchy  would ensure Ufe-enhancing abundance for  aU, including the earthly and cosmic environment.  Although she calls for diversity, I can't  escape the feeUng that Sonia's Utopia is  aly populated by Sonias. Oh, we'd aU  have various ethnic, class and racial backgrounds, we'd have different skiUs and desires, but basically we'd aU just be variations on good old American white middle-  class Protestant clean Sonia. She's earnest  and she tries hard enough, but she just  doesn't seem able to get outside her own  skin long enough to appreciate that some of  us wUl never fit into her vision.  In some ways, her solipsistic approach to  feminism carries a certain strength and I  don't feel as wholly negative as my opening  paragraphs might indicate. Johnson spoke  in Victoria in November, to a shockingly  ... women can never not  be oppressed within the  current system  empty hall—I don't know where everybody  was that night—and I've since been inspired  to read her earlier book, Going Out of  Our Minds, and her newest book, Wildfire: Igniting the She/Volution. I admire  her courage enormously. Much of what she  says is guaranteed to strike most people as  sUly, dangerous, even downright lunatic. As  someone whose intellectual boundaries wobble aU over the map, I appreciate a feminist  who knows what she thinks and has the con-  The National Film Board  in association with the YWCA  presents  INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S WEEK SCREENINGS  Salute to Studio D -16 Years of Feminist Filmmaking  •  March 4,5,6,7 • Cinematheque • 1131 Howe Street  FREE ADMISSION  GODDESS REMEMBERED  (54 min.) This film examines the earliest forms of  goddess worship in Old Europe and the forgotten  roots of women's spirituality.  ADAM'S WORLD  (17 min.) Theologian Elizabeth Dodson Grey  speaks from a feminist perspective on ecology and  women's place in history.  NICE COLOURED GIRLS  (17 min.) This stylistically daring film explores the  relations between Aboriginal women and white  men over the past two hundred years.  SOME AMERICAN FEMINISTS  * (56 min.) A fascinating "textbook on film" of the  history and developments that produced the  second wave of feminism in this century.  ILLUMINATED LIVES  (6 min.) This witty animated short challenges  > enduring myths about medieval women.  HALF THE KINGDOM  (60 min.) A documentary profiling several  prominent Jewish women who are challenging  assumptions about women's place in traditional  Judaism.  IN HER CHOSEN FIELD  (28 min.) Farm women discuss their fierce  attachment to the land and their contributions to  the agricultural economy.  PRAIRIE WOMEN  (45 min.) The untold history of women of the Wesl  and their work during years of social ferment - th  1920's and 30's.  NFB films are available for rental on 16mm  and VHS.  NFB Library, 100-1045 Howe Street, 666-0716.  SUN., MARCH 4  MON., MARCH 5  TUES., MARCH 6  WED., MARCH 7  7:30  RM.  ADAM'S WORLD  GODDESS REMEMBERED  HALF THE KINGDOM  NICE COLOURED GIRLS  SOME AMERICAN FEMINISTS  ILLUMINATED LIVES  IN HER CHOSEN FIELD  PRAIRIE WOMEN  9:30  RM.  NICE COLOURED GIRLS  SOME AMERICAN FEMINISTS  ILLUMINATED LIVES  IN HER CHOSEN FIELD  PRAIRIE WOMEN  ADAM'S WORLD  GODDESS REMEMBERED  HALF THE KINGDOM  I FOR MORE INFORMATION: 666-3838  9  National Office  Film Board     national du film  of Canada     du Canada  fidence to say it clearly without caring a fig  what people think of her.  She also has some important messages for  aU feminists, regardless of whether or not  we agree with her general approach or with  aU of her specific formulations. She reminds  us that feminism is much bigger and more  transformational than mere calls for equality. She points out the contradictions and  pitfaUs inherent in demanding concessions  from patriarchy. What the power structure  accords one day can be withdrawn the next.  If we focus aU our attention on men, demanding they change their ways and treat  us better, aU the whUe using their means to  acquire a greater share of power under the  system they control, we wear ourselves out  getting essentiaUy nowhere, and the men  are laughing aU the way to the bank.  Wildfire picks up her theme that oppression is a contract, that women can never not  be oppressed within the current system, and  that trying to change the system necessarUy reinforces it:  ... feminism is ...much  bigger than mere calls  for equality.  Women have resisted patriarchy with unsurpassed cunning, craft and passion for  at least 5000 years. I don't want to be  hasty, but it seems to me that 5000 years  is long enough to try any method, particularly one that doesn't work. pg. 15  It takes two groups to do tyranny: the  tyrants and the slaves. Tyrants never  stop doing tyranny untU the slaves stop  responding in the necessary way for  tyranny to be done to them. When they  stop, the game is up. (pg. 74)  The bulk of the book consists of her  analysis of what she considers mistaken attempts to resist or accomodate to patriarchy. Again, I admire her courage, as her  Ust is sufficiently inclusive to antagonise almost everyone.  She has a good go at providers of  women's services; women's centres and shelters that seek government funding; the  pro-choice movement; the peace movement;  lobbying,   voting,   running   for   office   or  supporting progressive candidates; Eastern  and New Age phUosophies; astrology; 12-  step programs, addiction and codependency  analyses; motherhood and especially lesbian  motherhood; gay rights; AIDS work; university women's studies programs; solidarity work with other oppressed people. Anything which smacks of direct intervention in  the patriarchal system or which diverts our  attention from women's creation of a new  world order she considers either collaboration with patriarchy or delusion resulting  from internalised oppression.  The only model of change that Sonia  Johnson finds useful is changing the way  we feel about ourselves. She claims that by  changing our feehngs about ourselves we are  changing the world, and that it is only by  changing our feehngs that we can change  the world. This is not simply quite different from the classical male poUtical activist model of change that says not to think  about ourselves, just change the world. It is  also quite different from the classic radical  feminist observation that in order to change  our Uves we must change the world.  I agree with Sonia that if we only change  structures and not people, those structures  don't really change. But Ialso think that if  we only change people and not structures,  the people aren't really changed. Humans  can only Uve and act within social structures, so we change ourselves by changing  the structures, which we can oidy change by  changing ourselves—it's a dialectic, eh?  What I Uke best about her work is that  it challenges me to re-think my understandings of feminism, materialism and the nature of radical transformation. I disUke her  blatant American bias and American-style  sales pitch for instant results. I distrust her  Protestant fundamentalist emphasis on personal redemption through faith. I also worry  about her closed conceptual system which  completely dismisses the credibihty of anyone who disagrees with her. For one example among many:  I can hardly beUeve that so many strong  and wonderful women are stiU trying to  make room for women in men's game—  reveaUng their lack of self-knowledge  and self-esteem and their feehngs of  powerlessness—when there is a marvelous women's game going on out there.  (pg- 264)  Considering her dictum that the means  are the end and that how we are now is how  we'll be in the future, this augurs poorly,  I think, for the success of her conflict-free  femimst communities.  10-80off  Sat, Feb. 10 to Sat., Feb. 17,1990  feminism, anarchism, socialism, environment, lesbian, gay, film, art, labour,  history, economics, literature  311 West Hastings Street, Vancouver  KINESIS ///////////////////^^^^^  ///////////////////^^^^  Arts  Distortions of Third World women  by Jyoti Sanghera  Bharati Mukherjee is the acclaimed author of four novels, two coUections of short  stories, and two works of non-fiction. Last  year, The Middlemen and Other Stories won the national Book Critics Circle  Award for fiction. Born in India in an upper middle-class BengaU famUy and married  to a white Canadian writer, she has Uved  in North America for over a quarter century, residing first in Canada and for the  past decade in the US.  Mukherjee projects herself as a "Third  World woman writer," portraying the reality of the immigrant world and exploring the intersection between the First and  Third Worlds. She undertakes this "exciting" exercise from her vantage point as an  immigrant which, she asserts, provides her  with an edge on account of having been  steeped in more than one culture.  Says Mukherjee, "... instead of seeing  my Indianness as a fragUe identity to be preserved against obliteration, I see it now as a  set of fluid identities to be celebrated." As  for her view on Third World and, in specific,  Indian women, Mukherjee observes: "What  foreigners perceive as forbearance is really  a secretive love of revengeful survival." I  would Uke to throw some Ught on this celebration of the "fluid identities" of immigrants, Mukherjee-style, and on her rendition of the "revengeful survival" of Third  World women.  Mukherjee's portrayal of immigrant and  Third World women is steeped in misogyny, her derision of white femimsts flagrant.   In   Days   and   Nights   in   Cal  cutta, she refers to femimsts and lesbians in a highly disparaging manner. With  monotonous similarity and superficiaUty,  she presents shoddy portraits of immigrant  women from India, Sri Lanka, the PhiUppines, Nepal, Vietnam, Suriname and the  Caribbean. Most of her women characters  are Uke Jasmine who has: "No visa, no papers, and no birth certificate. No nothing  other than what she wanted to invent and  tell ... a girl rushing wUdly into the future."  Grabbing snippets of news from the  mainstream media, Mukherjee adds ever  new adjectives to her Third World heroines. In The Middleman, women from the  city of Ludhina enter the US as maU-order  brides whUe, in actual fact, catalogue shopping for brides has not yet spread to the  Punjab.  Her intent is not to seriously examine  the growing phenomenon of trafficking in  Third World women through the medium  of the short story—far from it. Her express  purpose is to exoticize and sexuaUze Asian  women. She mocks at, exploits and makes  trivial every issue which women's groups in  various parts of the world are struggling to  seriously address and mobUize public opinion on. CapitaUzing on the issue of in-vitro  fertUization, Mukherjee weaves a bizarre  story wherein a young Indian woman gets  herself artificiaUy inseminated as an alternative to arranged marriage: "The father of  my baby is a bottle and a syringe ... Uke  Uvestock. Men louse up your Uves ... Just  Uke animals. That's what marriage is aU  about, isn't it? Matching bloodUne, match-  See Mukherjee p. 16  Bharati Mukherjee  Bharati Mukherjee  A hatred of everything Indian  JASMINE  by Bharati Mukherjee  Markham: Penguin, 1989  by Sunera Thobani  For decades, people of colour have been  told our problem is we don't want to assim-  Uate, we want to hold on to our backward,  primitive, "traditional" cultures. If only we  became modern, assimUated and took advantage of the civiUzed world we now Uve  in, our problems would disappear. So what  is new in this message? Only that author  Bharati Mukherjee has now joined the ranks  of those who wUl gleefuUy carry this "blame  the victim" approach into the 21st century.  Jasmine, Mukherjee's latest novel, is  characterized by her fast-paced short-takes  style of writing. It traces the adventures of  Jyoti, born in Hasnapur, a vUlage in Punjab. We foUow the transition our heroine  makes from the viUage girl Jyoti, into the  urban wife Jasmine. Jyoti is wUUngly reborn  in her husband Prakash's image of her—he  renames her Jasmine. Prakash is soon kUled  by a bomb, apparently meant for Jasmine,  setting in motion a chain of events that  sees Jasmine immigrating to the US, becoming Jane in the process. Jasmine eventuaUy  chooses to become (and remain??) Jase, the  woman re-re-re-born in the image, this time,  s   that her American Uberal professor lover  I   has of her. Once she has cast off everything  J   Indian—except, of course, the exotic—and  £  has made a sexual aUiance with a white  8   male in the Brave New America, Jase be-  4. comes truly "free."  The book is mediocre, catering to an  American audience but it deserves comment  because of the recent focus on Mukherjee,  and the claim by hterary critics that her  writing reflect the intersection of the First  and Third worlds. Her writing, in fact, is an  attack on the Third World peoples who are  engaged in the struggle for survival, dignity  and genuine self-determination in a hostUe,  racist world. Jasmine is smuggled into the  US and Mukherhee tells us a world-wide  network exists to smuggle Ulegal aUens into  the western world. The perpetuation of such  racist myths by Mukherjee, who claims to  be writing of "the" immigrant experience,  clearly endangers Third World immigrants  who are viewed with suspicion and hostiUty,  our right to be here constantly questioned.  Now the racists can claim to have the word  straight from the horse's mouth.  The KhaUstan (Sikh) issue is fleetingly  touched upon, with the Khalsa Lions presented only as a bunch of mindless, vicious thugs. Their struggle, in Mukherjee's  version, is reduced to a personal vendetta  against Jasmine, a Hindu woman, hated by  all Sikh men. This distortion is ridiculous in  the extreme.  Add to this masala formula the shaUow  and unauthentic character of our heroine  who remains untouched by the situations  around her. One gets the sense that, since  birth, Jasmine's only function is to perform  for her American audience. She hates India,  which is presented as a rotting, filthy, stagnant society. However, even this loathing of  everything Indian is not based on any substantial interaction by Jasmine with her environment. Rather, it is a loathing that is  based on Western racist images of India,  seeing only dirty, filthy, cunning Indians.  Along with the loathing, of course, comes  Jasmine's unconditional acceptance of everything American as superior. Jasmine  wants to model herself after the two white  women who give her temporary assistance  in America, whUe her mother, who has suc-  cessfuUy fought to prevent Jyoti's marriage  as a child to an older widower, remains unacknowledged as a positive female image.  This hatred of everything Indian propels Jasmine into the US. Flushing becomes mini-India where obsolete Indians  Uve out their obsolete Uves stuck in a cultural ghetto. The fact that people of colour  are forced into this ghettoized existence  in a racist society is quite beyond the  comprehension of our Black Skinned/White  Masked heroine, who sees this ghettoized  existence as freely chosen.  Mukherjee has perfected the art of sen-  sationaUzing issues Indian feminists have  struggled against, such as female infanticide, dowry, ostracism of widows and suttee. But instead of a substantive analysis  of these issues and their consequences for  women they are trivialized and presented  as props that attest only to the "exotic"  nature of Jasmine, making her sexier and  more desirable as a mysterious woman of  the Orient. Jasmine uses sex to carry herself forward in her adventures, making sexual bargains with various males at every  stage. Mukherjee presents these bargains as  leading to greater "freedom" for Jasmine;  "freedom" American-style—Jasmine vaU-  dates the racist dual-stereotype of Third  World women as carnal, oversexed, lusty animals, and submissive, seductive, mysterious feminine "real" women. But, one must  give Mukherjee credit, she reaUy does pour  herself into her writing.  KINESIS V^^S^^^^^^^^^^  Arts  In which animals appear as themselves  WITH A FLY'S EYE,  WHALE'S WIT AND  WOMAN'S HEART:  Animals and Women  Edited by Theresa Corrigan  and Stephanie Hoppe  Pittsburgh: Cleis Press, 1989  by Susan Prosser  "Now I can die!" Theresa Corrigan's eyes  crinkle playfuUy as she concludes a story  about being kissed by Sweet WiUiam, a  bear at PAWS (Performing Animal Welfare  Society) in Sacramento. It was there her  understanding of the relationships between  women and animals began to take shape.  "It was Sweet WUliam who first encouraged me to work on the anthology With a  Fly's Eye, Whale's Wit, and Woman's  Heart."  Over the past 10 years Corrigan has been  teaching women's studies, working at PAWS  and engaging in other forms of animal rights  activism. A few years ago she met Stephanie  Hoppe at a writing workshop for women in  Oregon. They discovered their common interest in animals when Hoppe read a short  story about the day her cat spoke to her.  They corresponded for some time after the  workshop and out of this correspondence  rose the idea to edit an anthology on women  and animals. In January, Corrigan visited  Vancouver and read from her anthology at  Octopus Books.  Fly's Eye is best described in the editors' introduction as a collection of stories:  "stories in a wide sense, the sense in which  aU writings that give shape to perceptions  are stories." In fact, the writings are as diverse as Uterary fiction, interview, peiem,  theoretical essay, and story in the more traditional sense of what one might hear from  friend or stranger over tea. There is no complete analysis here, no definitive statement  about what it is that makes the relationships between women and animals unique,  but you wUl find a range of writings in  which animals appear as themselves, not as  a metaphor for the writer's experience; in  which animals are assumed to have culture  and subjectivity as valuable as our own; in  which the anti-vivisection movement is revealed as herstorical in the feminist movement; and in which the issues of animal Uberation (then and now) paraUel those central to the feminist movement.  In short you wUl find women who are trying to understand animals, not merely tolerate them.  Hoppe read  a... story  about the  day her  cat spoke  to her  It is the theme of understanding which  I find most compeUing in Fly's Eye. Sally  Carrighar writes about the years she spent  in the bush as a self-taught naturalist,  not applying theories and categorizing behaviours but observing, being stiU, Uving  with the wUd animals. She writes "what impressed me most were the stability and sanity ... Here in the wUderness there was a  code of behaviour so weU understood and  so weU respected that the laws could be depended on not to be broken."  Pat Derby (the founder of PAWS) in  an interview with Corrigan concurs, "For  god sakes Geraldine, don't just do something, stand there ... People think they  always have to be doing ... the easiest  way to understand animals and to communicate with them is not to do anything: it's  just to be with them. Everything I ever  learned about elephants, I learned from ele-.  phants, not from any experts." In a beautiful story which tells why barn mice and  barn owls dream each other into existence,  Judy Grahn subjectifies aU possible points  of view, aU possible words and constructs.  Poet Joan Dobbie describes hitting a deer  and she wonders, "Why are we so god-  awfully sure that being aUve and dying  means being in pain and needing to be  dead?" in yet another atypical expression of  how women experience animals' Uves. There  is an aspect of this book and that is the  challenge to understand difference: not just  interspecial as Fly's Eye puts forth, but  between humans; that understanding, not  merely tolerance is what we must cultivate  among ourselves as culturaUy differing humans.  In the first three sections of the book, the  writings are personal: it is the attitude of  an individual, usuaUy the writer, which has  developed through personal experience with  wUd or domestic animals. The final section  is categoricaUy poUtical. Oddly enough, the  book's most satirical piece opens this section. In 1987, "at the height of pit buU hysteria," Corrigan wrote a counter proposal  to a city staff report on an ordinance to  ban or severely restrict pit buUs. Her "modest proposal" replaced pit buU with man  and the result is shockingly funny. "Having  worked for years at the Sacramento Rape  Crisis Centre, I thought human males were  certainly a greater threat," says Corrigan.  In a theoretical essay, Carol J. Adams  quotes extensively from Susanne Kappeler.  She expands Kappeler's analysis of the way  in which male subjectivity in western culture is constructed by objectifying others  (women) to include animals. Adams concludes, "Non-human animal experimentation is not an isolated case of animal oppression nor is it unrelated to human male  dominance. Animal experimentation is inherent in the way men have made themselves subjects in the world by making oth  ers objects."  This is an interesting and eclectic collection of stories but I was left with several  questions. Are women's relationships with  animals unique? If so, why? Could a similar  anthology be compiled by and about men  and animals excepting the last chapter paralleling animals' and women's rights? Am I  being asked to read these stories simply because I am a woman? To the last question  I would say yes. In our interview, Corrigan said they wanted stories that were "prescriptive rather than descriptive." The absence of answers to my other questions is at  least partiaUy practical, but an oversight.  Fly's Eye is the first of two volumes. It is  in the second volume that editors Corrigan  and Hoppe discuss their motives for compiling the anthology, their criteria for accepting manuscripts, and the process by which  the focus of the volumes was achieved.  "Fly's Eye" is a catch of established and  new writers, aU of whom write with strength  and wisdom, sometimes with humour and  sometimes with pain about their relationships with animals as different as elephants  and crabs.  Mukherjee from p.15TM"1^  ing horoscopes, matching castes, matching,  matching." The issue of arranged marriages  is not to be ridiculed in this fatuously insensitive manner.  Mukherjee's immigrant characters faU  into two categories. The first is inhabited  by those who cling to "nostalgic ghettos"  reeldng of stale curry smeUs, who shuffle  around Uke "bumpkins" and "pumpkins"  making shady deals in the sleaze of the immigrant netherworld. An overwheming majority of Third World immigrants, including aU South Asian males, are consigned to  this hapless category. The second kind of  immigrants—most of her principal women  characters faU into this category—have either in actual fact (Uke Jasmine), or symbol-  icaUy "murdered" their past, severed their  ties with their decaying, nauseous past and  baring their bosoms to the unchartered experiences promised by the Brave New World  in America.  Every Third World immigrant woman in  Mukherjee's writings steps over the threshold of this "wUd... exciting ... new world"  in the arms of a white male lover. Love and  tenderness seldom enter the scene, for according to Mukherjee, love is nothing but  "a sad parade of need and demand". Appended on to a white male, the immigrant  woman passes from one sexual encounter to  another against a backdrop of not-so-often  muted violence.  At the same time, she shuns men of her  own ethnic background, unless she is a prostitute. Asian men in Mukherjee's writing  are typified by the Ukes of Rajiv Khanna,  a graduate student, who grabs women's  breasts; or Manny Patel, who defecates in  the sink "squatting Uke a vUlager." "AU  Indian men are wife-beaters. That is why  I married an American," proclaims one of  Mukherjee's women. But Mukherjee is not  content with distorting Third World women  into sexual savouries for white men: in numerous stories, she has them enter into sexual Uaisons with disabled white men not for  love but out of a warped sense of creating  "equivalence" between "two wounded people."  If there is one contribution for which  Mukherjee truly deserves an award, it is  her ingenuity in cementing the stereotypes  against immigrant peoples in North America. (Indeed, she has been rewarded.) In  her stories, the Cambodians come from  the "kiUing fields", Vietnamese  are "honey-skinned bar girls" from Saigon  who stick "coins and amulets into napalm  burns," Chinese women are "flat-chested,"  an Aeroflot airplane carries "grim Ubzeks,"  a young Indian woman who happens to be  in British Columbia "organizes farm workers' unions" in "her shriU union voice."  What I find personaUy unpalatable is  that Mukherjee whose only asset may be  her acrobatic skiU with the EngUsh language  has the temerity to attribute to every character from the Indian subcontinent, irrespective of class and education, a manner of  speaking EngUsh where every verb appears  only in its future-continuous form. Referred  to as 'Indian EngUsh,' it was popularized by  sycophantic scribes of the British Raj during the earlier part of this century when  coining dialogue for their "native" characters.  Mukherjee speaks neither for women nor  for the Third World. She has a self-serving  agenda: to make it in the corridors of commercial success. Racism notwithstanding,  it is for this very narrow reason of non-  recognition that she left Canada. Having  ingeniously added aU the ingredients and  masalas into the American melting pot, she  has served a quaint immigrant stew ala  Mukherjee for the ethnic-geared gourmet  American audience. And of course, she deserves an award from those she serves.  The only problem is that most of us  "sniveUing immigrants" refuse to be stewed,  to be served as exotica to the epicurean consumer in the West and to be cut, chopped  and devoured. We refuse to serve as fodder  for unscrupulous colonial touts whose loyalty Ues with their bone-throwing masters  and whose only purpose is to legitimize the  ideology of domination through their works  of "creativity."  WhUe the Mukherjees exude their drivel,  there is a slowly but steadily growing force  of young women and men writers and artists  in our midst (such as the Asian Women  Writers Workshop based in London) who  do not pimp, commodify or maul, but who  identify, agonize, confront, protest and mobilize to change.  Bharati Mukherjee's other books include The Tiger's Daughter, Wife, Darkness, Days and Nights in Calcutta, and The  Sorrow and the Terror.  16  KINESIS  Feb. 90 Arts  /////^//////C7//V////////////////^^^^  NNING TO WRITE  RUNAWAY  Diary of a Street Kid  by Evelyn Lau  Toronto: Harper & CoUins, 1989  by Jean Lum  The startling content of Evelyn Lau's diary, greedUy sensationalized by the mainstream media, has brought much attention  to the author and her book.  Would there be such a stir, I wonder, if  Runaway: Diary of a Street Kid was not  about a 14-year-old girl's experiences on the  street, if it didn't contain explicit writing  about sex, violence and drugs?  Many questions came to mind even as  my curiosity was piqued. I was mostly interested in the story because it concerned  a Chinese-Canadian woman. Literature by  people of colour is often overlooked or ignored by mainstream publishers. And I read  from my perspective as a Chinese-Canadian  university student raised by a mother in the  grip of traditions and values from a faraway  yet not forsaken land.  Runaway chronicles the turbulent two  year period in Lau's Ufe between March 22,  1986 and January 20, 1988. An almost unbroken series of diary entries forms the main  part of the book. A prologue briefly summarizes her upbringing and her relationship  Jokn, I ttu'nlucur lesttaintsaoufo'I>e  etotke company* zf^on ta£e oar-e ofitke  company u/orier s cwdcos-e centre. / kau-epat  a cist ojjyoanyperson s os-au/ino- Sappiies on your-  desn, this morn/nip. iOa can yet them at  Datatfrapk/cs.  with her parents. An epUogue discusses her  Ufe away from the street and concerns about  publishing the diary.  The narrative, set mainly in Vancouver, begins with Lau at home, a discordant  prison guarded by immigrant Chinese parents with conservative values. Lau's relationship with her mother was, in particular,  a fountain of strife. Her mother puts endless energy into forcing Lau to be an over-  achieving student and traditional Chinese  daughter. Lau could not outwardly rebel: "I  was terrified of my mother, her outbursts of  screaming and abuse, her constantly telUng  me that I wasn't worthy and wasn't good  enough."  Lau's passion for writing is disapproved  of and forbidden by her parents. When she  was in kindergarten, they had already determined a career for her as a doctor or  lawyer. UnwUUng to tolerate any more of  their treatment, Lau spontaneously runs  away.  Her once sheltered Ufe swiftly explodes in  the chaos of street Ufe: drug addiction, physical violence, psychological abuse, prostitution, suicide attempts and psychiatric care.  Yet, Lau says, "Although it may sound hard  to beUeve, aU the events that took place  during these two years were easier on me  emotionaUy than Uving at home which was  why I have never gone back there to Uve."  Lau's autobiography is also about reconstructing, recovering, and redemption—  from her chUdhood experiences, from the  sexual violence of street Ufe, drug addiction,  and destructive relationships with men who  supply her with companionship and drugs.  Runaway is about a young woman who is  socially isolated both before and after running away. The book reveals that the only  long-term, caring, positive relationships in  this street kid's Ufe are with her counsellor  and psychiatrist.  Stationery & Office Supplies • Artists' Materials • Copying • Facsimile • Electronic Publishing  . 1460 Commercial Drive • Ph 255-9559 • Fax 253-3073.  In spite of huge obstacles and detours,  Lau continuously fights through her Ufe's  "sUces of heU." The book reveals a teenaged  girl's voracious hunger to be a writer, her  hope "... to Uve long enough to make a  name for myself from my writing." That endows her with an amazonian strength and  determination to survive the street Ufe.  Diaries are not usuaUy written for pubUc  consumption. Lau writes as if confiding in a  best friend, speaking a long monologue for  an audience of one. At times her unrelenting frankness made me uncomfortable. Although it is Lau's choice to publish, reading  such intimate disclosures seems intrusive.  To be a spectator to someone writhing in  torment and brutality, even near-death, felt  voyeuristic. I wonder if she's stepping out of  her narrative and confronting the audience,  somewhat unfairly, when she declares:  Here I am. I want to go home. I want to  have friends. I want to be loved by someone. Is that naked enough for you?  Her narrative voice is emotional and intense, dominated by rage. Lau attacks the  external elements gnarUng her tree of existence. And her voice is directed at her  self, at the actions which wound her and  thwart her writing ambitions. At the same  time, Lau's rage is intertwined with an urgent longing to succeed, to re-affirm her self-  esteem. Always present is her overwhelming  desire and committment to write. About reworking a piece of writing she says, "something is driving me here, won't let me rest  untU an aUotted number of pages have been  revised."  Lau's prose is straightforward, outspoken and vivid. In particular, her characterizations of people are strong, imbued with  shape and individuaUty. Of one "trick," she  paints a distinct portrait:  ... The man who picked me up was Oriental in his late forties, wearing a black  leather jacket. He was solidly buUt and  tanned, and wore a leer on his face. He  claimed to have a wife and kids, but in  the next instant, he reached over and  squeezed my breasts.  "You've got big boobs, eh? Very big  boobs for a Chinese girl."  Her ear for dialogue and eye for detaU  infuse Ufe into the people she records. Oc-  casionaUy, her writing flashes poetic fire as  when she writes, "She [the nurse] extracted  tubes of blood from my arms, a spiU Uke a  wet flower plastered afterwards on the floor  at my feet."  Some aspects of Runaway are problematic. Its episodic nature and brief entries  move the narrative quickly, but I don't understand the purpose of the book's division  into eight sections. Sometimes, the story becomes repetitive. I'm interested in knowing  more about Lau's artistic process and less  about her drug experiences. For instance,  how did she write her award-winning Utera-  ture during such physical and emotional distress? Who were her Uterary influences?  What I most wanted to find in Runaway—and did not— was a perspective informed by the author as a teenaged girl with  Chinese roots growing up in a white society.  A wonderfuUy evocative description of news  coverage when she is found hints at that  background. "A reporter picked through my  words Uke an old Chinese amah would pick  through the hair of her cluld, searching for  Uce, pinching them away." But this kind  of reference is rare. At another point, Lau  Lau writes  as though  confiding in a  best friend  paraphrases a racist man who objectifies  and wants to exploit her: "I was sixteen  years old and Oriental, big pluses ... He  said he could have me making $10,000 a  month ii I wanted to, that I had been wrong  in thinking that aU there was was standing on a street corner blowing men for fifty  bucks." But she makes no comment.  The irreconcUable differences between  Lau and her parents are an intriguing, important topic: something I relate and sympathize with. However, Lau's prologue only  skims that issue and leaves me puzzled. Was  the only possible resolution to sever ties  with her parents? I wanted to hear more of  her parents' story told in their own voices.  FinaUy, I wonder how a manuscript originally 900 pages long is edited, arranged  and shortened to 300-odd pages. The whole  picture cannot be seen. Who set the editorial criteria and decisions? For instance, the  diary ends abruptly with Lau stiU on the  street. There is a large, sudden gap between  these entries and the epUogue, written years  later.  For Lau to publish her diary required  risk and courage. The demanding process  of preparing her manuscript for publication  was "much Uke reUving the experiences."  The labels of runaway and chUd prostitute  won't be easily lost.  Runaway: Diary of a Street Kid is an  important addition to the body of writing  by women about their Uves and experiences.  The book is a firsthand account about part  of a young woman's Ufe who is also a young  woman of colour. The book, though incomplete, is a portrait of the artist as a young  woman. It is also about the abuse and oppression imposed on women by an ethnocentric patriarchy. Finally, it is a young  woman's struggles to overcome those conditions. I look forward to reading Evelyn  Lau's future work.  KINESIS SSSS$S5SSS***S^^  ARTS  Gasp:  Ink spilled from coast to coast  by Michele Valiquette  Let a feminist loose with a personal computer and what wUl she do? Why produce  a periodical, of course. If she's Debby Gregory, that is. Gregory says she's longed for  a Victoria-based newsletter ever since Flagrant folded. "AU lesbian activity in our  town seems to take place in private," she  explains, "There is no ongoing public sense  in which we are a community."  With Lesbianews: Victoria's Monthly  Lesbian Feminist Newsletter Gregory  hopes to begin turning that situation  around. The journal's goals are threefold: to  increase lesbian visibUity, to establish a safe  forum for communication and exploration,  "and to create a place where Victoria-area  lesbians can share poetry and fiction."  In the inaugural editorial last faU, Gregory made potential readers and contributors an offer they could hardly refuse: "My  part in aU of this is to get Lesbianews  printed and distributed each month ...  Your part is to subscribe ... let me know  what you Uke and what you don't Uke ...  and give me material."  In addition to networking—through a notices column and a calendar of events—  the September and October (1989) issues  featured 10 pages each of creative writing,  short stories on topics as diverse as gardening, co-dependency and community buUding, and a "Dear Gertrude" column.  According to the editorial box, Gregory has been joined in this project by a  smaU band of writers and production people. She welcomes submissions and promises  to print everything that "avoids poUticaUy  dastardly categories without faUing presto  the twin deadly sins of Creeping Boredom  and Terminal Niceness."  Annual subscriptions are $15 (12 issues)  and can be obtained from P.O. Box 5339,  Station B, Victoria, B.C. V8R 6S4.  Waterlily Flourishes  And on the easternmost coast ... In keeping with a fine feminist tradition, the editors of Waterlily have chosen a name for  their new periodical that overturns traditional expectations. The waterUly, they teU  us, symbolizes the strength and the herstory  of Newfoundland women. The plant is "nor-  maUy found in more temperate climates"  but ^t survives this harsh environment and  Uke Newfoundland and Labrador women,  flowers in spite of it." And the present generation of femimst journalists isn't the first  to appreciate the connection. In the 1920s  there was a short-Uved women's buUetin of  the same name. By reviving the Waterlily  the editors are reclaiming "the history of  our foremothers."  The contents of the quarterly tabloid reflect the breadth of contemporary feminist  activities and concerns on the eastern coast.  Coverage in the issue I saw ranged from  practical health information to discussions  of the province's welfare system and the  working conditions of nurses; from a report  on the struggles of Innu women against militarization to an account of convent school-  Waterlily editors are  reclaiming "the history  of our foremothers"  ing. Articles included short newspieces as  weU as fuU-page analysis and managed a  nice balance between material that would  interest new and seasoned feminists.  Waterlily's style, which the editors describe as professional yet open, is one of  its most distinctive features. The coUective  is committed to ensuring that individual  women's voices are heard and prefers first  hand accounts and analysis based on experience to interviews or what they call secondhand expression. So far this has led to writing that is strong and straightforward. And  a lively two page letters section (including a  subscription request from NDP leader Audrey McLaughlin) suggests that both Waterlily 's form and its content have been en-  thusiasticaUy received.  In a country where feminist activists are  separated by as many as 4,000 mUes, communication is difficult yet essential. Periodicals Uke Waterlily play a crucial role in  maintaining Unks between us and in providing a basis from which to co-ordinate our  activities. Women's centres and resource U-  braries in particular wUl want to add Waterlily to their collections. But at the reasonable price of $10 per year the paper wUl  fit into many individual budgets as weU.  Waterlily welcomes submissions from  Newfoundland and Labrador women and—  wonder of wonders—it pays contributors!  Write: Waterlily at P.O. Box 367, Station  C, St. John's NFLD A1C 9Z9.  Cackles and Cagey Conversations  gasp is a more specialized publication based  in Montreal. The EngUsh-language magazine, also into its second number, aims  "to break away from aU narrow definitions  of feminism." And it reveals an irreverent, playful spirit, calUng for readers to  send along "commentary, confusion, caustic  criticism, cackles, cagey conversation, creative controversy, and/or convulsive conventions."  gasp is printed on 100 percent recycled  paper—a first, as far as I am aware, in  feminist publishing. Not only is it environmentally sound, but large easy-to-read type,  generous use of white space, and original  artwork make it visually pleasing as weU.  And an editorial commitment to a "funky  format" suggests that we may expect future  innovations.  The articles included in the 27-page issue  that came my way have a broad cultural focus: an analysis of racism in the women's  movement, interviews with Turkish writer  Yeshim Ternar and British film maker  Prathiba Parmar, a discussion of Harlequin  romances, an analysis of R.E.A.L. Women  and "post-feminist syndrome," as weU as a  quick recycUng guide.  The editors invite submissions in the  form of articles, reviews, transcribed interviews and "rants" and promise to reply. The  cover price is $2 and although I couldn't find  information about frequency or the annual  sub rate, my best guess is quarterly and $8.  Write: gasp, 3549 rue Dorion, Montreal PQ,  H2K 4B7.  "Excited Yet Suspicious ..."  And finaUy, we have an "old" journal moving in important new directions. The summer/faU issue of Canadian Woman Studies (Vol. 10, Numbers 2 & 3) explores the  Uves of Indian, Inuit and Metis women. It  was produced by a group of guest editors—  aU Aboriginal women—who admit ambivalence when the project was initiaUy proposed: "... there were mixed reactions. We  were excited and yet suspicious ..."  "The twin deadly sins of  Creeping Boredom and  Terminal Niceness..."  Experience of racism within the white  women's movement and of the reluctance of  many white feminists to acknowledge and  respect diversity did not make the decision to participate easy. But ultimately, the  possibiUty of reaching young Native women  with a new message, of speaking for themselves rather than being spoken for, and of  educating the educators won out.  In an opening dialogue, Osennontion and  Skonaganleh:ra explain: we're "interested in  articulating our own directions, our own aspirations, our own past, in our own words  ... [we're] concerned about how we can  best affect the readership—how we can get  across the message to them that we are absolutely different!"  Teaching and learning are at the heart  of this impressive 174- page volume. Significantly, the issue is dedicated to the Grandmothers "who kept the fire burning through  a long time of darkness" and "who passed  on our teachings." The first of its five parts  honours Elders through a series of profiles.  Others explore history and tradition, language, problem-solving, health and futures.  Each section encompasses multiple forms,  many of them based on oral events: dialogues, conversations, interviews, poems,  letters, diary entries, narratives, essays and  stories. The range reflects the diversity of  both contributors and editorial coUective.  "We set out to cast a wide net," the group  says, "inviting Aboriginal women from all  directions to participate. There is no single predominant type, group, national identity amongst us ... we come from aU  walks of Ufe—we are daughter, sister, auntie, mother, grandmother, friend and relative." It is a claim confirmed by the black  and white photographs provided by Native photographers which grace nearly every page.  No brief summary could do justice to the  scope of this special issue of CWS—it's a  collection readers wUl want to have on hand  so they can return to it time after time.  The volume is $10 and can be ordered from:  212 Founders CoUege, York University, 4700  Keele St., Downsview, Ont. M3J 1P3.  KINESIS Arts  ///////////////////////^^^^^  Remember the 80's?  Beyond mediocrity and mindlessness  by Lauri E. Nerman  As this is the first column of the nineties  it seems appropriate to take a retrospective  look at some of the significant music created  by women in the eighties.  I detest the ranking system we are inundated with at year's end: everyone talks  about the best of, or the number one song.  I find this sentiment to be offensive and  steeped in patriarchal doctrine: something  always has to be better. Comparing music  is often Uke comparing apples and oranges.  Instead, I present in alphabetical order  (by artist) a sampling of albums that are aU  innovative and uncompromising. These are  albums that remain timeless within an industry that generaUy thrives on mediocrity  and mindlessness.  Due to the Umitation of space there are  many musicians I am unable to write about.  I think about the importance of the resurgence of artists Uke Bonnie Raitt, Phoebe  Snow, Ellen Macniwaine and Patti Smith.  LiUian Allen, M.C. Lyte and Cookie Crew  remind us of the true poUtical and often underrated feminist aspect to rap music.  Both Michele Shocked and Ferron's work  are important examples of the cutting edge  of folk. Who can forget Sinead O'Conner's  electrifying performance at the traditional  Grammy Awards. Her costume consisted  of a halter top, torn jeans and a stunning  buUseye tattoo on her skull. Annie Lennox  startled a sleepy music audience with her  continual gender crossing and refusal to be  pigeon-holed.  My choices for this column are subjective. If there is a common criteria it is that  this music provides thought and content in  a creative and varied way.  Laurie Anderson: Big Science Warner  Bros, 1982. The world was introduced to the  visionary sounds of Laurie Anderson with  this debut album. Although she has gone  on to record many others, few have reached  the depth of this work. With minimal instruments and use of her vocoder and computers, Anderson creates a symphony of images and emotions. "0 Superman" is one of  the most haunting songs recorded. Unprecedented, Anderson created this music with  her vision of technology and heart.  Sandra Bernhardt Without You I'm  Nothing, Enigma Records 1989. H you're  a fan of late night television you've probably encountered Sandra Bernhard and her  eclectic comedy routine. She is also an accomplished jazz singer and this double album is testimony to her talent. She juxtaposes music with her monologues which  range in topic from famUy relations, being  a Jewish teenager in a Christian neighbour-  women who stiU wear white go-go boots.  Sonia Diabate and M'mha Sylla: Sahel Triple Earth Music 1988. This album  was originaUy recorded in 1983 when aU  the musicians happened to meet in Paris.  It draws on the rich heritage of Guinean  folk music using acoustic instruments in a  modern way. Both Diabate and SyUa are  members of Les Amazones de Guinee, an  woman band formed in 1961. AU musicians serve as officers in the Gendarmerie  of Guinea. It is an extraordinary album as  each woman takes a term describing the turbulent dimensions of her Ufe. A difficult album to find, but weU worth the effort.  Nona Hendryx: Nona Hendryx RCA  1983. Nona Hendryx's first solo album is  simply a tour de force. This is r&b and  funk at its greatest. She tackles the subject  of bi-sexuality with such honesty and passion it leaves the Ustener breathless. After  saic of sound and voice. CaU it jazz, folk  or new wave—I say a label isn't important  because it's genius. Her discordant style  meant a six-year search for a record contract in North America: British-based Virgin Records had the sense to sign her.  Maureen Tucker: Playin' Possum  Trash Records 1981. When the Velvet Underground debuted, Moe Tucker was the  drummer and for years people assumed  Tucker was a man. When this album appeared there was a furious debate over  whether Moe and Maureen Tucker were the  same person. Need I say more. Playin' Possum is a gem because it marks her return  to the music scene after a long absence. As  a single parent she was raising her children  and conquering her drug and alcohol dependency. Tucker plays aU ten instruments on  the album and sings with a rawness and energy unequaUed. It is the sound of rock and  of a survivor.  Jennifer Warnes: Famous Blue Raincoat Attic Records 1988. Famous Blue  Raincoat is simply a classic. OriginaUy released in 1986, it has recently gained wider  distribution. Warnes' handUng of Leonard  Cohen's songs is stunning and mesmerizing.  The album is pure poetry without the insipid vocals of its original creator. My stereo  and ears have been hstening to this album  for years and we plan to do so for many  more.  Let's hope this new decade continues to  produce the quaUty of music that you've  just read about. Perhaps the industry wUl  finally acknowledge and support real talent.  (I can dream, can't I?) UntU next time.  hood, and her lust for Madonna and Stevie  Nicks. She is subtle and biting at the same  time, reminding us of the perUs and joys of  Uving on this planet. This is a brUUant example of how the personal becomes the poUtical.  DalbeUo: Whomanfoursays Capital  1984. When this album was released it received very Uttle air time and promotion.  DalbeUo's boldness in addressing issues  around sexual abuse, violence and anger was  never appreciated or acknowledged. Most  critics wanted the return of Lisa DalbeUo—  disco and pop queen of Canada. Whomanfoursays strikes out with passion and guts.  This is by no means an easy album. It  requires attention and thought. It's loud,  brash and one of the most chaUenging albums of the eighties.  The Del Rubio Triplets: Three Gals,  Three Guitars, Cabazon Records 1988.  MUly, Elena and Eadie have been in the  music business for over four decades: no  smaU feat considering they are barely able  to sing or play the guitar. The triplets cover  such classics as "Light My Fire" and "Ding  Dong, the Witch is Dead" in such a free-  wheeUng way they sound good. These are  women who don't take themselves seriously  and in that process are entertaining. This  album makes me smUe and I've always loved  the break-up of LabeUe, Hendryx spent a  long time as a back-up singer and then finally found a vehicle for her talent. Aided by  Carole Pope and Laurie Anderson (to name  a few) Hendryx strikes out with passion.  Rickie Lee Jones: Pirates Warner  Bros. 1981. Her music and words capture  the mood of American youth in a refreshing and disarming way, with the majority of  songs centring on the loss of innocence. Pirates is an important example of folk-rock.  This album reminds us that almost a decade  ago, Jones was breaking ground in an area  that other artists are now claiming as their  own.  Monsoon: Third Eye MobUe Suit Corporation 1983. This album introduced western audiences to Indipop. Lead singer Sheila  Chandra's powerful voice and the intricate  structure of traditional Indian instrumentation produce sound beyond anyone's imagination. With sitars soaring and great dance  beats, the originaUty and power of this album withstands the test of time. Unfortunately this was their first and last album.  Chandra has gone on to a successful solo career.  Mary Margaret O'Hara: Miss America Virgin Records 1988. One of the least  known albums of the eighties. Toronto-  based O'Hara has created a unique mo-  This publication is regularly  indexed in the Canadian  Women's Periodicals Index.  The index is a reference guide  to articles about women printed  in more than 80 English and  French periodicals, for use by  researchers, lecturers, students  and anyone else interested in  women's studies.  This alphabetized hardcopy of  a comprehensive computerized  index is produced three times a  year by the Canadian Research  Institute for the Advancement  of Women, and is available on a  subscription basis.  For more information, please  write:  Canadian Women's  Periodicals Index  University of Alberta  11019-90 Avenue  Edmonton, Alberta  CANADA, T6G2E1  KINESIS LETTERS  graphic by Debbie Bryant  PEN:  Racism in the cultural community  Kinesis: To Canadian Pen:  On behalf of our membership, the Board  of Directors of A Space wishes to express concern at PEN's newly elected President, June CaUwood's actions at the recent  PEN gala. We, and many people whom we  have spoken to, are disgusted at CaUwood's  telling the group of people who were making a protest about racism, sexism and classism, to "fuck off".  Such a lack of respect towards Marlene  Nourbese PhiUp and other writers and individuals is shocking. CaUwood, because of  her reputation and eminence in the profession, is setting a very poor example to  those who wUl, with any encouragement,  make racist remarks or take racist positions.  We're not trying to prove that CaUwood is  a deeply racist person—clearly her poUtical  work in Toronto disproves that. What disturbs us is that her careless remark suggests  that the coUective of PEN is not really taking seriously the current upheavals in the  Canadian cultural community.  HPEN writers are not noticing it in their  daUy Uves, they must have at least heard or  read about struggles at the Women's Press  and Writer's Union.  Surely PEN members have heard that  Native, Black and Asian writers in Canada  have had, and are still having, a great deal  of difficulty getting published. Surely they  must've heard that funding for Canadian  university programs for Native Canadians is  being cut. Surely PEN members know that  writing which does not reproduce the concepts of the dominant society are not disseminated by that society.  Why does PEN, as part of its membership criteria, refuse to accept members untU they have published two books? And  more seriously how can PEN not consider  the points which Vision 21 made in its  leaflet, "PEN Canada Locks Out Writers Of  Colour'?  We strongly suggest the foUowing actions:  • June CaUwood publicly apologize to Marlene Nourbese PhiUp and other members  of Vision 21;  • that members of PEN start a dialogue  with members of Vision 21 and other  writers of colour in Canada;  • that Canadian PEN re-evaluate its membership criteria as soon as possible with  a view to enabUng those writers to whom  publishing is inaccessible, regardless of  their community respect and foUowing,  to belong to this organization as valued  members if they so desire. And that this  be done in consultation with Vision 21  and the Committee on Racism in Writing and PubUshing (c/o ANDPVA, 972-  0871);  • that Canadian PEN develop a statement  of Aims and Objectives that recognizes  aU members' responsibiUty towards proactive lobbying of publishers, organizations and institutions which directly affect writers to ensure that Canada's 'alternative' writers have more access to the  current mainstream.  We are sure that an enormous amount of  work went into this Congress. We respect  you for that work. We do not beUeve it was  in vain. But we are very concerned that the  Offended by local theatre  Kinesis: To TheatreSports League:  I am writing in regards to your 1989 production of Look, More Rain, Dear. I was  deeply offended by the racist content of two  skits.  The opening number was a Theatre-  Sports remake of "it's the Most Wonderful  Time of The Year." One Une of the chorus was: "... Asian youth gangs in the alley ... " complete with two (Asian) women  pretending to stab the other three (white)  men with prop knives.  What with poUticians mis-directing the  cause of the current housing crisis onto the  "aUowed immigration of those Asians and  their golden money;" and the mainstream  media's misinterpretation of youth-gang violence as "Asian created" (do white youth  gangs not exist then?), racism is on the rise  in this city. This scene was extremely offensive.  Mid-way through the program was a  skit of a "foreigner" who was invited to  a white family's home to witness Christmas for the first time. The audience  never discovers where this visitor is reaUy from—Iran, Iraq, Pakistan, India—but  hey, does it really matter? The "foreigner"  is stereotypically portrayed wearing a turban and a "smUing, anxious-to-please-the-  whites-look," even whUe being assaulted by  the white woman character screaming EngUsh into his face, because ya know, "those  people don't understand, so ya's gotta yeU  at 'em."  This scene stereotyped one race to  represent aU others—regardless of reU-  gious/cultural diversity. And supposedly,  this entire production was to satirize Christ  mas. It didn't go far enough though—  Christmas is a white people created tradition. How arrogantly ethnocentric to assume, even in a satirical skit, that a "foreigner" should or would even want to learn  a white people created custom!  I am sure there were many other examples of either sexism, racism, classism,  ableism or homophobia that I've neglected  to mention, but these are the two I  would Uke to challenge here. I ask: were  the writers mostly white/middle-class/able-  bodied/heterosexual men?  As an Asian woman who has been and  continues to be hurt daUy by racism, I wUl  not accept your guUt or apologies as solace.  GuUt is an inteUectual mask to the feeUng  of fear: fear at loss of stature, power or in-  teUigence. And apologies equal the pity or  sympathy which I do not want.  I chaUenge you, the people of the Back  Alley Theatre Company, to confront and  unlearn your own racism.  I want you, namely the writers of this  production: Reid CampbeU, Rod Crawford, Gary Jones, Louise Moon, Lyle Moon,  Richard Side, Lorie VaUeau and Denalda  WUliams, to attend an Unlearning Racism  workshop, sponsored by A.W.A.R.E. (Al-  Uance of Women Against Racism,etc).  I congratulate the TheatreSports League  on their newly acquired space. But untU I  get your support to chaUenge and confront  racism, you wUl not be receiving mine.  In expectation,  Terrie Akemi Hamazaki  Vancouver, BC  expression of racist attitudes and practices  be re-evaluated and that openness and pro-  action replace them. Unless PEN is willing  to set its own lodge in order, the work that it  does internationally wUl always be suspect.  We hope for a reply to this letter.  Sincerely,  The Board of Directors  for the members of A Space  Toronto, Ont.  Protesting  the silenced  massacre  Kinesis:  As I'm attempting to digest the news  coming in on the radio of a terrorist attack  on women in Montreal today, my eye faUs  on the Dec. 6th edition of The Vancouver  Sun. It tells me that our mayor is assuring  the continuation of the sUenced massacre of  undomesticated women in Vancouver—by  urging tougher "hooker" laws. (Funny how  poUcemen are never caUed "cops" by the  daiUes; I guess that would be disrespectful.)  I read with horror as the paper faUs to  seek the opinion of a prostitute, even though  the streets are apparently crowded by them.  Neither do they interview a prostitutes'  rights advocate. Instead they quote a local  man, John Davis, bragging of how he and  his pals get their kicks by regularly chasing women off the street and taking their  pictures without their permission. I have to  wonder why this man isn't being charged,  or at least put under some kind of restraint.  What is he doing with these pictures?  But at least John Davis is acting out of  some sense of moraUty, misguided as it may  be. He sees blatant sexual activity occurring, and is instinctuaUy driven by fear to  attack. The mayor's motives are calculated  and based on finance rather than moraUty.  The city is only interested in a woman's  sexual activities when she receives cash in  exchange. Like any pimp, they want a cut of  the profits. It's a smooth racket—aU at the  same time they can coUect the dough, label  the young woman with a record (ensuring  further collections), and win over camera-  toting voters who want to see the sinners  punished.  H the mayor was reaUy serious about getting prostitutes off the streets he would try  to deal with the social and poUtical outrages that push them out there in the first  place. He wants the never-ending cycle of arrests and fines, for the city's coffers, at the  women's expense.  Sincerely,  Erica Scott  Whore At Large  Vancouver, BC  V  We are  ISII3LE  Aoeful Women'! Letters  • A  Poetry • Ideas •   Reports  Announcements • Visions  Annual Subscription  $12-U.S. lunds  Sample Copy: $3.50  Vashte Doublex  Box 1494  Mendocino, CA 85460  An empty  triumph  Kinesis:  I am sure that your next issue wiU have  plenty of commentary on the University of  Montreal massacre. I want to share what  my first response was. I am sorry to say it  was not a feeUng of terrible grief. It was not  a feeUng of sorrow for the families of the  young women. It was not a feeUng of "What  if it were my daughter?" All that came later.  My first feeUng was one of vindication. My  first thought was "Now they'll have to acknowledge that aU that hatred is out there."  And sure enough, in the pages of the  Globe and Mail and The Vancouver  Sun they were saying it—that this is just  a symptom, that hatred of women is out  there! This is an empty triumph. I write this  through my tears. I feel as if the seven years  of gradually beginning to feel good about  men again after my marriage break-up is aU  being undone. I have fought with my male  lover over it, because he feels blamed. None  of this is good. None of it is helping to heal  us and the earth. Yet when I am told next  time I'm "imagining" the hostiUty to women  that is ingrained in our social system I'U  point to this incident when I answer. Why  did it have to come to this?  Sincerely,  Anne Miles  Gibsons, BC  Disturbed by  filthy name  Kinesis:  While I know it's cheap and easy to criticize local groups where people are working  for Uttle or nothing in order to help the rest  of us, I am nevertheless so disturbed by your  last issue that it's giving me nightmares. In  the story about Sharon Rns, she is quoted  calhng her smaU daughter a filthy name.  I am deeply concerned that Sharon RUs  would call her daughter such a name; I am  more disturbed that Kinesis would print  it. It seems to me that if Kinesis is to use  words debasing and vilifying women, they  would only be in the context of defense, that  is, quoting what some judge or rapist said  about us in order to defend ourselves.  Is there nowhere to feel safe?  Yours truly,  Helen Potrebenko  Burnaby, BC  , KINESIS ////////////jy////^^^^^^  ///////////////////^^^^^  BULLETIN BOARD  Read this  AUUstings must be received no later than  the 18th of the month preceding publication. Listings are limited to 75 words and  should include a contact name and telephone number for any clarification that may  be required. Listings should be typed or  neatly handwritten, double-spaced on 8 \  by 11 paper. Listings wUl not be accepted  over the telephone. Groups, organizations  and individuals eUgible for free space in the  BuUetin Board must be, or have, non-profit  objectives. Other free notices will be items  of general pubUc interest and wUl appear at  the discretion of Kinesis.  Classified are $6 for the first 75 words or  portion thereof, $2 for each additional 25  words or portion thereof. DeadUne for classifieds is the 18th of the month preceding  pubUcation. Kinesis wiU not accept classifieds over the telephone. AU classifieds must  be prepaid.  For BuUetin Board submissions send  copy to Kinesis Attn: BuUetin Board, 301-  1720 Grant Street, Vancouver, B.C. V5L  2Y6. For more information caU 255-5499.  EVENTS  WANNA GET INVOLVED  With Kinesis? We want to get involved  with you, too. Come to the news group  meeting and help plan our next issue.  Thurs., Feb. 8 1:30 pm at our office,  #301-1720 Grant St. If you can't make  this meeting, call Nancy at 255-5499 to  arrange another time. No experience necessary.  IWD  In Vancouver, the International Women's  Day Committee is a group of women organizing events for women in celebration  of International Women's Day, March  8th. The Committee strives to be anti-  racist, anti-homophobic, anti-racist and  anti-ablist in its events and process. To  get involved, call 255-5511 for info.  GATHERING STRENGTH, AND  Gaining Power is a series of cultural/educational events sponsored by  VSW. February 7: Making Ends Meet—  The 90s. Economic survival strategies.  A short play on domestic workers by  the Philippine Women's Centre; speakers Marjorie Cohen and Melanie Conn.  February 14: New Ideas for a New  Decade. A look at feminism and political change from the perspective of women  of colour. February 28: New Reproductive Technologies. In our best interests?  A critical feminist exploration. Admission  by donation. Childcare subsidy available-  phone ahead to arrange: 255-5511. The  events take place at 7:30 pm at the Vancouver Indian Centre, 1607 E. Hastings.  Wheelchair accessible.  EVENT SIE VENT SIE VENTS  BLACK HISTORY MONTH  Runs throughout February with films,  theatre, art shows and forums. Highlights include the Writers' Forum, Feb.  10 at the auditorium, King Edward Campus, VCC with Miriam Tlali (Johannes-  berg, SA) and Makeda Silvera (Toronto)  and others. Also, a film series including  Girls Apart; Black Mother, Black Daughter; Mapantsula and many others will  run at various venues (Langara, Robson  Square, UBC, Cinematheque, La Quena,  and SFU) all month. On Feb. 14, a workshop on "Multiculturalism and Race Relations" using Theatre in the Rough techniques at Robson Square ($35); Feb. 18  is "TV Again", a popular theatre performance. For details about locations, times  and registration, call 876-1640, 687-8763  or 439-7515.  SOUTH SURREY  WHITE ROCK WOMEN'S PLACE  AGM on Tuesday Feb. 20th, 1990 at  7  pm.   Members  and   guests  welcome.  #1-1349 Johnston Rd., White Rock. For  more info, call 536-9611.  WINTER ROOTS FESTIVAL  The 2nd annual celebration of Vancouver's best roots performers, including  Aya, Sam Weis, the Dots, and Faith  Nolan, takes place Feb. 9-10. Evening  concerts 8 pm at the Van. East Cultural Centre, 1895 Venables. Workshops,  cabarets at the W.I.S.E. Club, 1882  Adanac, $15 Day Pass, $5 workshops.  More info at 684-4022 or 736-3022.  FEMINIST THEATRE  Nightwood Theatre, Canada's only professional feminist company, proudly presents "Good night Desdemona (Good  Morning Juliet). "A comical Shakespearean Romance by Ann-Marie MacDonald. Feb. 21 - March 17 at the  VECC. Call 254-9578.  LOVE ON THE PLASTIC  This play about call girls by Julia  Schofield makes its Canadian debut at  the Vancouver Little Theatre, 3102 Main  St. until Feb. 10 show 8:30 pm, tix $10.  More info at 876-4165.  NEW NETWORK PLANNED  All lower mainland women's groups are  called to a planning meeting for a communications network in response to increasing attacks on women's services.  Wed. Feb. 21, at First United Church,  Gore and Hastings. Coffee at 6:30 pm,  meeting 7 pm sharp. For further info, call  Diane Thorne, Reg. Rep., National Action Committee on the Status of Women,  939-5403.  >Learn How To Facilitate  Assertiveness Groups ♦  Vancouver Status of Women is looking for women interested in  facilitating our Assertiveness Groups on a volunteer basis.  We are offering a Facilitator's Training Program involving a  2-day workshop in March.  Workshops will be held: Thurs. March 15th 5:30 -10 pm  Sat. March 17th 10-5 pm  There is no charge, and childcare is provided.  Please register by calling Trisha at 255-5511 by  March 8,1990  WOMEN'S SOFTBALL  Summer, softball, and Celebration '90!  The Breakers, an Intermediate "C" team  in the Vancouver Women's Fastball  League, will be having tryouts soon! For  further information, call Joce at 251-  2179.  SAME-SEX BENEFITS  The Lesbian and Gay Benefits Committee will hold a fundraising brunch on Sun.  Feb. 11, 11 am-1 pm, Sitka Co-op Common Room, 1511 Graveley. Tix $5 and  $10. More info on this issue or the committee from Diana, 876-1465.  FREE LAW CLASSES  The Public Legal Education Society offers a wide range of topics for its winter  series, including tenants' rights, custody  and access, welfare law, wills, separation  and divorce. For specific dates, times and  locations, call 688-2565.  FREE WORKSHOPS  The Douglas College Women's Centre, New Westminster, is holding several drop-in workshops this spring geared  to women interested in attending the  college. Topics include Time and Stress  Management, Confidence and Self-Es-  teem, and Single Parenthood Survival.  Call 527-5148 for details.  NATIONAL CONFERENCE  "Moving Forward: Creating a Feminist  Agenda for the 1990's" will be held at  Trent University this June. See 'Movement Matters' for details.  WOMEN IN MEXICO  Women's Studies at el Colegio de Mexico, A.C. presents its first interdisciplinary  summer course for foreign scholars focusing on Women in Mexico, June 18-  27, 1990. Application deadline March 31.  More info from Profra. Elena Umitia,  Coordinadora del PIEM, Curso de Ver-  ano 1990, para extranjeras. El Colegio de  Mexico, Camino al Ajusco No. 20, Pedre-  gal de Santa Teresa, 01000 Mexico, D.F.  Tel: 568-60-33, Exts. 158, 292, 363.  WOMEN'S HEALTH COLLECTIVE  The second annual Women's Health Collective Open House will be held Feb. 27,  4 pm - 8 pm at 302-1720 Grant Street.  For info leave a message at 255-8285.  Door prizes, raffle and refreshments will  be provided. Everyone welcome.  IWD FILMS  Studio D's Feminist films will be showcased at the Pacific Cinematheque, 1131  Howe St. from March 4-7. Films include  Goddess Remembered, Half the Kingdom, Adam's World, etc. Screenings are  free. See ad this issue for details.  CAREERS IN ART THERAPY  The Vancouver Art Therapy Institute offers a 2 yr. grad. level training program.  Demo workshops scheduled monthly.  Next one Feb. 9, cost $35. More info at  926-9381.  SEE NEXT PAGE  VANCOUVER EAST CULTURAL CENTRE presents  Love him  or leave him.  Or re-write him!"  English Canada's  Only Feminist  Theatre Company  Qoodnight  Desdemona  (Qood MorningJuliet)  !A  Comical Shakgs-pearean Romance  by ANN-MARIE MacDONALD  Directed by Banuta Rubess Designed by Sue LePage  Lighting by Lesley Wilkinson Music by Nic Gotham  Starring Derek Boyes, Beverley Cooper,  Diana Fajrajsl, Martin Julien, Kate Lunch  February 22 - March 17  Preview February 21 Monday - Saturday 8 pm  Matinees; Wednesday 1 pm, Saturday 2 pm  VANCOUVER EAST CULTURAL CENTRE  1895 Venables at Victoria  Reservations 254-9578 Ticketmaster 280-1311        >gg*  Media Sponsor: The Vancouver Courier IySK  rith the support of The Canada CouncU Touring Office %Wy*»  to through the Toronto Arts Council ^1^  KINESIS Bulletin Board  From previous page  EVE N  T SIE VENT SIG ROUPS  TORONTO CONFERENCE  "No More Secrets: Exploring Patterns  of Women's Re-Victimization" will take  place May 25-28, in Toronto. This national conference will explore the intersecting dimensions of early childhood trauma and the re-victimization of  women. Presenters include Robin Morgan, Shirley Turcott, Judith Jordan. To  register, contact Nancy Johnson, Community Resources and Initiatives, 285  Markham St., Toronto, Ont. M6J 2G7  (416) 323-1328.  HEALING FAIR  The Waxing Moon Healing Village Society is holding its 2nd Annual Womyn's  Healing Fair March 3, noon-6pm, 285 E.  5th Avenue. Healers, crafts, books, food,  childcare and more. Special evening entertainment. Anyone interested in volunteering please call 536-2960.  WOMEN'S AIKIDO  Classes now offered at Trout Lake Community Centre, 3350 Victoria Dr., Fridays  6-7:30 pm. Taught by Tamami Kotake,  2nd degree black belt instructor. Fees $20  per month. More info at Pacific Aikido  Kensankai Association, 253-2134.  BLACK HISTORY MONTH  The Vancouver Folk Music Festival  presents 2 concerts of Black American  music, Feb. 4 with Guy and Candie  Carawan and the Joyful Sound Gospel  Singers, and Feb. 25 with Moses Rascoe.  VECC, 8 pm, tix $12. Reservations, 254-  9578.  CCEC Credit Union  Serving cooperatives,  community businesses,  &the non-profit sector.  + Lower interest rates on  loans to societies and  cooperatives.  ► Operating loans.  ► Mortgages.  ► Term deposits.  ► Chequing accounts and  other banking services.  •        ra \   m  U   AM d  2250 Commercial Dr.  Vancouver, B.C. V5N 5P9  254-4100  "LIVING EVIDENCE"  In celebration of Black History Month,  paintings by Valerie Romain will be shown  Feb. 5 - March 4 at the VECC Gallery.  Free  admission,   noon-6   pm   daily.  WOMEN'S WORDS  A Canada Council reading sponsored by  Women and Words features local poet  Angela Hyrniukand Victoria performance  poet Gail Harris. Feb. 15, 7:30 pm, Cdn.  Book Info. Ctr., 1622 W. 7th. Free Ad-  BIRTH CONTROL  Ovulation method—a safe alternative,  taught in 2 sessions at the Vancouver  Women's Health Collective, March 14  and 21. Inquiries or registration at 255-  8284.  VLC RE-OPENING  Open House 4-6 pm, Feb. 24, to celebrate the re-opening of the Vancouver  Lesbian Centre, 876 Commercial Dr. Special evening entertainment 8-11 pm, featuring Doreen McLean, Leslie Carter and  Nadine Davenport, Bonnie Ste-Croix and  Monique Turgeon, and Nora Randall and  Jackie Crossland. Food and refreshments  served. Free. Call 254-8458 for more info.  GAY NINETIES DANCE  VLC presents its Annual Valentine's  Dance for women Sat. Feb. 10, 8 pm -  12:30 am. Grandview Legion Hall, 2205  Commercial Dr. (at 7th) Tix $4-6. Off-  site childcare. No disabled access. Call  254-8458 for info and assistance.  WOMEN & THE ENVIRONMENT  Join other women Mondays, starting Feb.  19, 7-9 pm for films and discussions on  the environment. Cost: $30. for 6 wks.  Location: Rm. 207, YWCA, 580 Burrard  St. To register, call The Int'l Development Coordinator, 683-2531.  WOMEN'S WENLIDO  Basic classes in women's self-defense  start the 1st Thursday of every month  at Trout Lake Community Centre, 8-10  pm. $30. for 4 weeks. Phone 876-6390 for  more info.  "OPEN HOUSE" EXHIBIT  A mixed media event created from the  oral histories, photos, stories and personal  artifacts of 50 lower mainland women. Pilot project of BACKGROUND: The Living Museum of Women's Stories. March  3-31, location TBA. Call 253-9197 for  more info.  SPRING CRAFT CLASSES  COVENS: the purpose and structure of  covens; how to form one. March 5 at  7:30 for women only. March 7 at 7:30  for women & men. Sliding scale $2-$4.  To register call Pat 253-7189. RITUAL:  working with the 4 directions, the elements of Earth, Air, Fire and Water as  taught by Reclaiming Collective. March  12 & April 2. 7-10 pm. Scale: $5 - $10.  To register call Magda 929-0429. PROCESS: Discover and reshape our political dimension using discussion and guided  imagery. March 19 & 26. 7-10 pm.  Scale: $5 - $10. To register call Joan  O'Brien 254-2627.  TO YOUR HEALTH  The Vancouver Women's Health Collective needs volunteers. An opportunity to  be involved in women's health issues.  Next training starts in March. Please call  255-8284.  WAVAW WANTS YOU  WAVAW/Rape Crisis Centre is looking for  women volunteers to do rape crisis work.  Training begins Feb. 21 and runs 11 wks.  (Wed. 7-10 pm, Sun. 11 am-5pm). Childcare costs provided. Please call 875-1328.  Also needed: Women with experience to  organize and implement a fundraising  campaign. See 'Movement Matters' for  details.  LESBIAN DISCUSSION GROUP  Group meets regularly 2nd Sun. of every  month, 2-4 pm, and last Mon. of every  month, 7:30-9:30 pm. For info contact  Port Coquitlam Women's Centre, 941-  6311.  NORTH SHORE WOMEN'S NETWORK  A social group for lesbians. Want to make  friends? Come for coffee and a chat. Call  Irene at 986-8907.  GAZEBO CONNECTION  Lower Mainland lesbian organization offers monthly social events for members  and guests, newsletter and special interest groups. Privacy is absolutely ensured.  For info, leave a message at 734-8729, or  write 382-810 W. Broadway, Vancouver  V5Z 4C9.  Qjy^s &JSzlfwinje> /en, j^&r^^MrJl^^%  Y&om-iGr Qowt&~  7J&Zl  qp:  rYA  KM<W,  THE  ,1  THINK  X   EXFERlETNCffp  A  MAJOR PANIC Attack/  I WOKE   UP    IN   A   Cot-D  SwEAT? with a svdoeh)  PEAR   that rve fSfAfteYy  Yci/re  LOST" fit-u TOUCH    JfNcT   ABouT   Tt> <  i^J^ KEAcrry/J,start ramgums  ith  Some  existential. cra£>  • *# a* a* AV    ARE    You ?...  UST  Ml P -WINTER.  Blues ••  tAM&E, 6vTX ACTUAW-Y  STARTEP   WCNPER.1NG  Wel^ng-* amp srA(rrJ\WHV^^  !tryim&  toV/t-iw"... £(TH/S   IS  I ThooQ-HT MAYBE l7r?F££i?\£5'ETT'AJG'  0ETTER AS A **K.E./l.l-? )SCAR£EJgSj  WctAAHt   x riGvpepar^fso   how'p '  COULVACJT  thb:  PART. .7\ yea   snap'  UNTIL-   IT  CAtAS NATIitfAiiJ)  * yi£2i!KAbkY/ yourself  or it?  Vljbfcy  DR. PAULETTE ROSCOE  NATUROPATHIC PHYSICIAN  FAMILY PRACTICE  HOMEOPATHY  COUNSELLING  11 E. BROADWAY AVENUE  VANCOUVER, B.C. V5T 1V4  873-1991  " KINESIS  Maureen McEvoy ba ma (Cand.)  Counselling  Psychology  732-3227  Areas of expertise:  sexual abuse, relationships,  sexuality, depression, ACOA  WOMYN'S SPIRITUALITY  WEEKEND  Friday March 30 7:30 pm. "Priestess-  ing" in a Temple Without Walls. Saturday March 31 10-4 pm "Introduction  to Womyn's Spirituality". Sunday April  1, 1-5 pm "Womyn's Magic." Presenter: Jade, Co-founder of the Reformed  Congregation of the Goddess, Madison,  Wisconsin. Fees: $5-9 Advance Friday  Evening, $40-65 Saturday, $20-45 Sunday. Information/Registration Pat 253-  7189.  SELF-ESTEEM WORKSHOP  Are you at a turning point in your Recovery Program or wondering why that  confident feeling doesn't last? This ongoing group uses Family Reconstruction  to heal the origins of low self-esteem and  shame. Our services also include individual, couple and family counselling. Sliding  Scale Fee. Westside Counselling. Maureen Gold, Elaine Stoll, 732-9136 or 733-  6529.  VISION 21  A new, multidisciplinary group of artists  and activists from different racial and ethnic backgrounds who recognize the harmful effects of racism, sexism and classism on the arts in Canada. Vision 21  sees the arts as potentially a process of  exchange and dialogue, rather than appropriation, in which representation originating in Black, Asian or Native cultures  commands respect and support. Annual  memberships $10, to VISION 21, 208  Robert St., Toronto, Ont., M5S 2K8.  CELEBRATION '90  Gay Games III is now organizing volunteers. Training sessions for swimming  event timers start soon. Call meet mgrs.  Sheila, 736-6393, or Dirk, 669-2382. A  child-care team is also forming. Call the  GLC, 684-3303 for more info. /////////////////S///////S///SS//SS/S/////////////S//////////S//S/////////S//S///S/S/////S//SS///////  ///////////////////^^^^^^  /////////////////////^^^^^  bulletin Board  SUBMISSIONS1CLASSIFIED1 CLASSIFIED  LESBIANS OF COLOUR  Short stories, poems, oral histories, essays , photos, diaries, comics, reviews,  inter views, etc. Anonymous contributions welcomed/respected and will remain confidential. Send submissions by  March 15, 1990 to: Sister Vision Press,  P.O. Box 217, St. E., Toronto, Ont., M6H  4E2.  CONFRONT HETEROSEXUALITY  Submission deadline May 1, 1990 for  a special issue of Resources for Feminist Research, "Confronting Heterosex-  uality: the Theory and Practice of  Women's Subordination." Critical perspectives sought from diverse feminist  standpoints on women's experiences of  heterosexuality and its social meanings.  Inquiries, submissions (not to exceed  5,000 words) to RFR, 252 Bloor St. W.,  Toronto, Ont., M5S 1V6.  TREEPLANTING STORIES  For an oral history of silviculture in BC,  including an art show and book documenting stories and photos. Send stories (150 wds. max.) and photos to:  Treeplanting: An Oral History, Box 4, Britannia Beach, BC, VON 1J0 (896-2488).  Also seeking any info on women who  worked reforesting during the war. Final  deadline: Nov., 1990.  CALL FOR PARTICIPANTS  Women and men between 16-24 yrs., gay,  straight, bi, of all cultures, for a 9 day  workshop on sexuality. Work with Headlines Theatre Company to create script  material for a young adult education film.  No acting experience necessary. Participants will be paid. For more info, call  Teresa at 876-1482 before Feb. 5.  BREAKING FORMS  "Trivia, A Journal of Ideas," publishing  essays, reviews, translations, and experimental prose, is now accepting submissions for 1990. The focus will be on  "breaking forms," not restricted to written expression. Send 2 copies with SASE  to TRIVIA, P.O. Box 606, N. Amherst,  MA, USA, 01059. Deadline: April 1,  1990.  FRINGE FESTIVAL  Performance application deadline for the  6th Annual Vancouver Fringe Festival is  Sat. March 31, 1990. Apply early, spaces  filled on first-come, first-served basis. For  more info, call TheatreSpace at 873-  3646.  MOTHERS' WRITING  Wanted for radio show: diaries, journals,  poetry, essays, stories, tips etc. Please  send copy (not original) to: Dragu (Editor), Van. Main Post Office, Box 4618,  Vancouver, B.C. V6B 4A1  CLASSIFIE  WICCAN SHOP  OPENING IN VANCOUVER  Looking for womynmade ritual supplies  including oils, incense, candles, jewelry,  womyn-rune stones, herbs, amulet bags,  art objects and more. Contact Michelle  at 253-8450 or write to M. Clancey,  918 Salsbury Drive, Vancouver, B.C. V5L  4A4.  READ LESBIANEWS:  Monthly events, information, ideas from  Victoria's lesbian feminist community.  Sample issue/back issues $2 each. Yearly  subscription (mailed in plain lavender  wrapper) $18. Cheques to Debby Gregory, LesbiaNews, PO Box 5339, Station  B, Victoria B.C. V8R 6S4.  PEACEFUL GET-AWAY  Dreaming of summer sun in the dreary  winter rain? I'm taking reservations now  for July/August holidays on Saltspring Island. Enjoy a peaceful getaway in a self-  contained women's guest cabin with fully  equipped kitchen and bathroom, close to  lakes, hiking trails and the sea. $35 single, $50 double. Special rates by week or  month. Write Gillian Smith, C85, King  Rd., RR1, Fulford Harbour, B.C., VOS  1C0 or call (604) 653-9475.  TECHNOLOGY TRAINING  Women interested is a long term technology training opportunity are invited to  submit applications for the fully certified  program. Training allowances, childcare  assistance, and tuition fees are provided.  Qualifications: Grade 12 Math and Science or equivalency. Committment, interest and aptitude in electronics technology. Eligibility: currently unemployed or  employed 25 hrs/wk or less. Commencing March 5, 1990. For more information and application, phone 255-5027 or  1-886-3646.  LIFE SKILLS INSTRUCTOR  Qualified feminist life skills instructor  needed. Flexible hours over 5 month period. Work experience in teaching and  working with women's groups is essential. Resumes required. 255-5027 or 1-  886-3646.  VILLA DE HERMANAS  Our All Women's Caribbean Beachfront  Guesthouse awaits you. Beautiful, LF  owned Spanish style villa on long, secluded beach in the Dominican Republic. Small tropical gardens, oceanside  pool, spacious comfortable common areas with large balconies and magnificent ocean view. Private, large, airy guestrooms, sumptuous meals and drinks, relaxing massages and healing crystal readings. Room rates: $300 single; $400 double per week. For reservations call our  Toronto friend, Suzi, at (416) 462-0046,  9 am to 10 pm.  LAND AND CABINS FOR SALE  Secluded Vancouver Island property, 10.2  acres of sweet rolling valley land on  French Creek in Coombs. Southern exposure, with two well-built, fully equipped  cabins, outbuildings, and bath house. Alternate systems, 500 gallon/day water license, power available. Asking $116,500.  Call Cindy or Caitlin at (604) 248-5410.  MILJENKA ZADRAVEC, B.A.  Counselling for Lesbians, 251-1958. I am  a lesbian-feminist therapist with extensive experience working in the area of sexual abuse and incest. I work individually  and in groups on coming out issues; homophobia, family issues, self-esteem, support and information. I work with women  on issues of sexuality, relationships, and  codependency. Some techniques I use are  psychodrama, gestalt, dreamwork, guided  visualization and inner child work. I have  a sliding scale. First half hour free consultation.  GOODS FOR SALE  Akamba and Makonde carvings, masks,  batiks, sisal bags and jewellery, assorted  musical instruments and much more. 240-  810 Quayside Drive, New Westminster,  B.C. 520-1363 or 255-4353 (24 hrs.)  COMPUTER TRAINING  Lessons in WordPerfect 4.2/5.0; Lotus  1-2-3 and D-Base. One-on-one/hands-on  training. $25/session or $15/hour. Resumes from $15 onwards. Also sell computer equipment from $850 and up. Call  Margaret at 255-4353.  EMILY'S PLACE HOT FLASH!  Emily's on the move! The land and cabins that the Emily's Place Society has focussed its energy on for the last five years  has been listed for sale. However, until  the land is sold the society will continue  to operate the retreat, and we invite you  to use and enjoy it. Members of the board  look forward to your continued support as  Emily explores other places, other possibilities for women's empowerment.  PEACEFUL RETREAT  Bed and Breakfast located on Salt Spring  Island. Close to Fulford Harbour and  Ruckle Park. Cozy rooms with private entrances. A comfortable setting for women  in a feminist home. Phone Maureen  .653-4345 for info and reservations.  SHIATSU TREATMENTS  Eat your porridge, button-up your  coat, look both ways and get a  Shiatsu treatment. It's so good  for you. Astarte Sands 251-5409.  CHARLES SQUARE CO-OP  Charles Square, a 36 unit housing co-op  in East Van has an open waiting list for 1,  2, and 3 BR units. Rents are $460, $570  and $705 with $1,000 share purchase (financing can be arranged). Near park and  community centre; meetings run by consensus. To get on waiting list, send SASE  to Membership Ctee., 1555 Charles St.,  Van. V5L 2T2  WOMEN'S STUDIES INSTRUCTOR  There will be an opening for a part-  time instructor in a team-taught, interdisciplinary Women's Studies Program at  Vancouver Community College, Langara.  It will begin in September 1990. Submit  resumes immediately to Patty Moore, Coordinator, Langara, 100 W. 49th Ave.,  Van. V5Y 2Z6. Call 324-5370 for info.  HOUSEMATE WANTED!  I'm looking for a female, N/S, quiet  housemate to share a cozy East Van. (  home with me and two adorable, well-  behaved outside Siberian huskies. Rent  is $350/mth (& utilities), available Feb.  1/90 Laundry facilities, close to Broadway & Commercial. Call Barb 253-8248  (leave a message).  FOR RENT  Studio/Office space with high ceiling and  good light available March 1. Suitable  \  for women  artists,  photographers,  etc.  Near Seabus in North Van., Phone 980-  4235.  Lucie Blue Tremblay performs March 4  at the Vancouver East Cultural Centre,  with Jennifer Berezan  •WOW, it's our 15th •Birthday this year!  JOB OPENINGS  <$>   PRODUCTION COORDINATOR  A part-time  position with  KINESIS. The successful applicant will have'  graphic arts, design and layout experience; an abiHty to work with and train  volunteers; and an appreciation of feminist journalism values.  PAY: $9.92/ hour, 65 hours per issue  Closing date to apply: Feb. 13  Start date: Feb. 21  Call 255-5499 for information  1\>t deserve a big celebration, so we're  /join/j tofjivt oursdves ont.  Come for birthday cake and IS per cent  and sundries on Saturday, February  17th-froml0:30to5:30.a  KWXJ'WOWtTiS'&OO'KS,  641 Johnson Street in 'Victoria, 388-9411.  In the evening we've invited some ofou  favorite people, authors and you, to join us.  Adele 'Wiseman, "Betsy "Warland, T.%  Tone, My 9dcXgy, 'Daphne Marlatt, Xmela  9fyrnuifjand9{fincy Chater have already a/rrud  to tome, how about you?   See you at 7 p.m. at the 7oun/j fBCag.  Ptuditormm, Camosun Cod., Lansdown Campus  in Ifctoria. It's all-free andshould he great {un.  Mope to su you there.  Q'our-friends,  The 'Everuwomans 'Boods Collective  FUNDRAISER/ADMINISTRATOR  A full-time position with the VANCOUVER STATUS OF WOMEN. The  successful applicant will have an enthusiasm for fundraising and a proven  track record; administrative skills; and  an understanding of feminist issues and  collective process.  PAY: $1728/month (4-day week)  Closing date to apply: March 15  Start date: March 26  Call 255-6554 for information  Please send resumes to: HIRING,  Vancouver Status of Women, #301-  1720 Grant St., Vancouver BC V5L  2Y6  ■**  WU  KINESIS  mtm  m*  Feb. 90 23' f  LIBRARY PROCESSING CENTRE - SERIALS  2206 EAST HALL, U.B.C.  VANCOUVER , B.C.  VST IZ8       INV-E 9004  -^3  Jj&ues Ifanwfaetn flic 90s  A series of events sponsored by  Vancouver Status  of Women  WEDNESDAYS  7:30 pm  VANCOUVER  INDIAN CENTRE  January 31: Out ol Sight, Out ot Mind No Longer.  Native women speak on self-determination.  Rosalie Tlzya, Florence Hackett, Gloria Nicholson, Amanda White, Elaine Herbert.  February 7: Making Ends Meet — The 90s. Economic survival stralegies lor the next decade.  A short play on domestic workers by the Philippine Women's Centre; speakers Marjorie  Cohen and Melanie Conn.  February 14: New Ideas tor a New Decade. A look  at leminism and political change trom the perspective ol women of colour.  February 28: New Reproductive Technologies. In  our best Interests? A critical feminist exploration of what the application of reproductive  and genetic engineering means for women In  the future, as well as women here and now.  rs Information: 255-5511  Published 10 times a year  by Vancouver Status of Women  #301-1720 Grant St., Vancouver, B.C. V5L 2Y6  □ VSW Membership -$30 (or what you can afford)-includes Kinesis subscription  □ Kinesis sub. only (1 year) -$20        □ Sustainers-$75  □ Kinesis sub. (2 yrs) -$36                   □ New  □ Institutions/Groups -$45                  □ Renewal  □ Cheque enclosed     D Bill me           □ Gift subscription