 6:  a^LceuxcnoNS  NOVEMBER  Civic  Vancouver Status of Women     2029W. Fourth Avfe.    /736-374G-"7-B      Volume IV   No. 38  73-s305  Serials Division  Main Library, U.B.C.  Vancouver 8, B. C.  /^  <0.  %  -T1  Q"  QP&  'V  .Py  The Vancouver civic elections are to  be held on November 20th. As of going  to press, there are 40 women candidates  seeking seats on the Council, the  School Board, and the Parks Board.  Because we believe that many women have  much to contribute in public office  we are doing what we can to provide  opportunities for the expression of  women candidates' views. We are sponsoring an All Women Candidates meeting  in the Vancouver Public Library Auditorium at 7:30 p.m. on Thursday.  November 14th. We are also, in this  issue of Kinesis, providing space to  candidates to state priorities.  We had originally intended to limit  the number of candidates invited to  the meeting, selecting them by a draw  with equitable representation. However,  we now feel it would be more worthwhile  to provide a platform for as many as  possible. Most are running on a particular group's slate, but all, of  course, are also individuals. We have  invited them all to appear. There  will be a question period.  To obtain a statement of priority for  publication in Kinesis we submitted  a question to each candidate and asked  for a reply in 50 words or less.  Some  candidates stretched things a bit and  we decided not to quibble over a dozen  words. Condensed versions of statements  which were even longer were read to  the candidates concerned and approved.  Abbreviations will be used in referring  to groups which have nominated candidates.  In alphabetical order, COPE is  the Committee Of Progressive Electors;  FAPG is the Federated Anti-Poverty  Groups; LSA is the League for Socialist  Action; NDP is the New Democratic  Party; NPA is the Non-Partisan Association; and TEAM is The Electors Action  Movement. Candidates' names will be  listed in alphabetical order.  The question we asked is one which we  considered would be appropriate to  any of the three offices and which  would indicate real priorities. It  is this:  IF YOU COULD DO, OR WORK  FOR, ONE THING, AND NOTHING ELSE, IN  THE OFFICE TO WHICH YOU ARE SEEKING  ELECTION, WHAT WOULD IT BE? 'caddidatc/  COUNCIL  Helen Bovce - NPA.  A complete revision of by-laws  to eliminate many that are  irrelevant, at the same time  possibly introducing some that  are really useful. Any by-law  no longer appropriate or  enforceable should be repealed.  Valid ones should have teeth.  To this end, I would promote  establishment of a "By-law  Investigation and Enforcement  Department" similar to the one  operating effectively in  Edmonton.  Irene Cavaliero - COPE.  Never again would we see a woman's  house bulldozed while she stands outside in tears or hear of a woman and  her children living in a car because  she could not find accommodation.  Land, and funds at low interest rates,  are there for quality low-rental  housing. What is not there is a  strong council dedicated to low and  middle income people.  Amy Daleleish - NDP.  If limited to only one thing upon  which to concentrate all my energy  for the next few years, I think I  would choose low-income family  housing.  This is where there has  been frightful neglect over the last  twenty years so that people are living in cold, damp, overcrowded conditions from which thousands of mothers  with young children have no escape.  Marguerite Fordi - TEAM.  My top priority is community  development and neighbourhood improvement. Livable units within large  cities encourage stability and a sense  of identity.  City policies on transportation, housing, planning, schools  and p-.rks should encourage communities. The city should create an  ofixce for co-ordinating all aspects  with other agencies and levels of  government.  Bonnie Geddes - LSA.  Six of eight League for Socialist  Action candidates for Council and  School Board are women.  That's no  accident. We want to change this  whole sexist society wherein a tiny  minority - profit-hungry capitalists -  control our lives. The struggle for  our liberation is the struggle to  kick out that minority and build a  society that meets the needs of the  majority.  Bernice Gerard - NPA.  If I as an alderman could work for  only one thing I would focus on helping to find adequate housing for all,  which in itself would do much to  strengthen family life, and I would  do everything possible to resist the  increasing tendency of government and  self-appointed agencies to regard  'personal rights' with contempt.  Jacquie Henderson - LSA.  Women's interests lie in uniting with  others in the vast majority unrepresented by city government. Women  and working people need city government that rules in their interests,  fights for their rights.  City  government, controlled by working  people and oppressed, will be a  powerful force in the Canada-wide  movement for social change by throwing  its authority and resources behind  our struggles.  Monica Jones - LSA.  I endorse the LSA programme for city  government that builds the struggle  for repeal of all anti-abortion laws  and in defense of all the victims of  that law.  Dr. Morgentaler's tour to  Vancouver demonstrated the broad  support rallying around this issue.  City government that fights in our  interests would take this support  into a cross-country campaign against  the federal government.  NDP.  Child care - because it is a basic  need for many women. Without high-  quality child care, women are tied  to their homes and denied the opportunity to actively participate in  society as a whole.  24-hour user-  controlled child care*facilities in  every neighbourhood are a priority  of the NDP Vancouver Area Council.  Darlene Marzarj - TEAM.  One of my largest concerns is to make  information and social services  available to people who need them  with a minimum of referral - one  phone call should connect people with  problems to people with resources to  help.  Margaret Mitchell - FAPG.  My FAPG associates and I are  working for an economy that  produces jobs. Nowhere in any  municipality has there been a  concerted effort to either  provide jobs or compensate the  citizens when the government has;  FAILED to provide jobs. Why else  do we require government?  Joan Morelli - FAPG.  My partners and I in FAPG are working  to eliminate POVERTY. The welfare  bureaucracy costs the taxpayer millions of dollars in administration  costs. But the people who really  benefit from the money spent are the  welfare bureaucrats. The FAPG self-  help groups have proved that they  can do what the welfare bureaucracy  cannot do.  Leona Rodrigues - FAPG.  My associate FAPG colleagues and I  are working to eliminate Poverty. We  fail to see how building the Granville  Mall and Cobble Stone in Gastown can  eliminate Poverty.  But building housing  for Low Income People in Vancouver is  a step in the right direction. Public  Housing is not a drain on the Taxpayer  as it pays for itself.  Marilyn Sarti - NDP.  If limited to accomplishing  one thing on Council, it would  be to initiate a large-scale  low-cost housing program.  Excellent housing could be  made available initially to  low-income people, and later  to people of all incomes.  We must not let self-interested  land developers control our  future. I believe our city can  provide a good life for everyone who lives here.  Wendy Stevenson ,- LSA.  Women workers are hardest hit by  inflation.  City government must act  immediately to implement equal pay  for equal work; an end to discrimination in hiring practices; and to  provide, on a crash basis, free 24-  hour, user-controlled child care  centres. A workers' city government  can set the example by applying this  programme to civic employees and all  employees under city contract.  Carol Young - NPA.  I would work for a betterment of the  quality of life for the people of our  beautiful city.  Of primary importance  in obtaining this objective, is aiding  our police force to keep our streets,  homes and recreation areas safe. To  walk without fear is a thing we must  know again in Vancouver.  No\/  SCHOOL BOARD  Lilian Amiel - NPA.  W  To be limited to a concern in  only one area of education is  a situation which I hope never  arises. However, as we are still  a nation that runs by its skills,  I must stress that whatever else  schools may offer, they should  teach literacy and numeracy -  in other words, the well-known  phrase "Back to Basics."  Margaret Andrew - TEAM.  If I could work for only one  thing if elected, what "would  it be? A tough question for a  confirmed pluralist. More  parent and community involve-  -ment in the schools? Better  'language teaching? More  Canadian and less role-  -discriminatory texts? I  guess I'd have to plump for  doing what I know most about -  encouraging even better  library service for Vancouver  schools.  Lorena Baran - TEAM  ' Parents, teachers, and  students should be involved  in influencing educational  policies and curriculum  development. Therefore, I  would search for acceptable  techniques to provide inter-  -actions between school and  community that will establish  a positive working environment  leading to a sharing of  educational responsibilities. Marjorie Courvoisier - TEAM.  The direction of change must  appreciate the past and proceed  with the present.  Within the school system these  areas of time overlap. I must  take into account that our  children are the receivers of  our actions. Our school system  must respect the environment  from which children come and  create an environment to make  growth - scholastically as  well as humanly - possible.  Coreen Douglas - LSA.  As LSA candidate for School  Board I support the struggles  of women as students, teachers,  and staff for democratic control  over their working conditions  and education. For an end to  discrimination in textbooks  and curriculum; for the  establishment of comprehensive  women's studies courses; for  schools that serve the needs  of women.  Carol Eriksen - FAPG  My aim is to see that every  child is educated to the  fullest extent of his or her  capabilities. By this, I would  like to eliminate the ever-  -increasing number of drop-  -outs by making school so  attractive that attending  school will be the preferred  choice.  Betty-Anne Fenwick - TEAM  I would work towards a time when  every child in the Vancouver,>public  school system will have an equal  opportunity to acquire an education  to equip him or her to live in the  21st century, and that sometime  during this learning process each  child will experience a feeling of  personal worth so that he or she  may become a lifelong learner.  Pam Glass - TEAM.  Where is our educational  system failing our young  people? We have dedicated  teachers and excellent facilities.  Why are students "turned off" the  learning process, many as early  as Grade 4? Learning is a  discipline and when the discipline  is removed, the learning process  suffers. We'must restore the  enthusiasm for learning and  respect for authority that  students enjoyed in kindergarten.  Betty Greenwell - COPE.  Daycare facilities must be made  available to all children whose  parents wish or require such service.  At the elementary school level this  must also include before and .after  school care for children who require  it. As a school trustee, I would  support this program and continually  press for increased monies for  education to make this and other  advances possible.  Lynda Little - LSA.  We need a city government that  supports the right to teachers  and school staff to organize and  strike. A workers' city government  would throw its weight behind  demands of Vancouver teachers for  a contract that defends them against  inflation with a cost-of-living  clause and wage increases, and  defends job security against layoff s. Vote socialist! Vote League  for Socialist Action!  Irene Miller - NPA.  I am anxious to improve  relationships between parents  and school authorities - to see  parents accepting their responsibility regarding their children's  attitude to schooling; to see  the profession accepting parents  as equal partners, entitled to  be properly informed of their  children's performance and new  programs. Parents should not be  made to feel incapable of dealing  rationally with information  about their children.  Katherine Mirhady - TEAM.  To provide adequate schooling and  auxiliary services for students with  "Special Needs" to achieve their  potential, i.e. hard-of-hearing,  blind, mentally retarded, chronically  ill, physically handicapped, emotionally disturbed, specifically learning  disabled, extraordinarily gifted, and  those girls who are handicapped in  learning by believing education and  responsibility are for boys.  Freda Price - of Genuine Education  Movement, endorsed by  OTA.  If I could be sure of  accomplishing only one thing  as school trustee: I would  choose to make sure that all  non-handicapped children learn  to read and write, and to do  so easily, before the end of  Grade 2. Without literacy the  door is closed to further  education and we teach these  skills too late and in the  wrong way.  Hilda Thomas - NDP.  I would initiate an Affirmative Action  Plan within the Vancouver School  System to seek out and hire or appoint  qualified women to administrative  positions. More than half the teachers  in B.C. are women. Less than 10% of  the administrative staff are women.  This situation can be changed only  through the introduction of positive  measures to end discrimination.  Lilybet Turnbull - NPA.  Many areas of education concern me.  This year our educational system in  Vancouver is costing one hundred  million dollars and yet we still have  a number of graduate students who are  illiterate. This is a waste of time  and effort for students and teachers,  which is not only cheating the taxpayer but the student as well.  Lorraine Vernon - NDP.  I would strive to preserve the  original creative imagination  present in small children,  beginning their education, so  that it would remain, in higher  levels of education, as a  healthy and innovative curiosity  and motivation of the learning  process.  PARKS BOARD ?    'H /  Evelyn Atkinson - TEAM.  I would like to make the parks  more viable, from the active  people to the handicapped  and elderly - recreational  facilities to benches,  including all income groups.  Parks are much needed due  to the absence of backyards  and forest areas we used to  enjoy in Vancouver.  May Brown - TEAM.  I will work towards a  greater variety of uses of  Park and Recreation facilities.  I believe this can be  accomplished by such things  as: more programming in our  swimming pools, better use of  small halls and fieldhouses,  community centres open for  more weekend use, and lighting  on tennis courts and play-  -fields to extend hours of  play.  Judy Langdon - Independent.  To enhance our waterfront  and its use. From Boundary  Road, around the UBC penin-  -sula, to the north arm of the  Fraser River we are surrounded  by a beautiful shoreline. Much  more of our waterfront,  including False Creek, could  be opened up to our view and  to us for walking, cycling,  and for aquatic sports such  as swimming and boating.  Mildred MacKinnon - NPA.  To work for the preservation of open areas and to  develop them to the best use  and advantage of the citizens  in the local areas; to plan  for the necessary expansion  to facilitate growing urbanization and population density,  that the ecological balance of  our environment is preserved -  that balance upon which the  quality of urban life is so  dependent.  Helen Moran - NPA.  My prime objective when elected  as a Parks Board Commissioner will  be directed towards the retention  and acquisition of open spaces  within the city of Vancouver. By  so doing, I would promote the upgrading of adequate, necessary  facilities for utilization by all  Vancouverites during their  recreation hours. Elect Helen  Moran.  Margaret Pieott - NPA.  Open public waterfront is my  main concern and I was involved,  as vice-chairman of the Save the  Entrance to Stanley Park  Committee, in keeping the Four  Seasons' project off the water-  -front at the park entrance. I  would work to open up the water-  -front for the enjoyment of all  Vancouverites.  MORE.... Charlotte Warren - TEAM.  I would aim for a more "formal  agreement" between the Parks  Board and the School Board in  order that the facilities oper-  -ated by both boards be more  fully utilized and upgraded to  benefit a broader base of citizens.  In my opinion, many facilities are  not scheduled to maximize returns  relative to capital expenditure.  Greta Wood - FAPG.  Many things need changing:  enlarging and establishing  more community centres, far  more staff - the centres are  grossly understaffed - but the  one thing I would like to see is  the children of low-income  parents subsidized so that they  can join both the physical and  cultural programs already in  effect. They are culturally  deprived through no fault of  their own.  advisory  council  Members of the Federal Advisory  Council on the Status of Women returned from their October meeting in Ottawa  with the feeling that the federal  government is now making a serious  effort to implement recommendations  of the Royal Commission on the Status  of Women.  The Hon. Marc Lalonde, the new minister  responsible for the status of women,  told a luncheon meeting of the Advisory Council that the government was  re-introducing the Omnibus Bill and  the amendments to the Canada Pension  Plan and the Citizenship Act, which  died on the order paper when the  federal election was called. He also  said that the long-awaited human rights  legislation would be introduced before  Christmas, and that the proposed  commission would include a large  representation of women.  The Omnibus Bill, which was introduced the following day, provides  women on stamps  From time to time national governments honour a noteable person by  Issuing a stamp commenorating the  achievements of the persocn. They  have been conspicuously stingy in  conferring this honour on women.  We decided that since this issue of  Kinesis is largely concerned with  women candidates in the up-coming  municipal election, it would be  appropriate to feature three stamps  honouring women whose courage and  persistence made it possible for  women to vote and hold public office.  Susan B. Anthony -1820-1906  -a leader in the women's suffrage  movement in the United States;was  arrested in 1872 for voting.  Emmeline Pankhurst -1858-1928  -led the fight for women's voting  rights in England; was imprisoned  several times for taking part in  demonstrations. Women received  equal voting privileges in England  the year she died.  for changes in eight existing laws,  among them:  -changes to the Canada Elections  Act to eliminate reference to the  marital status of women on voters'  lists. The practice of leaving a  blank space when a woman states her  occupation as housewife would also  be discontinued  -changes to the maternity section of the Unemployment Insurance  Act to provide more flexibility in  the timing of maternity leave?  -changes to the Immigration Act  so that either the mother or father  could be regarded as the head of the  family, instead of always the father  -substitution of the word  'Ģpersons'for 'boys' in the National  Defense Act, so as to enable girls  as well as boys to belong to armed  forces cadet organizations  -changes to the Canada Pension  Plan would provide that the husband  of a female contributor would receive  the same benefits as the wife of  a male contributor.  -changes to the Citizenship Act  would make residency requirements  the same for both an alien husband  and the alien wife of a Canadian  citizen, and would ensure that children born outside Canada would be  natural-born Canadians if either  parent is a citizen of Canada. It  would also provide that women who  lost their citizenship because they  married aliens before 1947 would  automatically regain Canadian  nationality.  The Advisory Council, after discussing a report from its committee  on the one-parent family, decided  to ask the federal government to  issue a policy -paper that would  propose a comprehensive policy on the  one-parent family.  It urged the government to formulate  policies and encourage attitudes  that would give the single parent  woman the opportunity to become  financially independent.  Among the topics to be discussed  at the next meeting of the Advisory Council, scheduled for January 13-15 in Vancouver,will be  family planning and rape. An evening meeting on Wednesday, January  15, is planned to provide Vancouver  women with an opportunity to meet  informally with Advisory Council  members.  -Joan Wallace  Susan Charlton  B.C. Members,Advisory Council  <3our demission  ^fbstescanadiennc^  Catmdsflrhsst Office  cDayofiiv.yr.  <- J.L.  Nellie McClung - 1837-1961  -instrumental in winning the vote for  women in Alberta, Manitoba and Saskatchewan; served in the Alberta Legislature from 1921-1926; was the first  woman member of the Board of Governors  of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation; was one of five representative  women in the "persons case" that resulted in Canadian women being included  in the BNA Act's definition of "person."  Just over fifty years ago in Canada  women - along with idiots, lunatics  and criminals - were still denied  the vote. thank you  A word of thanks to those of you  who responded to the opinion quest-  ionaire in the October issue.To those  who took the,time to add suggestions  and comments a double thank you! To  those who haven't gotten around to  sending it in yet - here's another  chance. It is important that we know  what you want to see in your newsletter and the Political Involvement  Question is a crucial one for the  organization as a whole. Please  take a minute to fill in the form  and mail it!  A quick summary of the responses so  far shows that most members found  the newsletter interesting and there  were suggestions for future article-  and features.  The most frequent  complaint was that the newsletter  arrived too late in the month and  some of the events listed had already  taken place.  To remedy this we will  try to move our production date up,  so the new deadline for contributions  to the newsletter will be the 1st of  the preceeding month. Hopefully then  you will receive your December issue  before December begins. Please contribute!  The responses to the Political Involvement Question show that so far a slim  majority of members do not wish the  membership list to be made available  to candidates for appeals for votes,  financial contributions and volunteer work. The majority of responses  approve assisting women candidates  who display a serious concern about  the inequities pertaining to women  and a genuine desire to correct them,  and also male candidates who have  consistently supported women's issues.  The members of the VSW Executive  have each written a statement of  her own personal opinion on the  question of making the membership  list available to candidates.  EXECUTIVE STATEMENTS  President - Roberta Schlosberg  My feeling is that releasing the  membership list without the permission  of the members is a violation of  privacy.  This is a personal decision.  I don't like getting a lot of unsolicited mail.  Vice President - Nancy Conrod  I am deeply concerned with maintaining  individual privacy and freedom of  association.  In a society in which  one may be asked for her social insurance number in order to buy cat  food, it seems, privacy is no small  issue. Affiliation with the Status  of Women is a fact which each member  must be able to assert, deny, flaunt,  or hide at her own discretion. The  organization cannot make the decision  for the member. As a result, I  oppose giving any person or group  the list of our members.  Secretary - Jessie Parker  My sole reason for voting in favour  of the motion "that the membership  list not be released from the office  under any circumstances" is that I  don't feel VSW has the right to use  the membership list for anything but  VSW business.  Even if a candidate is in sympathy  with VSW, he'or she is in the business  of getting elected and the aims of  VSW are necessarily a small part of  the candidate's over-all concerns.  Public Relations Officer - Glinda  Sutherland  It is my belief that the Vancouver  Status of Women should not make its  membership list available to any  individual or organization. The  Status of Women member must have the  right to privacy and in no way should  our policy jeopardize this privacy.  Nominations Officer - Hanne Jensen  My initial reaction to the question  was that under no circumstances  should our mailing list be made  available to any individual and/or  group for political OR fund raising  purposes (or any other purpose unless  specific permission was granted by  the Executive).  This is still my  opinion on the subject. We have the  responsibility (through our meetings  and the newsletter) to make our members aware of issues such as the need  for more women in politics - and to  stress that for a woman to succeed in  politics, help is needed - also financial.  It will then be up to each  member to decide how she intends to  provide this support.  Newsletter Officer - Diane Ryals  I was not at the executive meeting  involving the vote about releasing  the mailing list. But, had I been  there, I would have voted against  releasing it. My reasoning is simply  that I look at it as an invasion of  privacy in allowing my name to be  released to persons I don't know  and perhaps are not in sympathy with  my political views.  Members-at-Large -  Nancy Denofreo -  I am opposed to the use of the VSW  mailing list for any purpose. A general appeal for campaign support of  all women candidates, including the  necessary individual information  could be sent by VSW to its members,  either through Kinesis or a special  edition. It should not be necessary  to release our names and addresses.  For me, its not just a question of  junk mail, I'm trying to hold onto  my privacy and to the concept of VSW  as a non-partisan organization.  I'm opposed to active political  involvement by the VSW but this  position was reached only after a  long sorting-out process. We stand  to lose more than we gain. While I  feel strongly that women need to  become active politically, this is  best done through a political party-  where party policy, structure and  candidates are decided. That is  basically where a candidate must  look for her campaign support - if  the support is not forthcoming,  either its the wrong candidate  or the wrong party. We must as  individuals join a political party  and work to effect changes because  we can no longer be apathetic about  "grass roots politics."  As a side issue, I used to feel that  since women's rights were my highest  concern I could gladly support any  feminist candidates.  I've since  learned that for me at least it isn't  that simple and I can't jump from one  party platform to another. My respect  you have, but my support I cannot  automatically pledge.  Diana Douglas  My reasons for not handing out our  VSW mailing list:  1 It is not the executives' decision  to make - it has to go back to the  membership as it concerns their  privacy.  2 When giving out your mailing list  you inevitably lose control over  it. Politics is a deadly serious  game t-  anything for a vote - there  would be no guarantees that the  list would be used for feminist  candidates only.  "For the good of  the party" the list will be passed  on and we all know how impossible  it is to get off a mailing list  short of moving.  3 If we did agree to lend our list to  'feminist' candidates only, I feel  that it would not be an easy matter  to judge. And who is going to judge?  For example - feminist candidates in  past elections have not always run  on feminist platforms nor mentioned  their feminist background in their  campaign literature. Would they  qualify?  What about a male candidate in  favour of women's liberation? Or  the female candidate who is pushing  for more day care, etc., but hotly  insists she is not one of those  'libbers' and she really feels we  should all stay in our kitchens and  serve our men.  4 Because there is ample scope for  any feminist candidate to speak to  us through Kinesis I feel we can  acquaint women with the issues  while actively urging them to support a candidate of their choice.  Carolyn Gibbons  So long-as VSW adheres to the policy  of not aligning itself with any  particular political party, I am  strongly opposed to VSW making its  membership list available to candidates for political office.  Allowing candidates to use a mailing  list implies to the membership en-  dorsation of that candidate and that  candidate's party.  Jo Lazenby  I voted not to release the mailing  list in the future because I feel  that organizations that I join, magazines that I subscribe to, companies  that I buy products from, etc. do  not have the right to give my address  to anyone else.  Therefore I do not  believe that we can make available  the addresses of our members without  their consent.  Bobbie Patrick  I abstained when the Board of Directors voted not to release the membership list under any circumstances.  I had conflicting thoughts and  wanted more time to ponder.  My opinion was reached before the  last Kinesis was published.  But as  that edition contained what I regard  as an extremely worthwhile debate on  the whole issue of the involvement  of the VSW in the political field  and as I seem unable to control an  addiction to argument, I wrested my  statement from the editor to amplify  a couple of points and to comment.on  the views expressed. The VSW is a non-partisan group, with  one of its stated objectives the  encouragement of women to seek public  office.  I agree with Ms. Errington that its  efforts outside the area of political  action have been instrumental in  bringing about a greater degree of  social justice and that these efforts  should continue. I also agree that  to support women only because they  are women is tantamount to imbecility  and that to support individual women  candidates would lead inevitably to  factionalism within, and disaster  for, our organization.  At the same time, however, I am  convinced along with Ms. Wallace,  that much of what has to be done  will not be done until there is  equality of representation, or something very nearly approaching it, in  government. As long ago as early in  this century George Bernard Shaw  warned the suffragettes that wrongs  would not be righted merely with  the vote.  It was argued in the Kinesis debate  that some women seeking election do  not basically support the goals of  the Women's Movement and can do us  more harm than good. Conceded, there  are a few. But surely today most  women who are elected, while they  may not constantly press for women's  rights, or may have other priorities,  would not oppose legislative reform  of the  sort that is needed. Perhaps  it is not so much that some of them  do not support the goals of the  Women's Movement as that the number  of women in major policy-making  bodies is so few that appealing for  justice in an area where we know it  should be accorded is crying in the  wilderness. Is it likely that if  there were enough women in office to  create a voice that had to be listened  to, substantial progress would hot  be madet  What I found so gratifying about the  Kinesis debate - perhaps "discussion"  would be a better word - was that both  writers showed concern to maintain  the non-partisanship of the VSW and  both had suggestions for providing  help.  Developing a program to equip women  with political skills, publicizing  the views of women candidates on  issues that are important to us,  holding all candidates' meetings,  and urging our members to support  women whose position they favour are  positive steps. I consider that it  would also be a positive step to  make the membership list available  to all women candidates who choose  to use it. As Ms. Wallace points  out, it would enable candidates to  inform members in their own and  other ridings of their stand on  various issues and to appeal for  donations and other assistance. It  may be simply a residue of youthful  idealism lurking about in my middle-  aged interior, but I believe that a  number of persons who are anxious to  see intelligent, capable, concerned  women playing more than a token role  in the processes of government would  respond. If we are going to get  anywhere politically, we have got to  do more than vote.  May I suggest that there need be no  problem in ensuring that the membership list is used by the women candidate only, on the appropriate occasion.  It could be stipulated, for example,  that the typing of addresses must be  done in the VSW offices under the  supervision of a VSW member - staff  or volunteer - and that mail bags to  contain the addressed envelopes must  be left with the VSW to convey to the  Post Office.  A major objection to releasing the  membership list appears to be the  intrusion on privacy involved -  certainly something one hesitates  to be a party to.  It was a factor  in the conflict when I abstained.  But commitment, more often than not,  involves a price; and I have decided  that if"I really care about helping  worthy women become a significant  part of the political picture, such  an intrusion on my privacy is a small  price to pay. Women before me  chained themselves to fence railings,  besieged government offices, and got  carted off to prison. Can I, reclining  in an easy chair, not spare a little  time to consider a political appeal  received in the mail? The decision  whether to do something, or nothing,  is mine. And, really, I would  hardly place in the same category  an exhortation to purchase some acres  of alleged greenery in the New Mexican  desert and an appeal for support from  a concerned woman who might have much  to contribute to the betterment of  my country or my province.  Ex Oficio - Alice James  I believe our membership list should  be available to members of our organization.  your   opinion  POLITICAL INVOLVEMENT  1. VSW will feature women candidates  in KINESIS and sponsor all candidates  meetings on women's issues whenever  possible (e.g. in the upcoming civic  election campaign). This would enable  members to decide for themselves their  own degree of involvement.  Is this sufficient for you?  2. If not:  A. Should VSW solicit volunteers  from its membership to do canvassing and other campaign work?  B. Are you in favour of making our  membership list available to  candidates for appeals for votes  financial contributions and  volunteer work?  C. Would you join a VSW permanent  political action committee, not  only to prepare to provide  assistance during election campaigns, but also to work between  elections to encourage women to  become involved in politics at  all levels?  3. Should we offer the outlined  assistance to:  A. All women candidates  B. Women candidates who display a  serious concern about inequities  pertaining to women and a genuine desire to correct them.  C. Male candidates who have consistently supported women's issues.  D. No candidates.  4. Other suggestions:  KINESIS - Does It Meet the Needs   of VSW Members?  1. Is KINESIS an effective communication link among members?  2. Does KINESIS give you the information you want and need?  3. Is there any subject that KINESIS  has not dealt with adequately?  4. Are the features interesting?  5. Do you like the content of KINESIS?  6. Would you prefer a more business-,  like newsletter?  7. Would you contribute articles or  art to Kinesis?  8. Other comments or Criticisms:  VSW SERVICES & RESOURCES  1. Have you made use of any of the  following services of VSW in the  past year?  A. Ombuds  B. Transition House  C. Orientation meetings  D. General meetings  E. Special summer workshop  F. Other  A. What was your general impression  of the services/presentation  offered?  B. Would you recommend VSW services  to others?  C. Would you seek assistance  from us again?  D. Are the programmes/services  timely? What would you recommend to improve them?  E. Do you have any suggestions  for future programmes or areas  of study?  3. Any other comments or criticisms? members  Forum  I have just finished reading the  Chatelaine article "Abortion: The  Issue Hots Up" and I am appalled at  the growing number of anti-abortion  organizations. One group started with  15 members in 1971 and now has 3,000  letter writers.  The battle is not won for a sane approach to abortion - it is still part  of the Criminal Code and out of 1300  Canadian hospitals only 260 perform  abortions. Maybe you can get one in  B.C. and Ontario but it's well nigh  impossible in the other provinces.  These hysterical groups don't really  care about the mother, or the child  either so long as it gets born. That  it may be unwanted or deformed doesn't  seem to matter.  Last week, I wrote a letter to the  Minister of Justice, Otto Lang, favouring removal of abortion from the  Criminal Code.  I got a "received  your letter: acknowledgement from his  deputy with no reference to my stand.  As Mr. Lang is anti-abortion I don't  suppose it will even be counted!  I  should have sent a copy to my M.P. and  Katie Cook too.  Foolish of me.  I think we should organize a "Freedom  of Choice" telegram to Ottawa - because  that's what it comes down to - a woman  has a right to choose and no group  should be able to impose its ethics  on the individual.  Sure, the Canadian Medical Association  and the Advisory Council on the Status  of Women favour the repeal of abortion  from the Criminal Code but did you  know the United Church did too and now  is going to reassess its stand? This  sounds ominous to me.  Also, it is rather scary that there  seems to be plenty of money backing  these medical organizations. It is  frightening to think that unless we  work and fight, the 1969 amendment to  the Criminal Code re abortion could  be cancelled.  "Abortion on Demand" was always a  crazy slogan. As if a woman would  bounce into a doctor's office and say,  "You gotta abort me, Doc!" Let's  hear no more of that. But "Freedom of  choice, repealing abortion from the  Criminal Code and no further persecution of practitioners like Dr. Morgen-  thaler who are helping women" are  ideas that most sane, thinking people  can support.  So let us be vocal and Write, Write,  Write.  — Pat Russell  I am more firmly  convinced than  ever that the law  under which I am  now being tried is  unjust, cruel and  dangerous to  women. "  At a press conference sponsored by  the B.C. Committee to Defend Dr.  Morgentaler on September 30 at the  Vancouver Public Library,Glinda  Sutherland, VSW Member-At-Large,  read the following statement of  support:  "Given the difficulties and dangers  of known methods of contraception  and the dislocating psychological,  social and economic consequences of  an unwanted pregnancy, abortion must  be the right of every woman.  The  Vancouver Status o.f Women stands in  full support of DrsHenry Morgentaler."  Dr. Morgentaler was convicted in the _  Quebec Court of Appeal of performing  an abortion on a 26 year old student  of McGill University and sentenced to  18 months in jail. He had been acquit-  ed earlier of this charge but the  Quebec Court of Appeal overturned the  decision. Dr. Morgentaler's case is  now being appealed in the Supreme  Court of Canada.  letter lobby  I attended a gathering a few  nights ago to hear Dr. Henry  Morgentaler speak on the abortion  issue. This court case has.  become well known all over  Canada and after reading so  much about him and his views  it was a real pleasure to see  and hear him in person.  Dr. Morgentaler's main point  was that abortion must be removed from the Criminal Code  and that the decision be left  between the woman and her  doctor. However, if this is  to come about alot of pressure  must be brought to bear on  the politicians of this country.  He told us that many politicians  feel that abortion should be  removed from the Criminal Code,  but due to incredible publicity  (and letter writing) from the  anti-abortion people, the  government is steering clear  of the whole thing. Apparently  when the Federal Advisory Council  on the Status of Women made  their decision concerning the  removal of abortion from the  Crim-nal Code they were flooded  with anti-abortion mail and  received minimal response from  pro-abortionists.  This is where we come in. We  must STOP nodding our heads in  silence. We must let the  government know that there are  thousands of us who feel very  strongly that we do have the  right to decide what is best  for ourselves and our bodies.  I urge all Status of Women  members who feel this way to  send the form letter below  to Otto Lang, Minister of  Judtice and to your local  yf p  __ Valerie Blair  Letter Lobby Committee  DR. HENRY MORGENTALER  WHAT ONE  WOMAN  CAN DO  SEND  Hon. Otto Lang,  Minister qf Justice,  House of Commons,  OTTAWA, Ontario  Dear Mr. Lang;  I want to express my views on  the abortion issue. I feel  most strongly that abortion  should be rem oved from the  Criminal Code and that it  should be considered a private  decision between a woman and  her doctor.  Sincerely, I work for the General Motors Acceptance Corporation of Canada, Ltd.,  1687 West Broadway. On July 31, 1974,  a Bookkeeper with 23 years service  with the company left her position  giving "mental anguish due to company  policies" as her reason.  I had worked  as her relief on several occasions.  Since I had the training and the ability and had demonstrated both by performing the job satisfactorily for a  six month period, I thought, that I  was next in line for the position  when it became vacant.  The Management disagreed. The term  Management here refers to the Branch  Manager (BM), Assistant Branch Manager (ABM) and the Accounting Manager  (AM), my immediate supervisor.  This is an account of my adventures  in seeking my rights through the  company's Open Door Policy.  But first, a little history.  It goes  back to 1957 in Toronto.  I left  Toronto voluntarily in 1961 to come  to B.C. but did not become employed  by GMAC again until May, 1962, thereby  breaking my service record.  In September of that year, I was laid off in  Vancouver and employed immediately in  London, Ontario.  (This 18 month service is important because I was employed here as Ledger Clerk, thus my  experience for the present position  goes back to 1962.  This was deemed  completely irrelevant because the  past is "water under the bridge.")  In June 1964, I voluntarily left  London, again breaking my service and  travelled till June 1966, when I came  back to Vancouver and was again employed at GMAC in a position called  "posting clerk" which is a Level Three  accounting position. Needless to say  that in all these branches, I touched  on all phases of the accounting department at one time or another. This  was my fourth time "in." In 1968,  Executive Office (EO) did a tally of  accredited years for a Company pension  plan.  I was accredited my total years,  presumably because I was involuntarily  dismissed in 1962, and had I not been,  I may have had continuous service.  In the light of two voluntary breaks,  this need not have been so. Thus I  can only conclude that EO considered  the total history, gave me the benefit  of a doubt, and chose generously in  my favour. Thus I have an eight year  length of service and fifteen years  of accredited service.  The Bookkeeper's position is a Level  Five position, second to the AM, and  encompasses both duties, bookkeeper  and assistant to the AM.  Since it is  a position through which all accounting  work is filtered, it must have some  authority to correct, to approve and  to teach when necessary. The Management initially decided that I could  do the work from a Level Three position, thus robbing me, not only of  the necessary authority for the proper  disposition of the duties, but also  the promotion and the salary.  In this  arrangement, Management would accomplish two desired objectives:  the  bookkeeping would be done by a person  who knows bookkeeping best and males  would be in the highest positions in  the department.  There would be two  Level Fours over me. One position,  Senior Accounting clerk, held by a  woman of twenty years service, posed  no anticipated problem because of her  superior knowledge and wide experience.  It is an interesting aside that it  took her more than fifteen years to  climb one level whereas no males are  held at their starting levels for such  a long time.  The other Level Four  was that of Cashier and was held by  a male of seven years service. He  was slated to be promoted to Level  Five. While his position is broadly  defined in the company manual, his  duties bore no resemblance to the  definition. He held no authority,  did no supervision, thus could not  substitute for, although he was a  help to, the AM. This person would  hold a position superior to mine.  That was bad enough. When he was  promoted to Level Five, he would be  my superior with authority to affect  the disposition of my duties.  When I was officially informed of the  reallocation of duties, I requested an  interview with the AM.  I told him I  felt I was being discriminated against,  that it was unfair that I, with more  years and experience, and as far as I  was concerned, greater ability, should  be in lower rank than a person of lesser years and experience, that I gave  the company my best effort in the last  eight years and not only was I not  getting any rewards but initiative was  taken away as well.  I ventured the  opinion that I did not think the  arrangement would work, because my  knowledge was wider than his.  I tried  to point out the incongruity of such  a set up. He thought there should be  no problem because our duties would  not "cross." The arrangement was  workable.  Whether the arrangement was workable  or not, it was not, I'm sure, discussed  at all.  It was decreed. As a woman  I wasn't supposed to question the  workability of any decision. When  necessary, I was expected to become  subservient to Male to make it workable.  If it became necessary for me to supplement Male's knowledge with my wider  knowledge, then I was expected to do  so, (and suppress the frustration.)  This process is called "working together" or "co-operating" whereas it  is in actual fact, a process which  could be called office pimping.  The  lesser experienced male in a higher  level lives off the knowledge and  productivity of the female in the  lower level.  She knows; he collects.  To be "co-operative" or to "work  together" means an exchange of information, a process in which two people  "teach" and "learn" on an equal basis.  If the female refuses to partake in  this process, she is labelled "uncooperative" or "hard to get along with."  I had to understand, I was told, that  Male wanted a promotion too.  (his  second in seven years while I have not  yet achieved my first in eight. The  psychology here is that male aspirations take precedence over female  aspirations and must be fulfilled,  even at the expense of the female.)  An inquiry into how Male reached a  level higher than I in less years  elicited a "when" response.  "He was  already Level Four when he came here"  from Alberta. Were the present complications, then, due to Alberta's  policy of promoting too quickly or  "to B.C.'s practise of importing males  on two occasions from Alberta rather  than promoting its women employees?  I was never properly informed. He  understood how I felt but he could  do nothing. He was only following  order's.  Then I would have to tap the source  who gives orders.  The interview  ended with him saying to let him know  if I should resign, (I mentioned  resignation as one of my options)  because he would have to think about  replacing me. This kind of callousness toward seasoned employees is so  prevalent that it causes adversity  between the old and the new.  Quite  often, it appears that recent employees receive greater consideration.  In this way, a management can, by  seeding disunity, keep its employees  from uniting into a common cause.  ^At the end of June, I paid a visit  to the B.C. Dept. of Labour. My  rights under the Act and the procedure  for filing a complaint were explained  to me. Yes, it did seem that discrimination was taking place by the allocation of the promotion and higher  salary to Male while the duties were  mine at lower salary.  But it was  one of those cases which is extremely  difficult to prove. The Act covered  only "similar work." There were so  many outs that an employer could -  and did - use.  I found the idea of  charging the Corporation for which I  had worked for fifteen years repugnant.  The President has embarked on a go-  ahead policy, with instructions to  his underlings that the best of woman-  power is to be utilized.  If women  are interested and capable, they are  to be afforded the same opportunity  as the men. There were several Level  Fives and Sixes named.  There was a  Level Six in Montreal.  Edmonton was  promoting women to previously unattainable positions.  Things were  moving.  Of course, the women felt  the pace was too slow, but the movement had begun.  This was very encouraging to me.'ñ† I reasoned that the  Company itself did not discriminate  but that this Branch did, therefore,  I would forego the official charge  under the Act in favour of the Open  Door Policy.  This was my mistake.  Let my quote from the Handbook, Page  12, on open door policy.  "In general  terms, the policy is simply an attitude of fair and friendly consideration for each individual's viewpoint.  More specifically, it invites you to  express yourself freely to your  supervisor about your job or about  General Motors policies.  If you have  a problem, a misunderstanding or a  THE BOSS SYNDROME  This Branch, yes^ the Corporation, no.  Charging a Branch was not possible.  I was advised to wait until the new  Act was proclaimed.  It was much more  precisely worded and more of my rights  were protected in it. Meanwhile, I  would look into the Corporation's  practice of its own policies. Maybe  there was some other way than laying  an official complaint.  If I had to  give out advice at this point, I would  say: Heed the legal advice you are  given. Loyalty may win you a gold  watch but it is legality that will  win your case.  I got nowhere looking  for "another way."  In theory, no company discriminates.  In practice? All women know about  the "in practice".  GM's stated  policy is standard:  to extend opportunities to qualified applicants and  employees on an equal basis regardless  of age, race, colour, religion or  national origin.  Then it goes on to  say that hiring and employment practices and procedures implementing this  policy are the responsibility of the  employing Units.  Thus, a mother-  company lays out a theory but leaves  the practice to its children-companies.  Since HO is half a continent away  and the only link to it from staff  level is through Management, the  latter can proclaim any degree of  autonomy it wants, providing no one  complains.  Since such complaints  can reach HO only through Management, they can be effectively  blocked. Aware of their own power,  protected by a theory, Management  can announce emphatically that this  Branchhas NEVER discriminated, when  as recently as two months ago, two  women were told not to aspire to positions traditionally male because  there were "up and coming young men  who will have to be placed." Since  males are hired into a level above  the females, there are always "up  and coming young men." Women are  not fired into the upper level because they have "no experience."  Thus promotions for women are effectively blocked.  request, talk to your supervisor  about it.  If he is unable to give,  an answer which is satisfactory to  you, he will arrange for your problem  to be taken to the proper authority -  your general supervisor...your General  Manager... the General Motors Central  Office in Detroit..." the latter in  Canadian equivalent is CHO in Toronto.  Note that in theory, I am invited to  question the company's policies.  Note also that no where does it state  that if an employee is not satisfied  with the initial explanation, then  resort to intimidation, charges of  disloyalty, charges of poor work,  suggesting of resignations, accusations of ungratefulness, threats with  future promotions, obscurity of actual  facts, anything to bring that employee  around to the desired point of view.  For three weeks, I prepared notes  toward a meeting with the ABM. My  whole purpose was to present facts  that may have been overlooked which  would effect a reconsideration of  their decision to vacate Level Five,  leave it in limbo until they promoted  a male of half my experience, while  having me do the work from a subordinate level at less pay.  In trying  to second guess their thinking, I  chose two factors on which they may  rely as their justification.  They  may contend that Male has more ability  than- I.  That would be a watery contention.  I earned better than average  ratings on my semi-yearly performance  reviews.  In fact, I mused, I was one  of those whose gradings were so high  that in 1972, they were realigned at  the behest of the Western Regional  Manager. Too many highs! Eight years  of audits will show one minor exception in my work.  I knew the duties  of Level Five well.  This was recognized by the fact that I was assigned  the duties.  In the very weeks that  this was taking place, I was often  fulfilling two positions in a single  day. There were days when I fulfilled  two positions plus the switchboard.  I reasoned, it would be difficult  to argue ability convincingly so  the justification must be on "personality."  In their terms, I have a personality  problem. All outspoken women (and  some men) are deemed (and doomed)  to have personality problems in this  Branch.  If you stand up for what  you believe, you "cannot get along  with people." If you do not kow-tow  in the master-servant tradition, you  are disrespectful. A new idea must  be initiated as though someone higher  created it and you are simply agreeing  with it. You must smile all the time,  even-when frustration is blowing your  brains out. You must watch your tone  of voice, even if it is God-given.  (Mine is low, therefore "abrupt" and  insubordinate." The interesting  thing about this problem is that it  is conditional.  For example, it is  conceded that my attitude toward my  work and the company I serve is excellent; toward supervision, it  stinks.  I get along admirably with  business contacts with whom I have  to deal via telephone, but in verbal  and written communication to supervisors, I suddenly lose all diplomacy and tact. My "problem" occurs  only within the office and only  during working hours. The fact  that I have kept the same friends  for eight years within the company  does not count because that is my  own time. When I questioned a  supervisor's course of action, believing it to be wrong, I was insubordinate. Later, I was proven  to be right and in that course saved  the super from committing a costly  error. That's nice, but I was still  insubordinate for having questioned  his authority at all. When I lost  my temper at a Bunker-type supervisor to whom German employees  were "Nazis", Italians, "Wops",  less diligent workers, "Ukrainians", and women "silly bitches",  I was called to task because I embarrassed him and made it difficult  for management to deal with him by  putting him on his defensive. Nor  was his Bunkerism a liability to  promotion. He was advanced in  August. Thus, on a one to one basis, it is the female who has the  "problem."  On July 23rd, I was going to refute  these and other allegations. All my  effort was in vain because the pivotal  point concerned a mathematical formula  by which I was eliminated for this  promotion.  I was told that Level Five  can only be granted to Male because  he was in Level Four whereas I was  in Three. .Promotions can only take  place in numerical sequence regardless of experience, ability, or suitability. He assured me several times  that I had the ability but unfortunately, ability was a secondary factor  to the level standing. The reasons  behind level standings which make a  lesser experienced male eligible and  a more experienced female ineligible  is "water under the bridge." (I  counted four promotional opportunities which were bypassed - that is a  lot of water under the bridge.)  There was no consideration to.be made  because I was not Level Four. All  other discussion, such as length of  service, rights, personality, gradings,  ability, past promotional opportuni*-  ties became superfluous. This is  company policy.  I found this rigid adherence to a  mathematical formula difficult to  believe.  Utilizing such a tool, a  Branch could forever eliminate its  female employees by advancing the  men at a faster pace than the women.  This would render "individual effort"  and "merit" meaningless. Did this  company which stated that "we want  you to realize your potential and  work toward its fulfillment" and  which promised "a chance to develop  your abilities and have them recognized and rewarded" disregard everything but the level factor?  Would the company not weigh the total  merits of each employee and favour  the most able, the most deserving?  To what purpose were those excellent  ratings? How was it that the policy  was so rigid on level standing yet  lax on reclassifying duties from a  higher position to a lower position,  therefore robbing that person of  higher pay, a practice of which legislators are taking a dim view? Are  managerial decisions never subject  to retrocession? These and other  questions remained unanswered.  I  made no secret that I would seek  audience with the BM and permission  to appeal to the Western Regional  Manager in Toronto, if necessary.  Between July 23 and August 19, (day  of encounter with BM) several things  happened.  1) Male was promoted to  Five unbeknown to me.  2) I assumed  the duties of Level Five on August 1.  3) AM approached me one day with the  suggestion that a promotion to Level  Four was being considered "if you  stayed." No mention of this was made  on the 23rd.  (My reply was that promotions could not be conditional.  I'm either promotable or not promot-  able.) 4) A performance review due  in June was obviously being withheld  pending outcome.  The meeting with the BM was a ten  minute blast in which I was intimidated, not allowed to refute his  charges or make any kind of completed  statement. This is "fair and frienflly  consideration for each individual's  viewpoint"? It was incredible.  Employing his megaphonic larynx, he  repeated "you have no ability" and  "you can't get along with people" so  often that I was to hear those phrases  in my sleep for nights afterwards.  I recall making two complete statements:  "That's not true" and "Why  are you so hostile?" Mostly I was  interrupted repeatedly with another  harangue.  First he laid down a condition, not written in the Handbook:  "You've got a chip on your shoulder,  lady, and when you remove that chip  then I'll talk to you." He could  not elaborate on the chip. Then a  fact peculiar to this Branch:  "We  don't care what John L told you in  1962. We don't care what happened  yesterday. This is 1974." Yesteryear's merits were discounted because  it was to theirs advantage to do so.  Demerits were counted for the same  reason. Then came the heavy ammunition in the form of charges of disloyalty:  "Do you like working for  GMAC? Do you? DO YOU?  I'm asking  you a question. DO YOU?" The implication was that questioning a policy  was tantamount to disloyalty and subject to dismissal.  I was stunned.  Charges of poor work:  "The reason  you didn't get promoted last year or  the year before was because you have  no ability. You've been told that."  Accusation of ungratefulness after I  mentioned the reasonableness the  Company applied to my accredited  years:  "WE did this for you. You  should be grateful.  If you want,  we'll take those years back." The  (cont'd bottom page 13) FOCUS...  10  This month I'd like to focus on  Recommendations 43-50, all of which  pertain to the position of women in  Crown Corporations. Crown corporations are in very general terms  organizations owned by the government  and entrusted with a specific task or  business endeavour. Examples include  the CBC, Central Mortgage and Housing,  the National Harvest Board, the  Economic Council and many others.  The minister on the spot is the Hon.  Marc Lalonde, Minister Responsible  for the Status of Women. Write him  at the Parliament Bldgs. in Ottawa.  You can also send copies to Prime  Minister Trudeau, the MP from your  area and the Advisory Council on the  Status of Women (63 Sparks Street,  Box 1541, Station B, Ottawa).  Rec.  41 In Canada, large corporations are  controlled, for the most part, by  a small group of company directors  and officers. Membership on these  Boards provides an opportunity to  participate in high level decisionmaking .  42 Ir order to obtain some idea of  the opportunity women have to share  in this kind of decision-making,  we examined the sex composition  of the boards and executives of 55  large firms.  43 The study revealed that women were  almost entirely absent from the  board room and the executive suite.  Of the 5,889 directorships and  1,469 corporate offices selected,  41 directorships and eight offices  respectively were held by women.  Women held less than one per cent  of the top corporate positions in  Canada.  44 We would have liked to have been  able to establish whether or not  women directors and corporate  officers are more common in some  industries than in others. However,  the number of women proved to be  so small that no pattern could be  validly established. For example,  at the time of the study there was  only one woman director and no  woman corporate officer of a  chartered bank. And in finance,  trust, loan, and insurance companies there were only four women  directors out of 697 and one woman  corporate officer out of 73.  There was, nonetheless, some indication from our sample that the  fields of finance, mining and  utilities may have a disproportionate shortage of women as compared to other fields. This  probably has the greatest consequence in the field of finance  because of its influence on other  fields. On the other hand, there  are probably more women directors  and corporate officers in building  supplies, printing and publishing,  and furnishing and household goods.  45 Finance, mining and utilities are  industries in which most of the  producers are large corporations,  while industries in which female  directors and corporate officers  are somewhat less scarce are  characterized by a relatively  large number of small and medium-  sized firms.  This suggests that  there may be an inverse relationship between the size of an organization and the degree to which  women can attain corporate  leadership.  46 There is no doubt that changes  should be made in the composition  of Boards of Directors of corporations so that there will be  a more equitable sex distribution  of decision-making power in the  business world.- Neither is there  any doubt that the absence of  women at the top means that the  country is ignoring many first-  class minds and abilities. Women  who are voting shareholders in  corporations may be able to help  this situation by signifying their  support for the appointment of  knowledgeable women directors.  47 In 1969, for the first time, a  woman became a member of a stock  exchange in Canada.  It was in  the Canadian Stock Exchange that  the first step was taken and to  date ,no other stock exchanges  have followed suit. Nor have any  women worked as traders on the  floors of the exchanges.  48 Toronto, Winnipeg and Calgary  stock exchanges reported that  their by-laws prohibit the  appointment of women as members.  We were informed by the Toronto  Stock Exchange that it was then  in the process of revising its  by-laws in order to leave the way  open for the appointment of  women. Neither of the other two  exchanges gave any indication  that changes are contemplated.  The Montreal, Canadian and Vancouver stock exchanges reported  that no regulations prevent women  being named as members.  49 The by-laws of the Montreal,  Canadian and Calgary stock exchanges were reported as requiring  that traders on the floor be men.  Toronto, Vancouver and Winnipeg  stock exchanges stated their bylaws had no such restrictions.  Nonetheless, there is no woman  trader on the floor of any exchange in Canada.  50 Formal restrictions, then, cannot  be entirely blamed for the absence  of women as members or as floor  traders in stock exchanges. The  Montreal and Vancouver stock  exchanges, where no sex restrictions exist for members, stated  that they cannot recall applications for membership for women.  The Toronto and Vancouver stock  exchanges were unable to recall  any applications for women to  act as floor traders even though  women were free to serve in this  capacity.  - Roberta Schlosberg  VICTORY!  On July 31 of this year Pacific  Western Airlines laid off two  stewardesses because they were four  months pregnant.  The airline is governed by federal  labour law which states explicitly:  "No employer shall dismiss or layoff  an employee who has completed twelve  consecutive months of continuous  employment by the employer solely  because she is pregnant..."  The airline made no pretense that  the layoffs resulted from anything  other than the stewardesses'  pregnancy. The stewardesses immediately complained to the labour  standards branch of the federal  Labour Department. The airline  then tried to argue that there were  many safety reasons for the decision  and that the law about pregnancy layoffs should not apply to stewardesses.  The arguments ranged from the ridiculous - pregnant women might not be  able to get through the emergency  exits - to the more ridiculous - a  doctor's medical concern that the  airline would have to design pregnancy  uniforms.  The Labour Department took three  months to decide what to do, but finally, at the end of October, ordered  that the airline reinstate the stewardesses until they ask for maternity  leave (maternity leave is a right  under federal law) and give them back  pay from the time of the layoff.  At last a victory!  -Nancy Conrod  did you  know?  That you nay not be eligible for  B.C. Hospital Insurance coverage  regardless of how long you've  lived in this province?  For BCHIS purposes the residence  of the head of the family determines  the eligibility of the rest of the  family, and the head of the family,  according to BCHIS policy is the  HUSBAND. PERIOD. Unless you are  LEGALLY separated or divorced.  So if your husband is out of the  province you may find you and your  children without hospital insurance  coverage, even if you work even if 'Ģ  you are the sole support of yourself  and your children.  -Gene Errington GOING ON AT  THE OFFICE  YOUDONT  SSSSffr  LETTER LOBBY  Letter Lobby is now in full swing.  We have 10 members and more join  every week. Our meetings are  usually held on the first Tues.  of every month and the next one  is Nov. 5 at 8 pm in the office.  If you miss it just call Dorothy  Hoime at 936-1662 or Diana at  the office and we will send you  the basic info pack to get you  going. This month's Letter  Lobby is on abortion.  By the way, amendments to  the Citizenship Act (as per  Roberta's article in the  Oct. Kinesis) and the  Omnibus Bill on the Status  of Women have been presented  to the House of Commons.  They are Bills it  C-20 and C-16  respectively if you want to  order copies from Information  Canada to peruse on your own.  The Letter Lobby group has  already cummunicated re our  positive and negative feelings  about the Omnibus Bill.  WRITER'S WORKSHOP  The Writer's Workshop has begun  and meets every second Tuesday  in the office at 8 pm. See the  calendar at the back of KINESIS  for the Nov. meeting dates. Wev  stress again that you don't have  to be an expert to join and  you can join at any time. We  hope to get into the reading  and discussion of feminist  literature too. Call the  office if you want more info.  CARPENTRY WORKSHOP  Carpentry—please read the  following bulletin if you  like to work with wood   "I used to steal nails as a  child, at least that's what  ny father tells me.  I don't  steal nails anymore but my</  interest in wielding a hammer  and saw is undiminished.  If  you've taken a night school  woodworking course for women  perhaps you found it lacking,  as I did, in instruction of  basic wookworking techniques..  I also miss the access to lathes  and handsaws etc. when the course  is over.  I feel that a workshop  set up for women by women  would prove more satisfactory   is anyone else interested?  The shape or direction such a  workshop can take depends on  a number of factors—how many  ORIENTATION  Orientation for November   Nov 14 cancelled , Nov 28.  lawyer and ombudstaff person  Nancy Conrod will talk about  Women and the Law.  FEDERAL ACTION COMMITTEE  The Federal Action Committee  meets every Tues. evening at  7:30 in the office at 2029  West 4th Ave. They are  currently working on an  investigation of the pension  system in Canada.  If you  are interested in working on  this' project or would like  more information contact Diana  at the office, 736-3746, or  Alice James at 261-8084.  ooomic iMinu  One of my favourite children's  stories ends with the admonishment  "all good things must come to an end."  The present issue of Kinesis experiences this sadness with the departure  of Kathy Sopko from her position as  layout editor, trouble shooter, artist  supreme, staff philosopher, office  diplomat, sometime ombuds advisor  and general purveyor of good will.  Kathy has worked on Kinesis for the  better part of three years, having  performed various roles on the paper  as a staff member and on some occasions doing all of the editing, layout  and graphics herself when no one else  was available. Her talent and skills  will be greatly missed and I only  hope Kinesis can continue in the  professional heritage that she has  left for us to exemplify.  This, of course, leaves us with only  one last task: wishing Ms. Sopko much  success and happiness in her new role  as Adult Education Assistant Director  for the YWCA. I envy that organization for acquiring such a gracious  and talented person. And, the  Kinesis staff and VSW membership  thank you, Kathy, for serving us so  long and so well.  - D.E.R.  &S$2C^CW2C^  initially become involved,  availability of space, instructors,  and tools.  If a fully equipped workshop is accessible,  ithen workshops could be structured to teach elementary  techniques by working on  common projects such as a table.  Simply access to a space to  work on private projects may  be all that some women would  need. Another possibility,  if a garage became available,  is a co-operative set up to  collect an assortment of simple  tools for everyone's use.  Anyone who has some ideas or  energy, tools or space to  contribute to establishing  a workshop can call Diana at  the office, 736-3746 or me  (Janet Janovick) at 733-6862."  11  "WOMAN ALIVE" - IN COLOUR!  North Shore  Thurs 8:30 pm  Vancouver/Burnaby  Wed 10:30 p.m.  Our weekly television programme is  now well into its second series.  Topics have been Prostitution, Men  in the Women's Movement, Abortion,  Women in Suburban Areas, Rape, and  Dr. Henry Morgentaler.  The viewing audience has been expanded  as North Shore cable now carries  "Woman Alive" on Thursday at 8:30 p.m.  Within a few weeks all the programmes  will be in colour as Channel Ten is  getting new equipment.  If you live in an area where there  is a cablevision station channel  and you would like to see Woman  Alive on it, just call AND write  your local cablevision office and  suggest (rather strongly) that they  arrange with the Vancouver Cable-  vision offices to carry the show.  Apparently it can be set up quiet  easily, but they need to know that  you want to see it.  If you are interested in working on  any future programmes or have ideas,  please call Glinda Sutherland at the  office.  XMAS SHOPPING  Enclosed with this newsletter  is an order form for posters,  postcards and t-shirts. BE  WARNED, due to a strike we  were only able to get hold of  100 t-shirts. The colours  are maroon red and gold ONLY.  The sizes are also irregular,  most of the maroon reds are  MEDIUM and most of the gold  are large. You have no idea  how much trouble we are having  getting hold of t-shirts!  These t-shirts are made of a  stretchy rib cotton, are fully  washable and machine dryable.  I would venture to say that  the mediums would fit anywhere  from size 10 to 14 and the large  from size 14-16. Please bear  in mind that this is a form  fitting shirt, it is not baggy  and loose.  (The only loose  fitting ones we have are white  with gold lettering on them.)  We will be ordering more t-shirts  as soon as the wholesalers get  some stock. The situation is  first come, first served with  these ones on hand. They cost  $3.15 each (includes tax) and  please include 50c postage and  handling charge if you order by  mail. Please note second choice  also.  We are prepared to mail out posters  in mailing tubes. They cost  $1.05 (includes tax) each, please  include 50c mailing and handling  charge if you order by mail.  Postcards come with 8 in a package,  and cost $1.05 each (includes tax),  please include 15c mailing and  handling for any order under 6  packages, and 30<? mailing and  handling charge for orders over  6. I would suggest that those of  you from out of town groups send  in one large order rather than  many small ones—it will save  money for all of us.  Diana Bissell 12  north shore  news  The North Shore Women's Centre is  holding a Pub Night every second  Tuesday at North Shore neighbourhood House,225 East 2nd, North Vancouver. The Pub Night is a means  of getting in touch with women in  the community who are looking for  a place to meet other feminists.lt's  an informal and relaxing way of getting acquainted and discussing issues  which concern and interest us.  We are enthused about the B.C. Federation of Women and want to know  more about it and also to encourage  women in the community at large to  become involved, so we are having a  B.C.F.W. Night. Helga Jacobson from  the Standing Committee will speak  about the Federation at the October  29th Pub Night.  At the November 12th Pub Night we will  have a meeting and then discuss Issues  in the Municipal Elections - women in  the N.S.W.C. are from all three north  shore districts.  The N.S.W.C. is co-sponsoring,with  the Women's Studies Program, at Cap-  ilano College,a workshop called "How  To Get Elected" which will be held  at Capilano College on November 23rd.  The day will be spent discussing the  following: power in politicsjgetting  experience in politics, the mechanics  of joining a party and/or organizing  a campaign. There will be women representing all levels of the government  present to speak and lead groups.  All these activities provide an opportunity for us in the N.S.W.C. to increase our awareness individually and  collectively. For more information  call 926-2755.  -Andrea Kiss  people's law  VANCOUVER PEOPLE'S LAW SCHOOL  More From the Fall Schedule  All courses and materials are  free of charge.  Please pre-register by telephoning  681-7532 from 9:30 to 4:30 p.m.  weekdays.  CIVIL LIBERTIES  ywca  offers...  SPECIAL WORKSHOPS  Sensory Awakening Weekend  A quiet and relaxed workshop giving  time to tune into ourselves through  our body senses. Learn more about  how we function, how we allow our  energies to flow or block them, how  we tense or relax our bodies. Experiment with allowing fuller body  movement and emotion expression.  Discover possibilities of enjoyment  through our body senses.  Leader - Anne Mills  Friday 7-10 p.m. November 15  Saturday 10 a.m.-4 p.m. November 16  Sunday 10 a.m.-4 p.m. November 17  Fee - $30  Limited to 18 participants. Co-ed.  Introduction to Condominiums and  Condominium Living  A one day seminar about the social,  legal and management aspects of  condominium living today.  Special Speaker - Jean-Pierre Daen  (Stratco Management Ltd.) with Ms.  Connie Donald (Cornwall Realty)  Saturday, November 2 and possibly  again at a later date.  for WOMEN only  Mother's Take-A-Break (Drop-In)  Crafts, cooking, discussion,etc.  Babysitting is free.  Wednesday- 1:30-3:30 p.m.  Fee- 75C per session.  The Law and Women  A six week series on the laws that  most affect women.  Leader- Rob Fenton, lawyer  Monday 5:30-7 p.m.;starts October 28  for six weeks.  Fee- $18  Human Relations - Communications  Group for Women  This is a workshop designed for  women who are seeking a clearer  understanding of communication  skills; a greater awareness and  understanding of the implications  of roles and learning how to work  in groups.  Leaders - Eileen Hendry and Helen  Stolte,M.A.  Thursdays 7:30-9:30 p.m.£starts October 31 for six weeks.  Fee- $20  November 18,19,20 at Vancouver  Main Library Auditorium, 750  Burrard St, Vancouver, 7:30-9:30p.m.  Instructors-Michael Bolton-lawyer,  Bill Black - law professor  Outline - Discussion of new Human  Rights Code, Canadian Bill of Rights,  freedom of speech and assembly; discrimination i.e. job, housing,sex,etc.  JURISPRUDENCE AND POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY  November 25,26,27 at 312 Main St.-  Couirt Room #2, 7:30 to 9:30 p.m.  Instructors - Mike Battersby - philosophy professor and Steve Wexler -  law professor  Outline - Discussion will focus on  the extensive expansion of administrative law which has had the effect  of taking law outside the courts and  placing it in the hands of the administrators. This is a problem because  of the enormous discretion accorded  administrators and the frequent lack  of appeal.  WOMEN AND THE LAW  December 2,3 ,4 at the B.C. Labour  Federation, Board Room, 517 East  Broadway, Vancouver, 7:30 to 9:30  Instructor - Penny Bain - lawyer  Outline - Marriage law, matrimonial  property, succession, custody, income  tax,credit,pensions,U.I.C.,child care.  IWY Secretariat Newsletter  The International Women's Year  Secretariat has commenced publication of a newsletter containing  information on plans and programs  for the year. To be placed on the  mailing list write to International  Women's Year Secretariat, Privy  Council Office, East Block. Parliament Buildings, Ottawa K1A 0A3.  The logo has been adopted as the  federal government's symbol for  International Women's Year.  new   west  LUNCHTIME LEARNERS  One of the major social issues of  our times is the questioning and  re-definition of the traditional  roles of women. This expresses  itself in ,a variety of ways as men  and women explore the cultural,  political, and social bases which  shape and direct women's lives.  Is a women's place in the home?  What about women at work? The  children, what will happen to them?  This Wednesday noon-hour series,  co-sponsored by Douglas College  and the New Westminster Public  Library is designed for persons  wishing to attend during the lunch  hour. The series is FREE and is  open to women and men.  October 23 - WHAT IT'S ALL ABOUT,  an overview of changing roles and  society and how it affects us.  Lynda Turner, Douglas College.  October 30 - WAS IT BETTER IN  GRANNY'S TIME?, the current  nostalgia mood suggests a historical look at the role of women.  Jacqueline Gresko, Douglas College.  November 6 - THE CONTEMPORARY  FAMILY, a discussion of the  conflicts and contradictions  which change introduces into  family and personal life. Dr.  Clare Buckland, Family Place.  NOVEMBER 13 - GROWING UP HUMAN, a  look at how children learn sex  and other roles, values and  patterns—old and new. Cindy  Schreck, Van. Community College.  NOVEMBER 20 - WHAT ABOUT THE MEN?,  some effects the women's movement  is having on male/female relationships. Dr. Leonard Millis, Douglas  College.  NOVEMBER 27 - WOMEN AND THE LAW,  focus on legal aspects of women  today. Have we really come a long  way—or a short way? Nancy Conrod,  Vancouver Status of Women.  AUDITORIUM, NEW WESTMINSTER PUBLIC  LIBRARY, 716 6th Avenue, New West.  Wednesdays, Oct 23 - Nov 27,  12:10 to 12:50 p.m. No charge,  coffee provided. 13  book  BOOK ON YUKON WOMEN  The Yukon Status of Women Council  have been working over the summer  on a grant from the Secretary of  State researching a book to be entitled Yukon Women.  It will feature  90 women from the Yukon Territory  and should be ready for the printers  in May. Watch for it!  Last month we published a list  of feminist films dealing with  women in the arts from the bibliography composed bynTerry McNeny.  This month we are listing the films  that deal with women and family.  These films are available for rental to interested groups.  If you  wish further information about the  specific films or are interested in  ordering, please contact the distributor listed.  FILMS  TITLE OF FILM  DIRECTOR(S)  DISTRIBUTOR(S)  COST  RJNNING TIME  SUBJECT   I  Women Who Have  Had An Abortion  Martha Stuart  (producer)  Impact  $ 40  29 min. col.  Dialogue with\  women        ^  Abortion and  the Law  CBS News  Special  ITE  Predominantly male  views of abortion  Margaret Sanger  Breakfast Dance  Mother To Be  Liane Brandon  Anne Wheeler  New Haven  Women's Film  6 min.  col.  23 min.  col.  75 min. b/w  women  and  family  This is No Time  For Romance  Childcare: People's  Liberation  It Happens to Us  19 min. b/w  14 min. b/w  28 min. col.  Amalie R.  Rothschild  ITE, Toronto  New Day $ 30  Can Film-makers  30 rain. col.  Sanger's struggle  to introduce family  planning to the States  housewife boredom  woman leaves husband-  encounters various  problems  One question raised in this  documentary is 'Can a woman  achieve her fullest self-  realization while at the  same time giving herself to  role of mother and wife?  Some footage from Czechoslovakia concerning natural  childbirth in a hospital and  and state nursery care for  children of working mothers.  Portrayal of young woman left  alone to cope with family  problems. Laurette is a  young secretary with a  daughter, and is separated  from her husband. Her  thoughts, feelings and  fears are illustrated.  Mrs. Case is a deserted  mother on welfare bringing  up her five children alone  in a big city. The problems  of a single parent on welfare  are clearly shown.  Woman reflects on her life  and marriage. Is it enough?  She fantasizes Qf what else  she might have made of  herself.  Demonstrates how mothers  can tie each other down  Documentary: abortion  THE BOSS SYNDROME CONT'D  delusion of grandeur was getting thick  b& claiming that he could reverse a  decision made by Executive Office.  Charges of sheer stupidity: "How  many times do you have to be told  you have no ability and can't get  along with people." He could not,  however, name a name. "It's in  your file," resorting to the boog-  eyman tactic. Threats using future  promotions:  "Do you want to be considered for the next promotion we  pass around or don't you?"  The powers of the manager are so  awesome that he can negate in ten  minutes a record which took fifteen years to build. When that  power is abused, the result is  truly horrifying. This BM decreed that I had no ability Jlost  it between the 23rd of July and  19th of August) in spite of facts  to the contrary. He denied discrimination therefore there was none.  ie  closed the whole issue by promote  tng Male to Five and blocking the  promotion by occupation. He answered the rigidity versus laxity  luestion by directing the AM to  switch positions. Now I would be  inly one level.away from where I  should be. AS I took my leave, I  isked permission and was denied.  'Youfre not writing letters to  myone, lady." Five minutes af-  :er I was told that I had no ability, the AM tactfully hinted that  ay co-operation would be needed for  :he transition. Just as tactfully,  [ refused. He who has ability,  loes. Thatrs where things stand.  After two nights and days without a  wink of sleep, I went on Sick Leave  for extreme tension aggravated by  fatigue and insomnia. But a friend  of mine stated it better. "You are  suffering from the Bos Syndrome."  Nadia Delmore c~  Clip and Send  MEDIA ACTION GROUP  Clip and Send  s: Editor  Jackie Pleasant:  The Enterprise  936 Brunette  Coquitlam, B.C.  Dear Editor,  L°mT t0r  ^6 enclosed ^aff photo  by Mickey Carlton which appeared in  your paper Sept. 25, 1974. More and  more women are offended by characterizations which portray women as  tempting dishes" and "tantalizing  wSSS rtS  *escribed ^ your staff  writer. The "steak & legs" nude  luncheon ad for the Port Moody Inn  depicts women as meat to be bought.  Such sexist attitudes have no place  in good journalism.  Sincerely,  An additional letter may be sent to  Dave LeRoux  Port Moody Inn "Cabaret"  3224 Saint Johns  Port Moody, B.C.  You're invited  subscribe!  NAME  PHONE (home)  (work)  OCCUPATION,  MEMBERSHIP DONATION  CORPORATE MEMBERSHIP $  RENEWAL     HEW MEMBER  I wish to become a member  I wish only to receive KINESIS   ""  In determining your donation we ask  position end the fact thet KINESIS  cost, approximately $3.00 per person  «L21f to print and ««ii.  WNESIS is published monthly by th.  Vancouver Status of Women, its  «««*«ig position of women in society.  specificall? TtlHl of no^lleet  the policy of Status of Somen  PUBLICATION DATE-   rnh.  la   ,  of each month last Week  COPY DEADLINE:   The 1st  "r ^  previous month. * °f the  SUBSCRIPTIONS:    KINEST* <  EDITORIAL COMMITTFP-   n-  J? Lazenby,  Bobbie pa?i^ &als>  Giaoomelli    Vivl»rL n^^.Eloah  30P.0,  Ma^J7-oHotZ,  Kathv  Kce^  B-sen,  aene $*£$*;  *££  -^^t^^f-  —  LAYOUT:   Jo Lazenby,   Janet  Janovxck,  Monica Mui,  Margie  ^olcloug^Diana Raynor       8  SUBMISSIONS:    KINESIS welcomes submissions from members and will  consider those from non-^embers.  ti .J!!?^!Sl0ttS' ^^ing letters  to the editorial committee, mist  b« accompanied by the writer's  «■■« jwd address.    Pseudonyms  vill be used where requested,  where necesssr. the editorial com*  •ittee will edit for brevity; *T  clarity and taste.  CCWRESPONOENCE:    Send to:    Vancouver  ftetus of Women, 2029 W. 4th Ave/  3746°"** 9* M"   ^•J*00*5 **+ mail  Dear Sisters,  I read with great interest the October  issue of Kinesis, especially, "Confessions of a Defeated Candidate."  I agree that it is vital for women  to have power where it counts; at the  political level. Ms. Wallace writes  that, "successful women candidates...  admitted that they had been deeply  hurt by the fact that the traditional  women's groups to which they belonged  had refused to support them in their  campaigns...'our organization must  remain non-partisan' was the typical  excuse...at that time we resolved  that we would never betray women in  this fashion".  -Yet, VSW is still non-partisan, and  by being so, I believe are still  paying "lip service" to feminist  candidates.  If the members of VSW  realize the importance of feminist  political power, the organization  should take a firm stand and publicly  support women candidates who have  the same goals as VSW; that of total  equality for women.  By the same  token VSW should NOT endorse women  candidates who show that they are  opposed to the women's liberation  movement, and if elected would only  perpetuate the system of male domination and priorities.  If VSW holds all candidates meetings  for women, I feel that you should;  after taking account of the political  stands of the candidates on the  women's movement; publicly select  and endorse a list of candidates who  are women, and then actively work  for them.  If we want change, we have to reject  the half-hearted commitment to  feminist power by being non-partisan.  If the candidates belong to one party,  support that party; if not, pick a  slate of women- candidates and endorse  them.  Just think of the confidence  it would give women candidates who  are feminists, if they knew they  could count on the support and backing of the women's groups in B.C.  Maybe it would encourage other women  to run for political office.  Either we support our sisters in  every way, and fight to get them  elected, or else ignore our talk of  solidarity and commitment to the  women's movement.  Yours truly,  Libby Davies  Dear Diane,  Thank you for your letter and all  the information. I haven't had time  to digest all of it yet, but would  like to respond to the questionnaire  on Political Involvement.  I think it is sufficient to feature  all women candidates in the Kinesis  and from there people who are interested in helping can be informed and  contact the candidate of their choice.  I would be interested in knowing who  the male candidates are that support  women's issues.  I would object to your making the  membership available to anyone for  the reasons Gene Errington gave in  October Kinesis.,  I have just begun to read Kinesis and  am very impressed, the articles are  interesting and informative. As for  the programmes being timely...yes,  indeed!  I am becoming more and more  aware of happenings around me and  getting very angry and gradually  realizing that I'd like to do something about what is making me angry.  Through a friend I discovered Kinesis  and your letter writing committee -  and that's the step I'm now making.  Enclosed please find a donation for  my NEW membership.  Sincerely,  Glennie MacKenzie  Dear Status of Women,  Here is my subscription and donation.  Keep up the good work. I think your  workshops sound terrific!  By the way, I can't make the meetings  but would be prepared to write letters  for the letter writing group (sporadically) if you'll let me know what's  wanted.  Also I approve of not releasing our  mailing list to political or any  groups - although I wouldn't have  minded personally I think.  Yours very warmly,  Angela Page  VSW:  Enclosed is my cheque for renewal of  the Newsletter, an excellent information paper.  Thank you for doing  the enormous amount of work that is  involved in a publication of this  kind - we appreciate you.  15  VSW EXECUTIVE MEETING  [The following is a summary of the  Winutes of the VSW Executive Meeting  held September 25,1974.  Glinda Sutherland and Kathy Sopkp  reported progress on the grant proposal for an audio-visual circulation library which would make it possible to get information to schools  and women's groups in outlying areas.  Glinda Sutherland and Nadine Allen  are preparing a proposal for an  Outreach grant . This would enable  VSW to take the ombuds service to  Communities by having someone from  VSW available at community centres  or other information centres for a  half or full day, weekly or bimonthly. These people could provide  information about the kinds of things  ombuds service can do and help arrange  orientation meetings and lectures.  Karen Richardson reported that she  and Carol Gordon were about 3/4 of  the way through their Western Canadian Women's News Service.(WCWN) project.  The purpeee of the project is to in-  communication between women and government, universities, media,etc.Carol  has been meeting with women's group-,  news editors,industrial relations  personel,government departments,human  resources and education groups all  over the province setting up a  communications network. The project  has yet to be evaluated and aareport  made to the Secretary of State.  Roberta Schlosbeeg,president, repor—  ed that a letter has been sent to  the provincial government protesting  the appointment of a male, Marc  Eliesen, as International Women's  Year '75 representative. If a positive response is not received it  was decided to start a campaign in  newspapers,etc.  A decision was made to sponsor a  meeting of all women candidates for  the up-coming civic election and to  feature them in Kinesis.  Kathy Sopko is leaving the VSW office  to take a position with the YWCA as  Assistant Director of Adult Education.  Jo Lazenby was appointed to replace  her as' Newsletter Co-ordinator.  A statement of support for the Committee to Defend Dr. Morgentaler was  authorized. 16  "-t&^V^K   'J  ^"dmlfet  ^RNiL  ***. i       Alt    OVER      1  ■i   THE   WORLD    1  lift'  000  &^J3S&h'-\  I      sr %.;:  ^M   CR0W1NC11P     I  BB^MK,-  order  now !  Photos courtesy of Kits Cameras  Models courtesy of VSW Office  Order form for T-shirts, posters  and postcards in this issue.  novemben  CALENDAR OF EVENTS  NOVEMBER 4 - COMMUNICATION SKILLS  WORKSHOP, 7:30 OFFICE  NOVEMBER 5 - LETTER LOBBY, 8 PM  WRITER'S WORKSHOP 8 PM  FEDERAL ACTION,7:30 PM  OFFICE  NOVEMBER 6 - NEWSLETTER MEETING,  7:30 OFFICE.  - WOMAN ALIVE, 10:30 PM  CABLE 10 TV, "EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION".  NOVEMBER 12- FEDERAL ACTION 7:30 PM  MEDIA ACTION 7:30 PM  OFFICE  NOVEMBER 13- WOMAN ALIVE, 10:30 PM  CABLE 10 TV, "IMMIGRANT  WOMEN IN THE LABOR FORCE"  NOVEMBER 14- ALL-WOMEN CANDIDATE  MEETING FOR CIVIC  ELECTION.  7:30 PM  VAN. PUBLIC LIBRARY  3rd FLOOR AUDITORIUM.  SPONSORED BY VAN. STATUS  Of WOMEN.  - ORIENTATION CANCELLED.  NOVEMBER 18- COMMUNICATION SKILLS,  7:30 PM OFFICE.  NOVEMBER 19- FEDERAL ACTION 7:30 PM  WRITER'S WORKSHOP 8 PM  OFFICE  NOVEMBER 20- WOMAN ALIVE, 10:30 PM  CABLE 10 TV.  NOVEMBER 25- COMMUNICATION SKILLS,  7:30 PM OFFICE.  NOVEMBER 26- FEDERAL ACTION, 7:30 PM  OFFICE.  NOVEMBER 26 —MEDIA ACTION  7:30 PM OFFICE  NOVEMBER 27- WOMAN ALIVE, 10:30 PM,  CABLE 10 TV.  NOVEMBER 28- ORIENTATION MEETING.  8 PM OFFICE.  OMBUDSPERSON  NANCY CONROD on "WOMEN  AND THE LAW".