 NOVEMBER 1993  Special Collections ^snai  Post-elections coverage page 3  CMPA $2.25  , News About Women That's Mot In The Dailies  ©  WM\1  ire Every v/»ere KINESIS  #301-1720 Grant Street  Vancouver, BC V5L 2Y6  Tel: (604)255-5499  Fax:(604)255-5511  Kinesis welcomes volunteers to work on  all aspects of the paper. Our next  Writers' Meeting isNov2 for the  November issue at 7 pm at Kinesis. All  women welcome even if you don't have  experience.  Kinesis is published ten times a year by  the Vancouver Status of Women Its  objectives are to be a non-sectarian  feminist voice for women and to work  actively for social change, specifically  combatting sexism, racism,classism,  homophobia, ableism, and imperialism.  Views expressed in Kinesis are those of  the writer and do not necessarily reflect  VSW policy. All unsigned material is the  responsibility of the Kinesis Editorial  EDITORIAL BOARD  Shannon e. Ash, Lissa Geller, Agnes  Huang, Fatima Jaffer, Anne Jew, Faith  Jones, Sur Mehat, Manisha Singh  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE  Karmen Koh, Sigrid Tarampi, Brenda  Wong, Anita Fast, Lisa Sturgess,  Fatima Jaffer, Juline Macdonnell,  Meegan Graham, Agnes Huang,  Kathleen Mullen, Gladys We, Faith  Jones, Miche Hill, Carol Pinnock, Sham  Sher Pannun  Advertising: Cynthia Low  Circulation:Cat L'Hirondelle, Jennifer  Johnstone, Tory Johnstone  Distribution: Yee Jim  Production Co-ordinator: Anne Jew  Typesetter: Sur Mehat  FRONT COVER  Graphic by Linda Kosarin  with text by Mary McAlister  PRESS DATE  October 26, 1993  SUBSCRIPTIONS  lndividual:$20 per year (+$1.40 GST)  or what you can afford  Institutions/Groups:  $45 per year (+$3.15 GST)  VSW Membership (includes 1 year  Kinesis subscription):  $30 per year (+$1.40 GST)  SUBMISSIONS  Women and girls are welcome to make  submissions. We reserve the right to  edit and submission does not guarantee  publication. If possible, submissions  should be typed, double spaced and  must be signed and include an address,  telephone number and SASE. Kinesis  does not accept poetry or fiction.  Editorial guidelines are available upon  request.  DEADLINES  All submissions must be received in the  month preceding publication. Note: Jul/  Aug and Dec/Jan are double issues.  Features and reviews: 10th  News: 15th  Letters and Bulletin Board: 18th  Display advertising  (camera ready): 18th  (design required): 16th  Kinesis is produced on a Warner  Doppler PC using Wordperfect 5.1,  PageMaker 4.0 and an NEC laser  printer. Camera work by The Peak and  Midtown Graphics. Printing by Web  Press Graphics.  Kinesis is indexed in the Canadian  Women's Periodicals Index,  the Alternative Press Index and is a.  member of the Canadian Magazine  PublishersAssociatjon.  News  Post election coverage 3  by Jackie Brown  Press Gang Printers shuts its doors 4  by Agnes Huang  BC&Y;Seven women's centres get funding 5  by Fatima Jaffer  Features  Cross-country post elections commentary 8  as told to Nancy Pollack  Interview with NAC's Sunera Thobani 9  as told to Fatima Jaffer  Royal Commission's report on NRTs 10     Life after October 25  by Judy Morrison and Christine Massey  Take Back the Night :... 11  by Zeenat F. Aman  Centrespread  Women of colour on the backlash 13  by Smita Patil, Agnes Huang, Lynne Wanyeki  Arts  Film Review of The Burning Season 15  by Yasmin Jiwani  Reviews of Vancouver International Film Festival 16  compiled by Anne Jew  Review of Lasf Chance Cafe and Other Stories 18  by Ria Bleumer  Reviews of Out on Main Street 19  by Sharon Lewis and Lezlie Lee Kam  Regulars  As Kinesis goes to Press 2  Inside Kinesis 2  Movement Matters 6  by Anita Fast  What's News 7  by Mariam Bouchoutrouch and Lissa Geller  Letters 20  Bulletin Board 21  by Meegan Graham and Sigrid Tarampi  Taking back the night in record numbers 11  ji  The backlash and women of colour  Lave no exp  iall   255*54  ¬ß-f  Workshop with Winnifred  Add paste-up, general layout  and design to your roster of  skills this fall in the production  room with a view at Kinesisl  Call 254-8691  Film fest reviews.  .16  1  NOVEMBER 1993 It's been a long, long, lo-o-ng election month! The suspense, the depression, the fears,  the waiting...is over! We now know where we stand. Sort of... The results are in and we've  gotourselvesa one-party state. The liberals...oops, that's a capital L...havethemajority. We  were putting the paper together on election night and were so sick of the hype, we almost  forgot to switch on the talking-heads election coverage on TV when an ex-Kinesis-ite  expatriate Vancouverite in Toronto called to tell us what was happening—how the Liberals  were devouring Ontario (98 of 99 seats), how the Bloc was devouring Quebec (54 of... We  turned on the TV as soon as the polls closed in BC and heard how the Reform was devouring  the West... [For details, page 3, and for reactions page 8].  In some ways, it's actually a relief to see the Liberals take the majority. And the Bloc (54  seats) form the official opposition. Anything, rather than a Liberal-minority Reform balance-  of-power nightmare. We'll admit it, Reform terrifies us... they've been quite vocal about  their commitment to the destruction of equality-seeking groups/peoples...Then again, the  Bloc's disregard of Aboriginal peoples in Quebec must be equally frightening to some in  Quebec right now...  Then there's the NINE-seats-for-the-NDP catastrophe (just heard about the ninth  seat): NDPers Betty Baxter (Van Ctr) ran fourth, Winnie Ng (Toronto Trin-Spad) ran second  Isee last issue for Ng interview], Margeret Mitchell (Van East) ran second, Dawn Black (New  West) ran 3rd—Dawn Black, former NDP women'scritic lost to Reform! Audrey MacLaughlin  kept her Yukon seat! The NDP are no longer an official party in the House...unless Chretien's  government allows them to keep their party status...?  Once the election dust (mud) clears, we'll be able to get on with...wait a minute. Did we  forgot someone, something...something we can barely see for red dust ...it's...it's...Kim  Campbell! Well, Campbell's certainly taken the fall for Mulroney...for herself too...for her  recent cabinet shuffle alone, for starters—the one where immigration got moved to the  ministry of public security, and secstate women's programs got swallowed up into a new  mega-ministry of human resources and labour. We're going to track down that story for  next issue...  Back to the Tories: they got wiped and we're feeling good about something at least. Two  seats for the Tories! Someone heard from someone that Barb Byers of the Saskatchewan  Federation of Labour says the only good thing to come out of this election is that the Tories  have finally achieved gender parity in the House of Commons! One woman, one man...get  it? Yeah, guess they did something right...?!  It's going to take a while for us to find out what's what where and why—we promise  you more depth, more analysis, more (but not too much more) on the elections in the next  issue...in case you find any typos in the stories, we had less than 24 hours in which to do the  post-election coverage...  We're not done yet with elections in Vancouver though. Lest you forget, the municipal  elections are on November 20 and we may be looking at the first woman mayor of  Vancouver ever—Libby Davis, long-time supporters of women's and community groups/  ^Thanks  Our thanks to Vancouver Status of Women members who support us year 'round with  memberships and donations. Our appreciation to the following supporters who became  members, renewed their memberships or donated to VSW in October:  Carol Anderson • Lois Eileen Arber • Nancy Douglas-Webb • Lynda Griffiths • Sandy  Howell • Angela Kelly • Barbara LeBrasseur • Karen Mahoney • Mary Moore • Chris  Morrissey • Jennifer Russell • Carolyn Schettler • Lisa Sturgess • Frances Suski  We would also like to say a special thank you to those who have responded to our fall  appeal and whose support is so vital in this time of government cutbacks. VSW is about halfway to our goal for donations this year and the support of individual donors remains crucial  to VSW:  Laureen Anderson • Jean Bennett • Priscilla Boucher • Jennifer Bradley • Kate Braid •  Ruth Bullock • Betty-Ann Buss • Janet Calder • Rita Chudnovsky • Karen Egger • Anita  Fortney • Jeanette Frost • Pat Fuller • Deborah Gibson • Cindy Holmes • Leslie Kenny  • Inger Kronseth • Heather Leighton • M.K. Louis • Judith Lynne * Lynne MacFarlan •  Sandra Mayo • Christine McDowell • Heather McLean • Patricia McNeill • Diane Mercy  • Patricia Murray • Margaret Norman • Susan Penfold • Catherine Revell • Hulda  Roddan • M. Scarlett • Anita Skihar • Helen Sonthoff • Veronica Strong-Boag • Johanna  Te Boekhorst • Helen Walter • Susan Wendell  And, thank you, to the volunteers who helped stuff, seal and stamp all the letters in  October:  Carol • Cat • Jennifer R. • Karen • Lisa • Miche • Shamsher • Roisin  Next writers'  meeting  November 2 @ 7 pm  #301-1720 Grant  255-5499  issues! She's not alone on the COPE slate—feminists Frances Wasserlein and Sadie Kuehn  are on it too. We'll bring you more on that too next issue...  Well, it's true! We read it in The Globe and Mail. A survey of 500 feminists reveals that  "feminists wear makeup" too! And more so than non-feminist women. And we like to shop  too! But...gee, they don't say anything about sleeping or eating, i.e. do feminists sleep? Do  we eat? Well, if we shop, we probably can't afford to eat... That wasn't in the survey.  By the way, the Victoria-based Feminists for Life organization (billing themselves as  pro-woman pro-life) just opened up a branch in Vancouver. They're probably thrilled to hear  that Reform took BC. These are very scary women—they borrow the rhetoric of the women's  movement and uses it to discredit "the early feminists" who still believe in a woman's right  to choose?!!  Back to The Globe and Mail...Not only did this national newspaper openly "campaign"  for the Reform Party in editorials, they had the nerve to ignore (not report) that fabulous  spoof of The Globe called The Glib and Stale...giving us the goods on NAFTA and its many-  faceted ways in which it solidifies the control of transnational corporations on global (in this  case, Canada the USand Mexico) economies.. The Glib and Stale was wrapped over Globes the  country over...the ones in dispensing boxes. So if you have a sub to The Globe, ...well, shame  on you...hope you get Kinesis too, just to balance things out a bit...anyway, if you have a sub  you probably missed out on The Glib. However, word has it, the Glib was so popular that  they reprinted a million copies, so it's still out there...it's worth a read. There's still time to  stop NAFTA...the Liberals aren't going to be easy to turn around on this one, but with  enough pressure, they just might....  The thing about the Liberals getting in (we keep going on about the elections, don't we?)  is that they aren't the Tories. Sure they're on the right of the political spectrum but so is almost  everybody these days (nationally speaking, not on the ground)...We think we're going to  have some interesting days ahead of us...  The Royal Commission on New Reproductive Technologies will be making its final  report on November \5...[read our story on page 10]...maybe... The latest in the mainstream  newspapers is that US geneticists can now clone human embryos, i.e. split them into twins  and store one up "for later"... new reproductive technologies and eugenics are a scarier and  scarier reality that needs to be addressed...and women are organizing to address the Royal  Commission's report (incidentally, the chair of the commission is a geneticist herself...!!!)  when it gets released this month. We'll bring you more...  Speaking of genetics, another assault genetically speaking is that on seeds and plants...a  United Nations report last mor^h warns that unless urgent action is taken to preserve species  of plants, the world's food crisis will accelarate..."biodiversity" (basically means the natural  diversity of seeds) is essential. Genetically uniform seeds are being used in the growing of  wheat, rice, maize and potatoes...natural seeds (there can be tens of thousands of naturally  diverse seeds for rice, for example) are being lost. ...Aboriginal women in particular are  speaking out and organizing around this...there may be an article with more (accurate)  details in next month's special issue on Aboriginal women...  There are some good things happening...like the funding of seven new women's groups  in the province [read page 5], which will probably lead to several new facilities being  opened. ..one of them, the SAWAN centre, will be the first South Asian women's centre in BC  ever! This is quite a landmark—there has been a South Asian community in BC for over a  hundred years now. ..and South Asian women's groups have operated in the community for  many many years without funding...This is truly a first.  Hey, we just checked our mail, and guess what we found out....The PEI rape and sexual  assault centre is celebrating its tenth anniversary this year. Congrats. We're really into  anniversaries these days...maybe 'cos Kinesis is celebrating our 20th anniversary...actually  the next issue will be the 200th time that Kinesis goes to press...!  As always, here's a seasonal weather  update: it's raining in Vancouver but it's  sunny at Kinesis.  We are happy to welcome—and welcome back:  Kathleen Mullen who, as we speak, is  hard at work developing a marketing/distribution plan designed to launch Kinesis  into new and exciting frontiers. Kathleen has  been hired on a Section 25 grant and will be  with us until January. Among other things,  Kathleen will be helping us design a readership survey of Kinesis readers, which we'll  be running in our next issue. We want to  know what you think of its content, layout,  where you find Kinesis, where you don't and  what you think about it and much much  more. As always, your feedback is appreciated and helps us realize the potential of the  paper.  The Kinesis Editorial Board has grown  by two and diminished by one since last  month. Long-time contributor to Kinesis and  "friend-of-the Ed Board," Manisha Singh is  now a member of our board, and has plans  to take us into unchartered global territory.  Agnes Huang returns after a six-month leave  of absence (she was not, however, absent  from the pages of Kinesis). Ed Board member  Kathleen Oliver has left the Ed Board temporarily to wrangle two full-time festival jobs.  We'd also like to welcome our new  writers this time around: Judy Morrison,  Christine Massey, Sharon Lewis and Lezlie  Lee Kam.  This production we were thwarted by  our own darn computer. Yes, it was virused.  So anyone out there who's inserted one of  their disks in our (ahem) drives, please check  it. Chances are it has a virus as well. We now  have a virus detector if you want to check it  here.  New volunteer this issue—Anita Fast!  A big thanks to all the people we called  in a panic—Stewart Morris and Ed Progar—  and a big, big thanks to Gladys We and Eric  Yang for helping us back into action.  There's a new, improved sub drive this  issue...starting this very minute...and there's  a prize involved! Anyone who gives three  gift subscriptions to Kinesis before January  30 can get her very own 1994 Everywoman's  Almanac. This perfect-bound edition is  packed with useful information and looks  oh-so-good next to your copy of Kittesisl See  our back cover for details—unfortunately,  we couldn't afford the printing costs to bring  it to you in colour, but take our word for it,  it's colourful!  Another reminder: our next issue features the Indigenous Women's Issues supplement compiled by guest-editer Viola  Thomas. It's shapingup tobeoneof the most  exciting projects we've ever been involved  in...we won't give away anything. This is a  Wait and See issue!  One more thing...our 20th anniversary  is still coming up next year so stay tuned for  NOVEMBER 1993 News  Post-election round up:  Living with the Liberals  by Jackie Brown  In a massive Liberal sweep that put  more Grits into the house of commons than  the "Trudeaumania" tizzy of 1968, Canadians have said No to the neo-conservative  agenda of the Tories and Yes to a party that  could mean at least some improvements for  women.  Compared to the regressive, deficit-reduction based policies of the progressive  conservatives, new Prime Minister Jean  Chretien has promised to retain funding for  women's advocacy organizations and frontline agencies dealing with violence against  women and other issues. Chretien has also  said he will remove federal immigration  from the Public Security portfolio~a move  that, if carried through, could mean positive  changes for immigrants overall and, particularly, immigrant women and children.  It remains to be seen if the Liberals are  more than just talk. As National Action Committee on the Status of Women president  Sunera Thobani points out, women will have  to lobby hard to make sure their voices are  heard above the regressive agenda of the  Reform Party-now a considerable force in  the House of Commons.  In the end, it was a romp for the Liberals, who won 178 ridings (including six in  BC) compared to 54 for the Bloc Quebecois-  -the official Opposition Party, and 52 for  Preston Manning's Reform Party (including  24 in BC). The NDP was trounced, taking  just eight seats (two in BC) and losing its  official party status in the House of Commons (12 seats is the minimum).  For the Tories, election '93 was a laugher.  The party won just two ridings and as such,  also lost its official standing in the House.  Not since 1945 and McKenzie King, has a  Canadian prime minister lost an election  and their own riding. So it was for Kim  Campbell, who fell in Vancouver Centre to  Liberal Hedy Fry. NDP Candida te Betty Baxter  placed a disappointing fourth behind Reformer Ian Isbister.  While NDP leader Audrey McLaughlin  managed to hang on in the Yukon, gone are  some strong NDP advoca tes for women from  BC, including Vancouver East's Margaret  Mitchell, who lost to Liberal unknown Anna  Terrana. Mitchell is a long time supporter of  women's, workers' and immigrants' rights.  Also not returning to Ottawa is Dawn Black,  who fought hard for abortion and other  women's rights, but lost in New Westmin-  ster-Burnaby to Reform candidate Paul  Forseth.  Joy Langan (Mission-Coquitlam) and  Lynn Hunter (Saanich-Gulf Islands), who  also lobbied strongly on behalf of women,  are gone. Burnaby's Svend Robinson, and  Nelson Riis of Kamloops, were the only  NDP survivors in BC.  On the other hand, Preston Manning's  Reform party did very well, missing out on  official opposition status by just two seats. It  appears that Manning's BC victories may  have in part been due to NDP supporters  voting Liberal.  So, now that we have a Liberal majority,  what's in store for the women of Canada?  NAC's Thobani is, for now, feeling quite  positive about the outcome, which she  says is a "resounding rejection of the  neoconservative agenda" which was bad for  women and just about everyone else.  "People did not buy into the agenda of  destroying social programs and eroding social justice in the name of deficit reduction,"  says Thobani. "And our issues have at least  been addressed by the Liberals. They have  said they will fund advocacy groups, and  Madeleine Parent on the Bloc Quebecois  by Dolores Fitzgerald  lio. "In Ont  that won ai  That has m.  NAC v  Madeleine Parent, a long time Quebecoise feminist and labour activist, believes Quebec's rejection of the Tories and its strong endorsement of Luci en Bouchard's Bloc Quebecois  (BQ) could mean that the women's and progressive movements in Quebec "will havea real  voice in parliament."  Parent says that prior to the election, the Quebec women's movement mounted a nonpartisan coalition campaign to press all parties, especially the BQ, to support women's issues  and social programs. Post-election, Pa rent says she is hopeful that women's groups, working  in coalition with various democratic organizations and unions, will continue to pressure the  Bloc.  "The women's movement in Quebec is in better condition than it ever has been to work  as a coalition to hold the BQ to its promises," says Parent. "We've come out of the election  campaign significantly strengthened and we [have been offered] the challenge to hold the BQ  accountable."  The election saw the BQ take 54 seats and become Canada's official opposition party. The  Liberals won 19 seats in Quebec, with the Tories only able to keep leadership-contender Jean  Charest's seat. Nine BQ women candidates were successful.  Parent is not overly enthusiastic about the BQ's women MPs, but she believes the social  democratic ideals of many of the Bloc MPs will benefit women and progressives generally.  She notes that women's groups will have to educate the BQ on issues such as pay and  employment equity.  According to Parent, the BQ's sweep of Quebec was the result of two major factors:  "...strong suuport of for sovereignty, and a strong desire to wash away the Tories".  In the next 12-14 months, both the BQ and the Liberals have to be concerned about  damaging their provincial counterparts' chances in Quebec's upcoming provincial election  in 1994. While Quebec sovereignty will be an election issue, so will social programs, which  are strongly supported by the Quebec electorate.  Failure by the BQ, as official opposition, to hold the Liberal majority to their promise to  protect social programs would damage the chances of the Pa rtiQuebecois of coming to office.  And failure by the Liberals to maintain social programs would severely undermine the  chances of the provincial Liberals.  Parent sees the Reform's Party's success in the West as "very unfortunate" and believes  Reform has "made inroads on [Quebec's] backs through a racist call to oppose Quebec."  NDP wipe out—what happened?  Thirty-three of the 44 New Democratic seats in parliament went down to defeat in the  1993 federal election. It's a result which, while long predicted, is still sobering.  In Onta rio, for the first time since the NDP was formed in 1961, no NDP candidates were  elected. In BC, the party returned only two members, losing long-time MP Margaret Mitchell  and the party's women's critic, Dawn Black. What happened?  According to Judy Rebick, a member of the National Action Committee on the Status of  Women executive, "...people stopped seeing the NDP as a real alternative when [the NDP]  joined with the Tories to support the Charlottetown Accord. And in the case of the Ontario  NDP's Social Contract and the BC government's stand on Clayoquot Sound, Audrey  McLaughlin didn't differentiate between the federal and provincial party positions and lost  further support."  Rebick's analysis is backed up by BC feminists, some of whom won't publicly comment  due to fears of a potential negative impact on provincial funding. One says, "The referendum  on the Charlottetown Accord was the first time that people really saw that the federal party  was no different from the other parties. The NDP's base in progressive movements had  started to erode. In BC, Clayoquot Sound was the cherry on the cake."  Another BC activist believes the NDP's fate was sealed by such events. "It would not  have mattered what they did, they were going to lose big...it will be very difficult to get the  NDP powers-that-be to understand this."  Quebecoise feminist Madeleine Parent believes the federal party's fatal mistake was  Audrey McLaughlin's dismissal of federal MP Stephen Langan as the party's finance critic  after Langan criticised NDP Ontario Premier Bob Rae's Social Contract legislation. Says  Parent: "The NDP has never been clear on what its role is and what its relationship should  be to the provincial NDP parties, which are often to the right of the federal party."  According to Rebick, the women's movement's relationship with the NDP "... has  always been fraught. The NDP has never been an adequate parliamentary opposition  although it has had the best positions on women's issues.  "Once again, it's time for the NDP to do some soul searching," says Rebick. "We have  never seen them do a "balance sheet' where they take a real look at their mistakes. They  always seem to just make some excuse. If this loss means such an examination really  happens, it may turn out to have been worthwhile."  mi the Public Security portfo-  rio, many of the liberal ridings  multi racial and multi-ethnic,  lea difference."  II do its part by lobbying the  provide more money for health care, breast  cancer research, and pre-natal programs for  example. Chretienhasalso renewed his commitment to social justice and says he supports women's equality."  Also positive is the number of women  elected to the house, says Thobani, noting  that the overall total is up. "So while we did  lose some good NDP women, we have not  lost ground and I think some of the liberal  women elected will play a positive role in  countering the anti-woman Reform party  agenda. "It's clear that Reform will try to  push the Liberals to the right so they must  stand up to reform."  But, she adds, much will depend on  Chretien's cabinet choices. "He has a lot of  women to choose from and if he makes good  choices, we could see some changes for  women. The Tory record was so bad that this  is a time for us to work for some gains."  Thobani says she hopes the Liberals will  also keep their promises with regard to immigration policies, including removing im-  Liberals to deliver on election promises and  make changes in other areas. For example,  she says, Chretien's job creation plan needs  work because road build ing and other infra -  structurejobsdon't represent jobs for women.  And, she says, the proposed childcare  program is tied to a three percent growth in  the economy-the only liberal policy conditional on economic growth. "Good care for  children enables mothers to work. Poverty  of women and children rose enormously  under the Tories."  Linda Marcotte of End Legislated poverty predicts that very little, if anything, will  change for low income ind poor people  under the Liberals, who she calls "Tories  with kind faces."  "It will still be the privileged who benefit the most," says Marcotte, adding that  just like the conservatives, the Liberals also  have strong ties to big business, which will  continue to have a strong influence on the  political process. Nor is she confident that  the Liberals will be able to effectively counter the Reform party's right-wing presence  in the House. The Liberals, she says, are  often "wishy-washy" and easily swayed.  Commenting on the job creation scheme,  Marcotte says while it's well and good to  build roads and create short term jobs, "What  we really need are permanent, higher paying jobs and that means reversing the trend  of government downsizing and instead  putting more money into health, education  and welfare. For the last 15 years, there have  been nothing but cuts to these areas, which  has not only meant bad services, but the loss  of thousands of jobs. The trend is to listen to  big business interests and reversing that  would make for big changes, but I don't  think the Liberals are going to do that."  Describing the loss of BC MPs like  Margaret Mitchell and Dawn Black as "sad,"  Marcotte says the federal NDP's stand on  the referendum and provincial NDP policies, had much to do with the party's disastrous federal showing. "The NDP has lost  touch with the people. The party's base is  working people, low income people, environmentalists, and unions. They feel alienated and that is something the party needs to  look at."  Like NAC President Thobani, NAC BC  rep Jackie Larkin is somewhat positiveabout  the Liberal majority, because compared to  the Tories, the party is at least more open to  women's issues and concerns and has said it  will continue funding women's advocacy  and other organizations. "I think that will  give energy to the fight because under the  Tories, therewasn'tmuchpoint, says Larkin.  "I also think the strength of the Reform Party  in the west will give energy to our fight and  could prompt a closer examination of the  NDP's base of support."  But she also sees problems with the job  creation scheme, which she says won't do  much for women. Larkin doesn't think the  Liberals will challenge NAFTA and believes  a national childcare program is iffy because  of the economic growth qualifier.  Larkin agrees that the NDP's poor showing is connected to its position on the refer  endum, which she believes resulted in the  party missing an opportunity to take a strong  stand on women, Quebec and Native Rights.  And, she says, disillusionment with provincial NDP policies have really hurt. "You  can't say you're a social democrat and then  not follow through."  NOVEMBER 1993 News  Press Gang Printers:  The presses stop  by Agnes Huang   There were good times, there were bad  times. ..and now there will be no more times.  Vancouver-based, Press Gang Printers, the  only feminist print shop in North America,  is shutting its doors after 23 years.  Press Gang Printers, a feminist, worker-  controlled collective, and unionized print  shop, has been forced to close down because  of financial problems. "Ourdebtsjust caught  up to us," says Sheila Gilhooly, a former  collective member who was laid off when  the print shop closed. "The recession is on  and times are tough. Suppliers and creditors  want to get paid faster."  Over the years, the print shop has accumulated about $75,000 in debt. In October,  Press Gang Printers formally closed its doors  and began liquidating its assets to pay off its  debts. Press Gang owes $10,000 in bank  loans, $40-$50,000 to suppliers, and $15,000  in loans from individuals. Its total debt is  more than the value of the company.  Press Gang Printers was not just a business, but was also an integral partof political  organizing in Vancouver. "Press Gang consistently and frequently made printing donations to political causes," says Sarah  Davidson, a former collective member who  worked with Press Gang from 1972 to 1980.  The closing of Press Gang Printers is a  devastating loss for the women's community, the lesbian community, and the progressive com m unity, says Catherine Ludgate  of West Coast Environmental Law, a client  of the print shop.  Press Gang was formed in 1970 as a  volunteer-run print shop, with both women  and men working there. In 1974, the men left  and Press Gang became a women-only collective. A highlight for the print shop was in  1987 when Press Gang became unionized by  the Communications Workers of America  [for a herstory of Press Gang, see Kinesis, May/  93.]  In the 70s and 80s, there were a number  of women's presses in Canada and the US.  But by the mid-80s, San Francisco Women's  Press, Storefront in Seattle, UI Press in Palo  Alto, and Iowa City Women's Press had all  closed down, leaving Press Gang as the last  remaining feminist print shop.  The Press Gang collective also ventured  into publishing in the mid-70s. As the publishing work grew, a new collective was  formed within Press Gang in 1982. In 1989,  Press Gang Publishers became a separate  legal and financial entity. The print shop's  financial difficulties do not affect the operations of the publishing company. In fact,  Press Gang Publishers is thriving, with the  recent publication of new books by Shani  Mootoo [see review, page 19]and two-spirited  First Nations poet, Chrystos.  Press GangPrintershasalonghistory of  money problems, says Sarah Davidson. "Financially, Press Gang ran small losses at the  end of most years, and the losses added up.  The cumulative effect of the losses made it  more and more difficult to pay off the debt."  Last year, the print shop was on the verge of  closing, but the community rallied around  Press Gang and the print shop was able to  stave off its demise for another year.  In order to pay back some of its debt,  Press Gang is holding a garage sale in November. "Small presses and equipment, furniture, paper, and collectors' items such as  posters will be for sale," says Lynn Giraud,  a former collective member who worked  with Press Gang for ten years [see Bulletin  Board for details]. The proceeds from the  garage sale will used to pay off the bankloan  first, then the creditors.  PressGang relied on community groups  for its client base: women's groups, co-ops,  lesbian and gay groups, social service agencies, political groups, unions, and community artists. While these community groups  were committed to Press Gang, many were  strapped for cash and had to search for  cheaper printing houses because printing  services were often more expensive at Press  Gang.  Raine MacKay of the Vancouver Women's Health Collective, says the community  Press Gang served didn't have the money to  give Press Gang enough business. The Hea 1th  Collective was only able to have some of its  materials printed at Press Gang. "We didn't  get enough money ourselves to be able to  turn around and buy printing services at  Press Gang."  Even Press Gang Publishers, who used  to have its books printed by Press Gang  Printers, has been sending their print jobs  back east because Press Gang Printers is too  expensive.  Ludgate iscritical of community groups  who used other printers. "Westcoast Environmental Law takes stuff to Press Gang to  be supportive of a collective, feminist print  shop, but a lot of groups don't print with  Press Gang," says Ludgate.  During its 23 years, Press Gang has tried  different creative solutions to help meet the  bills. Benefits, such as open houses and  dances, were held regularly, says Sarah  Davidson. "Benefits were used partly ascom-  munity events and partly to support the  printing and publishing business."  While many in the women's community came out to support Press Gang at their  events, the benefits were not enough to stem  their growing debt.  The recession and the Canada-US Free  Trade Agreement (FT A) appear to have been  the main culprits for Press Gang's demise. In  the last four years since the FTA, a considerable number of smaller print shops have  gone out of business, and even the larger  shops are cutting back staff and equipment.  Many big print shops in BC began taking on the smaller jobs—jobs that shops like  Press Gang used to get. "We were competing for jobs with much larger print shops  beca use a lot of jobs they were getting before  were now going out of the country," says  Gilhooly.  Giraud says another reason why Press  Gang Printers began to lose clients is that  "the political times have also changed."  When Press Gang started in 1970, many  political groups, such as lesbian and gay  groups, couldn't find a printer that would  print their materials. Press Gang was willing  to do the work with no questions asked. But  now, there are fewer groups who are refused printing services.  However, Kiss and Tell Collective member Persimmon Blackbridge says that Press  Gang Printers is still needed by those that  challenge "the line." In 1991, when Kiss and  Tell, a lesbian artists' collective, tried to print  their book of lesbian erotic postcards based  on their show Drawing the Line, most printers refused to take on the job. Press Gang  offered to print the book even though its  presses were not ideal for this type of printing job.  Eventually, Kiss and Tell was able to  find a printer but, says Blackbridge, "this  proves the saying, 'freedom of the press  belongs to those who own the presses,' and  that's why Press Gang is still so important."  Press Gang also got caught in the fast  technological changes of the printing industry. Lack of investment capital made it very  difficult for the print shop to purchase more  modern presses. Says Giraud, "Our equipment is outdated, and without equipment  we couldn't be competitive." To buy a press  that would make Press Gang more competi  tive, the print shop would have had to come  up with $50,000.  The focus Press Gang placed on training  women also made its operations more costly,  says Giraud. "Training is an expensive  proposition. And because Press Gang was  committed to training women, it often took  longer to produce the work and used more  materials."  Press Gang was a remarkable training  ground for women, says Nancy Pollak, who  worked at Press Gang from 1978 to 1982.  "Press Gang was oneof the few places where  women had the opportunity to learn how to  operate complex machinery," says Pollak.  "Press Gang was an important symbol  for a lot of women in terms of doing non-  traditional work," adds Davidson. "I think  for the various women who worked at Press  Gang Printers, it was a huge place of learning."  When Press Gang started, there was no  place for women in trades, says Gilhooly.  But now there is WITT (Women in Trades  and Technologies) and "it'snot such a wasteland for women in trades."  For many of the women, like Gilhooly,  the closing of Press Gang Printers is painful.  "Press Gang lasted 23 years, so I guess it's a  success story. But it doesn't seem like a  success right now."  Agnes Huang is a regular contributor to  Kinesis.  Racy Sexy  Race • Culture • Sexuality  Coconut! Cane & Cultass  Michelle Mohabeer's  world premier screening  Western Canadian premier screening of  Long Time Comin'  with special guests director Dionne  Brand, Grace Charmer & Faith Nolan  Visual Art Exhibitions  Sur Mehat, Shani Mootoo, Haruko Okano  Readings and Performances  Mercedes Baines, Shauna Beharry, Sheila  James, Anne Jew, Larissa Lai,  Lee Pui-Ming, Raj Pannu  and much more  Phone 682-5760  FOR PROGRAMME INFORMATION  Venues-Carnegie Community Centre, Chinese  Cultural Centre, Cordon Neighbourhood House,  Kitsalino Neighbourhood House, Richmond  Cultural Centre, Squamish Nation Recreation  Centre, Trout Lake Community Centre,  Vancouver Aboriginal Friendship Centre, West  End Community Centre.  Sponsored by the Chinese Cultural Centre. Co-sponsored by  Multiculturalism and Citizenship Canada, Canada  Employment and Immigration, Cultural Services Branch of  British Columbia, City of Vancouver (Cross Cultural Initiatives), Vancouver Foundation, Z95.3 FM Young Artists and  Audiences Fund. Logo design by Gord HilL  NOVEMBER 1993 News  BC and Yukon Association of Women's Centres:  7 centres  get funding  by Fatima Jaffer  Seven additional women's organizations in BC will receive funding from the BC  Ministry of Women's Equality this year, according to a Ministry announcement last  month. The groups are among 11 new members of the BC& Yukon Associationof Women's Centres (BC&Y), a loose coalition of 41  largely geographically based organizations.  To qualify for operational funding from  the Ministry, groups have to be members of  the BC&Y. The government established the  criteria in April 1992, when they reinstated  core funding to 28 women's groups [see  Kinesis, Apr/92]. Other criteria are: groups  have to be non-profit, community based,  primarily serving women, and registered  under the BC Societies Act.  The seven organizations, at least three  of which are not yet established centres, will  receive six-month contracts worth $17,500,  and an additional $10,000 in start-up monies. If they qualify for funding next April,  they will be eligible for annual core funding  of $37,500, the amount allocated to the 28  centres already being funded by the Ministry.  Centres with new funding are: the  Boundary Women's Coalition in Grand  Forks; the Philippine Women's Centre in  Vancouver; SAW AN (the South Asian Women's Action Network) in Vancouver; the  Sunshine Coast Women's Resource Society  in Sechelt; the Vancouver Lesbian Connection; the Vancouver Women's Health Collective; and the West Coast Women's Resource Centre in Ucluelet.  "It's good news for women in BC," says  Jennifer Johnstone of the Vancouver Status  of Women and a former member of the  BC&Y steering committee. "Women in BC&Y  worked hard last year to increase the number  of member centres, and to lobby for additional funding."  Johnstone says the news is particularly  good for groups that have been struggling to  establish a centre for a long time, like  SAWAN.  A week before the announcement of the  funding, a Ul-top-up grant worker,  Shamsher Pannun, was hired by the Vancouver Status of Women to assist the  SAWAN collective in opening BC's first  South Asian women's centre.  "It's perfect timing," says Pannun, referring to the announcement of the funding.  "South Asian women have not had access to  information about what our legal rights are,  about where to go or where to phone to get  services in a language other than English  and in a place other than a mainstream  agency, and so on."  Pannun adds that "young South Asian  women especially have not had a place that  is anti-homophobic, anti-caste/classist and  that meets the various needs of women of  different South Asian backgrounds."  She says consultation with South Asian  women's groups in BC, Montreal, Toronto  and New York have begun, all-day planning  meetings have been scheduled, and the search  for a centre in East or South Vancouver is  underway.  Hannah Heidikein of the Sunshine Coast  Women's Resource Society says the funding  from the Ministry means the end of a long  wait for women in the Sunshine Coast.  "Women have been attempting to get a centre together in the Sunshine Coast for about  15 years."  Heidikein says the society has held a  number of networking and outreach events  over the years and has a mailing list of about  300 women.  SunshineCoast received initiative funding for communities from the provincial  government three years ago to determine  the need for a women's centre. Heidikein  sa y s 87 percent of the women su rveyed supported the project. Sunshine Coast has already formed a committee to hire a coordinator and plans to open a centre within the  next six months.  <subhead>But not funding for all  Four of the 11 new members of BC&Y  did not receive funding from the Ministry,  namely Maple Ridge, Hundred-Mile House,  Parksville, and Women Aloud in Surrey.  JoanCowderoy of the Ministry of Women's Equality Grants Branch says, since the  Ministry did not have enough monies to  fund all the new BC&Y centres, it set priorities for funding.  Cowderoy says, Sunshine Coast, the  Boundary Women's Coalition, and the West  Coast Women's Resource Centre were  funded "to get the dollars out to women in  rural areas that have been underfunded and  underserved for a long time."  The Vancouver Women's Health Collective's funding came from a joint arrangement between the ministries of Women's  Equality and of Health. The monies will be  administered by the Women's Equality's  Grants Program.  Cowderoy says, funding SAWAN, the  Philippine Women's Centre and the Vancouver Lesbian Connection allowed the Ministry to meet its goal of "providing some  support for groups working with women  who face additional barriers in society."  One of the Ministry's criteria, that groups  be members of the BC&Y, has been criticized  for excluding women's groups that haven't  joined or choose not to join the BC&Y. In  particular, there are no Aboriginal women's  groups who are members of the BC&Y, and  the only two women of colour groups in the  BC&Y have just recently become members.  Cowderoy admits that the Ministry has  received feedback from the BC&Y member  groups saying that the membership criteria  should also be dropped because of the additional pressure that the criteria has put on  the association.  Cowderoy says it will keep membership in the BC&Y as a criteria this year, but  that the Ministry will review the criteria for  funding over the next year in consultation  with the BC&Y and other women's centres.  Cowderoy says she also plans to meet with  Aboriginal women's organizations to look  into the issue of funding their centres.  <subhead> BC&Y AGM - Part Two  The Ministry's announcement of new  funding last month coincided with the  BC&Y's second attempt to have an annual  general meeting this year. The first attempt,  last May, never got off the ground. According to the May AGM attendees, the BC&Y  ran aground for a number of reasons. Repre-  "Hey hey, ho ho, sex selection has got to go"  Over 250 people, mostly South Asian, marched through the Punjabi market in  Vancouver on October 2 to protest the targeting of the South Asian community  by an American doctor promoting racist and sexist fetal sex determination  services. The rally was organized by the Coalition of South Asian Women's  Groups Against Sex Selection to support their boycott of four South Asian  newspapers who refused to permanently remove Dr. John Stephens' ad [see  Kinesis, Oct/93].  The march wound up on a field outside Sunset Community Centre, where  members of the Coalition and other community groups spoke to the assembled  crowd. Speakers included: the South Asian Women's Action Network), India  Mahila Association, the Punjabi Women's Association, the Vancouver Status of  Women, Woman to Woman Global Strategies, and the National Action Committee  on the Status of Women.  Since the demonstration, two of the newspapers, The Link and The Indo-  Canadian Times, have told their advertisers they will stop running the offensive  ad. Confirmation of this has still not been received by the Coalition.  sentatives from women's centres were unable to agree on a definition of feminism;  held conflicting political visions of the role  of the BC&Y; and were unprepared to address strategies around funding, anti-racism  training, and lobbying. Following the AGM,  the Steering Committee members resigned.  [see Kinesis, Jul/Aug, 1993].  The following is reconstructed from the  October AGM documents. Some members  'of the BC&Y agreed to talk with Kinesis on  condition they not be quoted or named.  About 60 representatives of women's  groups attended the three-day AGM inRich-  mond last month. This time the AGM business was completed, but there was still little  substantial discussion and many of the contentious issues raised in May remain unresolved.  Concerns by members of the BC&Y  around the membership requirement for  funding were not dealt with at the AGM. A  resolution proposing that membership in  the BC&Y not be used as a criteria for funding or as the definition of a "women's centre" was tabled for next year's AGM. The  resolution calls on the Ministry to adopt the  BC&Y's definition of a "women's centre"  instead. However, last year, members had  found that the BC&Y's definition was too  broad and, in particular, lacked a definition  of the word "feminism." Since the resolution  was tabled, no discussion of the word "feminism" was held.  The BC&Y decided to leave consultations with the Ministry of Women's Equality  over changes to the funding criteria in the  hands of the Association's Government Liaison/Negotiation Committee. Butas issues  around the funding criteria didn't get addressed at the AGM, the ability of the Committee to lobby around funding and revision  of criteria is limited.  As well, lobbying priorities for the  upcoming year were not identified. Proposed committees on Finance to look at  federal and provincial lobbying, and on Lobbying on political issues were tabled for the  next AGM.  However, women at the AGM  brainstormed on general priorities for the  organization. Top priorities are to continue  addressing racism and homophobia in member centres through the Training Strategies  Committee, and networking between women's centres. Other priorities will be discussed at the BC&Y's coordinating collective meeting later this month and a game  plan will be developed.  An anti-racism policy was adopted  which includes requiring the BC&Y member  groups to seek anti-racism education for all  staff and volunteers, and to develop and  implement affirmative action policies and  procedures.  The most interesting developments of  the AGM appear to be the creation of the  women of colour and First Nations women  and the anti-homophobia committees.  The former, proposed by the women of  colour caucus at the AGM, will look at policies and procedures of the BC&Y and ensure  that the voices of women of colour and First  Nations women are being heard. The committee plans to facilitate networking in BC  among women of colour and First Nations  women staff, volunteers and clients of BC&Y  member groups. They also plan to implement "affirmative action" to ensure at least  one woman of colour and /or First Nations  woman staff member or volunteer from each  member group attend the AGM next year.  The structure of the BC&Y was changed  from a coordinating collective consisting of  a five-member steering committee with 9  regional representatives, to a coordinating  collective made up of 19 women. Essentially, the changes include the addition of  one more representative from the Vancouver Island region, and the replacement of the  three co-chairs by six members-at-large.  NOVEMBER 1993 Movement Matters  listings information  Movement Matters is designed to be  a network of news, updates and information of special interest to the women's movement.  Submissions to Movement Matters  should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double spaced and may be  edited for length. Deadline is the 18th  of the month preceding publication.  larly on issues relating to women and the  environment.  by Anita Fast  Counting women  inBC  The Ministry of Women's Equality has  released a statistical profile of women in  British Columbia called Women Count.  Intended as a reference for government  ministries, women's groups, community  organizations, and the general public, the  document is billed as including "a demographic overview of women in British Columbia as well as details of the specific conditions that limit women's opportunities and  choices—in their homes, in their workplaces  and their communities."  Women Coun t: sta tistics have been gathered from several sources. Primary sources  are: Statistics Canada 1991 Census profiles;  Gender-Equity in Post-Secondary Education  1992 by the Ministry of Advanced Education, Training and Technology; and BC Sta ts,  Ministry of Finance and Corporate Relations' Family Status of Working Women. Examples of statistics are: women make up  50.5 percent of the population of BC, five  percent of whom are Aboriginal women, 16  percent are women with disabilities—stats  on women of colour are listed as "not available at the time of this printing"; women  continue to earn less than men in all occupations, even those in which they dominate; 60  percent of BC women participate in the paid  labour force; 70 percent of mothers with  children living at home participate in the  labour force; 28 percent of women work  part-time,compared with lOpercentof men;  and 62 percent of women in BC work in  clerical, service and sales jobs.  To receive copies of this publication,  contact: Ministry of Women's Equality,  Policy, Planning and Evaluation Division,  2nd Floor, 756 Fort Street, Victoria, British  Columbia, V8V 1X4. Phone 953-4532; Fax  953-4529.  UN World Conference  on women part IV  Gertrude Mongella of the United Republic of Tanzania has been appointed Secretary-General of the Fourth World Confer-  enceon Women. The conference, which takes  place in Beijing, China in September 1995,  has a mandate of defining a platform of  action for the United Nations Commission  on the Status of Women to break down  obstacles to the advancement of the majority  of women in the world.  At the time of her appointment,  Mongella was Tanzania's High Commissioner to India. Previously she was Tanzania's Minister of State responsible for Women's Affairs. Mongella participated at the  Third UN Women's World Conference in  Nairobi ten years ago. She has since represented her country at numerous international meetings and conferences, particu-  Forming a Canadian  grassroots network  Women in Ontario and British Columbia are planning to form a Canadian grassroots network of women of low income and  their allies.  The proposal originated at the National  Congress of Neighbourhood Women Institute conference in the US last August, there,  four Canadian women met with women  from the US and Mexico who are part of the  North American Region of GROOTS (Grassroots Organizations Operating Together in  Sisterhood).  GROOTS, first organized by women at  the 1985 Women's World Conference and  Non-Governmental Organization forum in  Nairobi, is made up of women from 16  countries in seven regions of the world:  Africa, South Asia, Caribbean, South Pacific, Central and South America, Europe,  and North America.  GROOTS is intended to create links  among women at the grassroots level, provide a forum for grassroots women leaders  speaking out on international issues, and to  support attendance and participation in the  Fourth UN Women's World Conference in  Beijing in 1995.  The proposed Canadian network of  grassroots women and women's groups is  intended to bring forward the voices of Canadian women of low-income, to help clarify  the issues and priorities of grassroots women  in Canada, and to prepare them for participation in a national meeting as well as the  1995 Women's World Conference.  If you are interested in joining GROOTS  Canada in developing and planning a Canadian grassroots women's network, or would  like information about GROOTS, or Canadian events, call Marnie Tamaki at (604) 682-  6679, or write to: GROOTS BC, 314 Powell  Street, Vancouver, BC, V6A 1G4.  Learning resource  society closes  Learning Resources, a Vancouver-based  non-profit society, closed its offices last  month due to a lack of financial and human  resources. With its closure, Creative Career  Choices for Women, a program assisting  women in making informed career choices,  also ended, creating yet another gap in services for women seeking to make satisfying  changes in their career or find more fulfilling  work.  Recent projects by Learning Resources  include: a video entitled The Cinderella Myth,  which addresses the issue of preparing  younger women for the realities of the work  world; the comic book, Summer Love; and the  book, Jobstories: I Like the Work; I Like the Pay,  which provides information to both the adult  worker and the woman preparing to reenter the job market.  Learning Resources also provided programs such as Nowskills, which trained and  placed women in non-traditional fields of  employment. Their Job Seekers' Network  program and Women's Career Choices offered affordable employment counselling to  women. The group has also been involved  with advocacy groups concerned about improving employment and training opportunities for women.  Learning Resources asks that they be  removed from routine mailing lists. Any  mail sent to the society will be forwarded to  a Board member until further notice.  Twenty-five years of  health publishing  The Montreal Health Press is celebrating 25 years of feminist publishing. The  Health Press began publishing in 1968 with  the Birth Control Handbook at a time when it  was illegal to give out information of birth  control. It became a feminist collective in  1972 and went on to produce and distribute  three other works on health and sexuality:  the VD Handbook (1972), Sexual Assault (1979),  and A Book About Menopause (1988). French  and English manuals have been distributed  to clinics, hospitals women's groups, universities and high schools across North  America.  In honour of its 25 years of publishing,  the MontrealHealth Press hasissued revised  editions of three of its books: the STD Handbook, les MTS, and L'agression sexuelle.  For more information, contact the Montreal Health Press, Inc. CP 1000, Station  Place du Pare, Montreal, Quebec, Canada,  H2W2N1.  Books by Women's  Media Circle  The Women's Media Circle in Manila  has recently released two books. Who Calls  The Shots? carries the proceedings of the  First International Conference on Women,  Media and Advertising, and Sisterhood is  Global: Dialogues in the Philippines, examines  the status and role of Filipina women after  Corazon Aquino took over as President.  The Women's Media Circle in the Philippines was established in 1985 and provides radio and television programs by and  about women, as well as public service notices and educational materials. It is also an  In the immediate future you will  subscribe to the newspaper you  have in your hands  Looking for exciting personal growth,  professional enhancement,  and career opportunities?  Train to become a professional Community Health Counsellor and  meet the needs of women in a changng health care system.  Our Community Health Counsellor Diploma Program - the first transpersonal therapy  program in Canada - could be for you!  • You'll train to work as a counselling therapist, in areas related to women's and  Native issues, addiction/co-dependency, sexual abuse, trauma, and transpersonal  counselling.  • You'll feed your passion for healing by working with western medicine and other  holistic health care professionals as a legitimate mind/body healer, within the  newly developing, community-based, preventative health care system.  Wild ^College  of Natural Healing  1745 West 4th Avenue., Vancouver, B.C. V6J 1M2  Tel. 734-4596 • Fax 734-4597  Registration for our January 1994  enrollment is limited, so call or fax  us today and receive important  details about government financial  assistance and courses.  advocacy group against pornography, stereotyping of gender roles, and domestic violence, and works for women's health and  environmental awareness.  Who Calls the Shots ? is edited by journalist and feminist Rosario A. Garcellano. In  200 pages of text and photos, the publication  compiles the papers, presentations, group  discussions and workshops of the five-day  1991 women's media conference in a readable format. Included are the uncensored  proceedings of more than 150 broadcasters,  television producers, media executives and  journalists from African countries, the Americas, the Asia Pacific Region and Europe who  share experiences, identify specific problems related to women and the media, and  propose concrete resolutions.  Participants included Makhosazama  Xaba, Donna Allen, Ludmila Enuitina, Inge  von Bonninghausen, Margaret Gallagher,  Selina Chow, Malou Mangahas, Teresa  Monteiro Otondo, among others.  The second book concerns the exchange  of idea s, ideologies and experiences between  Filipina women and the members of the  Sisterhood is Global Institute's Asia-Pacific  Task Force on Women on a two-week mission in 1988. Task Force members Robin  Morgan of the US, Marilyn Waring of New  Zealand, Mahnaz Afkhami of Iran, Keiko  Higuchi of Japan, and Madhu Kishwar of  India meet Filipina women leaders, activists  from the Women's Media Circle, Gabriela,  Pilipina, Kalayaan, KaBaPa, Mt. Banahaw,  the Concerned Artists of the Philippines-  Women's Desk, Cordillera Women's Center,  Women in Nation-Building, and many more.  To order copies, write: The Women's  Media CircleFounda tion Inc. 96 Maningning  St. Teacher's Village, Quezon City, Philip-  pines 1101, or call (632) 921-2222.   Anita Fast is a first time volunteer writer  for Kinesis.  Bed & Breakfast  A  Memorable  Escape  Centre Yourself  in the comfort and tranquility  of Canada's beautiful, natural  Gulf Islands  5 acres of forested foot paths  trails with ponds  ocean and mountain views  Decadent Breakfasts  Hot Tub  A private retreat  (604) 537-9344  Mail: R.R.*, S-23, BO, Ganges, B.C. VOS 1E0  NOVEMBER 1993 What's News  by Mariam Bouchoutrouch  Clayoquot  Sound update  Although MacMillan Bloedel (Mac-Bio)  has been convicted of over 25 offences in the  past three years for logging violations, it is  the logging protesters at Clayoquot Sound  who will be serving jail terms this fall.  In what Friends of the Clayoquot (FOC)  spokesperson Tzeporah Berman is calling  "an outrageous decision," the first few of  over 750 protesters arrested during the summer blockade of a logging road in the Sound  were sentenced in October to 45-60 days in  jail and fines of $1,500-3,000.  The typical sentence for this type of  action is community service and /or a fine of  not more than S700, although some second  offenders have received 20-to-30-day jail  terms.  "You'd think the government would be  able to see that, if 750 people are willing to  get arrested and more are getting arrested  each day, then this is probably a good indication of what the public is thinking," says  FOC spokesperson, Bonny Glambeck.  After railroading the first group of 45  protesters through in a mass trial, without  giving them enough time to prepare a  defense, BC Supreme Court justice, John  Bouck convicted a second group of 22 protesters on charges of criminal contempt of  court and sentenced them to 21 days in jail  with fines ranging from $500 to $1,000.  Glambeck says, "Usually you have  about a year before the trial to get a lawyer  and prepare a defense. Essentially, [the protesters] weren't able to prepare a defense."  In his judgement, Bouck said the tough  sentences are intended to "dissuade others,  who appear to have the idea that first-time  offenders will be treated lightly."  Says Berman, "It's clear that the judiciary is trying to intimidate people from [car-  ryingout] further protest." She adds that the  court is merely supporting the provincial  government's position on the anti-clearcut  logging blockade. The blockade was set up  on July 5 by FOC to protest an April decision  by the BC New Democratic government to  allow logging in 63 percent of Clayoquot  Sound.  FOC is currently fund-raising for the  Clayoquot Defense Fund, to help support a  First Nations application for an injunction  against logging. The First Nations injunction  is expected next month, and is intended to  stop Mac-Bio from logging until a decision  has been made on the First Nations' claims  to the land. The Tla-o-qui-aht, Hesquiat,  Ahousahat, Toquaht and Ucluelet peoples  have never ceded the title to the Clayoquot  region and were neither informed nor consulted in the decision to allow Mac-Bio to  clearcut.  A protest is being held every Monday at  noon in front of Mac-Bio's offices in downtown Vancouver. Other actions are also being planned. For more information, call FOC  at (604) 725-4218.  by Lissa Geller  Morgentaler sues  Nova Scotia gov't  Well-known abortion rights advocate  Dr. Henry Morgentaler has filed a lawsuit  against former top Nova Scotian legislators.  The suit follows the unanimous ruling by  the Supreme Court of Canada that struck  down the provincial law enacted to keep  Morgentaler and others from opening freestanding abortion clinics in the province.  The law, which imposed heavy fines for  doctors performing abortions outside of  hospitals, was struck down as unconstitutional in October. The court found that the  provincial government does not have the  rightto legislate in thearea ofabortion rights  and had overstepped its constitutional jurisdiction.  The court also found that the law "was  intended more to keep Morgentaler out of  the province than to protect the health and  safety of women or prevent the emergence  of a two-tiered medical system." According  to Morgentaler, the ruling supports his clai m  that former Nova Scotia premier John  Buchanan created the law strictly as a  "fraudulentanddishonestwaytokeep[him]  out of Nova Scotia."  "The government should be taught a  lesson so that other provincial governments  will not feel they can do anything they like  simply because they don't like a cause or a  person," says Morgentaler of his lawsuit.  The suit names former Nova Scotia premier John Buchanan, former attorney general Thomas Mclnnis and former healthmin-  ister David Nantes, and alleges grounds of  malicious prosecution. Morgentaler was  charged with 14 counts of performing an  abortion outside of a hospital in 1989.  The current Liberal government in Nova  Scotia has issued a statement that no further  legislation regarding abortions will be forthcoming from the health ministry and that  abortions performed outside of hospitals  will now be covered under Medicare.  Defense campaign  for women prisoners  The Canadian Association of Elizabeth  Fry Societies (CAEFS) is calling on the federal government to review en bloc the cases of  15 women currently serving time for killing  their abusive spouses.  \    /  Introducing Amplesize Park's  V     i  own line of clothing  \** 1  New hours:  PI  Mon, Tues, Thurs 11-6  Fri 11-7  J^? V  Sat 10:30-4:30  j$\  Closed Wed & Sun  k      Quality consignment  r*  \    clothing  te  1    Size 14... plus  r  I       Amplesize Park  .1        5766 Fraser Street  /        Vancouver, BC  s  V5W 2Z5  \  Sarah-Jane (604)322-0107  This call cites the landmark Supreme  Court decision in 1990 which foundawoman  innocent of murder after killing her spouse  following years of physical and emotional  abuse. In. the case known as Lavallee, the  court ruled that, when a woman is charged  with the killing of her mate, evidence of his  prior abuse and the effects of long-term  abuse on her may be heard, where such  information shows she acted in self-defense.  The decision has obvious ramifications  for other women convicted of killing abusive mates, and CAEFS has identified 15  women across Canada who would qualify  to have theircaseappealed using the Lavallee  judgement.  Despite the ruling, the ministry of justice is refusing to allow the women's cases to  be heard en bloc and is insisting that the  women pursue their cases individually.  But CAEFS spokesperson Kim Pate says  an individual review will not provide the  women with appropriate justice. "Crown  Attorneys and judges are using a rigid, stereotyped understanding of who is a battered  woman," says Pate."Women who are assertive, who have been violent themselves, or  who have criminal records have been unable  to qualify for self-defense."  This narrow interpretation of "battered  women" has had a particularly harsh impact  on First Nations women and women of colour, whose lives and behaviour are judged  through a racist and sexist lens.  As well, some crown attorneys and police are focusing on the women's failure to  resolve their problems non-violently, rather  than locating the problem on the shoulders  of violent men and on the inadequate response of the justice system to violence  against women and children.  And Pate points out that some of the  women had already exhausted the appeal  process prior to the Lavallee decision, or had  lawyers enter guilty pleas on their behalf  and who are therefore not eligible for further  appeals. This means they cannot use the  progressive judgement in Lavallee to fight  for their rights individually.  CAEFS is calling on women's groups  across the country to support the call for an  en bloc review of these cases. For more information, or to participate in the E Fry postcard campaign, contact your local Elizabeth  Fry Society, or Kim Pate at (613) 238-2422 or  fax (613) 232-7130.  Implants fund  not a boon  Canadian women have little to look  forward to if a proposed $4.75 billion US  fund is set up to help women harmed by  siliconebreast implants, says Joanne Tomlin,  a BC woman who became ill after receiving  implants. Between 100,000 and 200,000 Canadian women received implants from 1969  FEMINIST LAWYERS  Melinda Munro  and  Clea Parfitt  are pleased to announce the  opening of their firm providing  quality legal services  in a comfortable atmosphere  labour/employment, family,  criminal law and  public interest advocacy.  MUNRO* PAR FITT  LAWYE RS  401-825 granville street,  Vancouver, b.c. v6z 1 k9  689-7778(ph)     689-5572 (fax)  until 1992, when a moratorium on breast  implants was imposed because of health  risks.  The fund was proposed as a global settlement to thousands of lawsuits against  manufacturers of implants. Lawsuit defendants include US-based Dow Corning Inc.,  the leading manufacturer of silicone breast  implants. Findings have shown that the implants have lead to severe medical problems  including pain, rejection, and cancerous  growths.  If the fund is approved, it would allow  women to makeclaimsagainstDowCorning  and other defendants, and receive settlements from the fund. Similar funds have  been used to settleclaims against the makers  of the intrauterine device known as the  Dalkon Shield, which led to severe complications, including death, during the 1980s.  Tomlin says the fund would largely  benefit women in the US at the expense of  other women in the world. "It looks as if  $200,000 would go to every sick American  woman when they put in claims.. .Women in  Canada (would get) $5,000 to $10,000 tops,"  she says.  Deborah Acheson, a Victoria lawyer  representing about 50Canadianwomen,also  pointed out that Australian and New Zealand lawyers have pulled all their clients out  of the litigation because it is so biased in  favour of American women.  Acheson is encouraging the BC government to pass legislation that would allow  women in the province to launch a separate  class-action suit against DowCorning. Similar legislation was enacted in Ontario and  has allowed women to pursue claims against  the company.  The BC Attorney General's office is currently reviewing the request.  Pro-lesbian law  in New Zealand  Lesbians, bisexuals and gays are among  several groups celebrating the passing of an  anti-discrimination bill in the New Zealand  legislature. The bill, which was passed this  summer, outlaws discrimination on the  groundsofsexualorientation,disability,fam-  ily status, age, political opinion and employment status.  Lesbians, gays and bisexuals are now  able to complain to the Human Rights Commission if they feel they have been discriminated against. If their case is substantiated, it  will be sent to mediation or a judicial body  for review and judgement. According to  Juliet Jaques of the Tamaki Makaurau newsletter, the bill has major implications for the  legal rights of lesbians in New Zealand.  "Most people respect the law even if  they don't agree with it. Perception of what's  okay is influenced by whether it's legal," she  said. "Many people will be persuaded [to act  fairly] without going to the Commission."  NOVEMBER 1993 Feature  Election reaction:  Sounding  off, liberally  as told to Nancy Pollak  The morning after the election, Kinesisgot  on the blower to ask women from various sector  for their reaction.  ■ Child Care: Rita Chudnovsky is a Vancouver-based child care advocate. "The Liberals  at least haveapositiveagendathatacknowl-  edges the value of a publicly-funded, national child care program. [The Liberal platform calls for the creation of 50,000 spaces  following each year of three percent economic growth, up to a maximum of 150,000  spaces.] But their agenda is modest, and the  way they have tied it to economic growth  represents a fundamental misunderstanding of child care. We see child care as a key  "Generally, we have  concerns about the  Reform Party members  being racist. This could  mean adverse policies  for Aboriginal people.  And the Bloc Quebecois  always seems to forget  the Aboriginal people."  -Barbara Weiss  tool in economic recovery, not as a luxury  we can only afford if there is an economic  recovery. Women continue to identify the  lack of child care as the key barrier to going  to school and getting a decent job—it's an  economic issue. Our challenge as advocates  is to convince the Liberals that child care is as  important a piece of the infrastructure as  roads and sewers.  "Other aspects of the Liberal platform  also concern us. They're calling for 40/40  percent cost-sha ring with the provinces, plus  a 20 percent user fee. They want a mixed  system—some not-for-profit and some for-  profit care. These issues need addressing,  but the bare bones are there."  • Labour: Barb Byers is president of the  Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. "We need  to hold the Liberals to their promise of jobs,  but the type of jobs is key. During the election, they talked about creating traditional  male jobs and nobody ever corrected them  on that vision. We need to re-frame [their]  thinking.  "For example, a national child care program is not simply [beneficial] to working  mothers, it would also create employment  opportunities for women. And jobs in a  child care system are long-term, not temporary.  "We need to analyze why so many people voted Reform. Canadians have long traditions and beliefs about equality issues-  have they really taken a massive turn to the  right? With the Reform in parliament, we'll  have a chance to see if people really like their  policies. People were discouraged with how  government operated and the election was a  message to all parties. The Conservatives are  responsible for the cynicism-the idea that it  didn't matter who you elected—and they got  the largest punishment. Hopefully, Canadians won't be punished, too.  "It's very sad the NDP lost so many  seats, since they are the party that puts forward equality issues. It's also important that  Audrey McLaughlin won her own seat-it  shows her willingness to go out and connect  with the real grassroots. The NDP needs to  re-build and reflect, over a long time. The  problem wasn't with their program, which  is good, but with people's cynicism."  • First Nations Women: Barbara Weiss is  with the BC Native Women's Society. "It's too  early to tell how Aboriginal women will be  affected by this new government. While he  was campaigning, Jean Chretien said he was  willing to meetwith Aboriginal people. We're  hoping for a more sympathetic ear than  from the Tories, who refused to listen to First  Nations women [during the constitutional  talks]. But it means starting the lobbying  process all over again.  "Generally, we have concerns about the  Reform Party members being racist. This  could mean adverse policies for Aboriginal  people. And the Bloc Quebecoisalways seems  to forget the Aboriginal people. They believe  the Quebecoise are the founders of Quebec,  with no mention of the Aboriginal people  who were there for thousands of years before."  • Abortion: Hilda Thomas is a pro-choice  activist and a founding member of the Every  Women's Health Centre in Vancouver. "If there  are enough Liberal women, the [abortion  rights] situation may not [fare] too badly.  But there is also a solid, hard-line anti-choice  block in the Liberal caucus, including many  powerful members [like John Nunziata]. Jean  Chretien supports the move to make private  members' bills easier to bring to the House.  Theseanti-choiceLiberalscould makea move  to bring in a bill to re-criminalize abortion.  "Then there's the Reform Party, who  are absolutely anti-choice and are determined  to do a way with the Canada Health Act. This  would be a total disaster. The CHA guarantees the right to universal health care in  every province. Without it, provinces could  de-schedule [stop paying for] any medical  procedure they wanted to. We saw how  [former BC premier] Vander Zalm tried to  do that to abortion in 1988—he lost on a  technicality. And Morgentaler wouldn'thave  wonhis recent case in Nova Scotia if ithadn't  been for the Canada Heath Act. Many provinces would be vulnerable without the protection of the Act."  • Lesbian Rights: barbara findlay is a  Vancouver lawyer and activist in the lesbian and  gay rights movement. "What we're looking  for from the new government is amendments to the Canadian Human Rights Act  that clarify the partnership rights of lesbians  and gay men—including financial and non-  financial rights, custody and adoption rights,  sponsoring a same-sex partner for immigration, etc. In civil rights terms, this is what we  need to push for. But it's hard to predict  what the Liberal majority will do, for two  reasons: The party has no official policy on  Reaction From the Atlantic Provinces  by Dolores Fitzgerald   Federal election history was made in St John's last night as two traditional Progressive  Conservative seats were won by Liberal women candidates. The victories mark the first time  women have won federal seats in Newfoundland. (Presumably the victory would be all the  sweeter for Jean Payne who took St John's East, a seat most recently held by the Tory's  notorious sexist John Crosbie.) The new Liberal women MP's level of support for women's  issues is unknown. According to Michelle Skinner, Newfoundland/Labrador's regional  representative for NAC and a member of the Bay St George Coalition to End Violence,  women are feeling "... very positive about the defeat of the Tory government. The Tory defeat  clearly indicates Canadians believe Tory policies are bad for [them]. We only hope the Tory  defeat sends a message to the Liberals that they had better not try to run in Tory shoes."  The Liberals won 31 of the 32 seats in the Atlantic provinces. New Brunswick, however,  returned a single Progressive Conservative MP, Elsie Wayne, a St. John mayor.  Skinner notes that, although the Reform Party had not made an impact on Newfoundland ridings, women are concerned about the Reform Party's success in the West.  "We are well aware of Reform's extreme right wing agenda and are worried about the  impact they will have on parliament and the other political parties, particularly with regard  to their support for the corporate agenda. We know they are a sexist, racist and homophobic  movement."  Valarie Killfoil, of the New Brunswick Coalition of Women's Groups and NAC's  provincial representative, also calls the Liberal majority win "...beneficial to women in the  Maritimes." She points out that the federal Liberals should be able to work well with Liberal  governments in Newfoundland, New Brunswick and Nova Scotia.  "If the Liberals come through on promises such as infrastructure improvements, there  will be an overall benefit to the area," says Killfoil. "Unfortunately when ideas for  stimulating the economy are only focused on highway construction and sewer repair, you  don't provide any direct way to get women back to work and that is a big problem since so  many women in the region are unemployed or working at very underpaid jobs."  Killfoil hopes Chretian will stand by his promise to protect social programs, which have  been devastated by Frank McKenna's deficit-cutting provincial Liberal government.  "McKenna has cut everything here. He even cut funding to New Brunswick's only rape cris  centre. Our only hope is that some of Chretien's promise to maintain social programs will  trickle down to McKenna."  Killfoil says the NDP might have been poised to make a breakthrough in New  Brunswick this election, but that that hope was dashed by Ontario NDP government attacks  on public sector workers which "blew away all of Bob Rae's and the NDP's creditability."  lesbian and gay rights, and Jean Chretien  opposed the inclusion of sexual orientation  in theCharter of Rights and Freedoms [in the  early 1980s].  "Personally, I heaved a sighof relief that  the Bloc Quebecois is the official opposition.  If it was the Reform Party, the pull to the  right and, in particular, their approach to  lesbians and gays would be horrifying. The  Reform Party has no official policy, but it is  "The loss of the NDP is  grim. The combination  of losing the left and the  rise of the right means  we're in deep trouble.  The women's movement  needs to be strong to  make these guys live up  to any promises."  -Bonnie Agnew  a party of Christian fundamentalists who  believe tha t homosexuality is a sin tha t should  perhaps be criminalized."  • Free Trade: Ellen Woodsivorth is with  Women-to-Women Global Strategies in Vancouver. "Essentially, there is no difference  between the Liberals and the Tories on free  trade. The Liberals might be more amenable  to environmental protections being included  in the North American Free Trade Agreement [NAFTA], and they feel different pressures [than the Tories] because their corporate base is more national. But the Liberals  won't stop anything-in fact, they want to  expand free trade to include Asia. And the  Reform Party and the Bloc Quebecois will do  nothing to stop NAFTA.  "The Liberals will probably go along  with [US president] Clinton's latest position,  which is to pass NAFTA now and re-negotiate it in three years. That is what Clinton is  offering [his opponents] in order to get  NAFTA through Congress on November  18th.  "With NAFTA, we'll see hundreds of  thousands more jobs going south. This is big  trouble for women, who will be further  pushed into doing unpaid work in the home.  Liberal job creation schemes are obviously  jobs for men, not for women. At no point  have the Liberals commited themselves to  undoing the damage the Tories did to job  training for women and to social programs  in general. So the Liberals' economic policies  will push women back into unpaid work,  and the Reform Party will provide the moral  rationale for why women should be there."  • Violence Against Women: Bonnie  Agneiv is with Vancouver Rape Relief and Women's Shelter. "The Liberals promised to increase funding for [anti-violence] programs,  but that doesn't necessarily mean much-it  could be 5 cents worth. Hedy Fry [the MP  from Vancouver Centre] has promised to  fight for direct federal funding for transition  houses, rape crisis centres and services for  battered women and children. [Currently,  only Quebec receives direct federal funding.] She claims to have Jean Chretien's ear,  but isn't that always where women are—at  the man's ear?  "What we want is for the violence against  women programs to be removed from the  Health and Welfare and Justice ministries,  and put under the auspices of the Status of  Women, and the Secretary of State Women's  Programs. Under the Tories, these offices  have been [virtually] dismantled.  "The loss of the NDP is grim. The combination of losing the left and the rise of the  rightmeans we're indeep trouble. The women's movement needs to be strong to make  these guys live up to any promises. But now  we need to be even louder, because the  elimination of the left from parliament means  our voices are the only accountability that  will work. All progressive movements will  have to work extra hard."  NOVEMBER 1993 Feature  Interview with NAC's Sunera Thobani:  From the ground on up  as told to Fatima Jaffer   Kinesisspofce toSunera Thobani,president  of the National Action Committee on the Status  of Women (NAC), in Vancouver a couple of  iveeks before election day (October 25) about the  election campaign and the role of the women's  movement.  Fatima Jaffer: The election campaign is  almost at an end. When we compare NAC's  popularity during last year's referendum on  the Charlottetown Accord and the lack of  attention NAC and women's issues in general have received this year in mainstream  election coverage, it's obvious women have  beenexcluded from theagenda. What's your  analysis of the way this election campaign  has been run?  SuneraThobani:Thereferendum showed  how women across the country are frustrated and alienated and have had enough of  the political elites in this country setting the  agenda in a way that is undemocratic, unaccountable and unrepresentative. Women  across thecountry played a really strong role  in defeating the Charlottetown Accord—the  women's movement was out in front, but  there were also many women in the labour  movement who broke from the position of  their unions and women from the NDP who  broke from the position of the NDP [to vote  "No" in the referendum]  [In this election campaign,] the political  elites have fought to regain control over the  political agenda in this country, and one of  the ways they have done that is by completely silencing women's issues at the national level. The right-wing political agenda  is marginalizing any progressive movement  fighting to democratize the po! itical process.  Women's issues have been distorted.  The talk about women is focused on the  gender of the prime minister: Kim Campbell  is a woman, how is she doing things differently; is she able to draw the vote of women  for her party because she is a woman? That's  the level of the discussion. [This] focus has  silenced the discussion on the issues.  But, in this election, we have also seen  that it is not enough for women to get into  positions of power. We have learned that a  Kim Campbell can continue to put forward  and support the same kind of empty Tory  policies. Women aren't fooled. We are not  going to vote on the basis of gender, and it  was a miscalculation by the Tory party [to  suggest] that if the Tories had a new face, a  woman, somehow that would be enough to  appease everybody.  When NAC came out criticizing Tory  policies [under Campbell], there was some  concern we would be set up as women  fighting women. But by focusing on policies, on the systemic forms of discrimination  women face, systemic racism, and inequalities built into our structures of power, we  were able to avoid letting the discussion  disintegrate to that level.  Jaffer: There have been all-candidates  debates on women's issues in most parts of  the country, and yet, that hasn't happened at  the national level. What happened to NAC's  campaign for a nationally televised debate  on women's issues?  Thobani: The NDP was the only party  committed to doing it. The other parties, the  Tories and Liberals had decided from the  beginning that they were not going to address women's issues.  One of the arguments we he'ard was  that there isn't an interest in women's issues.  It's so obviously not true—there have been  numerous forums, all-candidates meetings,  town hall meetings where women have been  raising these issues. During the nationally  televised debate in English, as soon as they  opened the floor to the audience, women  stood up and asked questions on child care,  violence against women, and abortion.  NAC also conducted a survey of about  10,000 people, and 80 per cent of the people  polled said that if NAC were to organi/.e a  debate on women's issues they would be  committed to watching it. Women want these  questions answered. The politicians are not  responding to them, deliberately not responding.  Jaffer: Women's voices may not have  been carried to the public in the mainstream  media, but I know, at least in BC, women  have been actively organizing around elec-  ediK  i, hoi  iing, income a  When you cut social programs, you  attack equality rights. What people are saying is, "Sorry, we cannot afford equality."  We hear the same kind of arguments when  we talk about employment equity and pay  equity: "Yeah, they're nice ideas, but we just  can't afford them." People across the country are learning to defend inequality, to value  inequality and to say, "Yes, that is how we  have to go into the future." It's a really  destructive path to be going down.  The women's movement's campaign  has been geared around arguing that we can  afford equality, we can be moving ina differ-  tion issues. What have you found in your  travels across the country during the campaign? Is that progressive voice still alive on  the ground?  Thobani: Absolutely. There is no doubt  about it. There are all these incredible things  happening all across the country. NAC has  been organizing events across the country  and the number of people who have come to  them is incredible. Women are turning out  in record numbers.  When I was in PEI, I met a 13-year-old  woman who wants to start a woman's centre  in her high school! There is definitely an  interest in what's happening in the women's  movement and in NAC, and real enthusiasm and energy about the changes that are  taking place in society.  I believe [NAC is getting that interest]  because many see NAC as a strong, progressive alternative and because there is no progressive alternative at the national level right  now.  Women of colour across the country  have also been interested in NAC to an  unprecedented level and they are taking  space and finding ways to be active in NAC.  Certainly, NAC has been trying hard in our  election campaign to focus on the rise of  racism in this society, like the changes proposed to immigration, particularly with Kim  Campbell assigning immigration to the portfolio of public security and thereby associating all immigrants with criminality.  If you look at the rise of the Reform  Party, the outcome of this election directly  a f fects women of colour and immigrant communities. Reform is running on a clear and  openagenda—anti-woman, anti-immigrant,  anti-people of colour, anti-francophone.  Theyhave been running thatcampaign quite  successfully and have attracted some of the  most right-wing and racist candidates. The  policies they put out will have very racist  and very sexist consequences.  Overall, the campaign has shifted the  national discussion to the right. You see it  reflected when people talk about how "we  can no longer afford social programs." It has  become "common knowledge" in this country that we can no longer afford social programs. Yet social programs redistribute  wealth in this society. They are based on the  principle that everyone, regardless of income, has an absolute right to health care,  ent direction. Women have to recognize the  right-wing political agenda as an attack on  equality rights.  Jaffer: So where will we be after October  25th?  Thobani: Well, there is no doubt that  social programs will be targeted for cutbacks. We are facing a dismantling of the  welfare state. The question is, how far will  the next government go. Whatever the government looks like after the 26th, there has to  be an all out fight to protect social programs,  to protect medicare. That is an absolute necessity.  In terms of violence-against-women  work, the Liberals say they will continue to  fund women's groups. But we know that the  Reform Party is absolutely opposed to that,  and if they have the balance of power, we are  going to see them put pressure on the Liberals.  Jaffer: How about the Bloc Quebecois?  Thobani: I don't think the Bloc is going to  target women's programs as the Reform  Party will clearly do. Themost serious threat  comes from the Reform. No matter what  government comes in, we have to be out  there fighting to protect that funding. Funding for women's groups is going to be a big  battle.  If advocacy groups and equality-seeking groups are all cut back, only people who  are wealthy will have a voice and representation. That's the clear political agenda in'  this country—that only the elite can set the  agenda and have representation. We have to  continue to say that it is not acceptable.  Jaffer: Yet, it's getting harder for progressive movements to manoeuvre with this  much right-wing pressure on us.  Thobani:There is a crisis in the sense that  there are very few national bodies to look up  to. There are no political parties offering  alternatives which have any chance of getting support. The most tragic thing that has  happened to the NDP is that it is no longer  seen as analternative—and it never will be in  the sense that people used to think it could  be.  It's on the ground that all these changes  are taking place. Right now, the women's  movement is seen as the most progressive  force there is in this country, not only in the  sense of representing women's issues, but  also in doing anti-racism work.  While we are often told that the women's movement is a white women's movement and that it is now being "inclusive of  women of colour," what is really happening  is that feminism is being redefined. Women  of colour have been feminists since feminism existed, and groups that want to defend an exclusionary definition of feminism  a re not going to survive. It's not a question of  being inclusive and opening the doors. It is  one of looking at how exclusionary organizations are, and how to change that. We  need to look at how priorities have been  defined in ways that have silenced huge  Communities of women and say this is not  acceptable. The priorities of organizations  are under question and we are really learning to define our issues and our struggles in  ways that are empowering, that bring us  together, and give us strength.  Whatever the  government looks like  after the 26th, there has  to be an all out fight to  protect social  programs...  When I became president [of NAC],  there were all kinds of predictions of doom—  that the organization would disintegrate,  that things would change for the worse. In  fact, quite the opposite has happened. By  dealing with racism and making anti-racism  a central partof ourwork, weareessentially  democratizing the feminist movement so  people have control over their lives and how  they represent themselves. NAC has come  out stronger, not weaker.  We have learned something really valuable, that [broadening the feminist movement] is something that needs to happen  more because it strengthens our movement  and builds coalitions in a way where it is no  longer [as easy to] divide and rule [us]. NAC  is now seen as a credible force. People are  learning that lesson, learning to recognize  that we are experiencing the attacks in different ways, but from the same source, and  that we need to be fighting the right-wing,  and building coalitions.  Jaffer: The women's movement is also  the strongest socially progressive movement  globally right now, in every country. Women  globallyarerecognizinghowthewaragainst  us is being fought, and how we are being  oppressed and marginalized by capitalism  and global restructuring. InCanada, wehave  been moving towards what I think is going  on internationally—building a very powerful women's movement.  Thobani: Yes, and it is a very different  women's movement which is emergingnow  because we've realised the attacks on women's rights in Canada are not just happening  here, they're happening across the world.  Even though in the past there have been  some international networks and international women's groups, the kind of growth  we're seeing today is qualitatively different.  It is much more rooted in women's lives, ii  the grassroots, with an analysis of class and  race. It is more on the ground and much  more radical globally, and [that's why] women's groups across the world are a real force  for change right now.   Thanks to Anita Fast for transcribing.  NOVEMBER 1993 Feature  Royal Commission on New Reproductive Technologies:  Been a long time coming  by Judy Morrison and  Christine Massey   Margaret Atwood's novel A Handmaid's  Tale describes a bleak society where a class of  women has been reduced to baby machines,  walking wombs. Written 20 years ago, this  tale might have been seen as science fiction.  In our present day context, it has the potential to become science fact.  Researchers conducting medical experiments in reproductive technologies apparently seek ways of artificially reproducing  what women have always done naturally  (and quite successful ly). Artificial insemina -  tion, in vitro fertilization ("test tube babies"),  surrogacy, freezing of embryos, ova and  sperm, experiments on embryos, prenatal  diagnosis, and other techniques are among  practices designed to furtheralienate women  from our bodies and affect our ability to  choose what happens to our bodies.  In Canada, women have been witness  to the virtually unfettered growth of these  medical techniquesand there hasbeen growing concern at the lack of legislation, dialogue or even public awareness.  In 1985, the Ontario Law Reform Commission produced a report called Human  Artificial Reproduction and Other Related Matters. It was the closest Canada ever came to  legislation that could confront the myriad of  reproductiveand genetic techniques in practice. But it was woefully inadequate—an  effort that represented only the views of five  male lawyers and involved no public input.  Dissatisfied with government inaction,  feminists lobbied for an assessment of and  public educationaround these technologies,  who profits from them, and the role of pharmaceuticals in their development.  One group of feminists, organized by  Margrit Eichler, a sociologist professor at the  Ontario Institute for Studies in Education,  formed- the Coalition for a Royal Commission on New Reproductive Technologies.  The coalition lobbied the government for a  public process—a royal commission—to  critically and publicly discuss the many issues related to reproductiveand genetic technologies.  In October 1989, the federal government of Canada announced the mandate of  the Royal Commission on New Reproductive Technologies and feminists looked forward to a truly public dialogue on these vital  issues. Four years later—after three extensions of their deadline and numerous controversies that have largely discredited the  commission's validity—the Commission is  finally going to make public its report on  November 15.  The coalition saw in a royal commission  firstly, an opportunity for focusing the public and media's attention on the issues and  bringing forth public debate, and secondly,  the possibility thata royal commission could  allocate funds for desperately needed research. Royal commissions can be potentially valuable tools for tackling issues of  national scope. Despite their limitations—  appointed and funded by the state, royal  commissions can be subject to political pressures—no other state instrument is as open,  public, flexible or free to consider almost  limitless policy options. At a time when our  system of representative democracy has revealed its weaknesses, royal commissions  offer a unique opportunity for a meaningful  public role in decision making.  Within a year, however, this royal commission began to raise concerns among  women in three main areas: its administration; its research; and its public consultations [see Kinesis, Feb/92]. As these became  morealarming,thecoalitionand other women's groups withdrew their support of the  commission and the coalition became its  outspoken watchdog.  A commission gone awry  When the commission was first appointed, responsibility for its administration was given to a UBC geneticist, Patricia  Baird, the only full-timeCommissioner. This  was contrary to the coalition's demands that  a social scientist not a biomedical expert be  appointed chair of the Commission. The  othersixpart-timecommissionerswerenever  included indecisions regardingthecommis-  sion's work even though they were led to  believe that they would be.  They made repeated requests to Baird  and the government for more involvement  in the commission's decision-making process. In December 1991, four of the commissioners filed lawsuits against Baird and the  government asking, among other things, for  a reversal of an August 1990 government  order-in-council conferring almost full  power on Baird. They were fired.  Their being fired removed their legal  standing to sueand they were forced to drop  their suit. While the official Commission  stand, as reported by the mainstream media,  attributed the dispute to "ideological" (read  "feminist") differences, extensive evidence  of Baird's refusal to share power is contained in federal court documents laid out in  the suit.  The research plan was also the focus of  many complaints and struggles, and is mentioned in the lawsuits. For good reason. The  research plan was cloaked in secrecy. At the  time of the suit by the four commissioners,  there remained 50 research projects that the  commissioners had not been allowed to see.  This research should have been used in  the recommendations of the Commission to  the federal government which, in turn might  use these recommendations as the basis for  creating laws and policies governing reproductive and genetic practices. Feminists, long  concerned with the dominance of reproductive technologies by medical experts, wanted  to ensure that some critical analysis of the  social and political effects would be included.  The National Action Committee on the  Status of Women (NAC) and the Coalition  had to resort to a freedom-of-information  request to get copies of research contracts. In  a classic example of conflict of interest, it  was discovered that one of these contracts  was awarded to an international public relations firm, Burson-Marstellar, which counts  among its clients several pharmaceutical  firms. This company was paid $66,000 to  produce a report on the commercialization  of new reproductive technologies.  Furthermore, there was concern about  the public and democratic element of the  Commission: the education of, consultation  with and debate among Canadians. Expectations were high regarding these issues.  The feminist community in particular felt  considerable urgency over the work of the  Royal Commission and was eager to be involved in the hearings. The Commission  further fuelled hopes for widespread involvement of Canadian citizens by proclaiming its "total society" approach to public  participation.  The "total society" approach raised hope  that the royal commission was truly interested in effectively engaging the public in  discussionsof complicated and little-known  issues like reproductive and genetic technologies, and would realise the need for  public education above everything else. People have to be able to cut through the exclu  sive and intimidating scientific jargon in  order to grapple with the crucial social issues of reproductive technologies. This Royal  Commission failed to adequately perform  this role. The public, without the benefit of  aneducationalcampaign,has been relegated  to the periphery, while members of the medical and scientific community, having been  allowed to conduct an exclusive debate in  their own "language" continue to dominate  the centre.  Hearings are one way of generating  discussion and gathering information about  a subject. Some inquiries provide intervenor  funding to help gr sroots groups develop  their own expertise and organize a submission toa commission. This Commission provided no such funding.  The Commission also chose to conduct  the hearings in an intimidating and unfriendly format. Commissioners travelled  to seven major cities in Canada (we will  never know how many rural women were  excluded by this action) where they were set  up in large ballrooms of luxurious hotels.  No child care was offered. Seating arrangements at the hearings were such that the  commissioners were seated at a large table  in the front of the room, facing a smaller  table where the speaker sat. Communication was a one-way process, from the  intervenor to the commissioners. Opportunity for questions was given only to the  commissioners. There was no opportunity  for formal discussion among participants.  The lack of funding and public education, scientific jargon and format of the hearings all favoured experts and doctors over  ordinary women. Thehearings, which could  have been a site for effective public involvement, were instead constructed in a way that  prevented them from contributing significant input to the Commission's work.  Even under these circumstances, feminist communities were still somewhat represented at the hearings and made some  valuable contributions in every city.  Nov 15—How women will proceed?  On November 15, after three extensions  as well as a federal election and a potential  change in government, the Royal Commission on New Reproductive Technologies  will deliver its long a waited report. If women  are not satisfied with theCommission's work,  there is still time to make their voices heard.  We must approach the Commission's recommendations with a critical mind. Reproductive and genetic technologies have implications for not only women, but people  withdisabilities, Aboriginal peoples, people  of colour, and lesbians and gays. Recommendations designed to strike a compromise between the medical community and  these peoples are not acceptable. What appears to be compromise only serves to uphold a power structure favouring the medical and scientific communities in place.  As we survey the report of the Royal  Commission, here are some questions we  can ask:  •Have these technologies been proven  to be effective and safe?  •Are long term risks known? Are women  advised of them?  •How do the touted benefits compare to  the risks, both known and unknown?  •What kind of choices do these technologies offer women that they didn't have  before? Are we going to be able to make  informed choices?  •Are all choices actively supported: for  example, the choice of a woman to refuse  technological intervention into her pregnancy?  •In light of society's current attitudes  toward people with disabilities, how will  the technologies impact upon this community?  •What is the difference between these  technologies and eugenics?  •Are expensive reproductive technologies the best way to deal with routine pregnancies or infertility? What does it say about  health care priorities?  •Are equivalent amounts of money being directed to education and prevention?  •Are pregnant women being "treated"  more and more as sick patients?  •Should these technologies be upheld,  are they going to be made equally accessible  to all groups in society?  This list is by no means complete in  responding to this report. It is imperative  that we draw upon our own experiences to  make real the impact of these technologies.  Whatever our assessment of the Commission's work, we now have an opportunity to  advance the debate beyond the scientific and  medical language in which it has been cast.  Rather than let another government report  sit on a shelf, we must actively insist on a  more inclusive debate that will allow us to  better reclaim our bodies.  Judy Morrison and Christine Massey are  members of Vancouver Women's New  Reproductive Technologies Coalition and  study and write about the Royal Commission on New Reproductive Technologies at  Simon Fraser University in Burnaby, BC.  EastsicIe DATAGRAphlCS  1460 Commerci'aL Dmve  i teL: 255-9559 Fax: 255-507?  OfficE SuppliEs  Now In Stock!  Art Supplies  1994 Date Books  Quo Vadis, Dayrunner, Brownline  ^-Unjoin Shop  CaU or fAx ancJ we'U sencJ you our MONThly flyER  of qREAi officE supply spEciAls.  Free NEXT'dAy dElivERy.  10  NOVEMBER 1993 Feature  Taking back  the night  by Zeenat F. Aman  Women took back the night this year in record numbers, in more places in Canada than  ever before...and were louder, prouder and livelier at most of the Take Back the Night  marches that took placelast September!  Of the 43 marches across the country, 12 were held in BC communities alone—the BC  communities of Prince George, Cranbrook and Penticton held their first Take Back marches  ever. And while it was the second Take Back the Night march in Victoria, the 600-strong  march was held without a City permit for the first time and was not shut down by the police.  Most surprisingly, the largest Take Back the Night march in the country was the almost  4,000-strong one in Vancouver on September 24. The march, traditionally held withouta City  permit, also took place without police interference.  "Ours is supposed to have been the biggest, loudest and liveliest," says Mary Mc AHster  of Vancouver Rape Relief and Women's Shelter. Rape Relief has organized the march in  Vancouver every year since its inception in 1978. Mc Alister was a key organizer of the event  this year.  Not only was it the largest crowd the Vancouver march has ever drawn, there was a  noticeable increase in the numberof younger women present. Coinciden tally, the march was  led this year by younger women on skateboards from the Vancouver chapter of Riot Girls,  a feminist organization for women aged 14-25, which originated in the US.  "We were thrilled with the attendance," says McAlister. She points out that another  highlight of the night "was the number of women's groups who were in attendance. There  were many, many, transition houses, women's centres...It was wonderful to have those  women's groups named [by emcee Elvenia Gray] because it was an opportunity to  acknowledge the work all year of those groups.  "It also was a demonstration of the level of unity in the women's movement locally,  which is great."  Speakers at the Vancouver march included a surprise appearance by Sunera Thobani,  president of the National Action Committee on the Status of Women (NAC), who happened  to be in town on a speaking engagement; Fawzia Ahmed of Women Against Violence  Against Women/Rape Crisis Centre; Monique Wilson of Rape Relief; and Kelly White.  Political actions announced at the march included: NAC's postcard campaign to  demand a pre-election, party leaders, nationally televised debate on women's issues;  Elizabeth Fry Society's postcard campaign to protest the incarceration of women prisoners  for defensive crimes against their abusers; and the South Asian Women's Coa li tion's petition  supporting the boycott of local community newspapers that promote female foeticide by  publishing advertisements of sex-selection services.  McAlister points out that other Take Back marches across the country also had  remarkable highpoints this year. Calgary's marchdrew a record 500, who marched along the  sports-bar strip on Electric Avenue. Thompson, Manitoba held its largest march ever; over  70 people marched along a street they had identified as needing better lighting. And  Cornwall, Ontario held its first women-only Take Back march, which drew 150 women,  double last year's attendance. "They told us perhaps more women came because they didn't  have to deal with men this year," McAlister reports. "Whatever the reason, the high  attendance at marches this year shows the solidarity of women and the high level of concern  about violence against women on the streets across the country."  Clockwise from upper right: About 4,000 women in  front of the art gallery; the Downtown Eastide  Women's Centre with their banner; Elrenia Gray of  Rape Relief emceed the rally; Kelly White and  Cecelia Wyss performed a song about Anna Mae  Aquash, a Native activist who was murdered; a Riot  Grrrl and her skateboard with friend; and  unidentified woman holding one of the many anti-  rape signs in various languages  NOVEMBER 1993 Anti-racism,,^     . .  a nfemmis  by Agnes Huang, Smita Patil and Lynne Wanyeki    The following is a conversation on the "backlash" against women of colour in femimst  communities which focuses on thereaction to an incident at a transition house in Toronto [see box].  A longer version of this conversation, done as a two-media project, aired in June on Obaa, a show  produced by and for women of colon rand First Na tions women on Co-op Radio in Vancouver. Agnes  Huang is a Chinese feminist activist; Smita Patil is a Kenyan-born South Asian lesbian feminist who  worksat a women's centre, Lynne Wanyeki is a chotara Kenyan anda member of the Obaa collective.  Lynne Wanyeki:The point of this conversation is to talk about "Callwoodism"—not just  June CaUwood, but what she stands for. It's interesting we've started using this term  Callwoodism—we have to question the kind of attention [CaUwood] has drawn to herself.  Shehasbecomeasymboloftheresistancetoanti-racist work beingdoneinfeministand other  communitiesacrossthecountry I've already heard at meetings CaUwood's "example" being  used when someone doesn't want to deal with something racist that's being addressed. You  know, someone mutters defensively, "Oh, this is just what women of colour did to June  CaUwood." $*£G&£-xjlx  Smita Patil: Yet it's not a new thingat all. We'veall encountered theattitude: "we've done  our anti-racist work, can't we put it aside now that you've got your power and get on with  the 'real' work of feminism?" Basically, most kinds of anti-racist work are being considered  a plot by women of colour...to take over, to steal power from white women.  In fact, that is how CaUwood put it in some of the interviews she has done with the  media; that she, as a woman, has no power so why are women of colour accusing her of  having power over them?  Agnes Huang: Well, as a white woman in a white supremacist culture, she has power.  Women like CaUwood deny their power because they don't want to take responsibility for  addressing their racism. She certainly can't deny she has influence in this society.  Patil: Yes. And what was particularly appalling is that she used every bit of that  "influence" to attack the women of colour at Nellie's. CaUwood took her story to the media  shortly after she resigned. The story was written by a national wire service, so almost every  local paper picked it up. I read versionsof that story in The Globe and Mail and The Vancouver  Sun. Yet there has only been one side of this issue: the mainstream media has not published  a story from the perspective of the women of colour at Nellie's, just a couple of opinion  pieces.  Huang: I also haven't seen any feminist newspapers talk to women of colour about the  incident. [The Womanist has since featured Black feminist Carol-Anne Wright's account of the  events that took place at Nellie's in their August issue. CKLN community radio in Toronto also  broadcast a conversation with feminists of colour responding to the media attention that the incidents  at Nellie's have received.]  Every article that has been published so far has focused on CaUwood, her contribution  to the women's community, and the "falseness" of this charge of racism by women of colour.  Quota, a lesbian monthly in Toronto, ranan interview with CaUwood, a straight woman, that  oasicatiy portrays ner as a victim ottnese angry women ot colour, reriecting very mucn  the attitude Callwood has: that, "after all she's done for women of colour...  Patil: "...the minute women of colour have power, they grab and use it against white  women; [that} women of colour have the power to call a white woman a racist and therefore  to silence her."  Huang: Even The Globe and Mail in presenting this issue in an editorial basically said: June  Callwood is a racist, but that means so are all of us because look at the work June Callwood  has done. [In this way, they've] negated what racism really is.  Patil: Yeah, and it's not just the mainstream media, that same thing happens all around:  "we don't call you paki or nigger so how can we be racist? We let you into our feminist  collectives, we work with you, we give you jobs through affirmative action, what more do  you want?"  Huang: And "we go through a few anti-racist workshops too."  Patil and Wanyeki:... oh, yeah, the workshops...  Patil:... which is all part of the work, but they're not doing it for women of colour. The  whole assumption here is that racism is a "women of colour" issue. But it's not our issue or  our problem; it's the problem of white society, of white culture. White people are racist,  they're always going to be racist; they don't suddenly become not-racist. It's an unlearning  process, but as longas they live ina society whose structures are inherently racist, they're part  of and profit from those structures. We're talking about systemic racism.  Wanyeki: It's tedious to go through this, but I do feel it's important to say "white" is a  race too. [White people] have never been specific about where they come from. If they're not  specific about where they come from, they can't be specific at all about their relations to  different specificities.  One of the things 1 wanted to bring us back to was the idea that "women of colour are  taking over." Callwood says that there's a notion of superiority that seems to underlie most  women of colour's activism. Well, I think we've seen that idea play itself out with what  happened with Sunera Thobani [National Action Committee on the Status of Women's  president].  Patil: I think Sunera is a classic example That assumption of taking over has very much  to do with a sense of being threatened, and the fact is, when white women address their  privilege, they are going to feel loss. Feminists, of all people, should understand that. There's  been an enormous backlash against women from men. With any loss of privilege, there is  fear, there is a sense of threat, and there is backlash.  To bring it back to Sunera, everyone was up in arms about her election as president of  NAC, defending her or attacking her—it was such a big deal. Yes, it is a big deal: she's the  first woman of colour president of NAC, a very important organization in this country. But  nobody cared in the same way when Judy Rebick became president of NAC. The kind of  attack we saw on Sunera was just unbelievable.  Huang: It's a flipping of the issues. Women of colour have been raising issues about  racism and about white privilege. And now, we are seen as "privileged" because we can cal I  Callwood and other white women racists. Meanwhile, not d, we still live in  a white supremacist state. We're just not as silenced as we once were.  Wanyeki: Yeah. It was just a year ago that feminist communities across the country were  up in arms supporting Pandora's right to be a woman-only space. That case hinged upon the  notion that reverse sexism cannot occur when you live in a society that's sexist and  Confrontin  by Smita Patil  In 1991, issues of representation, access to services, and power sharing at Nellie's Hostel  in Toronto were raised at numerous meetings between staff, board and the women of colour  caucus. In May 1992, board member, June Callwood resigned from the board, claimingitSe  had been "falsely" accused of racism by women of colour staff and board members.  Following CaUwood's resignation, a number of articles capitalizing on the anti-racism  and feminism debate in the women's movement were published in mainstream newspapers  and magazines. The following is a summary of some of those articles.  On June 15,1992, The Globe and Mail, published a story on Callwood by Canadian Press  reporter Jean Kavanagh. Callwood, a long-time "pioneer" in social agencies, writer, fundraiser, director of the Canadian Civil Liberties Association, and recipient of the Order of  Canada, is portrayed as a victim of the Nellie's women of colour caucus.  The opening paragraph reads: "Today, devastated by charges of racism from some of  [Nellie's Hostel's] newest members, Callwood...is dealing with a pain she says is as  paralysing as losing a loved one."  The reporter writes that "neither Callwood nor board members at Nellie's will discuss  details of the accusations and ensuing arguments." It then quotes CaUwood's version of the  events that led to her being called a racist. The Canadian Press story was picked up by a  number of newspapers across the country.  In March 1993, a nine-page article on Callwood by Elaine Dewar called, "Wrongful  Dismissal: Angry Anti-racists drove June Callwood from Nellie's..." was published by  Toronto Life Magazine.  The article, a long, convoluted attack on many people working in different progressive  and political communities in Toronto, attempts a detailed portrait of anti-racist, communist  "conspiracy;" and alleges that the feminist movement has been taken over by largely  working-class people of colour, their white allies and other left-wing "predators" on  "broken-winged victims."  The article also makes detailed references to the funding sources of every feminist  organization with women of colour staff or women of colour organizations, and alleges ways  in which funds are being (mis)spent.  misogynist. Yet here's women saying "well, reverse sexism can't occur, but reverse racism  certainly can."  Patil: Yes. In CaUwood's case, all the articles refer to how much she's done for the  women's movement, where she's come from, everything she's had to live through... We see  that all around as a defense, like: "after the enormous contribution we've made, we've done  our work, leave us alone, we're exempt. We don't have to be accountable for our racism."  That's not a defense, that's obscuring...that's a red herring.  Everyone recognizes the work women do as feminists. When feminists of colour work  in feminist organizations, we also do so in good faith—it isn't about wanting to become part  of a movement that basically excludes us, it's about changing a movement so that we can  operate in it. Yes, there is going to be pushing. The women's movement is stronger than it  ever has been and women of colour are at the forefront of that, the changes in the women's  community have been phenomenal, we' vecomea long way... baby. [Laughter] Enough of this  attitude that anti-racism has nothing to do with feminism anymore. But that's just what  Callwood is saying on a national scale... which is the only reason we're talking about her...  Wanyeki: Yes, it's not just about whatCallwood is saying, but about the kind of resistance  to anti-racist work that is suddenly legitimized by the symbol that she's become. I think all  of us have heard the term "Callwoodism " in the past few months in very different situations.  Patil: I've used it on a few occasions myself, but I think I mean something entirely  different. [Laughter]  Wanyeki: But it's being used against women of colour and we're quite resentful that we  feel the need to talk about issues of backlash because it takes time away from our own issues  and struggles.  Huang: Yeah. We spend most of our time now defending the work we do. I talked to  Carol-Anne Wright, who does a lot of other things apart from being on the women of colour  caucus at Nellie's. She said that because her name has been made so public as one of the  "foes" of Nellie's, everywhere she goes, she has to defend the work she does. She's one of the  women being held accountable for this "victimization" of June Callwood, this "attack," this  "confrontation" with Callwood.  Patil: Yes, it's women of colour who are losing their jobs in feminist centres because of  the backlash Callwood has legitimated.  When feminists of colour  work in feminist organizations,  we also do so in good faith—it isn't  about wanting to become  part of a movement that  basicaily excludes us,  it's about changing a movement  so that we can operate in it.   -Smita Patil  NOVEMBER 1993  -. ^Callwood is portrayed as a victim of "the new anti-racism movement," as are other  white people drawn into Dewar's commentary Terms like "women of colour" are deemed  part of "the language of anti-feminist Black American nationalists...language [that) spread  over Nellie's like a thickcloak over a pit trap."  The article repeatedly reinforces stereotypes of Black women and women of colour as  evil, venomous and inhuman It suggests that Black resistance to racism is destructive and  that anti-racism is a plot designed to destroy feminism and society in general Dewar cites  as an example workshops she attended at the Canadian Research Institute on the Advancement of Women (CRIAW) conference, Making the Links: Anti-racism and Feminism held in  November 1992. She describes CRIAW as a white feminist organization under seige by anti-  racist activists. She ends her description of a presentation at the conference called  "Deconstructing White Supremacy" with: "In short, feminist attendees [white women] were  told how to become handmaidens to their new leaders [women of colour]."  The Dewar article prompted a large protest by feminists and other progressive communities outside the offices of Toronto Life.  The following month, Saturday Night Magazine published a 12-page story on Callwood.  "White Woman's Burden" by Adele Freeman carried the sub-title—a summary of sortsof the  article's contents—"June Callwood seemed like the last woman anyone would call a racist  Was she insensitive to the needs of an institution she created or did the politics of anti-racism  push her over the colour line?"  While the writer attempts a less vitriolic, more balanced tone, and unlike the Toronto Life  article, quotes a couple of women of colour from Nellie's, a large part of the article focuses  on CaUwood's childhood, life, family and career. Ultimately, this article sketches a portrait  of Callwood as a woman wronged and battered by charges of racism, and women of colour  as victims of their own rage.  Five complaints to the Ontario Human Rights Coalition have been filed by women Of -  colour at Nellie's and are pending or under investigation. Two groups have formed to deal  with the ensuing backlash against women of colour: Coalitionof Woman of Colour Working  in Women's and Community Services; and the Women of Colour former Staff and Board  Members Still Struggling for Justice.  One of the things I find  really exciting  right now is that women of colour  are at the place where  we can examine our relationships >| ft  among ourselves ...  We're coming to the place  where we are dealing with all this backlash,  but at the same time,  we are leaving it behind.  -Lynne Wanyeki  Wanyeki: Among our own circles, we sort of go "Yeah, yeah, Callwoodism, nothing  new." It's just a new version of how the term "politically correct" is being used.  Patil: You mean using the term " politically correct" to basicaUy shut us up when we say  something that is considerate of or sensitive to other people? And now it's "Callwoodism."  You're right, it's a different word, but it's the same old thing, basically.  Wanyeki: But Callwoodism issrillquite serious because it's undermining everything we  work for, it's undermining the entire Left.  Patil: And the kind of power Callwood has wasn'tavailable to us 20 years ago. She's the  icon of the non-profit sector in Toronto and has national standing. That kind of power is  frightening, especially when she lets it be used against progressive movements. The  women's movement has to move together, and for the most part there is that kind of change,  that kind of movement. For instance, NAC's popularity has been largely due to the pushing  of women of colour from within the organization, cha ngingtheorganiza tion to make it more  grassroots and accountable, strengthening the women's movement. But it's becoming  extremely dangerous for us because women like CaUwood, who do have access to some  power, can undo the work we do. It has become twice as difficult to be out there as a woman  of colour because there is this new defense: people sit in the room and say "this is just like  theJuneCallwoodthing,I'm not a racist." And women of colour shut up,because if wedon't,  we're liable to get fired...and what happens to the work that needs to get done?  Wanyeki: I want to come back to the idea that we are fragmenting the movement. Was  it two years ago that the conference in Banff forfeminists working in mental health was held?  A South African woman, Rozena Maart, who's now based in Toronto, read a poem about  NOVEMBER 1993  anti-racist wink over dinner and the white women got quite upset. First Nations women  offered to have a circle to try to bridge what was going on. So it ended up that the "good"  brown women were the First Nations women and the "bad" brown women were the Black  women. Of course, the media picked it up and loved it because the women were fighting  again Back to the old stereotypes about "hen-pecking" among women, the feminist  movement coming apart and so on And that's the perception—that when we do anti-racist  work, when we challenge the white supremacy of feminists, we become the people who are  tearing the movement apart and we're doing it just to hurt them. They come up with words  like "wounded" and "battered." It's repulsive  Patil: [Uke] the pain of us holding them accountable is overwhelming; never mind the  pain of us having to deal with their racism.  Huang: White women have to get off this trip. This is what the feminist movement has  been and is about, because women of colour have always been involved and we've always  been doing this work We've fought for the visibility we now have. I don't think any one of  us is trying tonegateor deny the history, the work that white women havedone. But, for sure,  that is what'shappening to us as womenof colour. LookatSunera and what happened when  she was elected to the presidency of NAC. White women were so focused on her immigrant  status that they seemingly forgot that she put NAC on the map in terms of new reproductive  technologies, and that she's done a lot of work around violence against women.  Joan Johnson, a Black staff member, was one of the women at Nellie's calling Callwood  on her racism. Callwood basically turned around and satd "how can Joan say all this after  all we've done for her?" Meanwhile, Johnson's saying, "how long do I have to continue to  pay for it?"  Wanyeki: Well, that's another white supremacist notion. All of us who come from ex-  colonies or are living here in Canada, which is essentially still a colony in terms of First  Nations peoples, know the missionary syndrome of white people, like, "we're helping you,  be grateful forour help" even though that "help" isactually dependent on our being grateful.  We don't need it, it's not suitable to us. They're new age missionaries! [Laughter]  Patil: That being said, I think one of the dangerous things about something like this is  that it can turn into more of an us-and-them situation than is actually the case. There are a  lot of white women who are allies, who are doing the work, who are working in good faith  with us. That is going on in the women's movement, which is w hy it's so strong—and why  we're under such attack. It's that old divide-and-rule maxim. Although that doesn't explain  or justify what is happening within the movement, our white women allies get called "sellouts," which discourages white women who do want to work with us. There is the tendency  to make white women fear us and they've got to overcome that.  Wanyeki: I'm not denying there are white women allies But at the same time, a lot of  white women who call themselves allies are used to listening to women of colour for  direction. So when something like this comes up, all of a sudden, they're on their own, and  there's confusion.  Huang: Many of them can't take a stand unless women of colour say "this is the stand  to take."  Patil: Yet something like "Callwoodism" undermines all women, all our work, and I  don't know why they need us to tell them that.  Huang: And they're totallyconfused when there's two women of colour with different  perspectives. Who's the "good" woman of colour?  Patil: The Callwood incident isnot isolated, but it's the largest one because it played itself  out on a national level. In May this year, the BC & Yukon Association of Women's Centres  (BC&Y) had a meeting, and some of the same issues came up. There were 65 women present,  six of whom were women of colour. Some political choices had to be made around  accessibility and being inclusive. The women of colour were scapegoated for talking about  anti-racism work. BC & Ydidn't finish their agenda, and womenof colour—oranti-racism—  have been identified as thecause. But it's notwomenofcolourwho bring up racism, it's white  women. The racism of the white women in that room was incredible, so the women of colour  responded to it and worked with it—they didn't walk out, they stayed through the entire  thing, trying to explain, trying to make the white women see what they were talking about.  We're running out of that kind of pa rience. What's happening is that women of colour  are saying "enough, you want to catch up to us, catch up to us, but we've got other work to  do." Enough explaining. If they really are trying to move ahead, they can't make women of  colour deal with white women's "pain." What we're saying over and over again is global,  we're sharing our experiences, we're learning how systemic this is worldwide. "This" is not  just anti-racism, it's feminism, it's the women's movement, it's the fight against the new  world order or whatever you want to call it.  Wanyeki: One of the tilings 1 find really exciting right now is that women of colour are  at the place where we can examine our relationships among ourselves, and specificaUy, in  the Canadian context, we can stop, re-focus our goals and talk among ourselves about how  we can make genuine and useful alliances with First Nations women. We're coming to the  place where we are dealing with all this backlash, but at the same time, we are leaving it  behind.  Patil: And getting on with the work of getting along and making alliances.   Thanks to: Eun-Sook Lee for sending us a copy of a piece on Callwoodism done for CKLN  Radio Toronto, during their coverage of International Women's Day 1993; Dionne Brand,  Punam Kltosla, Rita Kohli and Carol-Anne Wright who were featured in that piece; Lydia  Masemola for technical assistance at Obaa; and Sur Mehat for transcribing. RISKY, RIBALD, RADICAL  ■ John Griffin, The Gazette, Montreal  "SASSY AND CELEBRATORY.  A TERRIFIC ROMP"  ■ Noah Cowan, Eye Weekly, Toronto  Compelling, often  hilarious and t  always rebellious,  the ten women  interviewed in  Forbidden Love  paint a portrait  of lesbian sexuality  and survival in '  Canada during the 1950s  and '60s, when lesbian love  was "the love that dare not  speak its name."  85 minutes        l£j  Closed captioned  •888  FdrbMden  Loi/e  ***2»*  AERLYN WEISSMAN, LYNNE FER  MARGARET PETTIGREW, GINNY STIKEMAN  ^E*S?!«*.  Yes! I want to purchase:  FORBIDDEN LOVE  • P.E.I., N.B., N.S., I  • All other provinces  TOTAL (A)  Enter 7% GST  = TOTAL (B)  Enter shipping & handling (taxes inclL  TOTAL (B) + PST + SHIPPING & HANDLING = GRAND TOTAL  □  Please send rr  e information on the NFB's collection of videos o  J women's cultures, politics and values.  I wish to pay by:  I   Cheque (enclosed, made out to Receiver General for Canada)  | | Purchase order (attached)  □ S LUJ L±^ LLU  am i i i i i I i i 1 i i i i i i i i i i i  Expiry date    I   HOW TO ORDER  Please complete this order form and mail to:  National Film Board of Canada or  Women's Marketing, D-5  P.O. Box 6100, Station A  Montreal, PQ   H3C 3H5  Fax: 514-496-2573  Attention: Women's Marketing  Cardholder signature Arts  Film review: The Burning Season;  Burning for whom?  by Yasmin Jiwani   THE BURNING SEASON  Directed by Harvey Crossland,  Produced by Annette Cohen and Amarjeet  S. Rattan  Vancouver International Film Festival,  October 1993  It's night time. A young, attractive, Sou th  Asian woman leaves the motel office with  keys and heads to her room. Outside, an  older South Asian man waits at the door. As  soon as she comes, he accosts her. "Where is  she?" he cries out.  She braces herself against the door, as if  to protect a cherished possession inside. A  struggle ensues. Suddenly, the man pulls  out the woman's hands. He gazes at the  intricate henna designs painted on the palms  of her hands. He backs off, goes to the hood  of his pick-up truck positioned a few yards  away, doubles over and starts to cry. She,  triumphant, gazes at him, then slowly goes  into the room. Over the bathroom sink, she  wipes the lipstick off her face and smiles at  her own image."  So ends The Burning Season. Directed by  Anglo-Canadian Harvey Crossland, the film  took five years to make and had a budget of  $1.5 million. It was the Western Canadian  Gala film at last month's Vancouver International Film Festival.  The story traces the evolution of "oppressed and frustrated South Asian-Canadian wife" to "liberated woman." That liberation is catalyzed by her having an affair  with a Rajput prince and following him to  his ancestral home in Rajasthan. There, even  though she is already married into a Brahmin-caste household, she undergoes a second marriage and becomes a Rajput princess.  The henna designs on the palms of her  hands signify her new status. It is this that  stops the man in the scene above, her Brah-  m in fa ther-in-la w, f rom his origina 1 intent—  striking her.  The power of tradition, signified by the  Rajput symbol of aristocracy (the henna),  contests the power of an imported tradition—the Brahmin allegiance as practised  on Canadian soil. Yet, The Burning Season  makes no attempt to explore the intricacies  of the caste system, nor does it make clear  why the Rajputs (in India) exercise more  social and cultural power than the Brahmins  (in Canada). Instead, the film deals with the  emancipation of one woman who flees an  "inherently oppressive and tradition-bound  cultural system."  That South Asian cultures are oppressive, backward, tradition-bound and rigid,  is part of a larger stereotype that has now  invaded popular culture. Arranged marriages, the subordination of women, barbaric cultural practices, et cetera, are signs in  the language used to construct this stereotype. The Burning Season furthers this stereotype with much fanfare.  A characteristic theme of most colonial  literature is the "exotic" contextual background against which the white hero's adventurous exploits occur. The recent mainstream, City of Joy, carried this theme to its  very end, where white hero Patrick Swayze  (patronizingly) rescues the inhabitants of an  Indian slum.  Unlike City of Joy, a Hollywood product, The Burning Season is a Vancouver production, and focuses on a young South Asian-  Canadian woman, Sanda (played by Akesh  Gill). But it utilizes the same thematic by  providing an "exotic" cultural backdrop  against which Sanda discovers herself. Ac  cording to director Crossland, The Burning  Season "is not an ethnic film [but a film]  about a woman's journey."  If this were truly a film about a woman's journey, why does the journey take  place in India? Why not in Surrey or at 49th  and Main, the Punjabi Market area in Vancouver? Does Sanda, asa South Asian woman  in Canada, have "to go back" to rediscover  herself? Or is it another twist to the colonial  plot, where the colonizer sought to discover  himself in an exotic setting.  Producer Amarjeet Rattan has stated  that: "The reason we made [The Burning  Season] was to entertain people,and through  entertainment people develop ideas. There  are people who don't know anything about  India, have never been to India, or might just  have some Indian friends. This is going to  give them more insight into the culture." So  Indian culture(s) are once again fitted into  stereotypic paradigms of white consumption. This time, under the guise of a woman's  liberation.  TheBurningSeasonbreaksone mould by  focusing on the life of a woman as opposed  to a man, in contrast to the male focus of  recent films dealing with India or South  Asians in the West, such as Masala, Sam and  Me, and Lonely in America. Another point of  departure is that The Burning Season deals  with the archetypal phenomenon of "going  back," of liberation through a rediscovery of  tradition and a rejuvenation of the weight of  that tradition. Sanda "goes back" to India,  but to a particular part of India—Rajasthan—  and she poses as a Rajput. Regional differences take the place of the colonially inscribed cultural/national differences.  Crossland plays with a paradox—the  weight of tradition that constricts 23 year-  old Sanda, compelling her to leave her uncommunicative husband (he doesn't say a  word throughout the film), and her tradition-bound father-in-law, and then rediscovering tradition in Rajasthan, through the  Rajput prince she has fallen in love with and  followed to his ancestral home. One interpretation of this paradox could be that tradition, as exercised in the Canadian context is  oppressive, but that rediscovering and revitalizing tradition, especially if that tradition  is the "genuine article," can be a source of  strength, identity, affirmation and liberation.  In the Canadian context, Indian practices and tradition are signified as being  patriarchal, oppressiveand rigid. Humanity  is significantly absent.  In The Burning Season, women are constrained by these cultural structures when  they rebel against them. Sanda is a subdued  woman who only comes alive in a classroom  context. Even her interactions with her child  are low-keyed. Most of the time she is quiet,  burning with contained frustration and anger. That frustration arises from her unhappiness over an arranged (first) marriage that  contains her within rigid, traditional familial structures. She is under pressure to produce a male child, but cannot because her  husband has a low sperm count. Her mother-  in-law is similarly quiet, watchingher daughter-in-law act out, but seemingly helpless to  do anything about it. She is the archetypal  self-sacrificing, suffering mother.  The story follows Sanda as she has an  affair with her Rajput tutor who turns out to  be a prince. "Prince Charming" Patwant  (played by Ayub Khan Din) fails to rescue  her and returns to his ailing father in India.  Sanda follows him there after their affair has  been discovered and her life is endangered  by her brutal father-in-law and her angry  husband (who still hasn't spoken a word).  Once in India, Sanda rediscovers the  weight of tradition as she fits into her lover's  Rajput household with its tradition-bound  ritualsand stratified roles. Patwant, her lover,  becomes as uncommunicative as her husband. Patwant's mother is a strong woman,  but her strength is derived from "knowing  her place and her role" in the Rajput  artistocracy. Patwant's father is about the  only humane character in the film. He is a  kind, old, and rather ill man who can no  longer fulfil his duties.  Akesh Gill as Sanda  In this context, in Rajasthan, on the agricultural lands owned by Patwant's family,  Sanda comes to play a more active role. She  accompanies Patwant around the countryside, explaining to women in the villages the  dangers they face if they agree to industrialization. This she does for Patwant—as she  says to him, it is the only way she can "be  with him." Hence, her activity, emancipatory as it seems in contrast to her previous  life in Canada, is male-defined, and ultimately in service of the man in her life.  Nonetheless, that is not enough, for  Patwant will not leave his traditional duty as  zamindar (landowner) for Sanda. His father  has died and his mother will not let him go.  So Sanda returns "home", back to Canada.  After giving up on her tradition-bound and  silent husband, she similarly gives up on  Patwant, her tradition-bound and now almost silent, lover. She has come unto herself.  She now knows who she is. Hence the last  scene, where Sanda stands before the mirror  in her motel room, gazing at herself, deliberately wiping off the lipstick, and smiling.  She is her own woman!  A cliched ending as any, but absurd in  the context of a South Asian woman liberating herself from a supposedly oppressive  cultural system. What does lipstick have to  do with anything? Sanda's liberation from  her father-in-law comes through showing  him the henna design on her hand. If that is  her ticket to liberation, why the lipstick?  Sanda in fact wins her freedom by alleging  she belongs to the Rajput artistocracy, which  is ultimately constructed as yet another tradition-bound cultural system.  Crossland's film has to be gauged within  the contextof South AsianrealitiesinCanada.  These realities are constantly struggling  against dominant stereotypes which typify  South Asian cultures as being highly oppressive, backward and tradition-bound.  Tradition as a link, as a source of grounded  identity in the flux of a diasporic existence, is  hardly ever entertained in the dominant interpretation except in those conditions where  it serves to affirm existing stereotypes—  where South Asians are seen as obsessively  in need of a cultural leg to stand on. The film  stereotypes South Asian cultures as oppressive to such an extent, that its weight com  pletely silences those who are victims of it.  Even Sanda hardly speaks. There are moments in the film where the term "pregnant  pause" would have to have an amazing  degree of elasticity if it were to apply. As a  viewer, there were times when I wanted to  scream, "Say something, anything, but say  something."  One wonders what burning reasons  prompted the production of The Burning  Season? Was it to reaffirm a contemporary  and popular stereotype—that South Asian  women are being oppressed by their backward cultural traditions, and we need to go  home to rediscover our true selves? Is it that  South Asian men are brutal oppressors or  wimps at best, and a woman's only source of  freedom is to leave them and, in that sense,  leave the upholders of patriarchal cultural  tradition?  If these are the messages the The Burning  Season hopes to communicate, it will surely  succeed, as its audience is largely white.  In this film, it seems the only way for  women to be emancipated is by following  "the route" laid down by the white version  of "the feminist movement." Yet it has long  been argued, validated and re-articulated  that, for women of colour, the family plays a  different role—rather than simply being a  site of oppression, the family often plays a  supportive role, acting as refuge, sheltering  individuals from the harsh realities of living  in a predominantly white, racist environment.  Moreover, within communities, women  play a pivotal role as cultural bearers, transmitting traditions from one generation to  another, orally and through networks of  communication. The family then is critical  as a source of rejuvenation, strength and  identity. Yet men are part of this familial  structure, and men do exercise patriarchal  power, as is the case in virtually all cultures,  the dominant society included.  But none of this comes through in The  BurningSeason.Thefilm identifies the source  of oppression of South Asian women as  stemmingfrom cultural tradition rather than  unequal power relations, as is the case everywhere. If oppression is located in a cultural system, what choice is there but to  leave that system and join the world of the  "liberated"—where structural inequalities  are perpetuated in a myriad of ways?  The deliberate construction of South  Asian cultures as oppressive, restrictive and  rigid is made even more apparent in light of  the principal female actor, Akesh Gill's own  cultural background. According to a reviewer, "Gill... grew up in a family that  encouraged her rather than restricted her."  She had to learn how to act the oppressed  South Asian woman so that she could show  the audience the way to liberation. Yet, Gill  plays a Sanda who is completely alone. Sanda  does not interact with any other woman, she  has no friends, she has no network of support. She is alone in a men's world where the  only other women she encounters are defined by their relation to men in the household.  Alone, unhappy and enmeshed in a  restrictive culture, Sanda opts to be alone, to  make her own way. And her story, according to Crossland, "is about the difficult journey we must all take to gain control of our  lives."  If that's theburningreason for TheBurn-  ing Season, I can only surmise that Crossland  has imprinted his own gender-biased, ethnocentric assumptions regarding the emancipation of South Asian women.  Yasmin Jiivani is a South Asian cultural  theorist, writer and activist.  NOVEMBER 1993 Arts  Reviews: Vancouver International Film Festival:  Viewers' voices  compiled by Anne Jew  Kinesis decided to try something a little  different in our review of films at this year's  Vancouver International Film Festival. Instead  of getting one revieioer to talkabout the films she  saw, we attempted a more collective format and  asked several feminist filmgoers what they  thought of films they Imd seen. Many of our  reviewers write for or volunteer at Kinesis.  The first five films reviewed were shown  together under the title "Five Women Directors. "Most of our reviewers had negative things  to say about the programming clwices and packaging. Reviewer WinnifredTovey sums it up: "I  guess they had five short films by zvomen directors kicking around. I had assumed they ivere  going to be feministfilmsandwas surprised tltat  that wasn 'I the organ izing principle. The gender  of the director and the length of the films just  doesn't cut it as a unifying theme for a bill like  this."  BEAUTY AND THE YEAST and  MY LEFT CYST  Directed by Pat Barker  BC, 1993  Beauty and the Yeast is a partly animated  look at the director's experiences after discovering a cyst in her left ovary. My Left Cyst looks  at what an animated Marilyn Monroe would do  if she had a yeast infection.  Lydia Kwa writes and works in Vancouver:  My Left Cyst was small in scope—reduced to  a left cyst—but funny. Beauty and the Yeast  appeared to be a postscript to My Left Cyst.  It was hilarious...and minimalist too.  Anne few is a Vancouver writer of Chinese  descent and from a working class background:  Both of Pat Barker's films are funny, especially the one with Marilyn Monroe. Women's health issues are too often featured as  dour subjects indocumentaries, mostly made  by men. But this director treats "women's  diseases" with a sense of humour. Yet both  films had a serious undertone.  Winnifred Tovey is a white, working class  lesbian and a frequent contributor to Kinesis: I  thought, boy, if I ever get an ovarian cyst I'll  be sorry I saw this movie. It communicated  this weird sense of the inside of your body  being terra incognita, like if you turn your  back on it for a minute it will breed these  terrible things.  THANK GOD I'M A LESBIAN  Directed by Laurie Colbert and Dominique  Cardona  Ontario, 1993  Thank God I'm a Lesbian is structured  around interviews with lesbians on issues such  as coming out, bisexuality, outing, s/m, racism  and the relationship of feminism to lesbianism.  The directors talk to Canadian and American  lesbians like Dionne Brand, Lee Pui Ming and  Sarah Schidman.  Lydia Kwa: Tlwnk God I'm a Lesbian is [a  film of] talking heads. Some interesting  things are said, but it doesn't sustain one's  interest as much as a film like Forbidden Love  does. The poetry interlude [where Nicole  Brossard reads a poem] was nice, but didn't  fit.  Kathleen Oliveris regular Arts contributor  to Kinesis: Thank God I'm a Lesbian is rather  textbooky. You know, it's like, "let's line up  these 12 lesbians and ask them the same five  questions, put them against a strange  backdrop...and you have the answers!"  I guess it could be great if it's the first  film you've ever seen about lesbians but, as  someone who's seen quite a lot, it didn't  break new ground for me. I think the film  was talking to people from a relatively limited range of outlooks and experiences about  various things. There was certainly some  diversity among the women, but not a whole  range of perspectives represented.  Faith Jones is currently enrolled in Women's Studies and English at SFU :The filmmakers—whoever they may be—really lost me  when they showed that image of the pierced  ni pple being p u 1 led right a f ter Dionne Brand  had said how difficult s/m imagery can be.  As a Jewish woman, I really have a hard time  with Nazi paraphernalia. So when Dionne  Brand said that she felt differently about the  slave images, the torture images, I felt the  filmmakers shouldn't have turned around  and showed us that. I don't care what their  intent was, it was disrespectful of Brand and  of all of us who have an emotional response  to those kinds of scenes because of our ethnic  history.  What saved the movie was how much I  liked some of the individual lesbians who  were interviewed. Dionne Brand, Sarah  Shulman, and a few others were very brilliant and insightful. But I kept wanting more.  The filmmakers keptcutting their comments  up into sound bites. I don't think it's as  useful to hear seven women talk for twenty  seconds each on, say, bisexuality, as it would  be to hear one or two women give complete  thoughts.  Winnifred Tovey: It ought to be basic  now that the audience should know who  made the movie and who they are. I think it's  part of taking responsibility for talking that  you have to begin by identifying who you  are and what sort of stake you have in what  you've got to say.  There was a diverse group of white  women, a Black woman, an Asian woman,  and an Aboriginal woman. That's not good  enough. It really felt to me that Lee Pui  Ming's presence in the film was tokenistic.  She did the music, but she didn't have the  same presence in the film as any of the other  women.  Both Dionne Brand and Laverne Monette  kept referring to their colour and their cultures in grounding their positions. None of  the white women did this. They didn't seem  to feel any need to exa mine their positions or  ground their positions.  Because Brand and Monette were the  only ones doing this, and they were the only  Black and Aboriginal women, it seemed as if  the filmmakers were saying that every Black  lesbian would have the same position, and  every Aboriginal lesbian would have the  same position.  ME, MOM AND MONA  Directed by Mina Shum  BC, 1993  In Me, Mom and Mona, the director, her  sister and mother talk together in Can tonese and  Englishabout theirlives, including how they lie  to the father about the relationships the daughters have with men.  Lydia Kwa: I had a problem with the  whole dynamic of the three women admitting they were talking about the father in  secret and saying that the way they could  have power was to just go behind his back  and lie. Also, the whole thing was made into  a joke and [the women] seemed really dysfunctional.  The film was potentially harmful in the  sense that itperpetuates the imageof women  of colour as devious and very unconscious.  It made the mother seem quite unconscious,  [which] seemed quite trivializing. I didn't  like the film.  Anne Jew: I had two very conflicting  reactions to Me, Mom and Mona. The first one  was it was the closest thing I've ever seen to  my own experience on screen, because my  family talks like that all the time, half in  English and half in Chinese. We have that  same kind of energy when we're all together  and talking. So that was great to see.  But there they were talking about lying  to the father. Mina asks atone point: "Do you  think this is wrong?" And they all justify  why they're lying to their father. I guess I've  been thinking a lot about misogyny and  sexism in Chinese culture and how that  really hasn't gone away. It has just manifested itself in more subtle and covert ways.  It's so obvious watching the film. I mean my  family does that too.  I've also been thinking about how our  history of misogyny affects relationships  between women, how it creates competition  and has probably done major damage to our  collective psyches, and these women really  stick together and support each other. But  they're doing it partly by protecting the  male, which is what we've always done and  we shouldn't be doing it anymore.  Also, at the end, they say they can do  anything they want—I guess they're in for a  surprise.  Lorraine Chan works in film distribution at  the National Film Board: I thought Me, Mom  and Mona showed how some families talk  and how you're always using a mixture of  say, Chinese and English.  I thought it was also interesting how the  mother delighted in colluding with her  So Yee Shum, Mina Shum and Mona Shum in Me, Mom and Mona  daughters to lie to the father. In some ways,  it undercuts the whole notion of a Chinese  patriarch because obviously, these women  are carrying on with their own lives and  they're doing wha tever they want and they're  lying to this father, keeping him in the dark  and everybody has this big laugh about it in  the film.  On one hand, it's dishonest and sneaky  and underhanded. But here we have Chinese Confucian patriarchy, and there are  these three very independent women who  are yukking it up because, "boy, isn't dad  kind of out of it, ha ha."  It's quite light, a fresh documentary and  not too serious. It's definitely a different  interpretation of what feminism means.  Cynthia Loxv is a Vancouver potter: Me,  Mom and Mona didn't say anything or do  anything for me. It talked a lot about heterosexual relationships, how women come together because of their relationships with  men, either through lying to them, or how  our relationship with our family is also defined by our heterosexual relationships.  Mona and Mina spoke too much. They  kept interrupting their mother. That was  really rude. I would like to have heard more  about what their mother thought.  It also didn't seem to have any kind of  analysis around the gathering of women, so  to speak, or of families. What was good  about it was it reflected the strength of  women, the resilience in terms of the mom  was always telling the girls to be independent and to be strong. And they certainly are  that.  LETTER FROM FRANCIS  Directed by E. Jane Thompson  Ontario, 1993  Letter to Francis is based on the short story  "Second Spring" by Ann Copeland. A nun is  sexually abused by a priest she comes to trust  and respect and discovers how oppressive religious institutions can be.  Lydia Kwa: It started to say some very  important things about the Catholic church  and portrayed the sexism and harassment  that was going on, but it felt like I was left  hanging. It could have gone much further  and said some more things. I think it did  make a point.  Anne Jew: I kept waiting for something  to happen. I think that kind of stuff is really  important: the whole institution of religion  and how so many people use that power to  prey on others. For example, this priest having all this power and using it sexually and  how religion really denies your self, your  sexual being, and how that was popping up  in their lives.  I didn't know why it was programmed  with all the other films. It just seemed so...  liberal. Nothing happened in the end to  change things. Okay, so she left [the church],  got married and had kids, but the other  woman wa s continuing her rela tionship with  that priest. It just went on.  Winnifred Tovey: I didn't get this movie.  I couldn't figure out why I couldn't get it.  Coming after the lesbian movie, and starting  out with the close friendship between those  two women—I watched quite a bit of the  movie thinking it was going to be about how  heterosexuality betrayed what was happening between them. By the time I figured out  that wasn't what was going to happen, it  was too late for me to figure out what it was  supposed to be about. Why program those  films together if they weren't going to inform each other?  Kathleen Mullen, who recently movedhere  from Ottawa, is a bisexual, ivhite feminist and  16  NOVEMBER 1993 Arts  frequent filmgoer: I don't know how Letter  From Francis got in there. It's traditional and  boring. It was just about this woman leaving  the order, and doesn't really deal with the  different issues brought up.  IN THE GUTTER AND OTHER  GOOD PLACES  Directed by Cristine Richey  Alberta, 1993  THEM THAT'S NOT  Directed by Christene Browne  Ontario, 1993  The first documentary follows the lives of  three men zt'ho collect refundable cans and bottles  and other miscellaneous items in the alley ivays  of Calgary. Them That's Not is a documentary  focusing on women and children in poverty and  how racism, sexism and classism in society and  institutions like welfare help to keep them there.  Anne few. As I was watching In the Gutter I began to get this very creepy feeling. I'm  not sure what the class background of the  director was, but it seemed the film's perspective was very much one of being on the  outside looking in, or vice versa. It was one  of privilege.  Through interviews, the men, although  they acknowledged how alcoholism played  a major part of putting them where they  were, made it seem like collecting ref undables  was a career choice. Instead of working in a  highrise for some corporation, they were  their own bosses in the business of recycling.  The director didn't incorporate any analysis  of how much the system is to blame.  Also, there were these romanticized  scenes of one man pushing his shopping cart  up a hill against a backdrop of the city as the  sun was setting. It reminded me of those  documentaries where some white guy or  woman goes to a developing country and  tries to "understand" the people and probably becomes quite attached to them, but  never really understands the issues, especially the one of power.  So it was with great relief and excitement that I watched the second film Them  That's Not. It had interviews with a wide  range of women and children across Canada  and, although it was obvious what poverty  had done to their lives, they were all extremely strong and aware of their situations  and why they were in those situations.  Also, everyone was mobilized to attack  the system and all in different ways, from  demanding a certain translator to actively  suing the government. It was great to see  women of colour portrayed in such an affirmative light, acknowledging racist and  sexist oppression, and fighting it in every  way they knew how.  According to the press release, the director grew up in poverty, so I'm sure that  has a lot to do with the success of the film, in  terms of really understanding the issues and  the emotional and psychological impact of  being poor, but also being able to present it  without condescension or romanticization  like the first film. And that's important and  truly empowering.  LE SEXE DES ETOILES  Directed by Paule Baillergeon  Quebec, 1993  A 12-year-old girl longs for the return of her  estrangedfather, Pierre. She lives withher mother  in New York, and is well-loved by her. Her father  returns, but the girl, Camille, has to deal with his  return into her life as the transsexual, Marie-  Pierre.  Kathleen Mullen: [The film] looks at a  young girl's struggle with accepting her father's transsexualism. She's coming to terms  with her father's transformation as well as  going through her own childhood-to-adolescence changes. She wants her father [and  mother] to be perfect and realizes her father  is a person with faults.  By the end of the film, she comes to  terms with her father's transsexualism and  Maria, with her children in Toronto, waiting to see a welfare worker in the  documentary Them That's Not directed by Christene Browne  comes to terms with her mother. Even though  her father had abandoned them, she has a  romanticized idea about her father, and  thought her mother was terrible. She comes  to realize her mother is the one who ha s been  there for her.  The film is depressing and sad, but is a  realistic look at her struggle and her growing up into teen-hood, as well as in dealing  with her father's becoming a transsexual  and all the difficulties that come with that.  It has a realistic take on the gay male  community as well—there's transsexuals,  transvestites and hustlers, and there's your  "average" couple too. By the end, Camille is  able to see herself as not being as lonely and  as alienated from everyone around her after  all. It's worth watching.  ONLY DEATH COMES FOR SURE  Directed by Marina Tsurtsumia  Georgia/Russia, 1993  The core of the story No One Writes to the  Colonel by Gabriel Garcia Marquez is transplanted from Central America to Caucasus Georgia. No One Writes to the Colonel, a tale of a  retired colonel limiting in vain for his pension in  a small town full of hate and intrigue, is essentially about a lonely, stifling journey into the  self. In Only Death Comes for Sure, the setting is a present-day Caucasus Georgia laid  waste by civil war and religious turmoil.  Mariam Bouchoutrouch is of Moroccan  heritage and took Russian Studies at McGiU:  It's about an elderly couple who live in a  small village and are basically starving to  death. They're very poor and don't have  enough money to eat. The husband has  agreed to take care of a fighting cock and  spends all their money on feeding the cock  and not feeding themselves.  It's similar Russian films I've seen so  far-—black and white, stark, drab, slow-paced  and depressing. The photography is wonderful and [takes] new angles on things.  The good thing about it is that it focused  on the wife. It points out how the woman  didn't have any say in how to do things. She  makes recommendations and suggestions,  and her husband ignores her or treats her  like shit. But it turns out she was right and he  was wrong.  The wife is quite a strong character. The  film mostly shows her frustration at not  having any other access to power aside from  her husband, and her husband not doing  anything about anything. She's very isolated  [from other women].  There's one other woman in the film  who stands out—the wife of a rich man. She  comes in, says things and has a very strong  personality, but she 's always put down by  her husband in front of other people. She's  not a very strong character in the whole  movie, but the way women are treated is not  ignored [by the filmmaker]. She points out  how poor people live and underlines it with  the women [in the film]., like, look who gets  the worst of it.  THE LONG SILENCE  Directed by Margarethe Von Trotta  Italy, 1993  The Long Silence is about a gynaecologist  who is married to a judge investigating corruption in politics. The gynaecologist lives under  the constant threat of her husband's potential  murder. When that happens, she deals with her  grief, then continues to seek the truth in the case  he was investigating.  Mary Lou Esguerra, a PhiUipina artist and  art educator, is a recent arrival to Vancouver:  I'm not too familiar with Italian actors, outside of the ones that come to Hoi lywood, but  those in this film are very interesting. The  woman who plays the lead has a very strong  presence. She's not stereotypically beautiful  or stunning, not a Sophia Loren. In fact she's  middle-aged, and has a particular beauty  and charm that comes through because she's  a dynamic person.  [Her husband] is assassinated and we  see her go through this process of first being  with and worrying about him, then living  through death threats by telephone, eventually finding out he died in an airplane crash,  and living through the widowhood as well  as wanting to continue his investigations.  The movie ends with bringing together  all the other women whose husbands have  died for the very same reason. They'd all  been married to judges who have tried to  open up this whole corruption ring. She  makes contact with somebody in the media  who tries to collect all the different voices of  these women and has them come on television. But in the process of continuing this  investigation, she gets killed herself and that's  how the movie ends.  It's a very personal and moving account  of her life as a woman who struggles through  all this. But at the same time it raises some  frightening things. On one hand, it's a fictional accountofherlife.On theotherhand,  it's not very unreal at all. In fact, it's a very  real sense of what's going on.  In the film, she implicates all these particular centres of power, these corporations.  1 don't know if she names them, but somewhere in the film, one of the guys mentions  these [corporate] people are going to various  countries, creating little wars in developing  nations, then selling them off.  The film shows to what extent people's  lives were being affected outside that personalized account. It's much more global,  it's happening worldwide and it's real. And  that was very scary.  The scariest was watching her die. Her  life is a parallel or analogy of what goes on  everywhere on a m uch larger scale. It's very  intense.  Lydia Kzra: There's quite a political message behind this film. Somebody made the  point to me that the main character is always  strong and not stereotypically female. All  the women don't fit the stereotypical beautiful, gorgeous women, but they have a beauty  about them.  The protagonist does really well in terms  of portraying this strength and her resolve at  the end of continuing with her husband's  task by speaking out about what happened.  In the end, she gets assassinated as well.  That's powerful.  But 1 couldn't stand the music. It was  overly dramatic in the background, heavy  and too much.  AILEEN WUORNOS: THE SELLING  OF A SERIAL KILLER  Directed by Nick Broomfield  Britain, 1992  Aileen Wuomos allegedly killed seven men  in 1990 and 1991 while working as a sex-trade  worker in Florida. This documentary focuses on  the media attention she has received and the  people U'ho have tried to make money off her  story. She is currently on death row.  Anne fezu: It was interesting watching  this story. I'd heard about it briefly when it  was happening, probably on one of those  tabloid TV shows, but it was amazing to see  how many people are sucking her dry, from  her lawyer to some guy writing a book on  her and complaining she didn't put enough  effort into her appearance as a sex-trade  worker. When that happened, a woman sitting behind me started yelling "Fuck you!"  at the screen. That was great.  The enormity of the injustice—she said  she killed the men in self defense as they  were trying to rape her vaginally and anally—  was overwhelming. It made me angry and  frustrated.  And when we see her in the courtroom  yelling at the judge or hear her in a taped  conversation with her female lover, we really get the sense she is doing everything she  can to fight back against all the utter insanity  of the media and the legal system.  The problem is, thedirectorisaniceguy  or whatever and he's exposing the situation,  but at the same time he's doing exactly what  he seems to be criticizing—profiting from  her story. And it's only because he has this  "nice guy" persona that he is getting away  with it.  Kathleen Oliver: This film is by a male  filmmaker, but I hope it's shown again because it was a really interesting document  about the way the patriarchal justice system  sets a woman criminal up in dramatically  different ways than a male in the same situation.  Although Wuomos is guilty of the  crimes she's committed, the system is also  guilty of "crimes" against her. She is far  more humane for all she has done than a lot  of the other people who are involved in this  case. This is a clear, self-explanatory document of great injustice. I liked it a lot although it made me really upset.  NOVEMBER 1993  17 Arts  Review: Last Chance Cafe;  Intrigue of  the unknown  by Ria Bleumer  LAST CHANCE CAFE  AND OTHER STORIES  by Anita Roberts  Polestar Press, Winlaw, BC, 1993  Roberts' first collection of short stories  is a delicate weave of life's often unspoken  and disturbing realities of growing up with  an awareness, insight and appreciation that  stems from a deep need to survive and become whole.  Through the stories, with their evocative illustrations, the reader witnesses the  young girl Anna's journey through fear,  sexuality and finally anger. Anna's most  immediate and accessible realm of exploration is her own body, while conflicting messages and abuse mo Id her being into a kind  of mechanism that soon knows how to feel  safe in the world outside herself.  Childhood sexuality, so seldom talked  about, is treated with an urge for acknowledgment and as part of the initial journey  into the self and others. In "Mortal Sins,"  Roberts explores how the Catholic trappings  of Anna's life shapes her interpretations of  sexual self. Seven-year-old Anna and her  nine-year-old sister Lou get caught "playing  dirty" by their father, who has "very strong  ideas about sex and sin." Accordingly, he  beats Lou, who got caught with her pants  down. In her child's mind, Anna comes to  understand from her father's context how  "playing dirty" is a mortal sin. Yet, according to her mother it is only a "sin of immodesty," as long as she confesses it. However,  this too changes when Anna is forced by a  priest to spell out her "sins" and feels  ashamed.  The "blasphemous" experienceof many  a young girl's sexuality is liberated in the  telling of "Kitty Love." Here, the nine-year-  old Anna is always surrounded by her sisters and knows her developing body, explores it. Roberts describes a young girl who  is proud of her body and fantasizes upon her  newly discovered sensations, withhelp from  Tiger, about being kissed "on those other  lips, the secret hungry ones."  In "Last Chance Cafe," the first of the  nine stories, Anna, "the third girl not born a  boy," pulls the reader into her Catholic world  of anxiety and guilt on a Sunday morning  getting-ready-for-church routine. Ever aware  of her father's looming presence, a "little  bird of anxiety" inside Anna's chest lets her  know where the anxiety barometer at home  is at by flapping its wings. Life is controlled  by the father's temper time bomb. Everything hinges on the constant threat of explosion. As Anna'smother reminds us, "...Dad's  at the end of his rope!" and a final "ejaculation of rage" is inevitable.  No matter how hard Anna tries to protect herself from her father's beatings, if "she  happened to be within reach when he was  on the warpath, she got it just like her mother  and sisters." Anna's coping mechanisms are  as natural to her as the childlike, often humorous, observations of her mundane  world.  This is explored even more fully during  a leap far away from the realities of home on  summer holidays. Anna wants "to be just  like her dad"—that is, in control and courageous—not like her mother who "always  disappeared when things got scary." The  freedom and rawness of nature, the warmth  of the water, bring Anna the safety of a  "warm blue womb," whileher father is more  relaxed. Anna receives a glimpse of promise. The reader senses Anna's relief at finally  feeling safe and strong with her changed  father, but also anticipates the anxiety, "that  prickly little creature that had been quiet all  summer," as soon as things get back to  "normal."  Later on, Roberts shows how the dynamics of Anna's relationship with her father carry over in relationships outside her  family when Anna seeks the friendship of  her class mate Wilemena, nicknamed Billy,  in the story, "Nanny Goat and Billy Goat."  Anna is "consumed with a love for Billy  that forgave all faults...Billy had a kind of  power over [Anna]. [Anna] was adoring—  Billy was the adored. [Anna] poured all her  energy into charming and pleasing Billy.  Billy was charmed and pleased as it suited  her."  Books  U/AffrBDl  Brook's Books  & Tunes  on Saltspring Island, Ganges, BC  Also dealing in used tapes & CDs  Will pay cash for gay/lesbian,  feminist, gardening, nautical, art,  literature & trades  Monday-Saturday 10:30-4:30   537-9874  It's been a long time comin'  Last month, Toni Morrison (pictured above in New York in 1974) became the first African-  American to receive the 1993 Nobel Prize for Literature. Born in Lorrain, Ohio, Morrison has  been writing since the early 1970s. She is the author of six novels: The Bluest Eye; Sula;  Song of Solomon, which won the 1978 National Book Critics Circle Award for fiction; Tar  Baby, Beloved, which won the 1988 Pultizer Prize for fiction; and her most recent Jazz, and  has written one play, Dreaming Emmett The Nobel prize comes with an award of $1.1  million Cdn. Congratulations!!  Roberts' voice of the adult woman allows Anna's inner world to come to light. It  allows her to share with the reader those  secret pleasures, fears and longings. This  exposure enables "Anna" to be released from  the adult body and live on the outside as a  whole. The very fine borders between inner  and outer world depicted in Anna's life  parallel the'equally fine line between reader  and words on a page—between Anna's experience and that of the reader. Roberts'  graphic yet subtle, deeply moving approach  to using language as a common thread linking Anna's experience with the reader's,  inevitably explodes into an empowering release of the unspoken and echoes deep within  our own female bodies.  Humour intertwines with harsh realities as though it were Anna's "little half-  smile..., the one that made her feel like she  was far away and separate from what was  happening to her." In the reading process,  this delicate use of humour creates a certain  distance, permitting access to Anna's painful discoveries.  Through the immediacy of emotion and  her tactile use of language, Roberts succeeds  in allowing this reader direct access to Anna's  experiences. It allows the borders between  reading and being read to fade. The intimacy  and familiarity with the need for safety,  innocent childhood play, the promise that  lies in a child's excited curiosity captures our  own anxiety and relief. Anna's experience  becomes the reader's. The stories touch our  own lives and evoke our own experience.  The strength of Last Chance Cafe lies in  Roberts' conviction to tell Anna's "immodest sins"—-so the shame no longer needs to  hide in the dark and what is underneath can  reveal its authenticity.  Reading Roberts' stories has been like  opening a big old metal door squeaking into  the abyss of patriarchal control. Once inside,  the rumbling of fearful and angry voices  caution the intruder. Yet, the familiarity with  the bizarrely logical perception of a child  also causes one to chuckle. I could not help  but notice that, while arriving deeper into  this abyss, inside my own body a rumbling  had started—manifesting itself in tangible  physical discomfort. Could it be that Roberts'  stories have activated my own dusty stories  in the Fear and Guilt Department of childhood? My mind ventured into this intrigue  of the unknown, guided there by Anna.  Roberts' ability to give her language  feeling and urgency will compel both adult  and teenage women to read these stories and  trigger a "coming out" of voices everywhere.  Last Chance Cafe will be launched on  November5atJosephine'sCafe,1716Charles  at 8 pm. Anita Roberts will be present.  Ria Bleumer is a Vancouver writer and  bookseller who has a deep appreciation for  literature tlrnt evokes a personal response.  315 CAM Rl F.ST.  VANCOUVER, B.C. HOURS:  V6B2N4 MONDAY-;  IT.1.: (604V684.0523 ID AM   6PK  1988 W 4th & Maple  Vancouver, B.C.  ^Dok^antel  new and  gently used books  Philosophy - Poetry  Native - General  Open daily 11am-7pn  Coffee Bar  1020 Commercial Drive  Vancouver BC V5L 3W9  (604) 253-1099  Bonnie Murray  Cynthia Brooke  NOVEMBER 1993 Two reviews of Out on Main Street:  Both hungry for more  by Sharon Lewis  OUT ON MAIN STREET  By Shani Mootoo  Press Gang Publishers, Vancouver, 1993  I well enjoy reading Shani Mootoo's  collection of nine fiction short stories, titled  Out On Main Street. It's a real treat to read  stories that talk about my food, my people,  my heartbreak ovah women dem. It was  after the reading that it hit home I have to  write a review. Critiquing another woman  of colour, a lesbian, a struggling artist, ouch,  scary! After a lot of chat with Lezlie, who is  also writing a review of Mootoo's book [see  this page], I felt it was important.  I work as an actor-writer-director in  Toronto and have experienced reviews by  people who have little understanding of my  culture. Sometimes it's hard, sometimes the  review is useless, and sometimes the review  has something for me, something that will  push me forward or incite me to look further. I have never been reviewed by another  woman of colour—a review from a woman  of colour would begin with an insight that  other reviewers do not have, hopefully it  would be closer to her on an emotional level,  my work would be vital to her, just as  Mootoo's work is vital to me. It also means  that a review from a womanof colour would  hit harder coming from the same community. Ouch scarey, but important. So here I  Out On Main Street offers stories that I  as a mix-up, Trin-Jam-Canbisexual feminist  activist-actor can revel in, see myself in and  havemyself reflected. Mootoo's background  as a visual artist supports her talent to paint  breathtaking images in writing. The situations Mootoo offers of secret desire for a  woman, silence around abuse, being brown  but not "the right kind" of brown, trigger me  on an emotional level. I'm hungry to see  these (my) stories told.  My hunger is fed by the brilliant imagery throughout the collection, but at the  end I'm left with a somewhat empty feeling  of eating enough but not the exact food that  I needed. The emotional journey of the character or the voice of the author isn't present  enough for me to stay in contact with the  subject of each piece. It seems that Mootoo  tries to objectify those forces that act against  her protagonist/subject, but instead what  happens is we, the reader, also become distanced. Mootoo's pungent, large-size portions, of images are what allows me in to  feed.  The collection begins with "A Garden of  her Own." The story takes on one "day in the  life of" Vijai, a neglected and emotionally  bruised wife, attempting to cope with being  an immigrant in an urban setting. We are  transported to the tiny, cramped kitchen that  Vijai is trapped in when she presents us with  the image of the bird "trembling inmy hand.  I can, right now, feel the life, the heat in the  palm of my hand from the little bird the  fright in its tremble."  As the story unwinds, we are somewhat  removed from the emotional life of the character—Mootoo moves from first-person narrative to describing the feelings of Vijai in the  second person. "She slid back to her side of  his bed, the other side of the line that he had  drawn down the middle with the cutting  edge of his outreached hand."  "Lemon Scent" is a sweet story, that  reminds me of the numerous crushes I had  on my aunties and distant cousins. Mootoo  offersa delicious imageof a "scoreof healthy-  looking prunes slit slightly and stuffed  plump with peanut butter, the slits sealed  The nine stories in the collection speak  to me of my life in Trinidad, my coming to  Canada, my feelings of isolation, feeling  different and not knowing why, not being  able to fit in as "a Trini Indian". I feel athome  with, and proud of the strong, brown Indo-  Trini dyke content in Out on Main Street.  Finally, someone is writing about me, some  of my life, heartache over "dose nice brown  women." I am one of those "kitchen  indians...a cultural bastard,"—but I am proud  of it. But I kept wai ting throughout for one of  the "indo-trini" women to fight back and be  proud of her heritage, despite the fact it is  difficult to assert and be a Trini-indian in  Canada. I wanted to hear "Yes, I am a 'roti-  indian' and proud of it".  "A Garden of Her Own" opens the collection. This story remind me powerfully of  what I felt like being brought to Canada  against my will, being forced to live in an  apartment for the first time, having no garden of my own. I can relate to the character  Vijai's intense feelings of isolation and loneliness, missing the strong vibrant colours,  noises, flowers, birds and trees of Trinidad.  Mootoo's bold imagery in this story  carried me back to my homeland and, like  Vijai, I missed "the sunlight-and a sky ceiling miles high" and "rain, pinging on, winging off the galvanized tin roof. But always  warm rain." The vivid imagery of sunlight,  loss of warmth, no sound of rain on the roof,  evoked powerful memories and spoke to  my situation of my colour and my power-  over with firm pink icing." The  between Anita and Kamini is rich with erotic  and lush imagery.  "Wake Up" is less image oriented and  follows perfectly after "Lemon Scent" as the  author's voice is stronger and follows an  action-oriented narrative. I feel it is one of  Mootoo's most revealing pieces in thecollec-  tion and allows a peak into the not-so-pretty  picture of growing up with an absent father  and a mother who is beaten down.  "Out On Main Street" is the pivotal  piece in the collection. It is the only piece  written in Trinidadian dialect. I felt close to  the piece, as the humour of being a brown  girl, with a brown girlfriend in the middle of  "Little India" in Vancouver is brought to life.  I feel comfortable as "Janet and me? We does  go Main Street to see pretty pretty sari and  bangle, and to eat we belly full a burfi and  gulub jamoon, but we doh go too often  because, yuh see, is dem sweets self what  does give people like we a presupposition  for untameable hip and thigh." I also felt the  uncomfortableness of Shani's struggle with  being a transplanted brown girl in a white  land, which at times is reflected in the awkwardness of the dialect.  Two of the strongest characters in the  collection for me are the abusive boyfriend  Bobby in "The BrightNew Year's EveNight,"  and the husband in "A Garden Of Her Own."  In the former, Bobby does speak in the nar-  See LEWIS on page 20    ■im—i     nil  by Lezlie Lee Kam  OUT ON MAIN STREET  By Shani Mootoo  Press Gang Publishers, Vancouver, 1993  I was asked to write this review by the  author of the bookand immediately refused.  I was flattered, but do not consider myself to  be a writer. My refusal however, stemmed  from the fact that I had seen Mootoo's work,  had heard of her reputation as an artist and  did not feel I had the right to critique her  work, especially as another woman of colour and     another Trini.  But Mootoo said it was precisely for that  reason Kinesis wanted me to write the review and why Mootoo had asked me; precisely because of my Trini-callaloo-indo-  dyke roots. So with much respect for  Mootoo's work but great humility, I share  my feelings.  Out On Main Street was pleasurable to  read-both times. Like Sharon Lewis writes  [see review this page], it is painful to critique  the work of another woman of colour, but I  can only relate to what speaks to me in the  work.  Mootoo's explosive imagery pervades  her work. Her characters are so believable,  they evoke powerful feelings and memories  for me. The combination of these two factors  makes her stories come alive. But I still felt  and wanted that piece which seemed to be  missing.  This story set the tone for me of how I  felt coming to thiscountry, feeling still sometimes out of place, looking different, "afraid  to smile at strangers...not like home...where  everybody knows everybody."  "Lemon Scent" is playful yet full of  despair. I too shared the experience of Anita  loving and lusting after the unattainable  Kamini. Being teased with Mootoo's erotic  imagery and her creative use of language—  "her fingers touch my lips. My tongue flits  against her forefinger. The heat and smell of  her cologne, like a pounding surf, fill up my  mind,"~took me back to my first brown  woman lover. ..who was also out of my reach  in the heterosexual society/country in which  we lived. And like this story left me hanging  at the end, wanting more...  "Out On Main Street" was another  favorite for me, funny yet giving a dose of  reality. Like Janet and Pud, I still continue to  experience being a "watered-down Indian,  we skin brown, is true, but we ain't good  grade A Indians." Yet I felt the Trini dialect  in this story was a little awkward and sometimes forced—maybe because they are so far  from home, but it is their way of still trying  to show their "trininess?"  I enjoyed the strong brown dyke content and assertiveness of Pud, but I shared  her feelings in Mootoo's graphic description  of being "a gender dey forget to classify...with  mih crew cut and mih blue jeans tuck inside  mih jim-boots." Yuh know, is de same way  I feel when I used to walk down Gerrard  Street with my girlfriend "who so femme  she redundant..."  Overall, this story illustrates what it is  like, still, trying to fit in and deal with culture  shock, racism and homophobia all at de  same time. And dat is ah real struggle all de  time!!  "Last Day Pandemonium and Heart  Beats" will speak to any brown girl who has  had to endure the regimented existence of a  "convent school life" in Trinidad. There is  nothing so nerve-wracking as the experi-  See KAM on page 20VWWW  NOVEMBER 19*3 Letters  Kinesis loves receiving mail. Please  get your letter to us by the 18th of the  month.  If you can, keep the length to about  500 words.  (If you go way over, we  might edit for space.)  Hope to hear from you very soon.  Love,  Kinesis  More on  Clayoquot  Kinesis:  I'm writing from a small city in eastern  Ontario, Brockville, and consider myself fortunate to pick up your publication whenever  I make it to Ottawa, a two-hour trip from  here.  As a feminist and as an aspiring writer,  it gives me a tremendously good feeling to  read Kinesis and to know that publications  such as yours exist and are reaching people.  Being from a small city, I am all the more  isolated from the ideas and shared support  of fellow feminists.  I was particularly interested in the article written by Shannon e. Ash on the blockade at Clayoquot Sound.  Sincerely,  Jennifer Grant  Brockville, Ontario  Gitskan piece  hits spot  Kinesis:  Thank you for your September 1993  issue! I found particularly powerful the interview with Ardythe Wilson. The struggle  of the Gitskan-Wet'suwet'en is a shining  example of the long hard process that will  ultimately transform Canada. Their example of patience and endurance is something  I and many of European ancestry, can learn  from.  And it was a privilege to read Shannon  e. Ash's moving testimony of her time spent  at the blockade at Clayoquot Sound. I honour the protesters that are putting their lives  on the line for the rest of us.  Peace,  Erin Fletcher (Ms.)  Toronto, Ontario  The Importance of  Email  I've just read your article "Can email be  female?" in the Sept Kinesis. Bravo! Very  important and timely! I do hope that many  more women will become aware of this  important new medium.  I agree with your comments about its  "potential to be a tool for progressive social  movements." In the discussions that I've  had/read/etc. with the few (very few)  women that I've met/read who have become involved in "the Net," I've become a  bit concerned about the direction in which  things are going. It's important that women  have (and take) the opportunity to represent  themselves as "cyberspace" develops.  Cheers!  Kathy Mulholland  Vancouver, BC  Email can  be female  Kinesis:  Enjoyed Gladys We's recent article on  "email" ["Is email female? " Kinesis, Sep/93].  I agree with Gladys that the majority of  subscribers to email are men. I am on three  networks, which are all adult-education oriented, and the majority of subscribers are  men from universities.  As a result of my circulating Gladys'  article to numerous women at University  College of the Fraser Valley, a few more  women have been requested to be connected  to email. Since most of the deans and program heads at UCFV are men, not as many  women are connected to the system.  Regards,  Susan Witter,  University College of the Fraser Valley  Chilliwack, BC  LEWIS from page 19^^  <^m**  rative but it's the images that work at defining him.  "Like a dragon protective of its existence, or on the scent of prey, he breathed  long and heavy and hot. He gritted his teeth  tightly against each other and gripped the  steering wheel hard."  The husband in " A Ga rden of Her Own"  is written in the second person. "But the  husband would only pat on his face a stinging watery liquid with the faintest smell of  lime, a smell that evaporated into nothingness the instant it touched his skin." Yet the  images that Mootoo offers us of these male  characters further the story along precisely  because they are objects, outside of the control of the subject(s) of her stories. We just  want to know more about the subject, what  the character is feeling and what the story is,  her story.   Sharon Lewis is the artistic director of Sugar  and Spice productions in Toronto, atheatre  company committed to the promotion of  women of colour artists. She is a Trin-Jam-  Can bisexual, feminist, activist, actor.  WOMEN  IN  PRINT  BOOKS&OTHER MEDIA  3566 West 4th Avenue  Vancouver BCV6R1N8  Canada  KAM from page 19 S^^ft^AA  ence Mootoo so perfectly describes, like a  life in prison, or hell. The story spoke to me  of the mixture of races, white nuns, brown/  black teachers, control by white perfects,  feelings of powerlessness. The imagery of  the "fishwives" is outstanding and is a brilliant way of making us realise the lack of  insult that is usually intended when people  say "you sound like a bunch of fishwives."  For me, now, that term will always be a  compliment!  Now I want more from Mootoo; more  of women and girls who look and sound like  me, eat my food, feel my life. Mootoo's  explosive imagery and crafty use of words  painted pictures of my life and my experience.  However, I sometimes felt I was only in  a tropical setting without knowing it was  Trinidad. Maybe this was done deliberately.  I did want more emphasis on the influence  of Canadian missionaries, the white British  and the white Americans, on our way of life  as "trinis." I felt that the majortiy of the  female characters were unhappy in some  SCREEN       PRINT  Making a Postive impression  for Our Community Since 1984!  (604) 980-4235  • Women Owned & Operated*  way, wanting to be like their mothers, trying  to find themselves.  The "trini dykes" seemed to be the most  assured. In "Sushial's Bhakti," I enjoyed the  strength and determination of the character,  and the vibrant imagery of ritual in trying to  find/create a new self, despite all the cultural obstacles in her way.  I found the male characters violent,  unreliableand abusive. Maybe their redeem  ing qualities were not apparent, or not meant  to be. This serves to make the voices of  women strong and powerful.  Time for another book, Shani. These  stories left me wanting more.  Lezlie Lee Kam is a Callaloo-Roti dyke. (She is  not a writer.) Toronto has been home for the  last 24 years, but her soul is in Trinidad. She  enjoys a sweet mango and a hot "lime"  anytime!  STITCHED  rMlC  Banners  Sima Elizabeth Shefrin    (604) 734-9395  \w*J  Book&  ¥    vr"       An Emporium  Open Daily  10 am to 11 pm  Your  Lesbian & Gay  Bookstore  BOOKS BY MAIL  CALL 1 -800-567-1662  Informative, entertaining and attractively illustrated,  this is the lesbian sex guide for the nineties.  $19.95  122 1   ThurlowCat Davie). Vancouver. B.C.  Tel:<604)669-1753 or    Fax:(604)685-0252  New from Creative Publishers...  J3. Woman s&lmanac 1994: Voices from Atlantic Canada  Marian Frances White  A Woman's Almanac 1994: Voices  from Atlantic Canada, attempts to further unearth  and preserve  wise woman  words. More  and more it  reflects  women's  vision of the  world, while  allowing an  exchange of  ideas and a  way of connecting with    others of  similar interests. It celebrates  women's honed ability to observe.  In its twelve profiles, women are also  asking questions, rather than just  sharing answers to their own particular dilemma.  While this almanac serves as a useful agenda book, it is much more  than this. Along with the biographies,  it provides astrological information,  the phases of the moon, and a  plethora of useful and interesting  trivia.  ISBN 1-895387-30-2  ft Woman s  1994  Marian Frances White, a fifth  generation Newfoundlander, was  born at home in  Carbonear, 1954.  She makes her  living by editing  and research. Her  first major book,  Not A Still Life: The  Art and Writing of  Rae Periin, was  released under Creative Publishers'  literary imprint, Killick Press, in  1991. The Finest Kind, a compendium of biographies from six years of  A Woman's Almanac was released  by Creative Publishers in 1992.  Marian makes her home in St.  John's, Newfoundland, and is  currently developing a film script—  The Untold Story—about the 1920s  Suffrage Movement, and has also  written a young adult history of  Newfoundland and Labrador for  the Discover Canada series, to be  released by Grolier Limited in  October, 1993.  This is the eighth edition of  A Woman's Almanac. It is available  in most major bookstores.  160 pages, 5x8  $11.95  Creative Publishers  P.O. Box 8660  St. John's, Newfoundland  A1B3T7  Tel (709) 722-8500 - Fax. (709) 722-2228  NOVEMBER 1993 Bulletin Board  EVENTS  EVENTS  Bulletin Board listings have a  maximum of 50 words. Groups,  organizations and individuals eligible  for free space in the Bulletin Board  must be, or have, non-profit  objectives.  Other free notices will be items of  general public interest and will appear  at the discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $8 (+$0.56 GST)  forthefirst 50 wordsorportion thereof,  $4 (+$0.28 GST) for each additional  25 words or portion thereof and must  be prepaid.  Deadline for all submissions is  the 18th of the month preceding  publication. Note: Kinesis is published  ten times a year. Jul/Aug and Dec/  Jan are double issues.  All submissions should include a  contact name and telephone number  for any clarification that may be  required.  Listings will not be accepted over  the telephone.  Kinesis encourages readers to  research the goods and services  advertised in Bulletin Board. Kinesis  cannot guarantee the accuracy of the  information provided or the safety  and effectiveness of the services and  products listed.  Send submissions to Bulletin  Board, Kinesis, #301-1720 Grant  Street, Vancouver, BC, V5L2Y6. For  more information call 255-5499.  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis? We want to get involved with  you too. Help plan our next issue. Come to  the Writer's meeting on Tues, Nov2 at 7 pm  at our office, 301-1720 Grant St, Vancouver. If you can't make the meeting, call 255-  5499. No experience is necessary, all women  welcome.  VSW WANTS YOU!  Want to get more involved but not sure  where to begin? Join us-become a volunteer  at Vancouver Status of Women. VSW volunteers plan events, lead groups, raise funds,  answer the phone lines and help to connect  women with the community resources they  need, organize the library and other exciting  tasks! Come to committee meetings; Fi-  nance/Fundraising, Mon, Nov 15,5:30 pm:  Publicity, Wed, Nov 17, 5:30 pm. The next  volunteer potluck and orientation will be on  Thurs, Nov 18, 7 pm at VSW, 301-1720  Grant St. For more info, Call Jennifer at 255-  5511.  ASSERTIVENESS TRAINING  The Vancouver Status of Women is offering  an AssertivenessTrainingcoursefor women  beginning in Nov. It will be conducted once  a week for six weeks during the evening  from 7-9:30 pm. The course is free, but preregistration is required. Financial assistance with childcare is also available. For  more info, please call 255-5511 Mon-Thurs  from 9:30 am-5 pm.  EASTERN EUROPEAN WOMEN  "Eastern European Women say no to sexism and capitalism". An account and slide  show by Portland Oregon Jewish activist  Adrienne Weller and Seattle lesbian/gay  organizer Susan Docekal following their 9  week tour of Croatia, the Czech Republic,  EVENTS  Book Launching/Reading/  Fundraiser for Rungh  Press Gang Publishers and Rungh Cultural Society  invite you to celebrate the launching of  Out on Main Street  by Shani Mootoo (Press Gang)  and  Van de GraaffDays  by Ven Begamudre (Oolichan)  8 pm  Tuesday, November 16  at the Heritage Hall,  3102 Main Street, Vancouver  $8  Wheelchair accessible  Tickets available in advance from Octopus Books and Press Gang Publishers  Some tickets will be available at a reduced price for those on a fixed/low income  Call Delia at 253-2537 for more information  Estonia, Germany, Poland, Serbia and the  former Soviet Union. Weller and Docekal  interviewed feminists, radical, anti-war and  anti-fascist activists. Their international  speaking tour will come to Vancouver on  Sat, Nov 20 at 8 pm at the Croatian Cultural  Centre, 3250 Commercial Drive. There will  be a $3 door donation with an eastern  European buffet served at 6:30 pm for a  $9.50 donation. For rides or childcare, call  874-0535 or 688-5195 two days in advance.  Wheelchair accessible.  WYLD WYND  Wyld Wynd performs bold jazz that rocks  the "norm". Writer, guitarist Sylvi & bassist  Wendy Solloway perform at the Broadway  Express on Nov 25 at 9:30 pm. No cover.  Performance takes place at 2733 Commercial Dr (at 11 th Ave). For more info call 877-  KATHLEEN SHANNON  Kathleen Shannon, founder of the National  Film Board's award-winning women's studio, "Studio D", talks candidly about feminism, creativity and the spirit on Vision TV,  Nov 22.  HISTORIC GARAGE SALE  Press Gang Printer'sfabclosingsale: Beautiful papers and notebooks, graphic arts  supplies and equipment, office furniture and  knick-knacks, computer, posters, shelves,  etc. Get a piece of our history and show  some support: Fri, Nov 5 at 12-9 pm and  Sat, Nov 6 at 10-5 pm at 603 Powell Street.  For more info call 253-1224.  REBEL VOICES  Janet Stecher and Susan Lewis from Seattle,  in concert at Josephine's on Nov 6 at 8-10  pm at Josephine's, 1716 Charles St. They  sing about social change, politics, life, tragedy, humour. "Uncommonly powerful harmonies": their songs have been described  as "tasteful, tactless, tender, taxing, treasonous treasures, theatrical thrill, tongue-  in-cheek tragedy." Advance tickets are $5-  $10. For reservations/tickets call 253-3142.  LILLIAN ALLEN  A book launching, reading and signing of  "Women Do This Every Day: Selected Poems" by Lillian Allen a poet, writer, activist  from Toronto at Josephine's, 1716 Charles  St. Nov 8 at 7:30 pm. Free!  VIDEO NITE AT JOSIE'S  It's video night at Josephine's, 1716 Charles  St. Sat, Nov 13 for Part one of the Lesbian  Soap, "Two and Twenty." It's free to the  public, donation if you can to benefit the  continuation of Josephine's. Part two of  "Two and Twenty" is Fri, Nov 19.  RADICAL WOMEN  Radical Women has embarked on an international speaking tour to publicize findings  from its recent trip to Eastern Europe, the  Balkans and Russia. The sixth stop on the  tour will be a public torum in Vancouver at  the Croation Cultural Centre on Nov 20. For  further information call 874-0535 or fax 688-  5195.  AIDS IN ZIMBABWE  The world premiere of the film Side by Side:  Women Against AIDS in Zimbabwe will be  screened at 7:30 pm and 9:30 pm on Dec 1,  atthe Pacific Cinematheque. This film shows  the positive work being done by many remarkable Zimbabwean women who are  committed to stopping AIDS. This film features: Anatolia Mushaya, Dr. Sunanda Ray,  and Tisa Chifunyise. Each of them exempli-  Co-op Radio  CFRO  102.7  RIX/I  Listener Powered!  Oo m m u nity-Based!  Where women have a voice  Monday, 8-9pm: Womenvisions  For women about women by women. Health, politics, iaw, spirituality, arts,  sexuality and alternative ideologies.  Thursday, 8:30-9:30pm: The Lesbian Show  Thurday, 9:30-10:30pm: OBAA  By women of colour for women of colour. Local community news and events,  interviews and music not heard in the mainstream.  Friday, 8-10pm: Rubymusic  12 years on the air, Rubymusic features the best in music by women—old, new,  lost and found.  For a free listener's guide call 684-8494 Monday-Friday, 10am-6pm  Book Launching/  Reading  Press Gang Publishers is happy to invite you  to celebrate the launching of  In Her I Am  (a special edition of erotic poetry)  by Chrystos  8 pm  Friday, November 19  at The Lotus, 455 Abbott, Vancouver  Reading begins at 8:30 sharp  Snacks and signed copies of the book  will be for sale  For more information call Delia at 253-2537  NOVEMBER 1993  21 Bulletin Board  EVENTS  EVENTS  EVENTS  EVENTS  ties the hope of the human spirit, and the  creativity and commitment of Zimbabwean  women tofight AIDS. Thefilm was produced  by local film makers Harvey McKinnon and  Peter Davis. Co-sponsored by the World  AIDS Group-BC and the Academy of Cinema and Television. For more info contact  Peter Gillies, World AIDS Group at 254-  7052 or Harvey McKinnon at 732-4351.  NORA RANDALL  Nora Randall and CCLOW invite you the  book launching and celebration of Nora's  recent publication, "BackTo School Survival  Guide For Women". There will be food,  drinks and an opportunity to discuss the  book with the author. All are invited on Nov  23 from 4-7 pm at Josephine's, at 1716  Charles St.  VLC EVENTS  On Nov 5, there will be a paint party. Come  out and help revitalize the Vancouver Lesbian Connection Centre at 876 Commercial  Dr. at 10 am. On Nov 6, come and join other  Lesbians to discuss your work and share  writing with each other at the Women's  Writing Group, at 6-9 pm. On Nov 7, B-  Average performancetwill be at the Lotus.  Help support the VLC by attending this  hilarious comedy at 7:30 pm. On Nov 14 at  4-6 pm there will be an initial meeting toform  a support group for lesbians investigating  motherhood. Anticipated areas of interest  are legal aspects, alternative insemination,  parenting, etc. On Nov 21 there will be a  Lesbian Craft Fair & Coffee Shop, from 1 -7  pm. Come out and buy lesbian-crafted  presents for your lived ones and check out  the centre. For more info on all these events,  call the VLC at 254-8458.  VIDEO IN  The works of Lynn Hershman will be presented at Video In Studios located at 1965  Main Street, on Nov 19 & Nov 20, at 9 pm.  Hershman is known worldwide for her experimental videos fiction and fantasy, interrogating perceptions of the self as they  entwine with contemporary issues of gender, desire, prostitution, abuse, eating disorders and just plain life. Tickets are $4 or  $5. For more info call 872-8337.  LINA DE GUEVARA  Lina de Guevara is the artistic director of  Puente Theatre, which she founded in 1988  to give a voice to the experiences of immigrants from Latin America. She emigrated  to Canada in 1976 from Chile, where she  was an actress, director and teacher at the  Austral University. Members of Puente Theatre will join Lina to present an excerpt from  their forum theatre piece "Canada Tango".  Fri, Nov 26 at Josephine's Coffee Bar, 1716  Charles St. Admission is $8/$5 for members.  KOKORO DANCE  Kokoro Dance presents Esse, the essence  of a women, through a poetic narrative by  Elizabeth Dancoes, dance by Barbara  Bourget and music by Robert J. Rosen.  Performed by Barbara Bourget, Elizabeth  Dancoes, Barbara Pollard and Cellist Peggy  Lee. Nov 30 to Dec 4 (two shows Dec 4,  6:30 pm & 9 pm with a fundraising art  auction/party afterthe 9 pm performance) at  8:30 pm at Vancouver East Cultural Centre,  1895 Venables St. Tickets are $16/$14 on  TuesAVed/Thurs (2 for 1 on Tues). On Fri/  Sat, they are $18/$16. For reservations and  info, call 254-9578.  CLAIRE KUJUNDZIC  Flying females, falling figures, and umbrellas are all subjects of Claire Kujundzic's  current playful, colourful, and lively work on  display at the Vancouver East Cultural Centre Gallery, on till Nov 23,1895 Venables St.  Amnesty International, Tools for Peace, and  the International Confederation of Midwives  are among those who have used her art  work. VECC Gallery hours are 12 noon to 6  pm daily. For more info call 254-9578.  AMY HILL  Writer/performer Amy Hill's one-women "autobiographical romp" called Tokyo Bound  chronicles a vivid and engaging coming-of-  age story of the Japanese-Finnish-American author. She was labelled American in  Japan and Japanese in America. Hill's voyage of self discovery is both humourous and  poignant. This is a co-presentation with the  Vancouver East Cultural Centre, the Powell  Street Festival and the US/Canada Performance Initiative Project. On Nov24-27at  Vancouver East Cultural Centre, 1895  Venables St, at 8 pm. Forticket infocall 280-  3311. For reservations call 254-9578.  VOICES IN ART  Voices in Art: Tools of Resistance is a  conference for women to continue the discourse among women about the different  ways art can be political and cultural tools.  This conference will focus on Aboriginal  women and women of colour artists and the  politics of feminism, to create a celebratory  f oru m in which the creative strengths, voices  and differences among Aboriginal women  and women of colour are explored through  panel discussions and/or performance of  the artist's art. Speakers include Sunera  Thobani (NAC), Marrie Mumford (Association for Native Development in the Visual  and Performing Arts), Djanet Sears, Fauzia  Rafig (Diva), Marlene Tsun, Sheila James  (The Company of Sirens), Brenda Joy Lem,  Winsom, and a production by Sugar 'n'  Spice and many more. It takes place on Sat,  Nov 13 at Dunning Auditorium, Queen's  University, Kingston, Ontario. Fees are $10-  $25 sliding scale and childcare is available.  The space is wheelchair accessible. For  more info call the Education Commission at  519-545-2725 or OPIRG at 519-549-0066.  LESBIAN/GAY STUDIES  UBC's President's Lecture Series in Lesbian and Gay Studies has various speakers  scheduled for the month of Nov. Daphne  Marlatt and Betsy Warland will be speaking  on "Together and Apart: Inside Collaborative Writing" Tues, Nov2, 7:30 pm at Angus  110, University of British Columbia. Prof  Monique Wittig and Susan Stewart (Kiss  and Tell) will speak on "Lesbian Bodies and  Lesbian Con/Texts" Fri, Nov 12 at 7-9 pm at  the Hebb Theatre, University of British Columbia. Admission isf ree. Deborah Britzman  will speak on "The Significance of Lesbian  and Gay Studies for Transforming Education" Fri, Nov 19 at the Diamond Faculty  Club, Simon Fraser University, 4-6 pm.  Admission is free. Isaac Julien takes a look  at "Race and Post-Colonialism in Cultural  Production". A showing of Looking for  Langston and The Attendant at Pacific  Cinematheque, 1131 Howe St on Sat, Nov  27. Sliding scale admission. For more info  on all these events call 822-5358  FREE LAW CLASS  The People's Law School is offering a free  immigration law class. Immigration policy is  ever-changing. To keep you up to date on  the current trends there will be a free immigration law class at West Pt. Grey Community Centre, 4397 W. 2nd Ave on Mon, Nov  29 from 7:30 to 9:30 pm. Wheelchair accessible. To pre-register call 224-1910.  ECONOMIC WORKSHOP  The Ministry of Women's Equality, in cooperation with Status of Women Canada  and other provincial/territorial women's directorates, is organizing an "Economic Equality Workshop" on Nov 29-30 in Ottawa,  Ontario. This event will provide a forum for  feminist economists to present their papers/  research/ideas and policy directions, and  will serve as a medium to improve the links  between economic researchers and policymakers in Canada. The proceedings of the  workshop will be published and tabled in  Jun at the annual conference of federal,  provincial and territorial Ministers Responsible for the Status of Women. The document  may be made available to women's groups,  provincial departments throughout Canada.  Please call Zeynep Karman at (613)992-  7099 for more info.  FREE LAW CLASS  The People's Law School is offering a free  law class about Small Claims Court. Small  Claims Court offers a way for people to  settle legal disputes cheaply and easily,  without a lawyer. The Small Claims Court  has changed many of its forms and procedures to make it even easier. Get the latest  info about these changes by attending the  free law class at Kensington Community  Centre, 5175 Dumfries St on Wed, Nov 24  from 7:30 to 9:30 pm. Wheelchair accessible. To pre-register call 327-9401  SEXUAL HARASSMENT  "Sexual Harassment: No more excuses...to  do it, to tolerate it, not to react." Nov 10-13  in Ottawa, Ontario. Aconference sponsored  by the Canadian Association Against Sexual  Harassment in Higher Education. For more  info call Mariette Blanchette (613)237-6885  or Solange Cantin (514)343-7020.  EMPOWERING FARM WOMEN  "Beyond the Barriers: Empowering farm  women to step beyond the barriers to meet  the challenges of the 21 century." The 6th  National Farm Women's Conference is being held at the Delta Pacific Hotel in Richmond from Nov 11 -13. The goal is to provide  an opportunity forfarm women tospeak with  an integrated voice on social, legal and  economic issues and to promote a recognition for the valuable role farm women play in  the economy of Canada. For more info call  Linde Cherry at 856-6363.  CRIAW CONFERENCE  "Expanding the Healing Circle", Canadian  Research Institute for the Advancement of  Women annual conference is being held on  Nov 12-14 in St. John's, Newfoundland. The  organizers believe that healing strategies  need to be developed and shared on the  problems of violence against women in single industry towns, addictions, institutional  violence, shelter issues and legal policy  issues. Keynote speaker Maggie Hodgson,  of the Nechi Institute for Drug & Alcohol  Education. For more info call the CRIAW  coordinator at (709)753-7270 or fax  (709)753-2606.  BLACK WOMEN'S CONGRESS  The 11th Biennial National Congress of  Black Women conference is occuring on  Nov 12-14 in Winnipeg, Manitoba. Their  focus will be on women's' health issues. For  more info call Norma Walker at (204)775-  4378.  POVERTY/FEMINIST VIEWS  The Centre for Research in Women's Studies and Gender Relations will host their 2nd  annual conference on Nov 18-20, co-sponsored with UBC School of Social Work. This  year's theme is Poverty: Feminist Perspectives. It hopes to bring together anti-poverty  and community groups with interested researchers to investigate what feminist perspectives mean for understanding poverty.  For more info call UBC at 822-9173.  INFO POLICY CONFERENCE  BC Information Policy Conference "Partners for Public Access". We are constantly  beingtoldthatweare in the information age  but it is the large corporations and institutions that controls most of the information  flow. Many community and public organizations are concerned that the current government policies on information access will  reduce our access to information. This conference is designed to give a general examination of government policies and to explore  the role of Freenet, a non-profit community  computing utility. Nov 19-21 at SFU at the  Harbour Centre. Fee $40/$20 for Students/  low income. For more info call BC Library  Association at 430-9630.  MULTICULTURALISM  "Multiculturalism and Anti-Racism, A Vision  forthe Future: Equality, Equity and Empowerment" is a conference sponsored by the  Canadian Council for Multicultual and  Intercultural Education, provincial affiliates  and federal government to be held in Vancouver from Nov 25-27. The local contact is  Sam Fillipof 731 -8121 orfax Inez Williston in  Ottawa at (613)233-4499.  ABORIGINAL WOMEN/SOCIETY  "Aboriginal Women in Contemporary Society" is the 3rd annual cross-cultural program  presented by the Whistler Centre for Business and the Arts on Dec 1 at Whistler. The  program, in recognition of the International  Year of the World's Indigenous Peoples, will  present aboriginal perspectives on the inter-  relatedness of women & men, family, work,  politics, treaty negotiations, education, community, health, and justice. For info call the  Centre 932-8310 or 682-5248 (toll free from  Vancouver) or fax 932-4461.  ELLEN BASS  Ellen Bass is the author of The Courage to  Heal: A Guide for Women Survivors of Child  Sexual Abuse. This intensive one day training will provide a basic, nonclinical overview  of issues related to working with adult survivors. Ellen explores creativity in the  healing process, working with diverse  populations, dealing with intense feelings,  safe touch, the importance of language, and  writing as a healingtool. Jan 26, Vancouver,  1-800-561-5789.  BC VSL2T5 &" (604)253-3142  smoke free cappuccino bar    #   light vegetarian meals  (§• art & crafts   (J  gifts & music O   pool table  Open Tuesday •* Sunday  Womyn's Open Stage       Q*.  Sunday, November 28  ^*  Book your Special Event with Us  KARATE for WOMEN  YWCA - 580 Burrard  Mon., Tues., Thurs. 7 pm.  BEGINNERS GROUP  September 16  D2ia 734-9816  ■ go girl go studio ■ opening dec 10-12 ■  • 2814 trinity st • 1 block north of renfrew and mcgill •  ♦ show and sale of ceramics by cynthia low ♦ info 254 9487  <? Q @  f riday dec 10  opening 7pm  food and juice  Saturday dec 11  noon - 9pm  demonstrations  ^t-r\ SvLJS^  NOVEMBER 1993 Bulletin Board  GROUPS  VLC  VLC hours are Tues/Thurs 12-6:45 pm. Sat  12-5 pm. Ongoing groups: Sun-Lesbian  Youth Group; Mon-Survivers of Incest  Anonymous; Wed-ACOA; Thurs-Healing  Circle for First Nations and mixed Native  heritage lesbians;1 st & 3rd Fri-Over 30's  Social Group; 2nd & 4th Fri-Women of  Colour Support Group. All groups start at 7  pm. 1st & 3rd Sat-Writing Group. VLC  needs your help. We are more than a centre.  We have a number of committees that are  looking for volunteers. If you are interested  in becoming a vital part of the VLC, consider  joining any one of the following committees:  Political Action, Fundraising, Library, Education & Outreach, Lesbian Health Issues,  or International Networking. Please phone  for more information at 254-8458 or drop by  in to 876 Commercial Dr. Join us at the  centre for a craft fair and coffee house on  Nov 21,1-7 pm.  INTERNATIONAL LESBIAN WEEK  Plansfor International Lesbian Week'94 are  coming together fast and furious. Some  events planned are: Sexpertease at  Graceland; an evening of performance and  displays by First Nations women; Lesbians  in recovery AA and Alnon; Lesbians of colour video and lecture series; a craft/trade  fairto buy/sell/trade. There is still time to get  involved including helping to organize the  Dyke Visibility March. Join us at our next  meetings Sun, Nov 7 or 21 at 7 pm in the  common room at 1656 Adanac. For more  info call Mary 684-5307.  DR. PAULETTE ROSCOE  NATUROPATHIC PHYSICIAN  HOMEOPATHY  COUNSELLING  DETOXIFICATION  HYCROFT MEDICAL CENTER  108-3195 GRANVILLE ST.  VANCOUVER, B.C. V6H 3K2  731-4183  Affordable therapy for  women working or\ issues  of self esteem, abuse,  depression and personal  growth in a supportive  environment.  0ar\&n& Gaq& • Counsellor  254-375S  barbara findlay  is delighted to announce  that she is now practising law  with the law firm of  Smith and Hughes  321-1525 Robson St.  Vancouver  phone 683-4176  Smith and Hughes offer a full range of  legal sendees to the lesbian, gay and  bisexual communities of Vancouver.  Initial consultations ere without charge.  CLASSIFIEDS  WALLACE AWARD  Bronwen Wallace Award of $1000 will be  given for the first time to honour the poetry  or short fiction of as yet unpublished young  writer. Submission requirements that the  writer must be a Canadian citizen or landed  immigrant, under the age of 35 as of Jan 15,  unpublished in book form, but whose work  must have appeared in at least one independently edited magazine or anthology.  Applicants should submit 5-10 pages of  previously unpublished poetry in English  (or, in alternate years, no more that 2500  works of an unpublished English language  prose fiction sample, double spaced). The  writer's name, address, and phone number  are to appear only on the cover sheet ac-  companyingthe manuscript. All pages should  be consecutively numbered. Entries will not  be returned. The deadlineforsubmissions is  Jan 15, and all submissions must be sentto  The Bronwen Wallace Award, c/o The Writer's Development Trust, 24 Ryerson Avenue, Suite 201, Toronto, Ontario, M5T  2P3. The final Judges will be three established writers. The decision of the judges will  be final.  LESBIAN EROTICA  Sister Vision Press is calling for new works  of short stories and poetry "Celebrating  Lesbian Erotica". Deadline for contributions  is Dec 30. Send your work with SASE to  SisterVision Press, PO Box 217, Station E,  Toronto, Ontario, M6H 4E2.  WOMEN OF COLOUR  Sister Vision Press is callingfor short stories  and poetry for a new collection of writings by  women of colour. The deadline for contributions is Dec30. Pleasesendyourworkalong  with a SASE to SisterVision Press, PO Box  217, Station E, Toronto, Ontario, M6H 4E2.  ASSIMILATION IN CANADA  A call for submissions for "But Where Are  You Really From? An Anthology on Identity  and Assimilation in Canada". Essays, personal narratives, articles, commentaries and  poetry are wanted for this anthology which  will examine issues around identity and assimilation in Canadian society. In particular,  this anthology will focus on the experiences  of non-white women, born or brought up in  Canada, in search of cultural identity but  caught between two sets of values, traditions and lifestyles-those which derive from  Canadian society; and those influenced by  cultural heritage. All submissions should be  typed, double spaced (diskette copy if possible) and include a bio with full address and  telephone number. Do not send originals.  Deadline is Jan 15. Submit in duplicate with  a SASE to Identity, Sister Vision Press, c/o  Hazelle Palmer, 19-1666 Queen St East,  Toronto, Ontario, M4L 1G3.  imiiiiMiiiiMi  San gam Grant R.P.C.  REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL COUNSELLOR  Private Practitioner,  Workshop + Group Therapist  phone (604) 253-5007  when the music changes se dees the daece...  bTiet?  •organic landscaping  Vancouyer,BG Vfof IU  * r  Lani t Bri-tf r»mtmg  The NFB and the Chinese Cultural Centre present two free  screenings of short films by Chinese Canadian women directors— Return Home by Michelle Wong (above) and Me, Mom  and Mona by Mina Shum—playing Sun, Nov 7, 2 pm, Unit 860-  4400 Hazelbridge Way, Richmond and Wed, Nov 10,7:30 pm, 50  E Pender, Vancouver. For info and tickets call the CCC offices  at 278-0873/687-0729 or the NFB at 666-3838.  CLASSIFIEDS CLASSIFIEDS  LESBIAN ARTIST/CRAFTSWOMEN  VLC is holding a craft fair on Nov 21 and is  looking for lesbian artists and crafstwomen,  etc. Any interested womyn please call 254-  8458 for more info or to register for a free  table.  THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE  Counselling and therapy using an integrative and eclectic approach in order to explore the individual's conflict and distress  within the social context in which this occurs,  such as adoption and fostering; racism and  anti-semitism; heterosexism, etc. For an  appoint, please call Sangam Grant at 253-  5007.  DECEMBER 6TH ROSE BUTTONS  Dec 6 is Canada's National Day of Remembrance and Action to End Violence Against  Women. To honour this day, and as part of  the 16 Days of Global Activism Against  Gender Violence (Nov 25-Dec 10), the  YWCA of/du Canada is again producing the  Rose Buttons with an accompanying bookmark. The December 6th button, which bears  a large red rose, reads: "In Commemorat ion  of the 14 women killed in Montreal, December 6, 1989, and all women who have suf-  feredfrom violence." Groups working to end  violence against women can sell the buttons  forfund-raising and public education. Available in bags of 100 for $50. English or  French text. To place your order contact:  YWCA of/du Canada, 80 Gerrard St East,  Toronto, Ontario, M5B1G6, Attention: Rose  Button. Tel: (416)593-9886. Fax: (416)  971 -8084.  HOUSEMATE(S) WANTED  At Sky Ranch women's land, near Burns  Lake. Very Remote. Very beautiful. Room  available in old farmhouse, short-term or  long-term. Rent 10-15% of income. Contact  Judith at 694-3738. C4, site 20, RR2, Burns  Lake, BC. Pets, children welcome. Work  exchange negotiable. Seeking new members.  VILLA DE HERMANAS  Beautiful, spacious LF owned guesthouse  on long secluded beach in the Dominican  Republic. Tropical gardens, pool, large private guestrooms, sumptuous meals, massages. Room rates: $330 single; $440 double per week. Call ourToronto friend Susan,  at (416)463-6138 between 9am & 10pm.  A WOMAN'S PLACE  Emotional Fitness Centre Counselling, education and consulting service of the North  Shore. Offers feminist and lesbian affirma  tive counselling, workshops, support groups.  Areas of specialization: low self-esteem,  depression, anxiety, communication, relationship difficulties, emotional, physical,  sexual abuse recovery, coming out. Call  Lou Moreau at 924-2424 RCC.  WOMAN-TO-WOMAN  A feminist counselling service for all women  who are wanting to make positive changes  in their lives. For relationships, coming out,  substance abuse, sexual abuse and other  forms of violence, I offer a safe, supportive,  professional environment in which to explore your options. Frances Friesen BSc,  BA, MA (candidate), 5-6975 Kingsway,  Burnaby, 540-0634, Sliding scale, free initial  consultaion.  GENERAL PRACTITIONER  Joan Robillard, MD, General Practitionerfor  all kinds of families. Located at 308-2902  West Broadway, Vancouver, V6K 2G8.  Telephone 736-3582.  GODDESS INSTITUTE  University instructor of Goddess Mysteries  seeksfeminist partners with financial means  tocrer an instituteforspiritualtransforma-  tion t -ed on divine feminine. Please pass  thewordaround! Lovetohearfromyou! Dr.  Nadia Torrens, 70051 Londonderry PO  Edmonton, Alberta, T5C 3C6.  LOG CABIN  Lesbian wishes to share log cabin on women's farm in Coombs on Vancouver Island.  Must be smoke tolerant. $235 month, everything included. Available Dec 1. Iris 248-  4942.  WOMAN SINGER  Woman singer, guitarist, songwriter, spiritually inclined is looking for similar features to  specialize in vocal harmonies. 436-5739.  RIDE WANTED  From Vancouver to Kimberley/Cranbrook  area and back, ideally leaving Vancouver  before Christmas and returning after New  Year's. Will share gas and driving—experienced winter driver. Please leave a message for Sally at 251-4231. I will get back to  you after mid-Nov.  WHERE ARE YOU?  Ann Rainboth, Rachel Godhu—where are  you? Lizanne wants to re-connect with you.  Please call me at 921 -9726 (home) or 985-  1888 (work!). Candice would like to see you  too, Angela (the Red from Saltspring).  NOVEMBER 1993 Free to prisoners  Orders outside Canada add $8  Published ten times a year by the Vancouver Status of Women  #301-1720 Grant Street Vancouver, BC V5L 2Y6