 NOVEMBER 1995 More UBC woes? pg 3  CMPA $2.25 Inside  KINESIS  #301-1720 Grant Street  Vancouver, BC V5L 2Y6  Tel: (604)255-5499  Fax:(604)255-5511  Kinesis welcomes volunteers to work  on all aspects of the paper. Our next  Writers' Meeting is Nov 6 for the Dec/  Jan issue, at 7 pm at Kinesis. All  women welcome even if you don't  have experience.  Kinesis is published ten times a year  by the Vancouver Status of Women.Its  objectives are to be a non-sectarian  feminist voice for women and to work  actively for social change, specifically  combatting sexism, racism,classism,  homophobia, ableism, and imperialism. Views expressed in Kinesis are  those of the writer and do not  necessarily reflect VSW policy. All  unsigned material is the responsibility  of the Kinesis Editorial Board.  EDITORIAL BOARD  Fatima Jaffer, Lissa Geller, wendy lee  kenward, Agnes Huang, Robyn Hall,  Laiwan, Alex Hennig  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE  Manuela Lucchese, Effie Pow, Amy  Chen, Meh Najak, Dorcas, Sharyn  Carroll, Dorothy Elias, Lori Motokado,  Persimmon Blackbridge, Nancy Pang,  Fatima Jaffer, wendy lee kenward,  Agnes Huang, Shannon e. Ash,  Laiwan  Advertising: Sur Mehat  Circulation: Cat L'Hirondelle, Andrea  Imada, Linda Gorrie, Chrystal Fowler  Distribution: Carolina Rosales  Production Co-ordinator: Laiwan  Typesetter: Sur Mehat  FRONT COVER  Thai women at the opening ceremony,  4th World Conference on Women,  Beijing, China  photo by Fatima Jaffer  PRESS DATE  October 24, 1995  SUBSCRIPTIONS  Individual: $20 per year {+$1.40 GST)  or what you can afford  Institutions/Groups:  $45 per year (+$3.15 GST)  VSW Membership (includes 1 year  Kinesis subscription):  $30 per year (+$1.40 GST)  SUBMISSIONS  Women and girls are welcome to  make submissions. We reserve the  right to edit and submission does not  guarantee publication. If possible,  submissions should be typed, double  spaced and must be signed and  include an address, telephone number  and SASE. Kinesis does not accept  poetry or fiction. Editorial guidelines  are available upon request.  DEADLINES  All submissions must be received in  the month preceding publication. Note:  Jul/Aug and Dec/Jan are double  issues.  Features and reviews: 10th  News: 15th  Letters and Bulletin Board: 18th  Display advertising  (camera ready): 18th  (design required): 16th  Kinesis is produced on a Warner  Doppler PC using WordPerfect 5.1,  PageMaker 4.0 and an NEC laser  printer. Camera work by OK Graphics.  Printing by Horizon Publications.  Kinesis is indexed in the Canadian  Women's Periodicals Index,  the Alternative Press Index, and is a  member of the Canadian Magazine  Publishers Association.  ISSN 0317-9095  Publications mail registration #6426  News  UBC strangles debate on Poli Sci department 3  by Rebecca Harding  Execution order commuted for Sarah Balabagan 4  by Agnes Huang  Students rally for education 5  by Ezekiel Sam uels  Dealing with domestic violence 6  by Agnes Huang  Funding for single mom's employment program cut 6  by Andrea Imada  Racism and sexism at UBC .  Centrespread  REPORT FROM BEIJING 95  Introduction 9  Huairou NGO Forum diary 10  by Fatima Jaffer  The struggle for democracy 11  by Aung San Suu Kyi  Indigenous women's rights 12  by Winona LaDuke  Lesbians march in Huairou 14  photo essay  Lesbians strategize against conservatism 14  by Rebeca Se villa  Reviewing the Forum and the Conference 16     Aung San Suu Kyi  by Sunera Thobani  Asian women organizing 18  by Winnie Wun Wun Ng  Arts  Mercedes Sosa: Voice of the Americas 21  by Guadalupe Lesca Jolicoeur  Review: The Journal Project 22  by Janet Nichol  Five Asian Canadian women writers/performers in review 23  by Sook C. Kong  Review: Lit from Within 24  by Janet Askin  Regulars  As Kinesis Goes to Press 2  Inside Kinesis 2  Movement Matters 7  by wendy lee kenward, Patty Gibson and Shannon e. Ash  Bulletin Board 25  compiled by Manuela Lucchese  Passionate about women's issues?  Want to see those issues In these pages?  Come to the next Writers' Meeting  on Monday November 6  for the Dec/Jan issue, at 7 pm  at #301-1720 Grant Street, Vancouver.  Telephone: (604) 255-5499  Lesbians march at Huairou..  SKY Lee..  NOVEMBER 1995 Here's an update on an update we  brought to you last month in As Kinesis  goes to press. In our October 1995 issue,  we reported that women's reproductive  rights in Alberta were dealt a blow when  Ralph Klein announced his  Covnservative government would no  longer pay for abortion services.. .except  in cases where abortion is "medically  necessitated." That was his plan.  But it seems his master plan had a  little glitch...he needed someone to define that little phrase, "medically necessitated," Klein tried to get doctors to  play 'dictionary,' but they didn't want  to play that game. They told Klein the  decision of whether or not to have an  abortion was between a woman and her  doctor...and told him to go away.  So now poor Ralphie, doesn't have a  definition, and he's had to scrap his  whole anti-choice plan.. .1 ucky for women  in Alberta.  On this side of the Rockies...pro-  choice advocates in BC are going to get  a chance to see whether or not the province's Access to Abortion Services  law...or more commonly known as the  "bubble zone" law...has any teeth. Next  month, an anti-abortionist caught doing  anti-choice    things    outside    the  Everywoman's Health Centre and inside the bubble zone will be making an  appearance in court on charges of violating the bubble zone. We'll keep you  posted on the verdict.  More on the topic of bubble  zones...some good news for women in  BC from south of the border. Early in  October, the US Supreme Court rejected  a constitutional challenge by a group of  anti-abortionists of that country's version of the bubble zone law—they don't  violate freedom of speech or freedom of  religion.  So the thinking up here is that, if the  courts in the US-the supposed great  defenders of free speech and individual  rights-have given the okay to bubble  zones there, then there's a good chance  the courts here will do the same...but  that's not for sure. But we'll have to wait  for a constitutional challenge first anyway before we'll find out the answer.  As Kinesis goes to press, Quebec is  about to go to the referendum polls. And  the question of the month is....what did  you think about Lucien Bouchard's comment blaming white women in Quebec  for not having enought (white) babies?  Without dwelling on it anymore, we just  needed to say we're totally disgusted  with the big B's blatantly racist and  sexist comment. And apparently over  3,000 women in Quebec were a bit pissed  off at his remarks and held a rally to tell  his so.  We just (literally) received a letter  from the Centre for Women's Global  Leadership in New Jersey announcing  the 5th annual 16 Days of Activism  against Gender Violence Campaign (November 25 to December 10.) The theme  of this year's campaign is "Bringing  Women's Human Rights Home," and  they're calling on women everywhere to  take up actions. They'd also appreciated  knowaboutactionsbeingplanned...soif  you're working on one, drop them a  note at Douglas College, 27 Clifton Ave,  New Brunswick, NJ, 08903; or fax: (908)  932-1180.  What would As Kinesis goes to press  be if we didn't take the opportunity to  comment on Mike Harris and the Ontario Conservative government. Hopefully sometime soon we won't have any  cuts, cuts and more cuts to report from  back east.  Just when we thought they were  being mean and nasty by cutting welfare  spending by 22 percent, they get even  meaner and nastier by talking about  changing the definition of "disability"  so the Conservative government can  disqualify the "not-really-disabled-people" from receiving social assistance for  people with disabilities.  But hey, just when we thought there  was no hope for Harris and company,  they actually turn around and show us  how caring they can really be...Last  month David Tsubouchi, minister of  community services, thought he'd be a  nice guy and give budgeting lessons to  people receiving welfare.  Apparently, according to financial  planning wizard, Tsubouchi, itonly takes  $90 to feed oneself for a whole  month...that is, if you like to eat a lot of  bologna, and other processed things. He  also suggested that poor people should  barter for everything to get the lowest  price possible-keep your eye out for  that 69 cent can of tuna...Tsubouchi  swears it's out there.  It seems we have to spend a lot of  time as feminists, as activists, debunking the great myths the media tries to  pass off as news. According to the media, women who attended the 4th World  Conference on Women were too mired  in mud rain, and too harassed by Chinese security forces to have gotten any  work done. So, if you were looking for  news about women at the NGO  Forum...period...it definitely was not in  the dailies.  We've been talking to our own  Fatima Jaffer whose had been hobnobbing with lots of international gals she  met at the NGO Forum, and she's found  out that it wasn't just the mainstream  media in Canada that had no idea what  was happening in Beijing...apparently,  almost all media outlets jumped on  CNN'slead anfocussed on fighting with  logistical problems as the main happening at the NGO Forum.  If you want a taste of what was  really going on at the Forum, check out  our firt special supplement on  Beijing...and if you're still hungry after  sampling Part One of our coverage... well  then, you'll just have to wait til Kinesis  goes to press again for another bite.  Vancouver-status»of. Women  Thanks!  Our thanks to Vancouver Status of Women members who support  us year round with memberships and donations. Our appreciation to  the following supporters who became members, renewed their memberships or donated to VSW in October:  Winona Baker, Cathy Bannick, Barbara Curran, Patricia  Dubberley, Elaine Everett, Mary Frey, Marilyn Fuchs, Michael and  Connie Geller, Teresa Gibson, Erin Graham, Lynda Griffith, Heidi  Henkenhaf, Jennifer Johnstone, Barbara Karmazyn, Angela Kelly,  Barbara Lebrasseur, Karin Litzcke, Jane McCartney, Kathy  McGrenera, Bea McKenzie, Lolani Moreau, Christine Morrisey, Gail  Mountain, Margaret Ostrowski, Emi Pech, Carol Pettigrew, Neil  Power, Dana Putnam, Patricia Sadowy, Andrea Saunderson, Mark  Schneider, Dawn Simpson,, Gale Stewart, Jeanne St. Pierre, Sheilah  Thompson, Gale Tyler, Karon Webber, Lynne Werker, Elizabeth  Whynot, Shelagh Wilson, Rita Wong, Barbara Young.  Thanks so much for your support!  It's fall in Vancouver. The sun peeks  through theccchillycloudsas the trees  shed their red-gold leaves on the heads  of Kinesis volunteers comfortably attired  in layers of Kinesis t-shirts as we dutifully show up for production, day after  day after beautiful day.  We've got a whole heap of thank  yous to say this month, mostly to all the  women who helped make the Kinesis  benefit a huge success. We raised enough  money to put a smile on Andrea, our  hard-working fundraiser's face, and  everyone seems to have had a great  time. Funny about Kinesis benefits, no  matter how much time or effort we put  into it, whether it's big or small, it always brings out the best bunch of  women, and is one of the fun-est events  in Vancouver every year! (It's not just us  who thinks so; everyone says that, honest!)  So, thanks to all the women who  cameouttoour Benefit thisyear. Thanks  to our entertainers (who were a hit with  all of us): Elaine Stef, May Zhu, Eileen  Kage, SKY Lee, and Frannie Sheridan.  Thanks also to Judy Senang for doing  childcare. And many, many thanks to  the women who helped sell raffle tickets  and who volunteered their time and  energies at the event: Erin Graham,  Fatima Jaffer, Laiwan, Dorcas Wilson,  Anthea Whittaker, Centime Zeleke,  Jennifer Johnstone, Faith Jones,  Winnifred Tovey, Andrea Imada, Moira  Keigher, Balbi Bazran Kalia, Melina Udy,  Rose Gilbert, Janine Fuller, and Cat  L'Hirondelle.  More thanks to the wonderful  women who showed up for production  for their first experience of proofing,  pasting up and partying in the production room: Manuela Lucchese and Sharyn  Carroll (hey, and they're both from Ontario!)  Thanks also to new writers: Rebecca  Harding, Aung San Suu Kyi, Winona  LaDuke, Rebecca Sevilla, Winnie Wun  Wun Ng,SookCKong,GuadalupeLesca  Jolicoeur, Janet Askin and Manuela  Lucchese.  Join this illustrious group of  women...show up at the next Kinesis  writers' meeting on Monday, November 6th at 7pm or call Agnes at (604) 255-  5499.  Cheerio.  NOVEMBER 1995 JNews  Sexism and racism at UBC:  Deal of denial  Rebecca Harding  After some last-minute backroom  dealing, the University of British Columbia (UBC) lifted a suspension on  admissions to the graduate program in  the Political Science (PoliSci)department.  With this move, the university sends a  clear message to women and people of  colour that it will not tolerate any challenge to the sexual and racial discrimination and harassment students say is  rife in the department.  The lifting of the suspension came  just hours before the Senate—the highest decision-making body on academic  issues made up of student representatives, faculty and administrators—was  expected to vote on a motion to re-open  admissions to the Poli Sci graduate program.  Student activists at the university  contend the lifting of the suspension on  admissions was a "power play" to subvert what many anticipated would be a  clear majority of the university's senate  for the continuation of the admissions  ban.  New admissions to the PoliSci department has been su spended since June,  on a recommendation in a report written  by Vancouver lawyer Joan McEwen. The  report concludes there is a basis for  allegations of pervasive sexism and racism in the department [see Kinesis September 1995.]  Since the release of the McEwen  Report four months ago, the university  and the PoliSci department has offered  no apology to students who filed the  harassment and discrimination complaints recorded in McEwen's report,  nor have they formally acknowledged  that a problem exists in the department.  As well, no disciplinary action against  any faculty member has ever been taken.  So when student senators showed  up to the Senate meeting on October  18th, they were fully prepared to participate in a discussion on the admissions  suspension and on issues of harassment,  discrimination and equity in the Poli Sci  department. Students also showed up to  witness the senate vote.  At the meeting, students were  greeted with a surprise announcement  by the administration that a decision  had already been made and that the  planned voting and debating would not  occur.  In a memorandum, UBC's administration, the Political Sciencedepartment,  and the Dean of Graduate Studies announce they have reached a deal, and  that admission to the PoliSci graduate  program would be re-opened immediately. The memo was signed by John  Grace, the Dean of Graduate Studies.  Up until then, Grace—the only person with the authority to makedecisions  concerning admissions to graduate pro  grams—had been adamant about his  support for the suspension.  One week before the senate meeting, the Graduate Council, made up of  faculty and students in graduate studies  programs, held its own vote on a similar  motion to lift the ban. The grad council  defeated the motion in a landslide. At  that meeting, Grace had encouraged  people to vote for a continued ban.  He said, "overturning the suspension would send a message to many  graduate students that a narrowly conceived notion of Faculty priviledge is  more important than providing an appropriate and hospitable learning environment for students...It would also send  a message to women, visible minorities  and other disadvantaged groups that  their efforts to achieve equity will continue to be overridden."  It therefore came as a shock to many  who attended the senate meeting that  Grace had struck a deal with the PoliSci  department and the University administration.  Grace says he lifted the suspension  because the PoliSci department agreed  to take steps towards creating a more  equitable and harassment-free environment.  The memorand u m sets out the seven  terms the PoliSci department says it will  comply with if the suspension is overturned. The changes are more administrative than substantive, such as the  agreements toannounce publicly its commitment to educational equity; to commit itself to deal promptly with allegations of harassment and discrimination  in full accordance with University policy;  and to issue three reports on its actions  in 1996.  Studentsat the meeting were visibly  frustrated that the senate debate and  vote on the admissions suspension was  stopped before it even started. A number  of students heckled Dean Grace as he  addressed the senate meeting.  During the speech given by acting  head of the PoliSci department David  Elkins, students were heard chanting,  "Down with white supremacy." One  student hung up a dummy as a representation of the practices towards women  and people of colour within the Political  Science department. The dummy was  later burned outside of the meeting's  place.  All along, there has been a barrage  of coverage in the local and national  media, most of which delegitimizes the  McEwen report and the students who  filed the complaints. As well, the original issues of racism and sexism have  been buried under the charges of "assault on academic freedom," made by  faculty members of the Poli Sci department.  In a bizarre twist of political mud-  slinging, the media and the critics of the  McEwen report labelled the  participants and defenders of  the McEwen Report, "Red  Guards," "McCarthyists,"  "hysterical feminists" and  "dissidents."  Students at UBC are in an  uproar about the high-handed  behaviour of the academic administrators.  Annabel Webb of the Alliance of Feminists AcrossCam-  puses says she is shocked by  the power playing that went  on in making the backroom  deal. She says it was made with  no student input, and in fact  most students were caught  unaware that a deal was even  being negotiated.  Amanda Ochran, a graduate student in geography and a  former PoliSci student, says  she suspects the deal, which  the mainstream media calls a  "compromise," was struck because the university administration wanted to put a stop to all the  media attention UBC had been getting  as a consequence of the McEwen report.  She says she believes the PoliSci  department has orchestrated the media  attention in support of their position so  that the administration, desperate to  minimize the unwanted press, would  have to cut a deal with the department.  "The PoliSci department got what it  wanted by behaving worse and worse,"  says Ochran. "If admissions to Political  Science had remained cut off, it would  have set a precedent for universities  nationally and internationally, and it  would have generated more bad press  for UBC."  She says if the vote had been allowed, the senate would have likely  voted to keep admissions to the PoliSci  graduate program closed. As of October  13, caucus leaders within the senate and  student lobbyists confirmed that at least  43 of the 90 senators would have voted  to keep PoliSci admissions closed. Only  10 senators publicly admitted supporting the reversal of the suspension.  "With those kinds of numbers, it  would have been almost impossible for  them to get a vote to lift the ban on  admissions," says Ochran.  Kamila Rashid of UBC's Women's  Centre says that one week ago, maintaining the suspension of admissions  seemed like a done deal, at least until  steps were taken to address the allegations of racism and sexism. She says she  doesn't understand how the environment in PoliSci could have changed in  just one week.  Rashid says that everyone knows  the deal is wrong, "Dean Grace knows  its wrong, the students know its wrong,  Students burn a dummy outside the meeting  place of the university's senate.  faculty in the department know it's  wrong. This was not due process."  To students, the lack of interest UBC  hasshown for due process wasapparent  even before the lifting of the ban when  UBC President David Strangway threatened students with a possible libel suit  for putting up posters expressing their  opinion of the Poli Sci department and  the university's response to the McEwen  Report.  The posters went up a week before  the Senate meeting all around campus.  One advertised the senate meeting with  the words, "Stop PolitiKKKal Science."  A political cartoon of the Dean of the  Faculty of Arts, who was critical of the  McEwen Report, appeared on another  poster.  Strangway ordered campus security to take down the posters, saying  they fell beyond "the legal limits of free  speech."  UBC Women'sCentre'sRashid feels  that the whole question of whether or  not to re-open Political Science graduate  admissions is a moot point. She says,  "Focusing on whether to re-open or keep  admissions shut shifts the discussion  away from the substantial issues, such  as creating an environment free from  harassment and discrimination."  Meanwhile, women and people of  colour who have reported incidents of  sexist and racist harassment and  discriminition, and those who have been  vocal on the PoliSci issue, are now the  most vulnerable.  As Ochran says, "it is now open  season on them."  Rebecca Harding i  student at UBC.  a pseudonym for a  NOVEMBER 1995 News  Sarah Balabagan: migrant workers' rights:  Fight for freedom  by Agnes Huang  Sarah Balabagan, a sixteen-year-old  Filipina domestic worker convicted of  murder in the United Arab Emirates  (UAE) won't have to face the firing  squad, but she may not get to return  home to the Philippines in the near future either.  In mid-October, the family of her  employer—the man Balabagan is accused of murdering, Mohammad  Abdallah Al-Baloushi—agreed, in accordance with UAE's Islamic law, to  accept "blood money" and withdraw  their demand that Balabagan be put to  death.  One month earlier, the UAE court of  appeal convicted Balabagan of pre-medi-  tated murder, dismissing her claim that  she had acted in self defence and had  stabbed her employer with his knife  because he was raping her [see Kinesis,  October 1995.] His family had pressured  hard for Balabagan to be given the death  sentence.  Women's and migrant workers'  rights groups in the Philippines and internationally launched a concerted campaign to pressure the President of the  UAE Sheikh Zaid Bin Sultan al-Nahayan  and Philippine president Fidel Ramos  for a full acquittal, unconditional release, and immediate repatriation of  Sarah Balabagan to the Philippines.  While the UAE and Philippine presidents would not push for full acquittal  for Balabagan, they did call on the Al-  Baloushi family to withdraw its demand  for the death sentence in favour of a  lighter penalty.  Although the execution order was  withdrawn, Balabagan was not acquitted of the charge and may still face a  prison term. She is scheduled to appear  before the UAE Sharia court to determine her innocence or guilt on October  30th—the second time she has appeared  before the court.  The first time, the court acknowledged Balabagan had been raped, but  still sentenced her to seven years in  prison for manslaughter and ordered  her to pay her employer's family 150,000  dirhams (US$40,000). The court also ordered his family to pay Balabagan 100,000  dirhams (US$27,000) in damages.  GABRIELA, a national alliance of  women's organizations in the Philippines, says that "without a doubt, actions on a local and international arena  calling for justice for Sarah Balabagan  played a significant role in the decision  of the UAE president to persuade the  family." Numerous protest actions were  held not only in different parts of the  Philippines, but in other countries as  well, including vigils and letter-writing  campaigns in Vancouver. Groups in  Vancouver coord inating actions around  Balabagan and other migrant workers'  rights are the Philippine Women Centre,  SIKLAB (an organization for migrant  workers), and the BC Committee for  Human Rights in the Philippines  In a joint press release, the groups  say, "these protest efforts not only created a groundswell of international outrage, but also contributed in exposing  the connivance of the UAE government  and the Ramos regime in the exploitation, oppression and neglect of migrant  workers."  The groups add that while Ramos  may claim that the dropping of the demand for the death penalty for Sarah  Balabagan was due to his government's  own diplomatic efforts, it is his policy of  exporting cheap labour that put women,  like Sarah Balabagan, into situations  where they are vulnerable to oppression, abuse and exploitation.  Balabagan was only 15 years old  when she left the Philippines to work in  /ireden/Sng creative and critical contributions to current debates  within women's community, theory and subcultures  fic/urn,, theory, poetry, interviews, art and more!  Of WHITING, POLITICS, ART & CULTURE  Canadian wot  (#35) and Se  Class (#s 25 & 26), Asian  n (#30). Jewish women  , Sexuality (#s37 &38)m\\  ditions to your bookshelves  appreciated resources!  igh INLAND BOOK COMPANY (20:  Recent/uy/>//y///.i include: It'/'///J Language:  the politics of language across cultures;  #4.2 Rice Papers: writings and artwork by East  and Southeast Asian Women in Canada;  its/?: "Sister Sluts and Slut Condemnation" and  a panel discussion on "The Politics of Desire."  "Without a doubt,  actions on a local and  international arena  calling for justice for  Sarah Balabagan  played a significant role  in the decision of the  UAE president to  persuade the family—  GABRIELA  the UAE, and was forced to leave to help  support her family because of lack of  jobs in her home country.  Women and migrant workers'  groups say the campaign must continue  to ensure that rights of Sarah Balabagan  and other migrant workers are protected.  "Sarah does not deserve a single day  in jail, nor should we pay a single centavo  to bail her out for a crime she did not  commit," say the BC based groups.  GABRIELA is calling on a coordinated mass action to ensure justice for  Sarah Balabagan. Together with  MIGRANTE (International Alliance of  Filipino Migrant Workers) and BAYAN  (New Patriotic Alliance), GABRIELA  will be staging a picket at the UAE Embassy in Manila on October 30, at the  same time when Balabagan's case is being heard. [Kinesis will cover the court's  decision in its Dec/Jan issue.]  Women's and migrant workers'  rights groups in BC are calling on supporters to send letters to the ambassador  of the UAE calling for a complete acquittal, unconditional release and immediate repatriation of Sarah Balabagan.  Write to: His Excellency Al Shaali,  Ambassador, Embassy of the United  Arab Emirates, 3000 K St. NW, Suite 600,  Washington, DC, USA 20007; or fax:  (202) 337-7027.  Send copies of all responses to:  SIKLAB, PO Box 127, 6416 Fraser St,  Vancouver, BC, V5W 3A4; or fax: (604)  322-9852.  Women interested in understanding more about the situation of migrant  workers, the Philippine Women Centre  will be holding a grassroots women discussion group to address the issue of  'What are international human rights?'  Wednesday, November 8th at 7pm. The  meeting will be held at the Centre, 1011  E. 59th Ave, Vancouver. For more infor-  mation, call (604) 322-9852.   Agnes Huang has been following migrant  zuorkers' rights issues for Kinesis.  /J«^«e&»e  Canada's best Latin American Women's magazine  covers a broad spectrum of issues and interests,  with interviews, literature, testimonies, essays,  humour, reviews and visual art.  Aquelarre is published four times a year in English and Spanish.  Available at bookstores or  by subscription. Great deal!  Yearly sub. only $15 Cdn.  NOVEMBER 1995 News  Federal cuts to post-secondary education:  More rainy days ahead  by Ezekiel Samuels  Last month, students in British Columbia organized demonstrations to protest the proposed cuts by the federal  government to social program spending,  and specifically to education. The cuts,  which will become effective when the  Canada Health and Social Transfer  (CHST) is implemented on April 1,1996,  will take $90 million away from funding  of post-secondary education in the province.  On October 11th, students at the  University of Victoria (UVic) helda mock  trial of the federal ministers responsible  for the cuts in front of the BC provincial  legislature. Prime Minister JeanChretien,  Finance Minister Paul Martin, Minister  of Human Resource Development Lloyd  Axworthy, and Revenue Minister David  Anderson were all convicted and sentenced to life times of poverty for their  assault on post-secondary education and  social programs in Canada.  The demonstration in Victoria coincided with a national day of action called  for by the Canadian Federation of Students (CFS) to protest cuts to federal  transfer payments for post-secondary  education. The CFS called for the day of  action in mid-September, and whi le many  campuses did participate, several student unions found it difficult to organize  actions and mobilize students on such  . short notice. The weather was also a  factor in the relatively low turnout at  UVic's demonstration, where about 200  people braved a downpour.  Two days later in Vancouver, the  Alma Mater Society of the University of  British Columbia (UBC) held its protest  march against the cuts. UBC students  were joined by students from Simon  Fraser Universi ty and Camosun, Langa ra,  and Capilano colleges, and by community groups and unions.  UBC's AMS decided to hold its  "great trek" on October 13th to coincide  with the university's annual open house.  The open house brings a lot of people  from the general public onto the campus, and student protesters used the  occasion as an opportunity to send a  message to the public about the threats  to access to post-secondary education  becauseof the pending cuts. The organizers said they wanted the public to be  aware that if federal cuts to social spending go unchecked, more and more people could be denied the right to education.  The Vancouver protest also took  place in pouring rain. The initial crowd  that gathered at Connaught Park for the  start of the trek was around 200 people.  But as the marchers worked their way  along a main street leading to the UBC  campus, lots more joined in. By the time  the trek arrived at UBC, 1000 people  were a part of the demonstration. Slogans such as "education is a right" and  "stop the madness" were chanted fervently.  Once at UBC, a rally was held with  speakers from student organizations,  feminist groups and unions. The speakers addressed the links between the  various cuts to social spend ing—cuts to  education, to social assistance, to medicare. They also spoke about the u rgency  to present a unified force against the  cuts.  A number of speakers referred to  scenarios that would likely follow the  implementation of the CHST, such as a  single mother having to choose between  Students, community and labour activists trek to UBC to protest federal  funding cuts to post-secondary education. Photos by Chris Nuttat-smith.  buying food for her child or paying tuition to get job training.  Shazia Islamof UBC's women 'scen-  tre made it clear that cuts to education  and the resulting rise in tuition fees  would make post-secondary institutions  even less accessible. And referring to the  university's response to charges of racism and sexism in the political science  department [see Kinesis Stytember 1995,  and page 3], Islam pointed out that UBC's  "chilly climate" for women  students—and in particular, women of  colour students—was already pushing  women off campus, adding that increased tuition costs would push them  even further.  On April 1,1996, the federal government plans to bring in its Canada Health  and Social Transfer program, replacing  the current federal provincial transfer  payment system—transfer paymentsare  used to fund health care, social services  and education in the provinces. The  CHST will combine the current federal  transfer payments into a single block  funding to each province. One danger-  ouscomponentoftheCHSTisthatitwill  dismantle national standards for welfare (see "Cutting off CAP," Kinesis June  1995.1  In total, the federal government  plans to cut $6.6 billion in transfer payments for social programs. For BC, this  will mean approximately $840 million  less in funding for health care, social  services and education. Currently, 11  percent of federal transfer payments goes  towards post-secondary education. After CHST comes into effect, approximately $90 million less will be available  for universities and colleges in the province.  And each year following the implementation of the CHST, the federal government plans to transfer less and less  money to the provinces. In seven years  from now, BC will have lost all its federal transfer payments. By the years  2008/2009, all block funding from the  federal government to the provinces will  be eliminated completely.  UBC has been told to expect an eight  percent cut in its federal operating grant  for next year. And because UBC has a  policy whereby students must compensate for inflation and decreased funding, students are bracing themselves for  a jump in tuition fees. The Alma Mater  Society has predicted an 80 percent increase in tuition for the next school year.  Studentsparticipating in the protest  actions in Vancouver and Victoria say  the federal government must stop  targetting students and poor people for  the country's deficit problems. At the  heart of the two protests was a call for  the Liberal government to balance the  federal budget by reducing the $7.2 billion in coporate tax breaks and subsidies, rather than by cutting funding for  social programs.  Ezekiel Samuels is a pseudonym for a  student from UBC.  NOVEMBER 1995 News  Violence against women:  Band-aids not solution  by Agnes Huang  In response to a series of highly  publicized murders of women by their  former male partners, politicians and  police are scrambling to come up with  solutions to ease the fears of the public.  Over the last month, the mainstream  media has focused attention on domestic violence, following a spate of murders of women in Vancouver that featured prominently in news reports. In  particular, two recent cases have received more media attention than is usually given to the hundreds of other cases  of domestic violence that happen in the  province.  In one case in Coquitlam, a man  murdered his former in-laws outside a  church, before going to the home of his  estranged wife and killing her. In the  other case, a man is being charged with  stabbing deaths of his former wife and  her boyfriend.  Following these two murders, BC's  Attorney General, Ujjal Dosanjh, directed his senior ministry staff to look  into electronic monitoring systems as a  means of combatting violence against  women. With electronic monitoring systems, an alarm would be triggered if the  electronic bracelet came within a certain  proximity of a woman's house.  Laraine Stuart of the Battered Women's Support Services (BWSS) says that  politicians pick up on measures such as  electronic monitoring because they are  seen as concrete and practical solutions.  But in reality, while they may be well-  meaning solutions, they are only band-  aid solutions because they do not address the systemic nature of violence  against women.  Federal cuts to employment programs:  Single moms  program axed  What is needed, says Stuart, are  very long-term, systemic solutions, such  as changing society's attitudes towards  violence against women and battered  women. But she adds, few politicians  are willing to make the breadth of commitments needed to bring about societal  changes.  One major limitation of electronic  monitoring is that a man would have to  be under a court-imposed restraining  order before he could be required by law  to wear an electronic bracelet.  Stuart says she also fears that electronic monitoring will give women the  false sense that they are safe from abusive male partners and ex-partners. But  since electronic monitors trigger alarms  only when a man approaches within a  certain distance of a receiver device,  there would be no warning or protection  for a woman if she were not near a  receiver. Receivers would be placed only  in a woman's home and workplace, and  there would be nothing to stop a man  from being violent towards the woman  outside of those places.  As another response to the heightened public awareness and fear of domestic violence, the Vancouver Police  Department recently announced plans  to establish of a special unit that would  do follow-up work with women in high-  risk cases involving serial criminal harassment. The special unit would consist  of a police officer and a social worker.  BWSS' Gail Edinger, who with  Laraine Stuart coordinates a program  on violence against women in relationships, says her organization supports  the idea of a special unit for domestic  harassment cases. But, she says, the follow-up team should include a battered  women's advocate, and not a social  worker.  Edinger says, given that social workers  would havetoworkwithin theconstraintsof  theFamilyServices Act, rhesupport women  wouldreceivefromsocialworkerswouldbe .  more limited, and may be biased. She says  advocates involved in the follow-up team  would be a more ideal model because they  are independent and separate from any  system.  Edinger and Stuart are both members of a Coordination Committee of  over 50 active members who work on  numerous areas within the broad spectrum of violence in relationships. Edinger  says the Committee has talked at length  over the years about developing a follow-up response team made up of a  police officer and a battered woman's  advocate. It hopes to be able to work  with the Vancouver police department  to influence the make up of the special  unit.  by Andrea Imada  Federal Finance Minister Paul  Martin is wielding the Liberal axe  again and once again, young single  mothers in Vancouver looking to reenter the workforce are feeling the  brunt of the attack.  The Vancouver YWCA recently  got word that effective December 31 st,  federal funding for Focus, its pre-employment training program for young  single mothers, would be gone. [Federal funding for the program comes  from the department of human resources and development.]  To make up for the pending federal cutback, the program applied to  the provincial ministry of skills, labour and training for funding, but  was turned down.  The YWCA Focus program is intended to assist young single mothers, between the ages of 16 to 24 years,  to prepare for and access further education, vocational training or to obtain suitable employment. The program provides young mothers with a  diverse range of personal development programs, education and skills  training, coupled with support services such as childcare and parenting  information. The combination is one  that helps overcome some of the fundamental obstacles that single mothers face in trying to enter the  workforce.  Laurel Johnson, who works with  Focus, says it is the only program of  its kind serving the needs of this specific group, and she fears that if the  program goes under, young single  mothers will be left to "fall between  the cracks."  Over the past four years, 136  young mothers have participated in  the program with more than two-  thirds securing jobs or further education opportunities.  Johnson say the YWCA is looking  at all avenues of funding in order to  continue the Focus program, including sponsorships and donations. But  they are also appealing to the community to write letters of support to  local MLAs and MPs, and to Human  Resources and Development, and the  Ministry of Skills, Labour and Training to prevent the cancellation of the  program.  Letters should be directed to:  Duncan McRae, CJS Manager, Human Resources and Development,  #415-757 W. Hastings St, Vancouver,  BC, V6C 1 Al; and Dan Miller, Minister of Skills, Labour and Training,  Room 109, Parliament Buildings, Victoria, BC, V8V 1X4.  For more information, contact YWCA  Focus, 806-750 W. Pender St, Vancouver, BC, V6C 1G8; tel: (604) 688-4666.  4i a c a Z I N  The 1995 Canadian Magazines  for Everyone Catalogue  More Than (^25cT) Magazines  __ to Choose From!  (_^/ ur 1995 Canadian Magazines for  Everyone catalogue is bigger and better  than ever. Use it all year long to find the  perfect gift. Or treat yourself, at home  and at work, to the latest information  from coast to coast.  To get your new catalogue, fill in this  coupon and mail it today with $5  (including CST, shipping and handling).  We are also happy to accept VISA or  Mastercard orders by fax or phone.  130 Spadina Ave. Suite 202 Toronto ON AA5V 2L4  Tel (416) 504-0274  Fax (416) 504-0437  6  NOVEMBER 1995 Movement Matters  listings information  Movement Matters is designed to  be a network of news, updates and  information of special interest to  the women's movement.  Submissions to Movement Matters  should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double spaced and may be  edited for length. Deadline is the  18th of the month preceding  publication.   by Patty Gibson  by wendy lee kenward  Happy birthday  Sojourner  This September marked the twentieth anniversary of Sojourner: The Women's Forum. Over the years, Sojourner has  been a forum for women to inform, challenge and encourage each other.  Sojourner started out as the women's newspaper of the Massachussets  Institute of Technology (MIT) in 1975,  and grew into a national newspaper covering news, issues and debates in the US  from a feminist perspective.  In celebration of Sojourner's anniversary, Karen Kahn—its editor for the past  eight years—has compiled an anthology  of some of the best written and most  compelling articles published over the  past 20 years. Frontline Feminism, which  is being published by Aunt Lute Books,  gathers together over 100 past articles  published in Sojourner to recreate some  ofthehotdebatesand heated discussions  that were covered in Sojourner's pages.  A few changes have been brought  about in celebration of their 20th birthday. Sojourner is planning on adding a  few new things to the paper, such as an  expanded arts section with more film,  book and music reviews, columns and  interviews. As well, Sojourner is hoping  to bring readers more investigative reports on feminist activism around the US  and worldwide.  To enable it to continue publishing  for another decade (at least) without always being caught in a financial crunch,  Sojourner has launched a 20th Anniversary Campaign. Sojourner hopes to raise  $125,000, and so far, they've raised a  third of that goal. Women interested in  making a contribution to the 20th Anniversary Campaign can send donations to  Sojourner,42Seaverns Ave, Jamaica Plain,  MA 02130 USA.  Comfort  women redress  The Canadian Coalition for "Comfort Women" Redress (CCCW), a Toronto-based group, is working to disseminate information and increase  awareness in Canada of the issue of  "comfort women." Comfort women is  a euphemistic term used to describe  women who wereexploited by the Japanese army during World War Two to  provide sex to Japanese soldiers.  It is estimated there were over  200,000 comfort women. The majority  of them were Korean, but Dutch, Chinese, Filipino, Indonesian, Malaysian  and Taiwanese women and girls were  also forced into this sexual slavery.  Many womenand girls werelured away  from their homes with false promises,  or were threatened or kidnapped, and  many were raped repeatedly—some by  20 to 30 soldiers a day.  TheCoalitionhasbeen actively protesting to the Japanese government to  apologize and compensate individual  former comfort women. So far the Japanese government has done little except  toadmit its involvement in "recruiting"  the comfort women and operating the  "brothels." It continues to deny that  women and girls were forced to work  as sex slaves for Japanese soldiers and  has refused any redress.  CCCW is currently raising funds to  publish an advertisement in a major  Canadian newspaper. Petitionsand letter writing campaigns have been ongoing strategies for protesting the refusal  by the Japanese government to take  responsibility for forcing women to be  comfortwomen.Thegroupisalso planning a major exhibit of photographs to  imform people about the issue of comfort women.  For more information about the  Coalition's work in support of comfort  women, contact the Canadian Coalition for "Comfort Women" Redress,  c/o the Korean Canadian Women's Association, 789 Don Mills Rd, Suite 312,  Don Mills, ON, M3C 1T5; or call (416)  421-2220.  Action guide  for welfare  The National Anti-Poverty Organization (NAPO)—has produced an Action Guide to help people organize to  protect national standards for social assistance.  NAPO has launched a nationwide  campaign to mobi lize people against the  federal spending cuts to social programs  and the elimination of the Canada Assistance Plan (CAP). On April 1, 1996,  when the Canada Health and Social  Transfer (CHST) takes effect, not only  will social program funding be cut by  $6.6 billion, but also four of the five  national standards for welfare guaranteed under CAP will be gone.  CAP has been in existence since 1966  andsetsoutguaranteesoftherightofall  Canadians to social assistance, including the right to welfare when in need; the  right to an amount that meets basic need  requirements; the right to appeal welfare decisions; the right not to have to  work for welfare; and the right to welfare regardless of what province you're  from. After April 1st, only the last guarantee will remain [see Kinesis/z/ne 1995].  NAPO's Action Guide, entitled 30  Million Good Reasons to Have National  Standards For Welfare, is a 12 page newspaper which gives substantial information on national standards for welfare,  and suggests actions that individuals  and organizations can plan.  The guide discusses what national  standards for welfare are; how national  standards implement basic human  rights; why we need them; who is attacking them; and what you can do. The  pages detail the rights of poor people,  workfare, and the competion for and  scarcity of jobs. And the Action Guide  suggests actions such as organizing a  public forum, or building up an anti-  poverty group.  For more information or to order  copies of the Action Guide, contact Tlie  National Anti-Poverty Organization at  316-256 King Edward Avenue, Ottawa,  ON, KIN 7M1; or call (613) 789-0096.  Organizing  for medicare  Women's organizations, including  the Vancouver Status of Women, the  National Action Committee on the Status of Women, The DisAbled Women's  Network, and the Vancouver Women's  Health Collective, have joined with seniors, people with disabilities, anti-poverty activists, other community groups  and health care unions to promote and  protect Canada's public health care system.  The BC Coalition for Health Care  Reform was formed several months ago  to respond to the provincial government's plan to regionalize the delivery  of health care services in BC, as well as  to the increasing attack on medicare.  The Coalition is holding its first  public event on Thursday October 26 as  partofacommunity-basedpublicaware-  ness campaign, designed to challenge  the increasingly popular notion that  Canada cannot afford its public health  care system. The event is a kickoff event  for National Medicare Week.  The Coalition plan to launch an eight  page brochure entitled Medicare: can we  afford to lose it?, which debunks many of  the myths about Canada's medicare system and explains why any move to an  American two-tier scheme will result in  a system that is accessible only to those  who can afford it.  Organizers of the event say the public does not yet realize how dangerous  the federal cutbacks to healthcare and  other social programs will be, pointing  out that the federal transfer payments to  BC for all social programs will total  approximately $800 million next year.  Within six years, federal support will be  eliminated altogether.  For more information about the  Coalition's work, contact Patty Gibson,  BC Association for Community Living  at (604) 875-1119, or Jean Greatbatch, BC  Nurses Union at (604) 433-2268.  ^ES   *  ^ (Jou don't have to finance  ^ what you don't support.  • Lower interest rates on loons  to co-ops and societies  • Term deposits      • RRSPs  • Chequing accounts and  other hanking .services"  A full-service credit union dedicated  rfS  to community economic develo^ment/^^^K  CCEC Credit Union  tercial Drive, Vancouver, B.C  Telephone   254-4100  Simon Fraser University  Department of Women's Studies  Professorship in Women's Studies  Tlie Women's Studies Department at Simon Fraser University is seeking a senior candidate with  an outstanding academic and either professional or activist record for the Ruth Wynn  Woodward Endowed Professorship in Women's Studies.This is a two-year limited tenn  appointment which will begin in September 1996. The area of specialization is open.  Applicants must have appropriate academic qualifications.  Responsibilities will include teaching, public lectures and community outreach.  Salary will be that of a senior scholar.  In accordance with Canadian immigration requirements this advertisement is directed to people who are  eligible for employment in Canada at the time of application. Simon Fraser University is committed to the  principle of equity in employment and offers equal employment opportunities to qualified applicant.-..  Candidates should a) send  which include an eval  um vitae and b) arrange to have sent directly three letters of refei  their teaching, research, professional and community service, to:  Mary Lynn Stewart, Chair  Women's Studies Department, Simon Fraser University  Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6 - Phone: (604) 291-3593  Completed application-, must be received by the Women's Studies Department no later than  15 January 1996. This position is subject to final budgetary authorization.  NOVEMBER 1995 Movement Matters  by Shannon e. Ash  Supporting women in  former Yugoslavia  Women Supporting Women in the  •*" Former Yugoslavia is a group of Van  couver-area women which formed in  March 1993 to respond in a meaningful  way to the war in the former  Yugoslavia—a war in which over 80% of  refugees a re women and children and in  which there has been systematic use of  rape as a war strategy.  The Vancouver women initiated  contact with a woman's organization in  Zagreb, Croatia to ask how they could  help. The groups' activities include raising financial aid and humanitarian support for refugee women; providing in-  ' "fc formation and education to the public;  and lobbying for the prosecution of rape  as a war crime. The group also sponsored two training trips to Zagreb to  assist women'sorganizationstodevelop  skills to support traumatized women.  Women Supporting Women in the  former Yugoslavia has no nationalist or  religious affiliations, and supports survivors of rape and war, regardless of  ethnic identification.  On Friday November 17, the group  will hold a benefit for "Women Survivors of War" at 7:30pm at the Heritage  Hall, 3102 Main St, Vancouver. The event  will feature a screening of the newly  released video, To Hear Her Name, about  reponses of women in Canada and the  former Yugoslavia to the war. As well,  there will be speakers from Bosnia and  Canada, Bosnian snacks and entertainment.  Admission is by $30 donation and  includes a chance to win two nights at a  bed and breakfast on Saltspring Island.  Tickets are available at the door, or at  Banyen Sound and the Vancouver Women's Bookstore.  For more information about the  event, or to make a donation (tax receipts will be issued for amounts over  $10), contact: Women Supporting  Women in the former Yugoslavia, #3-  3664 E. Hastings St, Vancouver, BC, V5K  2A9; or call (604) 299-3539.  Life quilt  for breast cancer  The Life Quilt for Breast Cancer  Project, a grassroots community initiative based in Vancouver, is creating a  Life Quilt in support of women living  with breast cancer and their families.  The project was inspired by Judy Reimer,  who has been living with breast cancer  for over five years.  Using the traditional quilt, the Project  will provide a forum for women and  their families to talk about their experiences dealing with breast cancer and the  need for community support. As the  quilt travels around British Columbia,  quilting bees will be held whereall those  affected by breast cancer can tell their  stories.  "The Life Quilt is about the practical  day-to-day realities of living with breast  cancer. We need a strong social fabric to  support women so they can live with  breast cancer and not just die from it,"  says Raine McKay of the Vancouver  Women's Health Collective, which is  sponsoring the Quilt Project.  The initial phase of the project involves creating three quilts, designed by  artist and teacher Gay Mitchell. Project  organizers are asking women across  Canada to contribute bordering squares  which reflect their individual feelings,  thoughts and experiences with breast  cancer. Once assembled, the quilts will  be displayed in a variety of community  venues throughout BC and subsequently  across Canada.  The second phase of the Project will  involve conducting a needs assessment,  and then working to provide the assistance needed. "Our vision isa network of  volunteers who will offer direct, practical help—help defined by those in need,"  say organizers of the project.  For more information about the Life  Quilt, please contact The Life Quilt for  Breast Cancer Project, #219-1675 West  8th Ave, Vancouver, BC, V6J1V2; or ca 11  (604) 736-4234.  Mexican women  workers' rights  Gala 20th Anniversary Celebration  and Fall Book Launch  Saturday, November 18, 1995    8 p.m.  Multipurpose Room, Lower Level, Vancouver Public  Library, Central Branch, 350 West Georgia Street  (Doors open at 7.-30 p.m.—event starts at 8 p.m. sharp)  Featuring readings from NEW books by  Larissa Lai, Marion Douglas, Joanne Arnott and Chrystos  Performance/Reading by Kiss & Tell  Video screening by Shani Mootoo  and Special musical guest Sandy Scofield  Refreshments, door prizes, book signingsll  Sliding scale $8-$15   Everyone welcome   Wheelchair accessible  FOR   MORE   INFORMATION:   876-7787  The Mexican Women Maquila  Workers Network is conducting its first  campaign in support of Mexican maquila  women workers—the Campaign for a  Just Wage. The Network is a Toronto-  based group recently formed to promote solidarity between Canadian,  Mexican and Central American labour  and social movements.  The Network has called for this campaign because the devaluation of the  Mexican peso and inflation have drastically lowered the standard of living of  maquiladora workers in the Mexico/US  border region. Although a just wage is  guaranteed by Mexico'sconstitution, this  right is being ignored by the Mexican  government. US corporations have  greatly increased profits due to the peso's devaluation, but the workers' situation has worsened.  The Campaign has two focus areas:  • to provide maquila workers with  information to help them calculate the  real losses they have suffered since the  devaluation in order to make wage demands;  • to pressure the Mexican ministry  of labour to enforce Constitutional provisions guaranteeing a just minimum  wage.  The Network is calling for letters or  faxes to be sent to the Mexican ministry  of labour expressing your support for  their demands.  Send letters to: Lie. Javier Bonilla  Garcia, Secretario del Trabajo,Secretaria  del Trabajo y Prevencion Social,  Periferico Sur 4271, Col. Fuentes del  Pedregal, Mexico, DF14149; or fax: 011-  52-5-645-5594.  For more informationaboutthecam-  paign and others in support of workers'  rights, write to the Maquila Solidarity  Network, 606 Shaw St, Toronto, ON,  M6G 3L6.  Project Censored  Canada  Project Censored Canada seeks to  identify and publicize stories which the  dominant national media have overlooked or under-reported. The project  was founded in 1993 by the Canadian  Association of Journalists, the School of  Communications at Simon Fraser University. The Department of Communication Studies at the University of Windsor joined the project this year.  The pu rpose of the project is to draw  attention to the gaps in the reporting of  significant national news. The primary  tool for doing this is an annual top 10 list  of under-reported stories—the list was  first released in 1994. Many of the 1994  top ten stories originated in whole or in  part in "alternative" publications. Besides the top 10 list, the project is also  building up a computerized inventory  of under-reported stories as a research  resource.  The project is currently seeking  nominations for the top ten under-reported stories in 1995. Nominations  must fit the following criteria:  • The story must be national or  international in scope, rather than local;  • The story must affect, or have  relevance to, a large number of people or  intensely affect a few;  • The story must have received minimal coverage in the national news media;  • The story must have appeared in  print or on air in 1995, and it must be  wel 1-docu mented.  To nominate a story or radio piece,  send a clipping or transcript to: Project  Censored Canada, School of Communication, Simon Fraser University,  Burnaby, BC, V5 A1S6. The dead line for  nominations is December 15,1995.  <=/fffoKJUU Boo£Lef>ing Senior  ¥oi<£nuJZ Business  & *Sztf SmfJoyd  • Monthly Financial Statements  • Government Remittances  • Payroll, A/P. A/R, Budgets  I Will Transform Your Paperwork!  (604) 737-1824 emaihbarb. l@deepcove.com  PRESS  GANG  PUBLISHERS  EastsicIe DATAGRAphlCS  1458 CoMMERciAl Drive  teI: 255^95*9 Fax: 255^075  OfficE Supplies  Am Supplies  Grand Re-Opening!  Larger Space  Lots of New Stuff  bgwi^iiUni'on Shop  NOVEMBER 1995 Supplement  Contents  Huairou NGO Forum Diary  by fatima Jaffer 10  The struggle for democracy  by Aung SanSuu Kyi. 11  Indigenous women's rights  by Winona LaOuke 12  Lesbian March  14  sm  14  From Forum to Conference  by Sunera Thobani 17  Asian women organizing  byWinrteWunWunNg 19  Theme areas  for Forum '95  * the economy  * governance & politics  * human/legal rights  * peace & human security  * education  * health  * the environment  * spirituality & religion  * science & technology  * media  * arts & culture  * race & ethnicity  * youth  Thirty thousand women gathered from across the world in Huairou, China,  August 30-September 8, for the Non-governmental (NGO) Forum of the 4th  United Nations World Conference on Women.  Forum '95 was a venue for the international women's movement (and others) to meet, share strategies,  debate, and raise awareness of crucial issues affecting  women's lives in the different nation states and regions  of the world.  It was modelled after the Nairobi NGO Forum in  1985, which took place concurrent with the 3rd UN  World Conference on Women. Many women have  attributed international networking at the Nairobi Forum for the proliferation of women's NGO activity in  most countries of the world over the past ten years and  the globalization of the women's movement  The slogan of Forum '95, "Equality, Development,  and Peace," spells out its three main objectives. There  were, however, 13 general theme areas which the 5,000  workshops, plenaries, panels, lectures, exhibitions and  other events addressed [see box beloxv left] The theme  areas were decided on at numerous national and international preparatory conferences which took place in  the two years leading up to the Forum.  Another objectiveof Forum'95wastoinfluenceand  lobby those attending the UN 4th World Conference on  Women, which took place in Beijing September 4th-  15th. In particular, women sought to affect the wording  of and commitments to the Platform for Action, a docu-  menttobeagreed upon by the6/X10government leaders,  governmental and non-governmental representatives  accredited to the world conference.  The Platform for Action is the blueprint for UN  member state governments to initiate action over the  next five years for women's advancement throughout  the world. The Platform is intended to review and  appraise theprogressmadeby women sincethe Nairobi  Forward Looking Strategies for the Advancement of  Women to the Year 2000, drawn up at the Nairobi  World Conference on Womea  In about 362 "paragraphs," the Platform for  Actionlistscriticalareasofconceraidentifiesobstacles  to women's equality, and makes recommendations to  international bodies such as the United Nations, to  national governments, and to NGOs.  While the Platform is intended to set the agenda  for nation states on the issue of women's equality in  their countries, women look at it more realistically as  a tool for women's organizations in efforts to lobby  their governments for social change  But after two years of organizing, strategizing and  making plans to attend, women almost didn't make it  to Huairou and Beijing.  The Non-governmental Forum was initially supposed to take place in Beijing—close to the conference  site—to enable women not accredited to the conference to influence decision making at the governmental  conference. Five months before the Forum was to  begin, the hosts of the conference, the Chinese government, nervous at the prospect of 30,1X10 feminists  descending on their capital city, changed the venue of  the forum to Huairou, a small town about an hour's  drive from Beijing.  Women protested the move, lobbied the United  Nations to demand China change its mind, and even  considered a global boycott. Concessions were made  to facilitate travel between Huairou and Beijing among  other things,and womendecided to  go ahead.  In this issue and in our December/January 1996 issue, Kinesis presents two supplements on Beijing '95.  We focus on Forum '95 because, to most NGO women, h is the "real conference,"  where women's organizing is front and centre. Or as some women in Huairou put it,  "the conference talks; Huairou acts."  The supplements are coordinated by Fatima Jaffer, who represented Kinesis on the Canada-Beijing Facilitating  Committee (CBFC) delegation, composed of 43 representatives of non-governmental women's and other  organizations from across Canada.  All photographs in this supplement are by Fatima Jaffer. This is part one of Fatima Jaffer's diary of the Huairou NGO Forum. The diary will continue in the  December/January issue o/Kinesis.  Monday -August 28th  The air crackles with anticipation, a sense of shared purpose and sheer excitement on the plane from Hong Kong to  Beijing. After months of preparations, waiting to receive confirmation of registration from the United Nations (a month  ago), visas from China (two weeks ago), and tickets from the travel agency (three days ago), we are a mere hour away  from landing in Beijing.  On the plane, I meet women from the United States, the Dominican Republic, Nepal, Uganda, and of course  Canada. The 43-member CBFC team is travelling together. We swap rumours and newspaper clippings about what  expect when we arrive. There are horror stories of immigration and customs and everyone begins to panic a little. I  wonder if some Customs officer is going to part me from the 200 copies of Kinesis in my bags!  It takes us minutes to sail through the special channels prepared for women arriving for the Forum. The immigration  officer barely glances at my visa; the customs officer doesn't look at our heaps of baggage and fastidiously filled-out  forms. There are hundreds of Chinese volunteers in blue-and-white t-shirts  waiting for us, and an abundance of wheelchairs with attendants for women who  need them. [To this day, there are reports of only one woman having anything  confiscated—a page from a book—at Beijing customs.]  I have no time to feel "cheated" of confrontation as we are promptly whisked  off in a bus to the Workers' Stadium to pick up our NGO Forum passes. Again,  there are none of the lineups and bureaucratic delays we had been warned  about, and we are soon off again, this time to our hotel in Beijing.  This anti-climatic feeling becomes a familiar feature over the next ten days.  We keep hearing rumours of danger, chaos or Chinese conspiracy, then find out  these have been grossly exaggerated. It's not like most women aren't used to  dealing with bureacratic nonsense and heavy-handed authorities in our own  countries anyway.  "^Members  of the CBFC  delegation  and their  baggage  pose at  airport in  Beijing.  Wednesday - August 30th  Forum '95 is not yet officially open but many of the 30,000 women attending  the Forum have arrived and are staying at various hotels, school dormitories and  trade buildings. I am impatient to see the site, and share a cab with others  making the hour-long trek to the Forum.  Huairou is buzzing with activity. I cannot begin to describe the excitement I  feel. The town has been taken over by women from around the world, though the  Forum site itself is confined to only one large rambling part of the town and you  need NGO Forum passes to get in. There are tents of all sizes, schools and other  buildings, a vast outdoor area with hundreds of parasols over tables and chairs,  large and small playing fields for performers and demonstrators, and numerous  food and vendor stalls.  The residents of Huairou seem remarkably friendly, considering we have just  invaded their lives and town, depriving some of them of their livelihoods while we  are here, whilst spending thousands of dollars in approved shops and  restaurants. [I find out later our presence is keeping peasants from Huairou  county from coming into town to trade.]  We pick up the Forum programs: 5,000 workshops, lectures, panels, cultural  activities and plenaries over 10 days; a festival of women's films; exhibitions of  photographs, ceramics, costumes, documents; women will speak on lessons  learned from the liberation struggles of Eritrea, and South Africa. Iranian,  Tunisian, Algerian women will speak on the persecution of women speaking out  against the governments of those countries. Canadian women will speak on  migrant workers' rights. There is a workshop on the use of the cervical cap as a  contraceptive device, and workshops on how to use statistics on gender. There  are sessions on money and credit, on sex and sexuality, on voice and dance, on  empowerment and anti-racism, on reproductive technologies, on affirmative action, on sexual harassment, on youth, and  on genetic coding of Indigenous people.  I visit an area where six large tents have been set up to house organizing activities of the various regions. There are  five regional tents—Europe and North America, Africa, Asia and the Pacific, Latin America and the Caribbean, African  and Arab countries; the sixth houses women from the host country, China.  The Africa tent is hopping with activity [see photo]. Women are gathered in meetings in every comer of the tent,  speaking French, English, Swahili, Zulu, Xhosa, Ibo, and dozens of other languages. They are singing, dancing, arguing,  hanging things up. Women have spilled over into the neighbouring and comparatively quiet Europe and North America  tent [see photo]. The only sign of Canada in the tent is the banner of the National Action Committee on the Status of  Women (NAC).  The Latin America/Caribbean tent is so full, I can only peer in. I see women putting up the giant patchwork banner  that will adorn the walls of the tent, embroidered with fruits and vegetables meant to symbolize the diversity of women's  lives.  I head over to the Asia and the Pacific tent, also filled with women who are decorating the tent. Different parts of the  Continued on page 16  Women get creative in efforts to publicize their  events and attract the attention of passers by.  10  KINESIS BEIJING '95 SUPPLEMENT  NOVEMBER 1995 Burma:  The struggle  for democracy  by Aung San Suu Kyi  Aung San Suu Kyi is the leader of the National League for Democracy in Burma. In 1990  when her party was elected as the government of  Burma, the military annulled the vote, and placed  Aung San u nderhousearrest. Just earlier this year,  she was released from house arrest. In 1994, Aung  San Suu Kyi was awarded the Nobel Peaceprizefor  her work in Burma's democracy struggle.  She was scheduled to speak at the opening  plenary of the NGO Women's Forum, but was  unable to attend. Instead she sent her message to  women via videotape. Below is an excerpt from her  plenary speech.  It is a wonderful but daunting task that  has fallen on me to say a few words by way  of opening this Forum—the greatest concourse of women (joined by a few brave  men!) that has ever gathered on the planet. I  vvant to try and voice some of the common  hopes which firmly unite us in all our splendid diversity.  But first I would like to explain why I  cannot be with you in person today. Last  month 1 was released from almost six years  of house arrest. The regaining of my freedom has in turn imposed a duty on me to  work for the freedom of other women and  men in my country who have suffered far  more—and who continue to suffer far more  than I ha ve. It is this duty which prevents me  from joining you today. Even sending this  message to you has not been without difficulties. But the help of those who believe in  international cooperation and freedom of  expression has enabled me to overcome the  obstacles. They made it possible for me to  make a small contribution to this great celebration of the struggle of women to mould  their own destiny and to influence the fate of  our global village.  The opening plenary of this Forum will  be presenting an overview of the global  forces affecting the quality of life of the  human community and the challenges they  pose for the global community as a whole  and for women in particular as we approach  the 21st century. However, with the true  womanly understanding the Convener of  this Forum suggested that among these global forces and challenges, I might wish to  concentrate on security, human rights and  democracy. I would like to discuss these  issues particularly in the context of the participation of women in politics and governance.  For millenia, women have dedicated  themselves almost exclusively to the task of  nurturing, protecting and caring for the  young and the old, striving for the conditions of peace that favour life as a whole. To  this can be added the fact that, to the best of  my knowledge, no war was ever started by  women. But it is women and children who  have always suffered most in situations of  conflict. Now that we are gaining control of  the primary historical role imposed on us of  sustaining life in the context of the home and  family, it is time to apply in the arena of the  world the wisdom and experience thus  gained in activities of peace over so many  thousands of years. The education and em-  powermentof women throughout the world  cannot fail to result in a more caring, tolerant, just and peaceful life for all.  If to these universal benefitsof the growing emancipation of women can be added  the "peace dividend" for human development offered by the end of the Cold  War—spending lesson the war toysof grown  men and much more on the urgent needs of  humanity as a whole—then truly the next  millenia will be an age the like of which has  never been seen in human history. But there  still remain many obstacles to be overcome  before we can achieve this goal. And not  least among these obstacles are intolerance  and insecurity.  This year is the International Year for  Tolerance. The United Nations has recognized that "tolerance, human rights, democracy and peace are closely related. Without  tolerance, the foundations for democracy  and respect for human rights cannot be  strengthened, and the achievement of peace  will remain elusive."  My own experience during the years I  have been engaged in the democracy movement of Burma hasconvinced meof the need  to emphasize the positive aspect of tolerance. It is not enough simply to "live and let  live"—genuine tolerance requires an active  effort to try to understand the point of view  of others; it implies broad-mindedness and  vision, as well as confidence in one's own  ability to meet new challenges without resorting to intransigence or violence. In societies where men are truly confident of their  own worth, women are not merely "tolerated," they are valued. Their opinions are  listened to with respect; they are given their  rightful place in shaping the society in which  they live.  There is an outmoded Burmese proverb  still recited by men who wish to deny that  women too can play a part in bringing necessary changes and progress to their society:  "The dawn rises only when the rooster  crows." But Burmese people today are well  aware of the scientific reasons behind the  rising of dawn and the falling of dusk. And  the intelligent rooster surely realizes that it is  because dawn comes that it crows, and not  the other way round. It crows to welcome  the light that has come to relieve the darkness of night. It is not the prerogative of men  alone to bring light to this world—women  with their capacity for compassion and self-  sacrifice, their courage and perseverance,  havedone much to dissipate the darknessor  intolerance and hate, suffering and despair.  Often the other side of the coin of intolerance is insecurity. Insecure people tend to  be intolerant, and their intolerance unleashes  forces that threaten the security of others.  And where there is no security, there can be  no lasting peace. In its Human Development  Report for last year, the United Nations  Development Program (UNDP) noted that  human security "is not a concern with weapons—it is a concern with human life and  dignity." The struggle for democracy and  human rights in Burma is a struggle for life  and dignity. It isa struggle that encompasses  our political, social and economic aspirations. The people of my country want the  two freedoms that spell security: freedom  People must be allowed  to play a significant role  in the governance of their  countries. And "people"  include women who make  up at least half of the  world's population.  from want and freedom from fear. It is want  that has driven so many of our young girls  across our borders to a life of sexual slavery  where they are subject to constant humiliation and ill-treatment. It is fear of persecution for their political beliefs that has made  so many of our people feel that even in their  own homes they cannot live in dignity and  security.  In my country at present, women have  no participation in the higher levels of government and none whatsoever in the judiciary. Even within the democratic movement  only 14 out of the 485 members of parliament elected in 1990 were women—all from  my own party, the National League for Democracy. These 14 women represent less  than three percent of the total number of  successful candidates. They, like their male  colleagues, have not been permitted to take  office since the outcome of those elections  have been totally ignored. Yet the very high  performance of women in our educational  system and in the management of commercial enterprises proves their enormous potential to contribute to the betterment of  society in general. Meanwhile, our women  ha ve yet to achieve those fundamental rights  of freedom, association and security of life,  denied also to their menfolk.  The adversities we have had to face  together have taught all of us involved in the  the struggle to build a truly democratic political system in Burma; there are no gender  barriers that cannot be overcome. The relationships between men and women should,  and can be, characterized not by patronizing  behavior or exploi tation, but by metta (that is  to say loving kindness), partnership and  trust. We need mutual respect and understanding between men and women, instead  of patriarchal domination and degradation,  which are expressions of violence and engender counter-violence. We can learn from  each other and help one another to moderate  the "gender weaknesses" imposed on us by  traditional or biological factors.  This Forum of non-governmental organizations represents the belief in the ability of intelligent human beings to resolve  conflicting interests through exchange and  dialogue. It also represents the conviction  that governments alone cannot resolve all  the problems of their countries. The watchfulness and active cooperation of organizations outside the spheres of officialdom are  neccesary to ensure the four essential components of the human development paradigm as identified by the UNDP: productivity, equity, sustainability and empowerment.  The last is particularly relevant—it requires  that "development must be by people, not  only for them. People must participate fully  in the decisions and processes that shape  their lives." In other words people must be  allowed to play a significant role in the  governance of their countries. And "people"  include women who make up at least half of  the world's population.  The last six years afforded me much  time and food for thought. I came to the  conclusion that the human race is not divided into two opposing camps of good and  evil. It is made up of those who are capable  of learning and those who are incapable of  doing so. Here I am not talking of learning in  the narrow sense of acquiring an academic  education, but of learning as the process of  absorbing those lessons of life that enable us  to increase peace and happiness in our  world. Women in their role as mothers have  traditionally assumed the responsibility of  teachingchildren values thatwillguide them  throughout their lives. It is time we were  given the full opportunity to use our natural  teaching skills to contribute towards building a modern world that can withstand the  tremendous challenges of the technological  revolution which in turn brought revolutionary changes in social values.  As we strive to teach others we must  have the humility to acknowledge that we  still too have to learn. And we must have the  flexibiliytoadapttothechallengingneedsof  the world around us. Women who have  been taught that modesty and pliancy are  among the prized virtues of our gender are  marvelously equipped for the learning process. But they must be given the opportunity  to turn these often merely passive virtues  into positive assets for the society in which  they live.  These, then, areour common hopes that  unite us—that as the shackles of prejudice  and intolerance fall from our own limbs we  can together strive to identify and remove  the impediments to human development  everywhere. The mechanisms by which this  great task is to be achieved provide the  proper focus of this great Forum. I feel sure  that women throughout the world who, like  me, cannot be with you, join me now in  sendingyouall ourprayersandgood wishes  for a joyful and productive meeting.  I thank you.  NOVEMBER 1995  KINESIS BEIJING 95 SUPPLEMENT  11 Indigenous women's rights:  Framing the questions  by Winona LaDuke  Winona LaDuke is an Indigenous and  environmental activist, the co-chair of the  Indigenous Women's Network, and the program director of the Environmental Program  of the Seventh generation Fund.She spoke at  the opening plenary of the NGO Women's  Forum in Huairou on August 31st.  I am from the Mississippi Band of  Anishinabeg of the White Earth reservation in northern Minnesota, one of approximately 250,000 Anishinabeg people  who inhabit the Great Lakes region on the  North American continent. Aniin  Indinaumymugintok. Megwetch Chi-iwexoag,  Megioetch Ogitchitaikwewag, Nindizhinikaz,  Beenaysayikive, Makwa nin dodaem,  Megwetch indiawaymugunitok.  I am greeting you in my language and  thanking you, my sisters, for the honour of  speaking with you today about the challenges facing women as we approach the  21st century.  A primary and central challenge impacting women will be the distance we,  collectively as women and societies, have  artificially placed ourselves from our  Mother the Earth, and the inherent environmental, social, health and psychological consequences of colonialism, and subsequently rapid industrialization on our  bodies, and our nations. As a centerpiece  of this problem is the increasing lack of  control we have over ourselves, and a  long-term security. This situation must be  rectified [not only] through the laws of  international institutions such as the  United Nations, but as well through the  policies, laws and practices of our nations,  our communities, our states, and ourselves.  The situation of Indigenous women,  as a part of Indigenous peoples, we believe  is a magnified version of the critical juncture we find ourselves in as peoples and  the problems facing all women and our  future generations as we struggle for a  better world. This conflict is manifested in  the loss of control over decision making,  loss of human security, militarism, the  globalization of the economy, the further  marginalization of women, increasing intolerance and the forced commodification  and homogenization of culture through  the media.  While I am from one nation of Indigenous people, there are millions of Indigenous peoples worldwide. An estimated  500 million people are Indigenous peoples  of some 5000 nations of Indigenous peoples in the world today. We are in the  Cordillera [of the Philippines], the Maori  of New Zealand, we are in East Timor, we  are the Wara Wara of Australia, the Lakota,  the Tibetans, the peoples of Hawaii, New  Caledonia and many other nations of Indigenous peoples.  We are not populations, not minority  groups; we are peoples; we are nations of  peoples. Under international law, we meet  the critieria of nation states, having a common economic system, language, territory,  history,culture and governing institutions.  Despite this fact/Indigenous nations are  not allowed to participate at the United  Nations.  Nations of Indigenous peoples are not,  by and large, represented at the United  Nations. Most decisions today are made  by the 180 or so members states to the  United Nations. Those states, by and large,  have been in existence for only 200 years  Most [of the] decisions  made in the world today  are actually made by  some of the 47  transnational  corporations and their  international financiers  whose annual income is  larger than the gross  national product of  many countries in the  world.  or less, while most nations of Indigenous  peoples, with few exceptions, have been in  existence for thousands of years. Ironically, there would be little argument in  this room that most decisions made in the  world today are actually made by some of  the47 transnational corporations and their  international financiers whose annual income is larger than the gross national product of many countries in the world.  This is the centerpiece of the problem.  Decision making is not made by those who  are affected by those decisions—people  who live on the land—but by corporations, with an interest entirely different  from that of the land and the people, or the  women of the land. This brings forth a  fundamental question. What gives these  corporations like Conoco, Shell, Exxon,  Daishawa, ITT, Rio Tinto Zinc and the  World Bank a right which supercedes my  human right to live on my land, or that of  my family, my community, my nation, our  nations, and us as women?  What law gives that right to them?  Not any law of the Creator, or of Mother  Earth. Is that right contained within their  wealth, which was historically acquired  immorally and unethically through colonialism and imperialism, and paid for with  the lives of millions of people, and species  of plants and entire ecosystems. They  should have no such right. And we clearly,  as women and as Indigenous peoples, demand and will recover that right—that  right of self-determination—to determine  our destiny and that of our future generations.  The origins of this problem lie with  the predator/prey relationship industrial  society has developed with the Earth, and  subsequently, the people of Earth. This  same relationship exists vis-a-vis women.  We are often in the role of prey, whether  for sexual discrimination, exploitation,  sterilization, absence of control over our  bodies, or being the subjects of repressive  laws and legislation in which we have no  voice. This occurs on an individual level,  but equally, and more significantly on a  societal level.  It is also critical to point out at this  time that most matrilinial  societies—societies in which governance  and decision making are largely control-  ledby women—have been obliterated from  the face of the Earth by colonialism and  industrialism. The only matrilinial societies which exist in the world today are  those of Indigenous nations. We are the  remaining matrilinial societies,yet wealso  face obliteration.  On a worldwide scale and in North  America, Indigenous societies historically,  and today remain in a predator/prey relationship with industrial society. We are  the peoples with the land and natural resources. The wealth of the United  States—that nation which today determines much of the world policy—was illegally expropriated from our lands. Similarly the wealth of Indigenous peoples of  South Africa, Central and South American  countries, and Asia was taken for the industrial development of Europe, and later  for settler states which came to occupy  those lands.  Today, on a worldwide scale, we remain in the same situation as one hundred  years ago, only with less land and fewer  people. Today, on a worldwide scale, 50  millionlndigenouspeoplesliveintherain-  forests, a million Indigenous peoples are  slated to be relocated for dam projects in  the next decade (thanks to the World  Bank)—from the Narmada Project in India, to the Three Gorges Dam Project here  in China, to the James Bay Hydro Electrical Project in northern Canada.  Almost all atomic weapons which  have been detonated in the world are also  detonated on the lands or waters of I ndig-  enous peoples, most clearly evidenced here  in China and in the Pacific with France's  obscene proposal to detonate atomic weapons this upcoming month.  Today, over 50 percent of our remai n-  ing lands are forested, and both Canada  and the United States continue aggressive  clearcutting policies on our land. Over  two-third of the uranium resources in the  US and similar figures for Canada are on  Indigenous lands,asisone third of all low-  sulphur coal resources. We have huge oil  reserves on our reservations. And we have  the dubious honour of being the most  highly bombed nation in the world—the  Western Shoshone Nation—on which over  650 atomic weapons have been detonated.  We also have two separate accelerated  proposals to dump nuclear waste on our  reservation lands, and similarly over 100  separate proposals to dump toxic waste  on our reservation lands.  _ We understand clearly the relationship between development for someone  else, and our own underdevelopment. We  also understand clearly the relationship  between the environmental impacts of  types of development on our lands, and  the environmental and subsequent health  impacts on our bodies as women. That is  the crux of the problem.  We also understand clearly that the  analysis of North versus South is an erroneous analysis. There is, from our perspective, not a problem of the North dictating the economic policies of the South,  and subsequently consuming the South.  Instead, there is a problem of the "Middle"  consuming both the North and the South.  That is our situation. Let me explain.  The rate of deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon is one acre every nine seconds. Incidentally, the rate of extinction of  Indigenous peoples in the Amazon is one  nation of Indigeous peoples per year. The  rate of deforestation of the boreal forest of  Canada is one acre every twelve seconds.  Siberia, thanks to American corporations  like Weyerhauser, is not far behind. In all  cases,Indigenouspeoplesare endangered.  And there is, frankly, no difference between the impact in the North and the  South.  Uranium mining has devastated a  number of Indigenous communities in  North America. Uranium mining in northern Canada has left over 120 million tons  of radioactive waste. This amount represents enough material to cover the  TransCanada Highway two meters deep  across the country. Present production of  uranium waste from Saskatchewan alone  occurs at the rate of over one million tons  annually.  Since 1975, hospitalization for cancer,  birth defects and circulatory illnesses in  that area have increased  dramatically—between 123 and 600 percent i n that regi on. 1 n other areas i mpacted  by uranium mining, cancers and birth defects have increased to, in some cases,  eight times the national average. The subsequent increases in radiation exposure to  both the local and to the larger North  American population are also evidenced  in broader incidences of cancer—such as  breast cancer in North American  women—which issignificantly on the rise.  There is not a distinction in this problem  caused by radiation whether it is to the  KINESIS BEIJING 95 SUPPLEMENT  NOVEMBER 1995 The rate of deforestation in the  Brazilian Amazon is one acre  every nine seconds. Incidentally,  the rate of extinction of  Indigenous peoples in the  Amazon is one nation of  Indigeous peoples per year.  Dene of the northern Canada, the Laguna  Pueblo people of New Mexico, or the people of Namibia.  The rapid increase in dioxin,  organichlorides, PCBs (poly-chlorinated  byphenols) in the world as a result of  industrialization hasa devastating impact  on Indigenous peoples, Indigenous women  and other women. Each year, the world's  paper industry discharges from 600 to 3200  grams of dioxin equivalents. This quantity  is equal to the amount which would cause  58,000 to 294,000 cases of cancer every  year, based on the [US] Environmental  Protection Agency's estimate of dioxin  carcinogenicity.  According to a number of recent studies, this has increased significantly the risk  ofbreastcancerinwomen.Similarly,heavy  metals and PCB contamination of Inuit  women of the Hudson Bay region of the  Arctic indicates that they have the highest  levels of breast milk contamination in the  world. In a 1988 study, Inuit women were  found to have contamination levels up to  28 times higher than the average of women  in Quebec, and ten times higher than that  considered "safe" by the government.  Itisalsoofgreatconcerntoourwomen,  and our people, that polar bears in that  region of the Arctic have such a high level  of contamination from PCBs that they may  be facing total sterility and be forced into  extinction by early in the next century. As  people who consider the bears to be our  relatives, we are concerned about their  ability to reproduce as a consequence of  this level of bio-accumulation of toxins.  We find that our communities, like those  of our relatives the bears, are in fact in  danger of extinction. Consequently, it is  clear to us that the problems found in the  South—like the export of chemicals and  the bio-accumulation of toxins—are also  very much our problems, and the problems are clearly manifested in our women.  These are problems  which emanate from  industrial societies'  mistreatment and disrespect for our Mother  Earth, and subsequently are reflected in  the devastation of the  collective health and  well-being of women.  I have presented  these arguments for a  purpose—to illustrate  that these are very common issues for women,  not only for Indigenous  women, but for all  women. What befalls  our Mother Earth, befalls her daughters, the  women who are the  mothersof our nations.  Simply stated, if wecan  no longer nurse our  children, if we can no longer bear children, and if our bodies themselves are  wracked with poisons, we will have accomplished little in the way of determining our destiny, or improving our  conditions. And these problemsarealso  inherently resulting in a decline of the  status of women, and are the result of  long-set historical processes—processes  which we as women will need to challenge if we are ultimately to be in charge  ofourdestinies,our own self determination, and the future of our Earth, our  Mother.  It is our belief, at Indigenous Women's Network, that:  1) Women should not have to trade  their ecosystems for running water, basic housing, health care, and basic human rights.  2) Development projects, whether  in the North or in the South, whether  financed by the World Bank, or by the  coffers of the Rio Tinto Zinc and Exxon,  often replicate patriarchy and sexism,  and by and large, cause the destruction  of matrilinial governance structuresand  land tenure, and cause a decline in the  status of women. By denying us the basics on which we live, and the clean food  and streams from which to eat, and instead offering us a wage economy, in  which privilegeis often dictated by class,  sex and race. Indigenous women are  frequently moved from a central role in  their societies to the margins (and as  refugees) of industrial society.  3) The industrial knowledge systems today often negate or deny the  existence, and inherent property rights  of Indigenous people to our cultural and  intellectual knowledge. Transnational  corporationsand international agencies  call us "primitive," while they steal our  medical knowledge, plants, and even  genetic material    (as in the Human  Genome Diversity Project). This situa-  tionaffects Indigenous women, asa part of our  communities, but on a larger scale, has affected most women.  4) Subsequently, our women find that  the basic human right to control our bodies  are impacted by all of the above, through  development policies aimed at non-consensual or forced sterilization, medical testing,  invasive genetic sampling, and absence of  basic facilities and services which would  guarantee us the right and ability to control  the size of our families safely and willingly.  These same development policies are often  based on tourism which commodifies our  bodies and cultures (the Pacific and Native  America as prime examples), and causes the  same for women internationally.  Collectively we must challenge this  paradigm, and this international arena. I  call on you to support the struggle of Indigenous peoples of the world and to recognize  that until all people have self-determination, no one will truly be free—free of the  predator, and free to control our destiny. I  ask you to look into the Charter of the United  Nations, Part One, Article Three which provides "...All peoples have the right to self-  determination. By virtue of that right, they  may freely determine their political status  and freely pursue their economic, social,  and political development."  "All peoples," should be construed to  mean Indigenous peoples have that right to  We believe that the right  of all peoples to self-  determination cannot be  realized while women  continue to be  marginalized and  prevented from  becoming full  participants in their  respective societies.  self-determination. And, by virtue.of that  right, they may freely determine their political status, and freely pursue their economic,  social and political development. Accord us  the same rights as all other nations of peoples. And through that process, allow us to  protect our ecosystems, their inherent  biodiversity, human cultural diversity, and  those matriarchal governments which remain in the world.  And, with the Unrepresented People's  Organization (UNPO), we reaffirm that definition of self-determination provided in the  International Covenant on Social Economic  and Cultural Rights, further recognizing that  the right of self-determination belongs  equally to women and to men. We believe  that the right of all peoples to self-determination cannot be realized while women  continuetobe marginalized and prevented  from becoming full participants in their  respective societies. The human rights of  women, like the human rights of Indigenous peoples, and our inherent rights to  self-determination are not issues exclusively within the domestic jurisdiction of  states.  So long as the predator continues, so  long as the "Middle"—thetemperatecoun-  tries of the world—continue to drive an  increasing level of consumption and continue to export both the technologies and  drive for this level of consumption to other  countries, there will be no safety for the  human rights of women, rights of Indigenous peoples, and basic protection for  the Earth. Consumption causes the  commodif ication of the sacred, the natural  world, cultures, and thecommodification  of children, and women.  The United States is the largest energy  market in the world. The average American consumes seven times as many wood  products per capita as anywhere else in  the industrialized world, and overall that  country consumesone third of the world's  natural resources. By comparison, Canada's per capita energy consumption, is the  highest in the world.  Levels of consumption in the industrial world drive destruction of the world's  rainforests and the world's boreal forests,  drive production of nuclear wastes and  production of PCBs, dioxins and other  lethal chemicals, which devastate the body  of our Mother Earth and our own bodies.  Unless we speak, and take meaningful  action to address these levels of consumption and the subsequent export of these  technologies and levels of consumption to  other countries, we will never have any  security for our individual human rights  as Indigenous women, and for our security as women.  If we are to seek and struggle for the  common ground of all women, it is essential to struggle for this issue. Frankly, it is  not that women of the dominant society in  theso-called First World countries should  have equal pay, and equal status if that  pay and status continue to be based on a  consumption model which is not only  unsustainable, but causes constant violation of the human rights of women and  nations elsewhere in the world. It is essential to collectively struggle to recover our  status as Daughters of the Earth. In that is  our strength,and security, not in thepreda-  tor, but in the security of our Mother, for  our future generations. In that, we can  ensure our security as the Mothers of our  Nations.  Megwetch mi go minuk megwetch.  NOVEMBER 1995  KINESIS BEIJING 95 SUPPLEMENT by Fatima Jaffer  LESBIAN DEMONSTRATION -Lesbian Visibility March,  For many, it was undoubtedly a highlight of the Forum.  Thousands of women-loving-women from all over the world  participated in the Lesbian Visibility March September 5th, making it the  largest demonstration at the Huairou site. Many wore blue buttons that  read "Lesbian rights are human rights: Beijing '95" in English and Spanish,  which was how out-lesbians identified ourselves and each other on site.  Others came out to support. There were banners and signs from all over  the world, as well as the ones made by women at the Lesbian Tent.  The March lasted hours, as we walked, chanted, sang, laughed, and  called attention to ourselves all over the site. We were met with applause  and cries of support, curiosity and confusion, as well as hisses of derision  from women at the various tents, buildings and on the "streets" as we  marched along.  A lot of worldwide media were there, including the Chinese media.  (The next day, however, the "independent daily" newspaper of the NGO  Forum, Forum '95, gave the March only a token mention. Failing to report the  largest and most controversial demonstration on site on September 5th was  too obvious an "oversight" to be mistaken for anything but homophobia.)  Apart from raising visibility on site, and calling on women to unite and  not let homophobia divide us, the purpose of the March was also to call on  September 5th NGO Forum '95 site, Huairou  the 4th World Women's Conference in Beijing to:  • Recognize the freedom to determine one's own sexuality as an inalienable  human right and a necessary precondition for equality, development and  peace;  • Recognize and integrate the needs and concerns of women of all sexual  orientations throughout the Platform for Action;  • Direct governmental, non-governmental and inter-governmental  organizations to address the concerns of lesbians and bisexual women in  the formulation and implementation of all programs and policies which  result from the Platform for Action;  • Make this a Conference of Commitments, with a concrete plan of action to  guarantee for all women the full exercise of their civil, political, social,  economic and cultural rights.  Issues of sexual orientation and sexuality were major points of  contention atthe world conference in Beijing. /C/rjes/swill bring you the  story of what was won and lost in our next supplement in our December/  January 1996 issue.  Meanwhile in Huairou, our victory was obvious. Lesbian visibility and  issues of homophobia were raised in an unprecedented scale on an  international level. And it was a helluva rush!  Lesbians strategizing against conservatism:  by Rebeca Sevilla  m  w/w&mofiesMxr  HTu5»iA  *•      %  5u^  **ap<#^ a£          ^fc^L^««—  Rebeca Sevilla is a lesbian activist from Peru, and  was the official representative of the International Lesbian and Gay Association (ILGA) at the the 4th UN  Conference on Women. She spoke at a Plenary Session  on the "Rise of Conservatism" focussing on strategies  from a lesbian perspective for confronting conservatism  in all its forms. Below is an excerpt from her speech in  which Seinlla also talks about the "ethic of diversity."  Look at the issue through lesbian eyes. For  lesbians, the oppression has always been high.  Lesbians usually liveinvisible,silent,secret lives.  Sometimes, lesbians lived openly for a time, but  then soon came witch hunts, concentration  camps, electric shock treatment...and social rejection. Today we are speaking out. Not because  there is less conservatism. But because there is a  stronger women's movement. And a stronger  lesbian movement.  Let's have a look at the United Nations  Women's Conference. In Mexico in 1975 [at the  first World Conference on Women], lesbians  spoke out, but were criticized by some feminist  sisters. Too many women were at that time  afraid to be labelled and discredited as lesbians.  In Copenhagen in 1980, lesbians organized  informal workshops. A photographer caught  some women sunbathing topless in a private  garden. The photo became world famous with  the caption: "lesbians in Copenhagen." Should  we conclude that all women sunbathing topless  are lesbians?  Before Nairobi in 1985, becauseof the photo,  there was trouble about lesbians attending. But  ILIS (International Lesbian Information Service)  was part of the NGO Forum program, and for  the first time the lesbian issue was raised by a  Dutch Minister at the official UN conference.  Before Beijing the same story re-emerged.  Rumours that lesbians would be refused visas.  Newspaper stories that the Chinese were most  worried about lesbians taking off their tops and  kissing each other. Police women are supposed  to have been specially trained and issued with  sheets to quickly throw over any such disturbance. (We lesbians do actually like to take off  our clothes, kiss and...but mostly in private.)  [In Huairou,] we do have our own tent  [among the other diversity tents], and have been  invited into major panels and commissions.  Sexual rights are an important lobby issue in the  final United Nations document [the Platform for  Action]. This is a positive story—a story of gain  for the lesbian movement, but also a story of the  conservative reaction.  Newspapers in China and elsewhere  focussed on the lesbian issue in a negative way.  Lesbian material in Chinese was removed from  the tent. The European/North American tent  did not want to announce a lesbian workshop,  but the Cyprus tent invited all the lesbian caucus  to join their party. Young Chinese volunteers  were interviewed and said they knew from the Hite report  that homosexuality exists, that they have learned a lot from  the lesbian tent, and that lesbians arehumans and repression  is not a solution.  In fact, this Beijing conference—the NGO forum and the  official United Nations conference—is about the political  battle between progressive and conservative forces, such as  the Roman Catholic church in all issues: human rights;  violence against women; economic issues; exploitation of  women; education; health; development issues; reproductive rights or oppressive family planning.  And being honest...there are some conservative forces  within the women's movement too. It is not so easy to know  thesedays who isconservativeand who is progressive. More  economic and political insecurity means more fear, and  therefore more fundamentalism.  Women are the topic over which progressive and conservative forces are fighting. Can we control our own lives,  and our own bodies? Can we choose our own sexuality?  The lesbian issue evokes tremendous emotional reaction and conservative backlash, becauseit is (quite correctly)  the symbol of women's freedom and independence.  So often we hear that lesbianism is a "western disease"  caught by Southern women. But a look in our own histories  shows that in all cultures and countries, lesbians "popped  up" every now and then. Today, lesbian groups are active in  all continents and in most countries in the world.  It is not Europe or the US, but South Africa, which has  the most progressive legislation—with laws against discrimination and making it possible for lesbians and gays to  adopt children. Nelson Mandela, the African National Congress and the Lesbian and Gay Coalition worked together  and understood thatdemocracy also means fighting gender-  apartheid and homophobia.  Most lesbians have to discover their own feelings in  isolation—without [having] information or role-models.  Many lesbians reject their own feelings at first. In cultures  where women suffer from clitorectomy, incest, or arranged  marriage, women have little or no control over their own  lives or bodies. But still, we know, women love women  everywhere, in any social, economic or political condition.  And now we are speaking out internationally about our  lesbian lives, our lesbian love.  We are learning to be proud, not ashamed. We are  learning to be visible and loud, not secret. We are not  satisfied with a lesbian tent. We want to be included in the  political agenda.  iiveipsity  Of course, then, we can expect backlash. Not only  because of the general rise in religious, cultural and economic fundamentalism. But also because we lesbians are the  symbol of the battle between the sexes; the symbol of the  independent, autonomous women. We do not need men. I  am a lesbian. I have good friends who are men. But emotionally and sexually I prefer women. This makes some men, and  some conservative political movements, very nervous indeed. Because if women can choose to be lesbians, how then  to control us?  It does also make some women nervous. Why? Because  lesbians challenge any woman to think about her choices  and her own sexuality. How many of you today have been  able to explore your own sexuality to discover for yourself  what you like or dislike? Young women—the next generation—can take this issue further, and hopefully claim more  freedom.  I want to ask all women and progressive men to realize  that democracy should be based on respect for differences,  respect for different choices in life. Women's rights and  sexual rights, and therefore lesbian rights, are human rights.  I want to introduce a new concept to you. I call it the  "Ethicof Diversity." Weareallsodifferentatthisconference,  from so many backgrounds. In order to avoid international  conflict, in order to start solving problems in this world, we  must develop an ethic of diversity.  We need to meet. But more than that, we need to get to  know each other, to ask each other questions. We need to  discover what we have in common, but particularly, to  respect our differences. We need to put effort into meeting  each other half way, and into learning from each other. The  ethic of diversity is different from religious ethics or political  values which we hear so much about because the ethic of  diversity does not claim one truth, but aims to deal with  differences. To respect and accept.  The daily practice of this ethic means that we build  networks and organizations which include everyone: Indigenous women, western women, straights, lesbians, bisexu-  als, women with visible or invisible abilities, migrants or  refugees, rich women or poor women, women with AIDs—in  fact, any of us.  An ethic of diversity means building a culture of respect—a rich culture which will allow us to find new solutions to old problems. New solutions based on agreement  and peace, not on fights.  The ethic of diversity is a strong  strategy to stop conservatism, because  conservatism is based in fear, on greed  and on divisions between people. Developing an ethic of diversity, especially a daily practice, is our challenge.  But I want to share with you something which worries me. Too many  religions, political and economic systems have preached freedom, but practise oppression. The women's movement too sometimes shows seeds of  intolerance, jealousy and disrespect.  And now back to lesbian rights  and some strategies. If you are a teacher:  talk about sexual diversity and different lifestyles. If you area health worker:  don't assume everyone is only heterosexual; ask me whether menor contraceptives are relevant topics to me. If  you are working on human rights:  work on the issues of women's rights  and lesbian rights and violence. If you  are working with media: include realistic reports about various aspects of  lesbian life. If you are a lesbian: come  out and speak out, and make a link  with others, with other diversity issues.  Lesbians have multiple identiites.  If you are involved in politics: fight  this week [in Beijing], and in your own  country, to ensure that sexual rights  are part of any constitution, and that  local, national and international laws  fight against homophobia instead of  supporting it.  We don't want just a tent or a  parade. We want sexual rights in all  political documents and in  practice...not only for lesbians, but for  all women from all over the world.  M  l:' \  smm  RIGHT* |  *£                  1  W^^mHUHAH  wgvttsi tent are set up for the various Asian and Pacific nations in the region. In one comer, Cambodian women are sewing  together a giant Ribbon of Hope, a project also called "Women Weaving the World Together," made up of banners and  quilts from women all over the world [see photo].  Women at the Arab tent are also busy setting up. There are posters on the outsides of the tent walls on the effects of  recent warfare on Kuwaiti women, in particular, chemical weapons used by Iraq. Like the other tents, this one houses the  more established, government-sponsored groups. Unlike the other tents, there are numerous men in the tent.  I walk over to where my map says the diversity tents are located: these are the smaller tents for "smaller groups," such  as lesbians, Indigenous women, women of colour and women with disabilities. On the five-minute walk over, I notice the  pavement is more cracked, uneven and uphill than in other parts of the site. It's also a long way from central areas and  there doesn't seem to be a road for vehicles leading to the tents. It's difficult to walk without looking down at my feet. I  wonder how women with disabilities are going to get to their tent.  [Later that night, Catherine Boldt of the Canadian Research Institute for the Advancement of Women on the CBFC  delegation, tells me the 160 or so women with disabilities at the Forum will be  protesting the lack of access. The United Nations building in New York is not  accessible to people with disabilities either, so we are not really surprised by the  insensitivity of UN staff in preparing the Forum site for us," she points out.]  It is time to leave Huairou for Beijing, where the official opening of the NGO  Forum is taking place this evening at the National Olympic Stadium.  The opening is a spectacular and sentimental show of pomp and  circumstance. The crowd is estimated at 60,000-80,000 women, with at least  5,000 Chinese performers. The Forum organizers welcome participants. There  are moving speeches by past convenors of the NGO Forums and Conferences,  and even a Peace Torch that has travelled through Africa before being brought  to Beijing by women from Uganda. Most of the proceedings are in English,  although women representing different regions welcome participants in the other  Forum languages—Russian, Spanish, French, Chinese and Arabic.  I finally know what it feels like to be at the opening of, say, the Olympics.  Thousands of cultural performers perform dances and make synchronized  shapes of doves, the UN logo, the logo of the NGO Forum and the Conference.  It is hard to resist feeling a little awed by the grandeur of it all and more  than a little moved by the number of women there. But I wonder if others are  buying into the glamour. It seems unnecessarily showy and incongruous, given  what we are here to do.  Bringing me back to earth are some Thai and Filipina women beside me,  who burst into peals of laughter as across the way a group of Thai women rise  proudly to wave the Thai flag every time NGO Forum convenor, Supatra Masdit,  who is from Thailand, speaks. The women are laughing at the nationalism and  seem quite unimpressed with the goings on. I'm relieved.  After thousands of balloons and doves are released, we sing the stirring  NGO theme song, Keep on Moving Forward, as well as, for some bizarre  reason, Auld Lang Syne. The opening is over and we breathe another sigh of  relief. It's time to get down to work!  !?The Global Tent was a central spot for  finding out what was happening; which  events were cancelled; what was new, or if  there was a meeting of women you'd like to  connect with happening.  ©Posters adorned the walls of tents;  in this case, the Lesbian tent.  $ Cracked pavements leading to the  diversity tent area, where the women with  disabilities tent was originally situated.  After a number of protests by women with  disabilities and negotiations with the UN  NGO Forum facilitating committee, the tent  was moved to a more central location.  Day one-August 31st  I get up at 5 a.m. to make sure I get to the opening plenary on time. The  International Beijing Huairou Convention Centre where the opening plenary is to  be held, seats 2,000 at full capacity (including aisles). I feel sure at least 20,000  women staying in Huairou have camped at the doors all night to ensure they get  in to hear opening speeches by recently-released Burmese dissident Aung San  Suu Kyi, Winona LaDuke of the Indigenous Women's Network, and Hanan  Ashrawi, of the Palestinian Independant Commission for Citizen's Rights [who  was unable to attend].  But the Convention Centre is empty when I arrive. I later hear thousands of women were waiting  since dawn at another venue marked "Plenary Hall" on the map in our programs. There is near panic as  they try to get into the Convention Centre at the last minute. About 4,000 women get in, some in  adjoining rooms where they hear the proceedings over speakers piped in from the main hall. The hall,  aisles and foyer are packed. I silently thank Judy Rebick, former NAC president, for having told me  about the change in venue last night. We had no idea then that so few knew about the new venue.  As for the size of the hall, executive director of the NGO Forum Irene Santiago later tells the media  that given there were 128 simultaneously held workshops taking place from 9-10:45 am. "We were not  expecting so many women to come."  Women tell me it is reminiscent of Nairobi ten years ago when only 3,000 of the 13,000  participants could get in for the opening of the Forum at Kenyatta Convention Centre.  But at this forum, a scene like this gets the media's attention because it is a quick, easy, China-  bashing story. So over the next few days, most of us avoid complaining publidy about the rain, the  workshop cancellations and transportation glitches in case a member of the media might hear and write  about that instead of the thousands of workshops and meetings and activities that ate taking place on  schedule. Continued on page 18  On day two, women with disabilities  from all over the world have a  spontaneous protest on the steps of  the Convention centre, after finding  out a workshop for women with  disabilities has been scheduled on the  second floor of a building with no  elevator.  '%. '  TJByJj  Hill  i  ©A Japanese feminist performance  group give a street performance with the  central message: equality for women.  Performers for the Once &  Future (OFAN) Pavilion, a  science, technology and  media exhibition. OFAN is a  body of more than 70 NGOs  involved in issues of gender,  science and technology. The  exhibition included  information on everything  from computers and applying  for credit, to agricultural  development and setting up  learning circles. Media groups  included the Tanzanian Media  Women's Association,  Feminist International Radio  Endeavour (FIRE), and the  bookstall of Women Ink., the  publishing arm of the  International Women's Tribune  Centre.  16  KINESIS BEIJING 95 SUPPLEMENT  NOVEMBER 1995 Conference strikes out:  Forum hits home  by Sunera Thobani  Sunera Thobani is the president of the National Action Committee on the Status of Women  (NAC), the largest coalition of women's groups in  Canada. She attended both the NGO Women's  Forum and the 4th World Conference on Women.  Just three days before I was to leave  Canada to attend the United Nations Fourth  World Conference on Women in Beijing, a  reporter phoned asking if I had received my  visa. When I said yes, she asked if I knew  anybody who had been denied a visa. The  newspapers had carried a number of stories  about the Chinese government allegedly  denying women visas to attend the conference. I said sorry, I couldn't give her any  names, everybody I knew had got a visa.  Checking around, I had been told that almost four hundred of the estimated six hundred Canadian women who had applied  iad got their visas! No conspiracy here by  the Chinese government to stop Canadian  women from attending, I laughed to the  reporter. She did not call me back.  Unfortunately, the anti-China bias in  the media coverage of the Conference did  not stop. The stories pouring out of China  focussed on security problems; harassment  of delegates by authorities; tents collapsing  in Huairou; and on and on. And, as many of  us feared, by focussing on these stories, the  substantive issues which women had gathered together to work on were thrown by the  wayside. They received no media coverage.  The biggest stories out of the Conference should have been about the dynamism  and the vitality of the international feminist  movement. The media should have told the  world that as the shift to the Right in our  countries has grown stronger, women's  movements have become more radical and  militant, and are challenging right-wing  forces globally. With over 30,000 women  participating in the NGO Forum, this was  the largest gathering of women activists in  this century. And all the media could talk  about was leaking wallsandcollapsingtents!  The NGO Forum and the Beijing Conference were timely. The current phase of  globalization is creating rapid change—every  country is undergoing major upheavals as  governments scramble to transform their  economies to keep pace. Everywhere, women's lives are being affected. Many of the  gains we have made in the past are being  destroyed as the backlash intensifies. New  challenges are emerging as conservative  forces grow stronger and more organized.  Violence against women has reached horrendous levels, the poverty of women and  children increasingsharply,andwomenand  children make up the majority of the one  billion people who go hungry every day.  In this climate, the NGO Forum provided a much needed opportunity for women  to come together to address these critical  issues. With over 5,000 workshops at the  Forum, women had the opportunity to discuss each and every issue impacting our  lives.  The NGO Forum began with plenaries  assessing the status of women, as well as  strategies women have developed in different regions toadvanceequality rights. Speakers addressed the globalization of the  economy, women and politics, women and  the media, women and militarism, the rise of  conservatism, as well as regional issues.  Workshops and discussion groups provided  much needed space for exchanging information with sisters from different countries,  and learning from each other's work. The  coalitionswhich were formed asa resultwill  serve women's groups well in the coming  years. Indeed, this coalition-building was  probably the most important achievement  of the NGO Forum.  Almost as soon as the NGO Forum  began, women from the South were organizing demonstrations and protests against  their governments. It was intriguing that  although the governments of the North are  far more powerful—with disproportionate  impact on the global stateof affairs—women  from the North were not organizing any  actions against their own governments.  NACdelegatesandmembergroupsgot  working right away to put that straight, we  organized a demonstration against the G-7  countries [seven industrialized nations] on  September 6th—the International Day of Action for Women's Equality. Two members of  the NAC team were Chinese-Canadian sisters and they also turned this demostration  into a protest against human rights violations by the Chinese government. Many  women from the South joined us in the  demonstration, and this is one of the strongest memories of the conference which has  stayed with me. There were tears as sisters  remembered Tiananmen Square; there was  laughter at the songs sung by sisters from  India. In the pouring rain, wet and cold,  being with this group of women seemed to  me to be one of the most wonderful reasons  for having come to China.  The officia 1 Conference, however, was a  different matter. While it is a major achievement of the international women's movement that we have pushed our governments—and the United Nations—to address  women's equalities, existing UN structures  have not served women well. Governments  adopted the Forward Looking Strategies at  the last UN Conference on Women a decade  ago[inNairobi,Kenya],andnotonecountry  in the world has implemented it. In Beijing,  democratic accountability of economic and  political institutions to the women of the  world therefore became a priority.  In the last five years, a record number of  United Nations conferences have takenplace,  addressing a diverse range of issues. With  each successive conference, the women's  movement has successfully lobbied to transform the United Nations agenda by putting  women's rights at the centre.  At the UN Conference on the Environment and Development (UNCED) [in Rio de  Janiero, Brazil in 1992], women's relationship to the environment was defined as critical, and women were seen as being central to  achieving sustainable development. Women's inequalities and poverty were directly  linked to environmental destruction.  At the World Conference on Human  Rights [in Vienna, Austria in October 1994],  women's rights were defined as universal,  inalienable, and indivisible, and violence  against women was recognized as a fundamental violation of the women's human  rights.  At the International Conference on  Population and Development (ICPD) [in  This was the largest  gathering of women  activists in this century.  [But] all the media could  talk about was leaking  walls and collapsing  tents!  Cairo, Egypt in September 1994], women's  health and reproductive rights were recognized as key to population and development  issues.  At the World Summit on Social Development (WSSD) [in Copenhagen, Denmark  in March 1995], women's economic and social empowerment were defined as central  to eradicating poverty and achieving social  integration.  Therewasanexpectationthatthe Beijing  conference would build on these previous  gains, and would result in a major breakthrough in setting the agenda for governments to advance women's status. There  was an expectation that maybe now governments could be galvanized into taking long  overdue action.  However, this was not to be. The Beijing  Platform for Action broke no new ground.  The Platform is seriously flawed in its approach to women's economic rights. There  is no recognition that the existing global  economic system is increasing women's inequalities. There is no acknowledgement  that the current model for economic growth  and globalization, based as it is on "free"  market principles and reducing the role of  government in re-distributing wealth, devastates the lives of women.  Because thedocument does not address  the causes of women's poverty, it is unable  tci address how to end it. The power of  international financial institutions,of corporations and multinationals, remains unchallenged. No questions are raised about the  accountability of these institutions to the  women of the world.  The Pla tform for Action does nothing to  counter inequalities between the North and  the South. Women from the South have been  calling for the cancellation of the debt burden of their countries. Many countries are  trapped in the cycle of debts they have no  possibility of ever repaying. These countries  continue getting deeper into debt as they  borrow more to keep up with previous repayment obligations. Not only does the Platform not call for debt cancellation for the  poorest countries, it also does not deal with  the accountability of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank for the  devastatingstructural adjustment programs  (SAPs) they have imposed on countries in  the South.  The gains for women are few and far  between in the Platform for Action—the  losses are too many to list. Protection aga inst  discrimination based on sexual orientation  was dropped from the final document. Although the Canadiandelegationhad pushed  this issue onto the agenda at previous meetings, at the critical moment for negotiations  in Beijing, the Canadian delegation did not  introduce the language protecting the rights  of lesbians.  One of the gains for women in the Platform is the recognition of women's unwaged  work, and the call for governments to measure and value unwaged work. The Platform  also calls for anendtodiscrimination against  girls on the issue of inheritance rights.  The committment of governments to  implementing the Nairobi Forward Looking Strategies as well as the Beijing Platform  for Action can be measured by the resources  they are willing to commit. Nowhere was  the hypocrisy of the governments of the  North—including Canada—more evident  than on this question. While these governments are quick to condemn the countries of  the South on women's rights, it was the  countries of the North that blocked committing new and additional resources to advance women's rights. Without these resources, the commitments made in both the  Forward Looking Strategies and the Platform for Action remain nothing more than  hollow words.  Achieving women's liberation,and ending the different forms of inequalities to  which women are subject can only be  achieved by transforming current power  structures. For this, women have to become  central to the political process, becoming  involved at every level of governance. We  can achieve this with the emergence of  women as a strong, political force, working  in our movement to transform our societies.  This is the job the international women's  movement committed itself to in Huairou.  NOVEMBER 1995  KINESIS BEIJING 95 SUPPLEMENT  17 Inside the Africa regional tent.  After the plenary, I wander around the site, trying to get my bearings. For  me, it's a day of figuring out where things are and how to get around, where the  shortest line-ups for lunch are, and who's located where. There are so many  workshops, thousands more than anyone could imagine were being planned.  I have a hard time deciding which one to attend, so I choose by proximity of  location to where I happen to be standing. I notice women standing around an  outdoor stall, and find an overflowing workshop on affirmative action in progress. I  join the women standing outside the circle  Over the next few days, this is to become a common occurrence. If you get  there late, chances are you may not gef into the workshop of your (first) choice.  Today gives me the feeling that it is not going to be easy to decide what to do,  where to be, and how much I can absorb over the course of the next ten days.  Even after the powerful words at the opening plenary, I can't help wondering  what we are all doing here. What can we achieve in a forum of this size? It's  overwhelming!  Still, as I listen to women from different parts of the world describe  affirmative action in practice in their countries, I realize the incredible power of  dialogue between women who would never otherwise find themselves in the  same room.  In time though, the women from Namibia who called the workshop seem to  be getting a bit frustrated with the numerous women from Canada and the US in  attendance, who talk about backlash against affirmative action in their countries.  Their experience is quite different, and they speak from a different place. Women  from South Africa point this out. The workshop continues, with everyone being  polite and trying to communicate across the differences that are only being  acknowledged by some. I look forward to the days ahead when the discussion must surely lose its  politeness, and women will really begin to talk with each other; to debate, and not to shy away from  confrontation.  Day two - September 1 st  ,    There is no Forum '95 newspaper today. Forum '95 is 'Ihe independent daily of the NGO Forum  on Women: Beijing '95," published primarily in English with an occasional article in French or  Spanish. It is the paperthat keeps us abreast of cancellations, new additions to the workshop  schedule, and keeps us informed on who's doing what and where to go on site. It also keeps us  informed on what's going on in the "outside world," as there are no international newspapers on site  or in our hotels.  I find out through a contact close to the organizers that the paper is missing because the China  Organizing Committee (COC) has objected to an item that says "China occupies Tibet." Forum '95  staff refuse to pull the offending item and the entire paper does not make it to press. There is no  newspaper to update us on what has been cancelled, added or is in the planning.  NGO Forum facilitating committee members renegotiate the right of Forum '95 to publish an  "independent" paper on site, and also get permission for other on site newspapers in languages other  than English to publish. The next day, Forum '95is back, but there is no explanation nor mention of  the missing issue of the paper.  Back on the stairs of the Convention Centre, women with disabilities from around the world  begin a spontaneous protest at the lack of access to facilities at Forum '95 [see photo]. This is not  their first demonstration. They have already met with NGO Forum organizers to try to negotiate  better facilities with little success.  The problems are many and have to do with poor planning and little or no consultation with  people with disabilities. There aren't enough translators and interpreters for the deaf and hard of  hearing; no braille computers for blind women; many of the buildings don't have elevators; there are  only a handful of wheelchair accessible toilets, none outdoors where the tents are located and most  of the activities take place.  Worse yet, the tent for women with disabilities is located in a remote part of the site, a long way  from the Forum's core, the Global Tent. Their request to swap tents with the Youth Tent, which is  next door to the Global Tent, is rejected by the organizers.  Despite the setbacks, women with disabilities continue to meet, strategize and organize on the  issues that brought them to the Forum. They take care to acknowledge the excellent job the Chinese  volunteers are doing, taking care of the women with disabilities by fetching lunch, attending women  in wheelchairs, running errands, and much more.  Eventually, women with disabilities win some concessions. Their tent is moved to a central  location behind the Global tent. The Swedish government loans the Forum the use of a braille computer. Other concessions are made regarding toilets and  providing shuttle rides to remote corners of the site. While many problems persist, it is something to celebrate.  This afternoon, the tribunal of the Global Campaign on Women's Human Rights takes place in the Convention Centre. Twenty-two women present their  stories of physical, psychological, sexual and other forms of violence, speaking for the millions of women in every country whose rights are violated over and  again daily.  Tanzanian Mahfouda Alley Hamid speaks of economic deprivation because of Structural Adjustment Programs (SAPs) imposed on their government in  return for loans from the World Bank. Twenty-nine year old Agnes from Uganda speaks about how she was abducted by rebel soldiers when she was 14 years  Continued on page 20  18 KINESIS BEIJING '95 SUPPLEMENT  ©Before the Forum begins: Women  from Francophone Africa find a quiet  corner of the Europe/North America  tent to meet, plan and debate.  f)An overflowing workshop on  affirmative action in practice by the  Namibian Women's Organization.  Women stitch together panels  of the 10-kilometre long  Ribbon of Hope and Peace at  the Asia/Pacific tent. The  project titled Cambodian  Women: Weaving the World  Together was started by  women from the rural areas of  Cambodia in November 1994.  Women from all over the  world contributed pieces to  the ribbon, originally intended  to bridge the distance  between the governmental  conference and NGO Forum  sites in Beijing. Women at the  Forum who were hearing  about the project for the first  time were given a chance to  contribute, adding to the  ribbon banners made at the  last minute, painted cloth and  even t-shirts, to be stitched on  to the whole.  The Ribbon of Hope was  paraded through the "streets"  of the NGO Forum site on  September 6th, the  International Day of Action.  On Sept 7th, about 200  women left the Ribbon draped  along the Great Wall of China.  NOVEMBER 1995 Asian women's activism:  Building global movements  by Winnie Wun Wun Ng  Winnie Wun Wun Ngisa longtime labour  activist and the southern Ontario regional representative of the National Action Committee on the  Status of Women (NAC). She attended the NGO  Forum as a member of the Canada-Beijing Facilitating Committee.  The NGO Forum was an experience of a  lifetime. Just spending 10 days with over  30,000 women from all parts of the world is  both inspirational and empowering.  Because of the last minute change of the  NGO Forum site to Huairou, I went with  fairly low expectations anticipating many  logistical hurdles. I was pleasantly surprised.  Yes, there were problems, the major one being  the issue of accessiblity for women with disabilities. But in all, the western media did the  forum an injustice by focusing on the logistics  and ignoring the wonderful exchanges and  bonding among women.  Globalization of the economy was my  focus for the ten-day forum. I concentrated on  the workshops and networks under this theme  and found out what our sisters in Asia are  doing.  After many workshops and discussions  between women from the south and the north,  a global picture of the feminization of poverty  emerged—women's rights, human rights and  economic rights are inextricably connected.  International financial institutions, such  as the IMF (the International Monetary Fund)  and the World Bank, have imposed structural  adjustment programs (SAPs) on countries of  the South in the name of development. One  sister from India said, "the whole notion of  such economic restructuring is to integrate  local economy into the global capitalist  economy. Economic changes are pol itica 1, and  in developing countries, SAPs are political  statements." Women expressed concern and  frustration over the increasing role of local  governments as agents of multinational corporations.  I attended a series of workshops on the  situation ofgarmentworkersacross the world.  An organizer from Asian Women Advocates  in California spoke about the situation for  24,000 garment workers  there—predominantly Mexican, Chinese and  Central American immigrant women. Seventy percent of the women are heads of their  households, and have been the most affected  by job losses and reduction in wages in the US,  she said.  In Bangladesh, 95 percent of the 1.2 million garment workers are women, and seven  to 10 percent are children. Last year, 2,000  workers were injured or died due to fire  accidents.  There are one million garment workers  in the Philippines. Over the past 20 years,  wages have increased by only 26 percent,  while inflation has skyrocketed over 100 percent.  In Australia, the use of garment industry  homeworkers has increased from 30,000 in  1980 to over 330,01X1 in 1995.  Ashared senseofcritical analysis bonded  us together and moved us to focus on strategies. Women stressed the importance of networking, monitoring and organizing.  As a result of this discussion, a group of  us circulated a leaflet widely throughout the  Forum site, exposing the hypocrisy of the  American-based, multinational garment corporation Esprit, which supplied cloth bags for  the NGO Forum. While priding itself as a  supporter for women's causes, Esprit has  done more thanits share of exploiting women  workers [see photo page 20].  In other workshops, women talked about  the shifts that have taken place as a result of  technological changes. Women also talked  abo ut the conscious effort on the part of some  governments to implement labour exportation strategies, playing into the demand of  transnational corporations (TNCs) for a pool  of cheap labour. Another concern for women  in the south is rampant sex trafficking. Yayori  Matsui, a Japanese feminist journalist, put  forward a compelling parallel: "the women  are the new'comfort women'for thecompany  warriors!"  One of the most exciting moments for me  was attending the workshop on economic  alternatives organized by Asian women. We  crammed in to a small discussion tent in the  pouring rain—women from Thailand, Indonesia, the Philippines, Korea, Hong Kong,  Japan, Canada.  Women from Indonesia shared their experiences of organizingcommunity economic  development alternatives and the empowering aspects of women's cooperatives. Japanese women talked about an alternate consumer network in Japan where women boycott products made by TNCs, and only purchase products made by local cooperatives or  women's co-ops from other countries in the  region—for example, soap made by a Thai  women's co-op.  I came out from that workshop exhilarated! There is so much wecanlearnand share  with each other.  Another lesson 1 came home with is how  vibrant thedailyorganizingeffortsby women  in the South were at the Forum. I was impressed with the Korean women in pressing  forward theissueofcomfortwomen [women  exploited by the Japanese army as sex slaves  during the second world war.] They staged  daily protests; drumming singing, drama,  circles to get other women involved. For example, they brought out a ten metre long  piece of white cloth and asked women to help  carry it as they marched through the Forum  site. The drumming and the multicolours of  women's hands holding a white cloth was a  symbolic and powerful sight.  There is an element of healing, bonding  and solidarity that regular demonstrations  and chanting can achieve; it is time for us in  North America to be more creative in our  organizing and getting our message across.  I have returned to Canada with a renewed commitment to international solidarity work. Just as multinational corporations  are globalizing, so should labour and social  movements. For the labour movement in par-  ticular, the challenge will be how to sustain  anti-racism and anti-sexism organizing—how  to integrate race, gender and class to provide  amuchmorefundamentalandinclusiveanaly-  sis. The working class, as we have traditionally known it, has evolved and changed, going beyond national physical borders, languages and cultures. The challenges and possibilities for labour are both urgent and invigorating.  Protesting Tian-an-men  On a personal level, I also went to Beijing  hoping to participate in a public actionaround  the Tian-an-men Square massacre on June 4,  1989, [when theChinesegovernmentcracked  down on a student-led democracy protest in  Beijing.] Asa Chinese Canadian involved in  I came back strengthened knowing there are so  many women in China and in every part of the  world who will not be silenced.  From L to R: Amy Go, Judy Rebick, Winnie Ng & Sylvia Springer  the human rights movement in China for the  last ten years, I was in Beijing for the UN  conference, not to condone the present government's oppressive actions and human  rights violations. That isa distinction I need to  articulate publicly.  I was driven by the sense that there are so  many ordinary Chinese citizens who do not  have the right to protest or mourn about what  happened on June 4th 1989. We—Chinese  women livingoutsideof China—had nothing  to lose except getting thrown out of China.  The Chinese government would not dare arrest us.  We had talked about getting a group of  women all dressed in black to go to Tian-an-  men Square for a symbolic protest. But the  security and logistics proved insurmountable.  Then came September 6th, the International Day of Action—the day Hillary Clinton  came to Huairou. We made two banners the  night before. Initially, our plan was to pull out  the banners to welcome Hillary—the media  and a big crowd would be there. But with the  pouring rain, at 8:00 am, the conference site  was a sea of umbrellas. Thousands of women  were lining up waiting to get into the plenary  session. There was no way we could be seen  or heard.  In solidarity with other women, NAC  had planned a demonstration that day at  noontoprotestthestructuraladjustmentpoli-  cies of the G-7 countries [industrialized nations] thathavedevastated the livesof women  in the south and dismantled social programs  for women in the north. The demonstration  took place outside the main Forum centre.  Our spirits were high.  After tlie demo, I took out the two banners. Amy Go and a number of Canadian and  US sisters helpal hold the banners. The banners read, in both Chinese and English: "June  4,1989: We'll Never Forget" and "Release All  Political Prisoners." You could feel the tension and the silence. Amy, standing next to  me, started to cry. Tears rolled down the  cheeks of many women. I stood there, saying  to myself, "It is the right thing to do. We are  doing this in solidarity with so many who  could not be here."  It was an emotional and a sobering moment. I spoke briefly in English and Chinese.  We raised the banners high so residents on the  street could see it. Some Aboriginal sisters  sang a pra yer song. We chanted some more. A  group of Indian sisters sang a humourous  song of political satire. The laughter eased  some of the tension in the air.  Then women spontaneously came up to  the banners to speak. A sister from the South  Pacific talked about the protests against nuclear testing and how they have become political prisoners of conscience. She spoke in  solidarity and called for the release of politica 1  prisoners everywhere.  Sisters from Nepal, Taiwan, Chile spoke.  We chanted and sang some more. Over 300  women were there in the pouring rain for  over an hour. Throughout, the media's and  the Chinese security's cameras were on. We  had caught the Chinese by surprise. There  was nothing they could do; we were in a UN-  protected Forum site. The security people  stood by, watched, and filmed. We did it!  On Friday—the last day of the NGO  Forum—I realized I was being followed. I  went to a Burmese Women's Workshop and  felt strengthened after watching the video of  Aung Sang Suu Kyi's address to the NGO  Forum.  In the afternoon, I travelled downtown  with three other Canadian women; two men  [Chinese police]—one witha purple umbrella  and the other in a brown windbreaker—were  our "personal bodyguards." We joked about  them but somehow you feel deeply the invasion of privacy. Their presence was a form of  harassment and intimidation, an invisible reminder of who is in control.  What I got was only a small taste of what  activists in China endure on a daily basis. To  withstand such pressure and be able to continue their work is an actofcourageandanact  of defiance in itself.  I came back strengthened knowing there  are so many women in China and in every  part of the world who will not be silenced.  Sisters, we are in great company in the struggle for justice and human rights. Our resolve,  our presence and our actions will be a constant reminder to the powers that be that their  days are numbered and truth will prevail.  NOVEMBER 1995  KINESIS BEIJING 95 SUPPLEMENT old, raped, beaten, tortured, and forced to cook and clean. She escaped and was "rescued" by the  military who did not feed nor clothe her, and provide no counselling or support.  Maria talked about life in the Maquiladoras (free trade factory zones) in Mexico; Nurjehan from  Bangladesh could not make it to Beijing herself. She swallowed pesticide and died after being stoned  with 101 pebbles in a pit by men for immorality. The woman telling her story said a human rights  organization took up her case and those who stoned her were sentenced to seven years imprisonment.  Juanita talked about being HIV-positive and dealing with the medical system in the United States.  Mary from Ireland talked about being hospitalized repeatedly from beatings by her husband since the  age of 17 and not being able to divorce him because of Catholic laws.  It is announced a petition will be presented to the UN Conference calling for the UN to report on  the steps it has taken to promote and protect the human rights of women since the International  Conference on Human Rights in Vienna in 1993. The petition has been translated into more than 30  languages, circulated in 140 countries, and is sponsored by more than 1,500 groups internationally.  Day three - September 2nd  Forum '95 carries a story on the O.J. Simpson workshop that some African-American women put  on yesterday under the violence-against-women theme. Over 100 women attend the  workshop, many from "Southern" countries. There has been no verdict yet in the  case of the Black American sports star accused of killing his white wife, but already  women know that the verdict will be an acquittal, and talk about the connections  between sexism, racism and violence.  I head over to the diversity tents for the third daily meeting of the hundreds of  lesbians who are here from all regions of the world. As on other days at the Lesbian  Tent meetings, women share stories of the homophobic and supportive things they  have encountered on site, and information on what they are working on.  We hear about how the women from Cypress invited lesbians from the tent to  dance with them in their tent. We hear about different reactions to the blue buttons  with the slogan: "Lesbian Rights are Human Rights: Beijing '95" we all wear to identify  ourselves and each other on site. The Chinese volunteers are curious and ask to  buy the buttons as souvenirs; others ask about whether women can have children  together; a Canadian woman tells me if s not my "fault;" I could have been "cured" of  lesbianism if my parents had known I was "this way" when I was ten.  We hear about the hundreds of media and participants who visited the tent that  day—what they asked about, how many were hostile (a few), supportive (a lot), and  curious (many, many more).  We are urged to support the Tibetan women in their demonstrations because  they support lesbian rights. Dozens of workshops are announced: on lesbians from  the South, sexual and reproductive health, incarceration of lesbian youth in mental  institutions, and so on.  At the end, as women mingle, an announcement is yelled: "Chinese and  Spanish media have asked to film the left side of the Lesbian Tent so if if s dangerous  for you to be identified publidy, stand on the right."  In the coming days, I make the Lesbian Tent my "home." It helps to have a  place on site to meet people, leave messages, find women to talk or debate with, to  organize out of, or to just hang out in. The scale and high energy of the Forum  makes it a lonely place for women without colleagues or a base. Even women from  organizations that could afford or were funded to send large delegations (up to 20-30  from a single organization sometimes) can feel incredibly isolated sometimes.  The tents are intended to break down that isolation, to give women a place to  organize from and network.  For example, the Grassroots tent, set up by various organizations made up of or  for grassroots women, invite women working on issues of housing and shelter, who  have no other base, to work out of the tent. This gives women, such as Malaysian  activist Susanna George of the Asian Women and Shelter Network, an opportunity to  meet and work with the women she has been networking with in the months before  the Forum. Every day, women working on shelter issues meet to discuss objectives  and criteria of work on this issue. By the end of the forum, a worldwide network of women working  on shelter issues has been formed to continue the work beyond Huairou.  Still, as one woman from the US put it, while working this way is one way to cope with the size  and breadth of the Forum, at the end you feel like "Huairou is one big campus, and the only people  you know are from your major."  I don't have any one major; I am alone in covering the whole Forum lor Kinesis. I continue to  take in the fragmented, many varied pieces of the whole, hoping for a day when it all suddenly  comes together in one easy picture.  Huairou is not easy. I only know one thing: the women's movement, if the Forum is it, is huge  and working on manydifferent issues in many different ways. Is it largely feminist? What does it  challenge? Is it one movement or many? What significance does what we do here have for the  women of the world who are not in Huairou?  As today ends, I hoDe the coming days will tell.  Tibetan women hold a silent demonstration outside the Global Tent at  the Huairou Forum site, to symbolize the silencing of Tibetan peoples by the People's  Republic of China (PRC), which has occupied Tibet since 1950, and PRC's violations of  the human rights of Tibetans. At a press conference following the demonstration, the 10  Tibetan women, all of whom live in exile in the US, Canada, Australia and Norway, said  that China tried to stop them from coming to the Forum. Sixty-seven Tibetan women were  either denied visas or faced obstacles that discouraged them from attending the Forum.  The women told stories of PRC policies to regulate the number of Tibetan children  permitted to be born, unofficially since the 1980s and officially since 1992. Various means  to "persuade" women not to have children included economic and social sanctions for  having an unplanned child, coercing women to have abortions and sterilization  operations.  The demonstration was planned with the assistance of the International Committee  of Lawyers for Tibet, a US-based organization, and took place with "the permission of"  NGO Forum executive director Irene Santiago. While Chinese security guards were in full  attendance, the protesting women were not harassed at the press conference.  Women protest the  use of women as  guinea pigs for new  reproductive  tecnologies, as well  as the "dumping" of  anti-fertility vaccines  on the "third world,"  which are then  forcibly imposed on  women to meet World  Bank targets for  "population control." |  ..  "ICO  M  JOk  *    tgrWMA  t. -  w&**  .  ©Women from various South Asian  organizations raise the issue of violence  against women with a long and loud  demonstration across the Forum site.  ©Almost 40,000 cloth bags,  in which we received our Forum  '95 programs, were provided by  Esprit, the American garment  corporation. Women circulated  flyers calling for participants to  mail the Esprit labels attached to  the bags back to Esprit to protest  the company's use of sweatshop  labour. The flyers point out that  women and girls work at dirt-  cheap wages and are subject to  unsafe working conditions. As  well, workers in Esprit factories  are forced to take birth control  pills to prevent them from getting  pregant and disturbing the flow of  work. A few days later, the flyers  were recirculated with a longer  explanation on the flipside by a  group called Sweatshop Watch,  which outlines a history of  Esprit's anti-worker history, which  includes union busting, frequent  labour law violations as  documented in a federal survey,  and moving a factory in the US  where the Chinese immigrant  workers were protesting to Hong  Kong, where labour is cheaper  and unions weaker.  20  KINESIS BEIJING 95 SUPPLEMENT  NOVEMBER 1995 Arts  Mercedes Sosa:  Voice of the Americas  by Guadalupe Lesca Jolicoeur  So often when we read about performers, we are given information that  is meant to 'entertain' us. That's fine, but  for some of us, the value of an artist is not  based solely on their ability to entertain  a captive audience. At least, this is the  case with Mercedes Sosa, who for thirty  years has created music and poetry that  speaks of much more than just a desire  for personal fame and fortune. Her name  may or may not be familiar—that doesn't  really matter. With Sosa, what matters is  honesty, courage and dignity—not being a household name.  Her story is the story of millions of  women all over the world who know  what it is like to carve out a place in a  society that doesn't accept who they are.  She was born to a Native washer-woman  in Tucuman—a remote province in  Argentina—that culturally has more in  common with traditional Andean culture than with the European culture of  other parts of Argentina.  Being part-Native has influenced  Sosa in the most profound way. In Argentina, indigenous people (women in  particular)occupythelowestrankwithin  the social strata. In addition, continued  political strife, social injustice, and thirteen years of violent military dictatorships has cemented Mercedes Sosa's  commitment to social justice.  She has recorded more than a dozen  albums—in all of them, she draws upon  a diverse array of musical influences  including jazz, folk, samba and tango.  And from the beginning of her career,  her music has reflected a tremendous  understanding of issues such as  marginalization, social injustice, humanity and feminism. Oneof her albums—La  Nueva Mujer (The New Woman)—is dedicated to women and includes interpretations of Latin American songs by  women.  She has collaborated  with and interpreted the  songs of many artists who  share her social and political concerns including  Silvio Rodriguez, Milton  Nascimento, Beth  Carvalho, Pablo Milanes,  Nilda Fernandez, and the  legendary Argentine  Atahualpa Yupanqui. Not  once have her artistic  choices or her personal  choices compromised her  identity as a native Latin  American woman. She has  somehow managed to sustain a commercial career  without being co-opted by  commercial forces.  She sings of Latin  American unity, socialist revolution, and  the struggle of Latin Americans against  imperialism. For many, Mercedes Sosa  stands for Latin Americanism, and for  justice and hope. "I know and am proud  that when 1 travel all over the world, my  success is the success of the Latin American culture," says Sosa.  As a performer, she remains magically distant and yet so tangible. She  consumes the stage with her charisma  and her integrity. It is these qualities—the  unyielding determination to express her  identity—that made her an enemy in the  eyes of one of the most infamous dictatorships of our time.  Despite the thousands of "disappeared" [people gone missing and suspected murdered], the censorship, the  collective silence and the indiscriminate  violence that characterized the Argentine dictatorships of the 1970s and early  1980s, Mercedes Sosa and many of her  fellow performers continued to sing the  truth and to inspire their listeners.  In 1979, after constant harassment  and threats, the military banned Sosa  from singing. Unable to perform—left  without a voice with which to communicate with her people—she was forced  into exile. For three years, Sosa lived in  Europe and continued to deliver her  message to the world. Her voice of justice and hope resonated for those at  home and for the people outside of Argentina who knew very little about the  grave injustices of the dictatorship. It  was people like Mercedes Sosa, exiled  artists and activists, who helped bring a  condemning hand upon the Argentine  military.  In another act of defiance, Sosa returned to Argentina in 1982 to sing once  again. The audiences packed the stadiums and made their feelings heard as  they sang along whole-heartedly with  every word of every song. One year later  the dictatorship fell.  But, social injustices do not miraculously disappear with the fall of a regime  and Mercedes Sosa has continued her  work asa messenger for women's rights,  cultural awareness, indigenous people's  rights and protection of the environ  ment. She has participated in dozens of  concerts and festivals dedicated to social justice, women's rights and ecology  in Latin America and Europe.  In 1990, she helped organize and  was a featured performer at Without  Borders, an all-women music festival  that toured in Latin America.  Joan Baez, with whom Sosa toured  Europe in 1989, believes that Mercedes  Sosa is one of the best performers around.  "I have never seen anything like her,"  Baez said. "She is monumental in stature, a brilliant singer with tremendous  charisma who is both a voice and a  persona. I hadn't been so moved by  music in a long time."  With the presence and power of an  Andean earth mother (Pacha Mama)  Mercedes Sosa captivates her audience  and delivers a message of truth, dignity  and justice.  Over the last few years the international community has recognized her  great contributions to culture and social  justice in the form of several honours,  including France's "Award in the Degree of Knight Commander," Germany's "Order of Honour," and Ecuador's  "Medal of Cultural Merit". Most recently, she won UNIFEM's (the United  Nations Fund for Women) anniversary  award for "Woman of the Year," which  will be presented to her at her concert in  November at Lincoln Center in New  York City.  Mercedes Sosa will be making her only  Canadian appearanceat Vancouver's Queen  Elizabeth Theatre on Saturday, November  18. Sosa will showcase songs from her most  recent album, Gestos de Amor.  Guadalupe Lesca folicoeur is a freelance  -writer in the Vancouver area. She is  originally from Argentina. She is presently working as a cultural attache for the  consulate of Uruguay in Vancouver.  • «• •  "' "■'   "\  This publication is regularly indexed in the Canadian Women's  Periodicals Index.   >  The index is a reference guide to articles about women printed in  mote than 80 English and French periodicals, for use by researchers,  lecturers, students ami anyone else interested in women's studies.  This alphabetized hardcopy of a comprehensive computerized Index  is produced mree timejs a year by the Canadian Research Institute for  the Advancement of Women, and is available on a subscription basis.  For more information, please mite:  Canadian Women's Periodicals Index  University of Alberta  11019-90 Avenue  Edmonton, Albena  CANADA, T6G2B1  KINESIS  Of  436-3825  255-5499  NOVEMBER 1995 Arts  Review of The Journal Project:  Conversations in  women's studies  by Janet Nichol  THE JOURNAL PROJECT  Dialogues and Conversations  Inside Women's Studies  Edited by Dana Putnam, Dorothy  Kidd, Elaine Dornan, and Patty Moore  Second Story Press  Toronto, Ontario, 1995  For those of us who have missed the  experience of a women's studies course,  this collection of journal writing by students at Langara Community College in  Vancouver offers an opportunity to read  the thoughtful reflections of over 50  women.  In two first and second year  courses—"Women and Sexuality" and  "Women and Social Change"—students  were regularly submitting journal assignments to instructors for feedback.  The idea of publishing the journal writing came from two students who had  taken the courses, Dana Putnam and  Elaine Dornan, and two instructors, Pa tty  Moore and Dorothy Kidd.  The four women recognized that a  wider audience was missing out on important "conversations" (as the journal  style is likened to) and "dialogues" between instructors and students. They  formed an editorial committee in 1992,  and then began soliciting journal writings—on a voluntary submission  basis—from women who were taking or  had taken one or both of the courses.  In the introduction of the book,  Dorothy Kidd outlines the process of  putting together the project, some issues  that came up along the way, and the  framework for the book. One issue Kidd  addresses is that in the earlier stages of  the project, there was a lack of representation in the writings being submitted of  women of colour and immigrant women,  lesbians, and poor and working class  women. She goes on to talk about strategies the editors used to encourage  "more women to submit pieces that  spoke from these experiences."  Through The Journal Project, the  reader becomes familiar with the writers, some of whom choose to remain  anonymous or use their first namesonly,  as they write openly on all or some of the  four theme areas: "Beginning Women's  Studies," "Naming," "Feminist Classroom," and "Integrating New Learning." These categories emerged naturally from the entries being submitted,  the editors note, allowing the students  to create the framework for the project,  rather than having one imposed on them.  In "Beginning Women's Studies,"  one i ssue of conversation i s first impressions of women's studies classes. For  some, women's studies was a starting  point in their exploration of feminism  and political consciousness. Jackie Lynne  states: "One reason I'm afraid of Women's Studies is because I feel like I'm on  the brink of knowing something; and  having once understood, nothing will be  quite the same."  Another student, Tanis Poole writes:  "A seed was planted with my first Women's Studies class—it was new /different, having women instructors...And to  be among so many other women! Phew,  'scary.'" And B.J. states: "the content of  the course is intensely interesting to me  and when I read, I feel like a sponge."  It's not all positive talk, however.  Several students also write about their  discomfort and anger within the classroom/college walls. One studentdreads  more discussions of race issues with  white people. Another is saddened that  the white women in class see racism in  an individualistic rather than systemic  way.  Women bring insights and thoughts  both from inside and outside of the classroom into their journal entries. Some  write directly in response to things that  happen or issues raised in their women's studies classes. After seeing a film  on the Canadian writer Margaret  Laurence, Varney Allis reflects on  Laurence's advice about "speaking the  heart's truth." Allis writes about her  own desire "to live my life as I want, and  not as I am 'supposed to' before I get a  minute older—and certainly before, like  Hagar, (a character in Laurence's novel,  The Stone Angel) I turn ninety."  In drawing from their own life experiences, a number of women explore  how the personal mixes with the political. Daphne Boxill writes about an  evening seeing movies which address  racism with a white friend: "I should  have gone alone. I couldn't relax and  fully enjoy these two films. I was worrying about her responses. The remarks  she would make. I feel so caught, stuck..."  The journal entries are not all written strictly in prose form. Some women  choose to include poetry, allowing their  feelings to emerge, as this excerpt by  Lidwina Bautista illustrates:  My children as me.  "Mom, why do you call Philippines  Home?  You live here, Canada is your home."  I wonder why...  In my silence, a stranger asked  "Where did you come from"  Colour immigrants, trying to  survive  "Go back to your own country,  you're stealing our jobs."  Within the theme of "Naming," a  number of students converse about the  construction of women's bodies and  images of their bodies. Suhasine Hansen  links class discussion on women and the  media with her family's attitudes about  weight, designer clothes and "fitting in."  She writes: "I think we are all victims of  the media, from race to sex, to height to  weight, to other forms of appearance,  etc."  And Michelle Elizabeth Neilson connects body image issues with her observations in the college cafeteria: "These  two women sitting beside me saw their  classmate coming towards them. They  call her over to them and, before she  reaches the table, one women says to the  other, 'She is so thin it's nauseating.'"  Michelle concludes from this that "we  have so internalized this beauty criteria  that we also judge our sisters according  to the slenderness of their thighs and the  size of their breasts."  The issue of sexuality is addressed  from various angles. Commenting on a  class presentation on "lesbophobia," one  woman writes: "I am really glad she  takes the risks she does in speaking the  truth." Another student bemoans not  having a date on Valentine's Day: "I  know its ridiculous, but every year I buy  into it." Sexual confusion is yet another  student's topic as she asks: "What do I  want? What makes me feel good?"  Some of the students write about  their pain dealing with past traumas or  current dilemmas. Elaine Dornan writes  about her friends'lack of understanding  abouther past sexual abuse experiences:  "They are well-meaning people who  genuinely believe they are offering  needed advice. But I bleed every time I  hear those words. I feel assaulted, I try to  explain how their words make me feel,  but most of my friends look away, unwilling to challenge the assumption behind their words. So, reluctantly, one  more time, I draw away from these  friends and try to find new ones; ones  who are able to listen to my  story and not pass judgement  upon me."  During the course of the  project, two meetings were organized in which 20 women  participated to give their  thoughts, either on tape or in  writing, on a set of questions  £§ concerning journal writing.  Those taped discussions and  written responses have been  included in the afterword as a  review of the val ue and process  of journal writing.  Overall, students respond  positively to the exercise of journal writing and the project, as  Karen Egger claims: "To me I  think, so what if it [journal writing] shaped me? It's an incred-  'tfp% ibly valuable tool...it's far less  "fy'i shaped than any other thing  you ever have a chance to put  out, in academia."  •* Somestudentsdopointout  limitations, and offer important cautionary notes for instructors  wanting to replicate this exercise. In  addressing the therapeutic role journal  writing often plays, Terry Gibson comments: "I was very fragile then, as 1  know others were as well. With our  instructors not there to do therapy, if  serious stuff gets triggered, we might  find ourselves with nowhere to go."  Strategies to deal with this issue are not  pursued, but could be developed in future projects.  The journal Project is unique within  the genre of diary writings. Collections  of journal writings in the past have not  tended to come from one time and place  as these do, and have not attempted to  reflect a specific project, such as a women's studiescurriculum. The writingisn't  always polished, sometimes there may  be excessive detail, but this is how we  "talk;" this is our authentic voice.  The journal Project models a democratic and trust-building editorial process, as well as providing samples for  other women interesting in exploring  journal writing. The fusion of women's  experiences with feminist theory, as presented in this collection, indicates the  vitality of women's individual and collective voices.  The editors' royalties from The Journal  Project will go toward establishing a bursary for women at Langara Community  College.  Janet Nicol is a public school teacher who  uses journal writing in her instruction.  NOVEMBER 1995 Arts  Asian Canadian women writers/performers at the Go-For-Broke Revue;  Literary treats  by Sook C. Kong  Last mouth in Vancouver, the talents  showcased during the three day Go-For-  Broke Revue at the Firehall Theatre (September 29 to October 1) by the Asian  Canadian Writers' Workshop, featured  an enticing variety of dance, theatre,  music—both classical and pop—and literary performance and readings by East  Asian Canadians, including both emerging and established artists and writers.  Below, Kinesis brings you a review  of the sterling performances by five Asia n  Canadian xvomen loriters/performersivho  participated in an afternoon variety program on September 30—SKY Lee, Lydia  Kiva, Kay Odaka, Larissa Lai and Rita  Wong.  SKY Lee  Ghost Stories, a skit by SKY Lee  takes apart various bigoted /self-interested positions by poking merciless fun at their inhabitants. The privileged white male, the less-than-hon-  est lover, and certain folks in the mill  town of Port Alberni, BC, are among  those that Lee singles out for her laser-beam treatment. To be sure, humour with an edge has multiple functions.  The irrepressible Lee, in a retro  polka dot dress and squeaky clean  runners with shopping bag in hand,  had the audience laughing and musing over her dramatization of various  character types. Her personae ranged  from girly-girl cutey, to tough-talking take-no-shit dyke, to the polite  next-door-neighbour Chinese-  housewife—the mother "made invisible by apron and diapers."  To the liberal white male who  says to all with pompous nonchalance: "Why, you are no different from  me," Lee's punchy-mouthed lesbian  character retorts: "That makes us all  lesbians of colour!"  Lee spares no one who demonizes  'the other'—whether the other be the  lesbian of colour, the beguiled lover,  or the 1950s Chinese housewife-  mother-type transplanted from China  into an (almost) non-comprehending  Canada.  The Chinese housewife-mother  persona takes apart all sterotypes  found behind the picket fences of  small-town Canada—including of  herself. Suffice it to say, politesse is  not her entire being. (What are those  pointed ends straining at the inside  tips of her dishwashing gloves?)  At the same time the Chinese-  housewife character is trying to provide small comforts—such as tea and  homemade Chinese pork buns—for  the abused white women next door,  their cultural collision indicates that  As one of the five women who performed in the variety matinee, SKY Lee,  author of Disappearing Moon Cafe and Bellydancer, presented her new  skit Ghost Stories at the Go-For-Broke Revue on September 30 at the  Firehall Arts Theatre. Ghost Stories takes apart a variety of characters —  from girly-girl cutey, to tough-talking take-no-shit dyke, to a red-neck',  Port Alberni Chinese-housewife. Photo by Laiwan  genuine inter-cultural understanding  can only arise when mutual understanding goes beyond the superficial.  In a montage performance that  covers much ground, Lee also weaves  in an excerpt from Maxine Hong Kingston's novel, The Woman Warrior:Memoirs of a Girlhood among Ghosts, in keep-  ingwiththedemonsandghosts which  were the recurring themes. Lee's off-  the-wall performance is pithily illustrated by this zany line from her Chinese housewife-mother persona,  "Whole day fuck fuck sang [sound],  no good."  Lydia Kwa and Kay Odaka  You knowarthascomealivewhen  an unmistakeable frisson courses  down your spine. This was the case  with Lydia Kwa and Kay Odaka's  dramatization of Kwa's long poem,  "Translating Fortune: Cookie Wisdom," [published in Kwa's first col  lection of poetry, The Colours of Heroines, (Women's Press, 1994).]  In an impeccable co-performance, Kwa and Odaka take their audience into the dark night of the  heterosexualized family and deal  capably and artistically with a subject of utmost pain and difficulty—incest. "Tell me how you define enemy,"..."are those of us  linked/by blood spared?"  Both Kwa and Odaka were  d ressed in black tightsand Batik vests.  Batik cloth, a fabric special to Malaysia, Singapore and Indonesia, is used  asa signifierof the weave of another  time and place in the life of the main  persona of "Transforming  Fortune"—the woman survivor. Kwa  and Odaka each play one half of the  woman's psyche—Kwa was 'Question' while Odaka was 'Admonition.'  Harnessing the expressive registers of their voices and the fluidity of  their facial expressions, Kwa and  Odaka delivered their lines—lines,  such as: "i consumed dutifully/  bloodied broth," "half-confessing/  abuse," "mummy," "i'm scared of  monsters in the closet."  Their eloquent voices, blending  in poetic poignancy, captured the al-  most-impossible-to-capture emotional recesses and mental nuances of  an incest survivor. Sometimes speaking their lines far apart from each  other and sometimes speaking them  huddled together, Kwa and Odaka  (re-)enacted a horrendous suffering:  "shield me shield me," and "wish you  had shielded me. too late to stop last  night's dream, his penis/gesturing at  me, you dazed by the kitchen sink/  his penis, twisted and upright,  wrought iron spike."  "Translating Fortune" is ultimately an empowering poem, for it  opens up a sliver of space between  heinous hurt, slow healing, and a tentative move toward self-empowerment: "translating fortune, act ot disentangle, from love and rage, leaping  over walls, back into myself."  It is also about learning to listen  very attentively to this laden question, in whatever form it appears: "is  there anyone/who speaks my language?"  Larissa Lai  Deep passion, quietly spoken,  sums up Vancouer-based writer  Larissa Lai's rendition of several of  her own poems. Her thought-provoking poetry ranges over bedrock issues, such as what being a diasporic  Chinese woman means, lesbian desire, and lesbian love narratives.  In "The Eldest Daughter," Lai's  persona talks, with heart-worn pride,  about her inter-woven loyalties—to  family, to heritage, to remembering,  to herself. Her poem moves to its  height of tremulous intensity in this  section: "Tell me, should I swallow/  my eye/like fat round pill/help it  settle/with a cup of hot water/or  should I hold it in my fist/high above  the spinning world/let it look in/as  though through a window."  For the generations of Chinese  women who have been dispersed  from their ancestral homeland of  China, China, as icon, stands for  myriad significances, the unravelling  of which depends on the location of  the speaker.  In "Under Construction," a poem  about a young Chinese Canadian  woman's experiences of China, her  vision is doubled with a perception of  a  fast-modernizing contemporary  Continued on page 24: Rivuc  NOVEMBER 1995 Arts   Benefit CD for rape crisis centres:  A compelling compilation  by Janet Askin  LIT FROM WITHIN  Various Artists  Nettwerk Productions  Vancouver, BC, 1995  For those of you who like sitting,  drinking tea—alone or with the company of other women—and lending a  careful ear to music which speaks to  women, you will enjoy this release.  Lit from Within—a compilation of  songs and spoken word—is an empowering collection of strong women's voices.  All proceeds from this CD will go  to rape crisis centres across Canada,  enabling the centres to continue providing critical services for women in  need of support and assistance. The  idea for the benefit CD started with  TonniMaruyama. Maruyama gained  the support of Vancouver's Rape Relief Rape Crisis Centre in Vancouver,  then contacted various women artists and Nettwerk Productions about  participating in the project.  Lit from Within is the first time a  Canadian independent label has put  out a compilation in support of a particular cause or issue. Hopefully, we  will see more of this kind of effort on  the part of independent record companies.  The songs and poems of the artists featured on this release deal with  a broad range of approaches to the  issue of violence against women and  women's reactions to it.  The diverse mix of women contributing to the project range from  Kate and Anna McGarrigle with their  powerful vocals and the inspirational  feeling of "Rainbow Ride," to Evelyn  Lau's quietly spoken (but not quietly  felt) poems, "Bruises" and "19."  "Snakes," the tone setting first cut  of the compilation evokes memories  of childhood imagery and boy violence, and is spoken in a clean and  clear voice by Lorna Crozier. She  captures your attention. (What  women can't relate to girlhood memories of being chased, threatened, and  taunted by little boys 'just having  fun?')  This is a CD that demands listening with your full attention, it is not a  conversation accompaniment or a  musical diversion. The compelling  voices Of these women will not remain in the background and, through  their words, the silence is broken.  Among the standouts...my favourites were Kristy Thirsk's angelic  rendition of "Songbird," (from  Fleetwood Mac's Rumours album),  and Sara McLachlan's "Good  Enough," which stings and rings all  too true, again and again. Suzanne  Little's "Swept Away" melodically  carries a theme prevalent throughout  the CD—a theme of change, leaving  and not losing yourself. And a 'melodic musical mention' to Meryn  Cadell's haunting and ardent "Safe."  Lit from Within's music and poetry speaks to women for women,  and I would recommend checking  music stores for this release, both for  the content and the cause.  Janet Askin is first-time writer for  Kinesis.  Revue  continued from previous page  China: "the only China I will  rememebr/is a China under construction," and a nostalgic longing  for an ancestral China: "dreaming of  a China that might have been/ready  any minute/to fall out the side." Her  corollary point is that bridging these  two faculties—the intellect and the  heart—would result in a new knowledge, a more holistic perception-cognition.  In her poem, "Tell: Longing and  Belonging," Lai deals with the reverberations and repercussions of lesbian desire with superb craft. ["Tell"  is published in Pearls of Passion: A  Treasury of Lesbian Erotica (Sister Vision Press, 1994).]  Feeling alternative emotion is a  difficult enough business. Writing  lesbian emotion is even more challenging. Lai more than meets the challenge with these lines of profoundly  felt emotions that neither escape the  heart nor the tongue: "tell you say  your usual way/of getting information/I want to say/I have a crush/on  you feel too shy/blush and say/  nothing."  The depth of the emotions felt are  reinforced through the paradox of  both saying and not saying—all at  once. Negation is an indomitable  reinforcer, while negation upon  negation—that is, denegation—kick  starts the generator of the lesbian  heart.  It is not only that one is ambivalent about verbalizing emotions. The  beginnings of certain about-to-become intimate conversations seem to  be fuelled by multi-layered ambiguities. If one were to follow conversations as though they were all about  linearity and mono-dimensional clar  ity, then one falls into a common  trap—the in-built lies of structural  dialogue.  Throughout "Tell," Lai teases  from language both its bridge-like  and its chasm-like qualities.  Apportioning and assigning are  counterproductive acts between two  lesbians who have long gone past  their comfort zones to become intimate. Lai takes up this point, encapsulating the tensed futility of verbal  contest, after the fact, when she says:  "but you tell me whose hands/made  the first motion downward/to interlock with the fingers/of yours or  mine/who turned first whose/lips  tongues teeth/met in the wind/  moist and hot against the cold /smell  of leather vague girl smell /coming  up through the skin."  If, as current research shows, 90  per cent of verbal communication is  non-verbal, better that language is a  point-of-departure than the point-of-  arrival.  Rita Wong  Rita Wong, a former editorial  member of Absinthe, a Calgary-based  literary journal, read two of her prose  pieces: an untitled account of her travels in China, and "Prosopopeia".  The UBC graduate student  hooked her audience with her sinewy  prose, moving seamlessly from the  solitariness of introspection and observation, to incisive analysis and  finely-nuanced emotion.  Wong used her silken but ever-  so-slightly sanded voice to maximum  effect, holding her audience spellbound with her sensitive reading. Her  flawless sense of timing and rhythm  texturized her living, breathing performance. Furthermore, she produced  a palpable vigour in the Firehall auditorium with very minimalist body  movements.  in Wong'suntitled work on China,  the first-person speaker turns pensive on a major question: 'How to  write China without being inhabited  by the almost ubiquitous tendency to  exoticize a space that one only visits?'  As she puts it, how does one make a  "visceral" and "real" China "come  alive" in language?  Instead of philosophizing, Wong  continued her reading, moving on to  a bus ride to Gansu province, the  dustbowl of China. Via the vehicle of  well-paced humour (including the  self-deprecating variety), she brings  to life the unexpected—the boomerang effect of one's own spitting, and  the surrealistic bonding with strangers created by a chain of nausea.  Continuing her theme of yoking  the expected with the unexpected,  Wong read the rest of her story on  China, including the section about  the Tibetan monks and their  corporeality. She made the monks real  and visceral, without obliterating their  spirituality. "[W]e chat with monks  around our age who are kind of cute  in that austere muscular way, monks  who sing raunchy songs, monks who  incidentally give us the fire in the  belly to go to Tibet."  "Prosopopeia," a highly evocative piece about absences and presences, turns conventional notions of  these phenomena upside-down and  inside-out, as in: "myself who is so  removed, so absent, a watcher...the  thinker and the sometimes silent doer, but preferably not the talker" and  "the problem with being the moon  rather than the sun, the problem with  being perceived as dependent, when  really, the moon exists however we  choose to interpret her."  Rounding off a most resonant  reading, Wong had parts ot her audience gasping when, without hint, her  reading of "Prosopopeia" culminated  in these achingly taut lines: "I am  scared of saying something you will  understand, stuck in a groove where  I want to reach out to you, yet drawing back in fear of actually touching  you."  Many were touched that afternoon.  Sook C. Kong is a doctoral candidate in  English, specializing in critical theory  and Asian women writers. Prior to  pursuing graduate studies, she xvas an  axvard-xvinning journalist.  Pen on fire?  Don't hesitate,  phone us now!  Camera in the closet?  Let it out!  Take photographs for  Kinesis  255-5499  Cover the arts that  you love on these  pages  NOVEMBER 1995 Bulletin Board  read    t h i si    INVOLVEMENT INVOLVEMENT  Bulletin Board listings have a  maximum of 50 words. Groups,  organizations and individuals eligible  for free space in the Bulletin Board  must be, or have, non-profit  objectives.  Other free notices will be items of  general public interest and will appear  at the discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $8 (+$0.56 GST) for  the first 50 words or portion thereof,  $4 (+$0.28 GST) for each additional 25  words or portion thereof and must be  prepaid.  Deadline for all submissions is  the 18th of the month preceding  publication. Note: Kinesis is  published ten times a year. Jul/Aug  and Dec/Jan are double issues.  All submissions should include a  contact name and telephone number  for any clarification that may be  required.  Listings will not be accepted over the  telephone.  Kinesis encourages readers to  research the goods and services  advertised in Bulletin Board. Kinesis  cannot guarantee the accuracy of the  information provided or the safety  and effectiveness of the services and  products listed.  Send submissions to Bulletin Board,  Kinesis, #301-1720 Grant Street,  Vancouver, BC, V5L 2Y6. For more  information call 255-5499.  Bed & Breakfast  A Beautiful Place  Centre yourself  in the comfort and tranquility  of B.C.'s Super Natural  Gulf Islands.  Healthy Breakfasts  Hot Tub & Sauna  5 acres of forested  foot paths with ponds  ocean and mountain views  A Memorable Escape  (604) 537-9344  1207 Bcddis Road,  Salt Spring Island, B.C. V8K 2C8  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis'? We want to get involved with  you too. Help plan our next issue. All women  interested in what goes into Kinesis—whether  it's news, features, or arts—areinvitedtoour  next Writers' Meetings: Mon Nov 6, 7pm at  our office, 301 -1720 Grant St, Vancouver. If  you can't make the meeting, but still want to  find out about writing for Kinesis, give Agnes  a call at (604) 255-5499. No experience is  necessary. Childcare subsidies available.  CALLING ALL VOLUNTEERS  Are you interested in finding out how Kinesis  is put together? Well...just drop by during our  next production dates and help us design  and lay out Canada's nationalf eminist newspaper. Production for the December/January 1996 issue is from Nov 22-29. No experience is necessary. Training and support  will be provided. If this notice intrigues you,  call Laiwan at (604) 255-5499. Childcare  subsidies available.  Janet Riehm, b.b.a.  CERiiriEd GenfraI Accountant  Business ConsuIt'inc,  CompUte Accouniinc, SehvIces  PMone (604) 876-7550  Bottom Line Accounting  ASSERTIVENESS TRAINING  The Vancouver Status of Women's Assertiveness Training Program will be starting  soon. If you would like to volunteer or participate please call Andrea at (604) 255-5511.  WOMEN IN BUSINESS DIRECTORY  Seeking women in business...with an eye for  the social—as well as financial—bottom line.  The Vancouver Status of Women is compiling a directory of women in business who  incorporate their social principles into their  business practices. For more info or for our  self-audit questionnaire, call 255-5511 or  write VSW at 301 -1720 Grant St, Vancouver,  BC, V5L2Y6.   VSW WANTS YOU!  Want to get more involved but not sure where  to begin? Join us—become a volunteer at  Vancouver Status of Women. VSW volunteers plan events, lead groups, raise funds,  answerthe phone lines, organize the library,  help connect women with the community  resourcesthey need, and other excitingtasks!  The next volunteer potluck and orientation  will be on Thurs Nov 16, 7 pm at VSW, 301 -  1720 Grant St. For more info, call Andrea at  255-5511. Childcare subsidies available.  in Kinesis?  Callus  WOMEN  IN PRINT  BOOKS & OTHER MEDIA  3566 West 4th Avenue  Vancouver BC  Voice   604 732-4128  Fax      604 732^129  10-6 Daily ♦   12-5 Sunday  j!  Discounts for  book clubs  Special orders  welcome  INA DENNEKAMP  Piano Service  DR. PAULETTE ROSCOE  NA TUROPA THIC PHYSICIAN  HOMEOPATHY  COUNSELLING  DETOXIFICATION  HYCROFT MEDICAL CENTER  108-3195 GRANVILLE ST.  VANCOUVER, B.C. V6H 3K2  JANET LICHTY  B.A., M.Ed. Counselling Psychology, R.C.C.  [COUNSELLOR  1-296 W18 Ave, Vancouver, B.C., V5Y 2A7  872-2611  Kinesis would like to thank all of the people  who contributed to making our annual  benefit a success!!  Elaine Stef * Eileen Kage * May Zhu * Sky Lee *  Frannie Sheridan * Erin Qraham * Cafe Deux Soleils *  Harry's Oft Commercial * Deserving Thyme *  Vancouver Women's Bookstore * Women In View  Festival * Magpie Magazine Gallery * Norman's Fruit  and Salad * It's All Fun and Games * Continental  Coffee House * Laiwan * Doll and Penny's * Pacific  Cinematheque * The Ridge Theatre * Commodore  Lanes * Duthies Books * Georgina Black * Spartacus  Books * Blue Ewe B&B * YWCA * Highlife Records *  Judy Senang....and all the wonderful, unforgetable  Kinesis volunteers and supporters... thanks for coming  out!!!!  EVENTS  FREE WORKSHOPS FOR WOMEN  Douglas College Women's Centre is offer ng  free workshops for women attending or interested in attending the college. Upcoming  workshops include: Assertive Communication Wed Nov 1,10-noon, Relaxation Techniques WedNov15,10-noon;CareerTrends  Wed Nov 22, 2-4pm; Talking Circle Thurs  Nov 23,4-6pm; and Time Management Skills  Wed Nov 29, 10-noon. Workshops will be  held at the Women's Centre, Douglas College, Room2720-700 Royal Ave, New Westminster, BC. To register call (604) 527-5486.  HEROTICA 2  Herotica 2 is being performed in Vancouver  until Sat Nov 11 at the Station Street Arts  Centre, 930 Station St. Herof/ca2is directed  by Katrina Dunn; written by Jan Derbyshire,  Shawna Dempsey, Margaret Dragu, Marie  Humber-Clements and Susan Musgrave; and  performed by Mercedes Baines, Diane Brown,  Melaine Doerr & Manami Hara. Show times  are Tues-Sun 8pm plus Sat 5pm. Tickets are  $14/$12 and 2 for 1 on Tuesdays. For more  inforcall (604)688-3312.  GRRR*RLS WITH GUITARS  Grrrris with Guitars features Robin Toma  with guests and Tammy Faesart Wed Nov  22, 10pm at the Lotus, 455 Abbott St, Van.  Admission is $3-5 or 2 for 1 with coupon  before 10pm. Again on Mon Nov 27. Grrrris  with Guitars will feature Judy Atkin/Melanie  Dekker, The Lingo Sisters and Julie McGeer  Mon Nov 27, 9:30 at the Railway Club, 579  Dunsmuir St, Van. Admission is $3/mem-  bers; $5/non-members. For more info call  (604) 685-3623.  READINGS BY FIRST NATIONS  WOMEN  Mahara Allbrett, Vera Manuel and Gunargie  O'Sullivan will present their work Sat Nov 25  at 8pm at Western Front, 303 E. 8th Ave,  Van. Admission is by donation. For more info  call (604) 876-9343.  COMING OUT ON BROADWAY  A Vancouver Women's Chorus presents  Coming Out On Broadway, a fun-filled cabaret featuring great show tunes Nov 24 & 25  at St. John's United, 1401 Comox St. Doors  open at 7:30pm. Showtime 8pm. Tickets are  $12 and are available at Women in Print,  Harry's and Little Sister's. For more info call  (604) 987-0393.  NATURAL MEDICINE  All women are invitedtoalecture/disscussion  on Natural Medicine and Women's Health,  featuring Dr. Isis M. van Loon, ND, of the  New Westminster Naturopathic Clinic Thurs  Nov 9, 4-6pm at the Douglas College Women's Centre, Rm 2720-700 Royal Ave, New  Westminster. To preregister and for more  info call (604)527-5148.   THE MIND OF A CHILD  The Canadian premiere screening of The  Mind of a Child, a dramatic and moving  documentary about Aboriginal, African American and Jewish children traumatized by racism, poverty and violence, and teachers who  are working with them, will be held on Wed  Nov 1, 8pm at Robson Square Conference  Centre, 800 Robson St. The film will be  followed by a discussion with First Nations  educator Lorna Williams, featured in thefilm.  and director Gary Marcuse. Tickets are $5 at  the door. The Mind of a CMdwill alsobe aired  on the Knowledge Network Sun Nov 5 at  9pm. For more info call (604) 255-6596.  NOVEMBER 1995 Bulletin Board  EVENTS  1  EVENTS  1  EVENTS  1  GROUPS  IN HER NATURE  Women's Press will launch In Her Nature, a  rich & warm debut collection of short stories  about women, by Karen X. Tulchinsky, in  Vancouver, Sat Nov 11, 8pm at The Lotus,  455 Abbott St. Free admission. Donations  acceptedtoThe Little Sister's Defense Fund.  BRENDA PETERSON  Mesmerizing storyteller Brenda Peterson  reads from her collection of essays, Nature  and Other Mothers, Fri Nov 3, 7:30pm at  Women in Print, 3566 W. 4th Ave, Van. In this  book, Peterson passionately observes topics from lullabies to abortion, dolphins to old-  growth forests, weaving a story of the bond  between women and nature. Free admission. For more info call (604) 732-4128.  UNDERSTANDING ALLERGIES  VitalAire Breathing Care Centre presents a  free lecture, Understanding Allergies, Wed  Nov1,7-8pmat#1-2190 W.Broadway, Van.  Special guest Mairee Gandera, from the  Allergy Information Association, will give a  one hr talk, complete with videos and a  question-and-answer period. Fre» refreshments. Space is limited, so RSVP by calling  (604) 730-0859.  TIBET FILM NIGHT AND BAZAAR  Women Working For Tibetans is hosting  Tibet Film Night andBazaarFri Nov 24 at the  Planetarium, 1100 Chestnut St., Van. The  event is a charity fundraiser and will feature  two new documentaries—Escape From Ti-  bet and Tears of Torture—handicrafts, cards,  calendars and live folk music. Bazaar begins  at 6:30pm and films at 8pm. Tickets $8 at  door. For more info call (604) 224-1901.  ELISE GOLDSMITH  Toronto author Elise Goldsmith will be reading from My War and Other Poems, Thurs  Nov 9, 7:30pm at Women in Print, 3566 W.  4th Ave, Van. Beginning with the title poem,  which recalls her experiences as a girl in  England during World War II, Goldsmith  offers a warm reflection on her life. The  reading is free. For more info call (604) 732-  4128.   DANCE! DANCE! DANCE!  Women in Music presents Dance! Dance!  Dance!, a dance extravaganza, Sun Nov 5,  atthe Commodore, 870 Granville, Van. The  featured events are: Ladies Don't Drum;  Women of Motown; and Women of Rhythm  & Blues. Doors open at 7:30pm; show starts  at 8:30pm. Tickets are $12 in advance through  Ticketmaster (280-4444), or $15 at the door.  Please bring a non-perishable food item for  the Food Bank. For more info call (604) 684-  9461.  GET PONCHED  Ponch de Creme (Ponch a crema) is a 151  Proof Party for girlies of colour and friends.  Featuring smokin' soca, soucous, salsa, hip  hop, acid jazz, old skool, funk, dancehall, MM  Music by MMM. Sun Nov5attheLotusClub,  455 Abbott St. 9 pm til close. Sliding scale  $3-5.   DYNAMIC DRUM WORKSHOP  Seattle-based Ladies Don't Drum will be  giving a dynamic drum workshop in Vancouver Sun Nov 5 from 2-4:30pm at the Commodore, 870 Granville. Cost is $20. Refreshments will be available. Call Women in Music  to register at (604) 684-9461.  LES PAS PERDUS  The Firehall Arts Centre Dance Series  presents Les Pas Perdus, an evening of  post-modern dance works Nov 9-11, at 8pm  at the Firehall Arts Centre, 280 E. Cordova  St, Van. 2 for 1 preview Thurs Nov 9, and  matinee Nov 11 at 2pm. The Series features  Pipo Damiano and Susan Elliot of Frozen  Eye, with guest choreographer Olivia  Thorvaldson, original music composition by  Francois Houle, and a short film by Bo Myers.  Tickets $16/$12. For tickets call (604) 689-  0926.  J. JILL ROBINSON  The Saskatoon author of Lovely in Her Bones,  J. Jill Robinson will be reading from her new  collection of short stories, Eggplant Wife  Tues Nov 14, 7:30pm at Women in Print,  3566 W. 4th Ave, Van. The collection is filled  with "intimate, fluid narratives., .of heartbreaking, unspoken truths about human behaviour." Admission is free. For more info call  (604)732-4128.  DEANNE ACHONG  Vancouver Artist Deanne Achong will be  exhibiting her work, Lime Made, until Fri Nov  lOatArtspeakGallery, 401-112 W.Hastings  St. Van. Gallery hours are Tues-Sat 12-5pm.  ARTISTS AGAINST OPPRESSION  The C.H.I.LD. Project—Children Hope in  Loving Democracy—-curated by Anne  Laframboise-Piche and Calla Shea, will be  exhibited until Sun Dec 3 at Gallery Gachet,  1134 Granville St, Van. The Gallery supports  artists who are mental health services consumers and/or survivors of abuse. For Gallery hours call (604) 687-2468.  GRASSROOTS WOMEN  DISCUSSION GROUP  What are International Human Rights? Come  to a discussion group atthe Philippine Women  Centre on Wed Nov 8 at 1011 E. 59th Ave.  Vancouver, between Fraser & Knight. For  info call (604) 322-9852  RECLAIMING SOPHIA  EATING DISORDER WEEK  Hear the voice of Sophia, "God's Exiled  Female Self," as Susan McCaslin, a widely-  published poet and author, reads from her  new book of poems, Locutions, Wed Nov29,  7-9pm at the Douglas College Boardroom,  4th Floor, 700 Royal Ave, New Westminster.  Admission $5; $2/students. To reserve a  seat call (604) 527-5440. Sponsored by the  WomenSpeak Institute.  BANKING ON HERSELVES  Investigate two approaches to investing the  money you earn into things you believe in,  with Brenda Humber, founder and President  of the Women's BANK Society and Lucy  Alderson & Melanie Conn from  WomenFutures Thurs Dec 7, 7-9pm at the  Douglas College Boardroom, 4th Floor, 700  Royal Ave, New Westminster. Admission $5,  $2/students. To reserve seat call (604) 527-  5440. Hosted by WomenSpeak Institute.  PRESS GANG TURNS 20  Press Gang Publishers will mark its 20th  anniversary Sat Nov 18 with the launch of  four new titles from Larissa Lai, Chrystos,  Marion Douglas, and Joanne Arnott, and  other entertainment. The gala event will take  place in the Multipurpose Room of the Central Branch of the Vancouver Public Library,  350 W. Georgia St. Doors open at 7:30pm,  readings begin at 8pm. The venue is wheelchair accessible. Advance tickets at Women  in Print and Little Sister's, $8-15. For more  info call Press Gang at 876-7787.  CRIAW CONFERENCE  Northern Visions: Northern Futures, a conference organized by the Canadian Research  Instituteforthe Advancement of Women, will  take place from Nov 10-12 at the University  of Northern British Columbia in Prince  George. Panel discussions will include  Women and Community Building; Education  and Work; Environment and Sustainability.  The cost of the conference is $300 and $75  for student/community or non-profit delegates  (maximum 2 delegates). For more info or to  register, call (604) 960-5610 or write to The  University of Northern BC, c/o CRIAW, 3333  University Way, Prince George, BC, V2N  4Z2; Fax: (604) 960-5791.  FAIR WARES FAIRE  The Penticton and Area Women's Centre is  holding a Fair Wares Faireto promote social  justice through the sale of ethically produced  goods, Sat Nov 1811 am-4pm at the Clarion  Lakeside Hotel, 21 West Lakeshore,  Penticton, BC. For more info call the Women's Centre at (604) 493-6822.  Organizers of the Eating Disorder Awareness Week 1996 (Feb 5-11) are inviting  people to attend the first General Volunteer  Committee meeting to plan the Week on  Tues Nov 7, 7:30pm at the Eating Disorder  Resource Centre of BC, St. Paul's Hospital,  1081 Burrard St, Rm 2C-213. For more info  call (604) 631-5313.  L'ARC-EN-CIEL  Ce mois-ci, les gens du groupe L'Arc-En-  Ciel, Les Francophones et Francophiles des  Communautes Gaies et Lesbiennes, vous  invitent a prendre le Brunch avec nous au  Cafe Chez Harry's, pres de Commercial, le  dimanche 26 nov, a 11h30. Pour de plus  amples informations, n'hesitez pas a composer le 688-9378, poste #1, boite vocale  #2120.  REDEYE  Redeye is a collective of women and men  who produce a 3 hour radio program every  Saturday morning on Vancouver's Co-op  Radio (102.7 FM). We work collectively to  examine the arts and current affairs from a  variety of feminist and other progressive  perspectives. If you are interested in volunteering on an alternative media project, we  can provide thorough training in the theoretical and technical aspects of radio. Come  along and see what we're up to. Bring a  friend. For more info call Lorraine at (604)  254-5855.  LEGAL CLINIC FOR WOMEN  Battered Women's Support Services and the  University of British Columbia Law Students  Legal Advice Program (LSLAP) is co-sponsoring free legal clinics for women on alternate Tuesdays from 6:30-8:30pm until Nov  14. For info or appointments call LSLAP at  822-5791.  VLC  The Vancouver Lesbian Centre is open Thurs  & Fridays 11am-6pm and Sats noon-5pm.  To find out about the VLC's groups and  upcoming events, drop by Centre, 876 Commercial Drive, or call (604) 254-8458.  GLC  The Gay and Lesian Centre of Vancouver  now has a province-wide toll free phone line:  1 -800-566-1170. The line is open to all lesbians, gay men, families andfriends lookingfor  info, referrals, peer support. The phone line  is open Mon-Fri 1-4pm.  iht for...  OUR COMMUNITIES!  OUR PUBLIC SERVICES!  i®lw)   A meeeaQe from the Public Service Alliance of Canada   •   (604) 430-5631  NOVEMBER 1995 Bulletin Board  SUBMISSIONS CLASSIFIEDS  ASIAN CANADIAN WRITERS  Powell Street Festival, an annual celebration  of Japanese Canadian art, culture and history, is co-sponsoring an event with the  Vancouver Storytelling Festival in March  1996. The Festival is looking for submissions  from Asian and South Asian Canadian women  writers, storytellers and poets. Please send  submissions to: Powell Street Festival Society, 450-1050 Alberni St, Vancouver, BC,  V6E1 A3. For more info call (604) 682-4335.  Deadline is Nov 30.  SEARCHING FOR BRAVE SISTAS  Many of us grew up under the influence of  religion, few of us emerged unscathed.  Tales of the effects, if any, of the power  religion has over our lives as children, wimmin  and lesbains are needed for an anthology  tentatively titled Recovering Stories of  Wimmin Surviving Religion to be published  by Sister Vision Press. Send your ideas,  stories, essays, poems, journal entries, lyrics, raps, words, whatevah.Send your submissions to Recovering c/o Sister Vision  Press PO Box 217 Stn E, Toronto, ON MH  4E2. Deadline is Dec 31.  QUEER PRESS  Queer Press is a volunteer-run, community  based micro press dedicated to providing  opporunities for lesbians, gays and bisexu-  als to experience the power of the written  word; and especially for women, people of  colour and queers living in rural areas. If you  have a manuscript or if you're a community  group interested in putting a manuscript together, tell us about your work. Write to  Queer Press, PO Box 485, Stn P, Toronto  ON, M5S 2T1. For info or writers' guidelines,  call (416) 978-8201.   ASIAN SUPPORT AIDS PROGRAM  (AS-AP)  Call for submissions & participants: Western  Canada's first Asian Lesbian & Gay Conference and Vancouver's 3rd Annual Lunar  New Year Celebration are being planned for  mid-Feb, 1996. AS-AP is seeking: 1) proposals for panel discussions; 2) artists &  performers for an exhibition and cabaret; 3)  panelists & participants for the conference;  4) volunteers. AS-AP is a grassroots community-based agency that provides education, care and support to the East & South-  East Asian community in the challenge of  HIV & AIDS. For more info call Denise at  (604) 669-5567 or fax (604) 669-7756.  Saturdays at 4p.m.  repeated at midnight  LYDIA KWA, PSYCHOLOGIST  I have a private practice in clinical psychology (Granville Island). I'm a feminist therapist and I work with clients on a variety of  issues. I welcome new clients, especially  survivors, gays and lesbians, women of colour, artists and writers. Call 255-1709.  SEEKING DYKE PAL  Horse crazy, dog loving dyke seeks similar  for walks, talks and rides. Also available for  horse-sitting, exercising, dog-sitting, exercising and training. Call Anne at 879-5177.  LESBIAN AND GAY SQUARE  DANCING  Have a great time learning how to square  dance with Squares Across the Border, Vancouver's only lesbian and gay square dance  club. You don't need a partner, you don't  need any experience, andyou definitely won't  regret it. Join us for our introductory class on  Mon Nov 6 at 7:30pm at St. Paul's Church,  1130 Jervist St. Donations gratefully accepted. All proceeds to A Loving Spoonful.  For more info call Ellen at 684-0089.  WOMENFRIENDS MUSIC CAMP  Enjoy a weekend with women where your  infinite creativity and musicality can find expression. Play, sing, chant, jam, perform,  compose, meditate, give ortake a workshop,  or simply relax. Nov3-5, at Camp Alexandra,  Crescent Beach, Vancouver. Sliding fee  $150-$250 including catered meals and  accomodation. For information and registration call Penny Sidor at 251 -4715.  KARATE FOR WOMEN  Shito-ryukaratetaughtbyfemaleblackbelts.  Learn a martial art for self defense, fitness,  self confidence! At the YWCA, 535 Hornby.  Mon, Tues, Thurs, 7:15-9pm. $45/month.  Call 872-7846.  Operine  Banton  Counsellor  202 -1807 Burrard St.  Vancouver, BC V6J 3G9  Tel: (604) 736-8087  s delighted to announce  hat she is now practising law  vith the law firm oc  Smith and Hughes  321-1525 Robson St.  Vancouver  phone 683-4176  'ñ†les offer a full range of  i the lesbian, gay and  WOMEN SURVIVORS OF THE WAR  Women Supporting Women in the Former Yugoslavia presents a benefit for Women  Survivors of the WarFriday, November 17,7:30pm at the Heritage Hall, 3102 Main St,  Van. Admission is by $30 donation. Tickets available atthe door and at: Banyen Sound,  2669 W. Broadway; and Vancouver Women's Bookstore, 315 Cambie St. For more info  call (604) 299-3523.  CLASSIFIEDS CLASSIFIEDS  HERITAGE HALL FOR RENT  Magnificent restored Heritage Building at  15th and Main St in Vancouver. Available for  special events of all kinds. From benefits to  book launches, conferences to cultural celebrations, banquets to private parties. The  building is smoke-free, wheelchair accessible, on the bus line, and offers non-profit  rates. For more info call 879-4816.  COUNSELLING FOR WOMEN  A feminist approach to sexual abuse, depression, grief and loss, sexual orientation  issues and personal growth. Slidingfee scale.  Free initial appointment. Susan Dales, RPC,  255-9173.   "I   LOWER BACK SELF-CARE  Learn to prevent and manage lower back  discomfort with gentle movements, self massage, breath work and anatomy awareness.  Sat Nov 18, 9:30-4:30pm. Cost $40-100.  Dhone Astarte Sands at 251-5409 for more  info.  CARPENTRY FOR YOUNG WOMEN  The Strathcona Community Gardeners Association and the Environmental Youth Alliance are looking to hire 10 women, 16-24  years old, to work on the construction of the  Strathcona Community Gardens Eco-  Pavillion between Nov 20 & May 3, 1996.  The program is for women who are willing to  do physically demanding work in an outdoor  environment, and who are interested in gaining carpentry skills, learning about sustainable architecture, and working with a group  of women, 30 hrs/week, and approximately  $190/week and a $2000 completion bonus.  Please apply by Mon Nov 6 and send an  explanation of interest to: Rachel Rosen or  Susan Kurbis, Box 34097 Stn D, Vancouver,  BC, V6J 4M1. For more info call (604) 873-  0616.  VANCOUVER  WOMENS  BOOKSTORE  315 CAMBIE ST.  VANCOUVER, B.C. HOURS:  V6B 2N4 MONDAY - SATURDAY  TEL: (604) 684.0523 10 AM - 6 PM  Lynn Redenbach. r.p.n.  Therapy for  Adult & Adolescent Women  < relationships  ' weight preoccupation & eating disorders  > trauma & abuse issues  NOVEMBER 1995 LIB1ZS 4/%  LIBRARY PROCESSING CTR - SERIALS  £206 EAST MALL, U.B.C.  VANCOUVER, BC %1 1Z8  When you can't ^ there yourself...  When it's O out,  or there's $fc on the ground,  or its 4...  When the day's been ©...  When the other sources are a ^...  Kinesis  For news or reviews,  you can't lose. &  Don't snooze, subscribe!  One year  □ $20+ $1.40 GST □ Bill me  Two years □ New  □$36 + $2.52 GST □ Renewal  Institutions/Groups □ Gift  □$45 + $3.15 GST □ Donation  Name_  □ Cheque enclosed   For individuals who can't afford the full amount  Address—  Country   Telephone.  for Kinesis subscription, send what you can.  Free to prisoners.  Orders outside Canada add $8.  Vancouver Status of Women Membership  (includes Kinesis subscription)  □$30+$1.40 GST  Postal code-  Fax   Published ten times a year by the Vancouver Status of Women  #301 -1720 Grant Street Vancouver, BC V5L 2Y6