 BIMINI WORKERS STRIKE  for wages and respect 1  WOMEN AGAINST RAPE - the November 5  National Day of Protest 1,2  B.C.F.W. ANNUAL CONVENTION  brings you policy and pictures 3  Sisterhood is INTERNATIONAL 4  Sisterhood is NATIONAL . 5  WHAT IS THE G.A.T.E. CASE  and why is it important 6  HOW DO WE FIGHT RAPE  one community's solution, 7  BILL 69 - the amendments to the FAMILY  RELATIONS ACT are bad new for women  and children 8  THE RALLY STORY - the book you've all  been waiting for 9  FEATURE: NICOLE BROSSARD ON QUEBEC  FEMINISM 10, 11  WOMEN'S INTERART 2ND ANNUAL SHOW 13  RIKA RUEBSAAT - Vancouver feminist  folksinger 14  EVENTS 18  LETTERS 19  9  SUBSCRIBE TO KINESIS!  Published by Vancouver Status of Women  2029 West 4th Avenue, Vancouver, B.C.  7  KIN€SIS  SPECIAL COLLECTIONS  NOV€MD€R77  vol 6 no 12  Vancouver Status of Women  Subscriber Only^_  Member/Subscriber_  AMOUNT ENCLOSED:  Subs are $8/year Individual (or what you can afford), $15/year Institutions.  VSW membership is by donation. Please remember that VSW operates on  inadequate funding — we need member support!  Kjnesis means change pagel  iiA\inn \mm en mi  S&Sb  ON STRIDE FOR A  vSCHWCJC  In October, the workers at Bimini neighbourhood pub on West 4th Avenue in Vancouver went out on strike. Waitresses are  amongst the most exploited of women  workers, and their fight to organize is absolutely a priority issue for feminists. Our  place is on the picket line.  Although certified with SORWUC (Service,  Office and Retail Workers' Union of Canada)  last January, they are still without their first  contract. After 10 months of attempted  negotiations, workers voted 13 to 7 for a  strike. On October 20, the strike began and  the staff are still out.  SORWUC STRIKE  The strike is the third in SORWUC's history.  SORWUC is a small, democratically structured Canadian union which organizes the  unorganized, largely women. The extent of  its community support was demonstrated  Friday night of October 21, when there were  85 people on the picket line.  Union spokesperson Pat Barter commented:  "We've had support on the picket lines from  women's groups, from locals of the Hospital  Employees' Union, the I.B.E.W., the CBRT  Seaman's section, and others. We also had  strong support from the local community  and Bimini patrons. 95% have refused to  cross our line."  "At first I was against the union," said a  waitress on the picket line. "I thought management wasn't being given a fair chance.  But incidents started piling up. Little progress was made in the first eight months of  negotiation. A mediator was requested, but  he reported out because things weren't going  anywhere. One of the barporters was fired,  supposedly because she was 'too short'; we  think  it  was because she was pro-union.  £ &£ SA<£ i  VHTiliTft 5ETT1ED!  BCYCCTT BiAiMi'S *  STRIKE  ____  Then a pro-union woman came back from  holidays to find she hadn't been scheduled.  Some people were getting raises and others  weren't. If you were new, you just didn't  have a clue about where you stood. When I  found I j;ould not reiy on management, I  realized that the union was the only place  to go."  Bimini workers I spoke with were unanimous in their contention that management  could easily have weakened the support for  the union by simply cooperating with the  law. "We had to fight for pay on statutory  holidays like B.C. Day and Labour Day,"  said one. "You shouldn't have to fight for  things like that."  Bimini workers have no benefits — no sick  leave, no medical/dental benefits, and no  leave of absence. No say in scheduling, no  recognition of seniority rights.  The wages for which Bimini workers are  negotiating are not exactly a king's ransom.  They want $4.50 an hour for a trainee waitress, and $5.00 an hour for a permanent  waitress.  Management's offer is $3.00 for a trainee  waitress and $3.50 for a permanent waitress.  Strikers say that his offer is ludicrous, in  view of the fact that these wages are less  than many of them are making now.  In contrast to the waitress' wages, the last  bartender, hired at Bimini's, with no experience, started at $4.50. According to the  waitresses, owner Peter Uram told them he'd  had to offer a man that much because "men  won't take less".  GROSS SEXISM  Bimini waitresses agree that they're fighting  for more than just wages and benefits.  "We're fighting for respect, to be treated  like human beings," said one. "When they  found out I was pro-union, the way I was  treated really changed. Management started  cracking snide jokes about my appearance."  How would you like to work for a boss who  makes 'jokes' about your abortion?  Gross verbal intimidation has been part of  the picket line experience. Last Friday night  I watched management supporters survey  the picket line. I heard them decide that all  the women on the line were a) unattractive  and b) dykes or 'lesbos'.  The picket has been solid, although a few  employees have crossed. At least two or  three of those inside must have been among  the two-thirds voting in favour of strike.  "If they feel so inimidated they have to go  inside," said the waitresses, "then they really  do need the protection-of a union."  Kinesis phoned Bimini owner Peter Uram for  his comment on the dispute. He didn't have  one. Uram is the president of the B.C. Pub  Owners Association, and as such probably  has more at stake than keeping his own  workers in line.  SUPPORT THE STRIKERS  The Bimini strikers are emphatic that they  are anxious to get back to work. "The  longer the picket line and the stronger the  community support, the sooner will manage^  ment take us seriously and the sooner will  our contract be negotiated," they concluded.  NOVEMBER 5TH  PROTEST RAPEf  WAR  November 5th is a national day of protest  against rape. In B.C., the B.C. Federation  of Women (BCFW), , through Nanaimo  Women Against Rape, will sponsor anti-rape  actions throughout B.C.  Vancouver Women Against Rape will make  the day one of public education about the  crime of rape. At 2:00pm on November 5th  they will hold a tribunal at the Courthouse,  Georgia and Granville.  This tribunal will be an indictment of the  institutions and individuals who perpetuate  women's oppression and one of its most  violent expressions — rape. The church, the  educational, medical and legal systems will  be among societal institutions to be judged,  turn to page 2  wo,  t3fo(8(£3r  \\   l  I  Mas   ' KINESIS  page 2  GAY RIGHTS RALLY  WAR Demands  October 21 and 22 were proclaimed national  days of protest for John Damien by the  National Gay Rights Coalition (NGRC).  John Damien was fired from his position as a  racing steward for the Ontario Racing Commission two and a half years ago because he  is a homosexual — despite a 20-year spotless  career in the racing business. At the time,  Charles McNaughton of the Commission  said,  "Well, what did you expect, he's a  Damien's fight for job security affects every  lesbian and gay man in Canada. We need the  term "sexual orientation" included in all  provincial human rights codes to protect  gays against discrimination. Gross prejudice  is what keeps gays in the closet and is what  punishes those who come out. This kind of  discrimination needs to be eliminated.  Here in Vancouver, a rally was held on October 22 to support the rights of gays to job  security. John Damien was present and  spoke to a crowd of more than 100 persons.  A representative from VSW made a short  presentation. B.C. Federation of Women  also sent a message in support. Speakers  emphasized the need for protection in the  human rights codes and to re-instate Damien  in his job.  This rally is just the beginning of serious  attention to this issue in the next year. The  oppression of gay people has existed far too  long and some major changes in legislation  and attitudes must take place. Loss of jobs,  residence and children, and intimidation by  heterosexual privilege are just a few examples of blatant heterosexual oppression. As  gays we must be proud of our sexuality and  unite to support issues that will give us our  human rights.  GAY RIGHTS NOW!  cont'd.from page 1  Women Against Rape (WAR) has become an  international title for the struggle against  rape. WAR groups are active in many parts  of the western industrial world, including  Italy, England, Australia, West Germany and  the U.S. In every country, the WAR groups  make one basic statement: RAPE IS NOT  AN ACT OF SEXUAL PASSION; IT IS AN  ACT OF VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN.  If you live in Vancouver, you will have  noticed the red WAR symbols on the pavements. Each symbol marks the location  where a woman has been raped. These signs  are designed to raise public awareness about  the crime of rape and to focus attention on  the November 5th protest.  The international WAR groups have developed a feminist analysis of rape. Rape is a  violent manifestation of unequal power relations, they point out. Rape is a political  crime and as such demands political answers.  It is a crime which treats women as property  and its abolition will entail a transformation  of the property relations in this society.  ACTIONS THROUGHOUT B.C.  Nanaimo WAR provided Kinesis with details  of what will be happening all across B.C. on  November 5th:  NANAIMO — There will be a motorcade  through the shopping area, with placards and  loudspeaker messages. Women Against Rape  t-shirts are being sold in local stores. Leaf-  letting and postering will also take place.  FRASER VALLEY - Motorcade with placards through local shopping centres in the  Fraser Valley towns. A video on rape will be  shown on local TV.  PRINCE RUPERT - Workshop on rape on a  local talk show.  PRINCE GEORGE - Leafletting, and the  sale of t-shirts in the local malls. A march  has been organized, involving community  groups. A rally will follow the march and  will include films and speakers. In addition,  a TV program on rape has been arranged.  NELSON - There will be a public meeting  on November 5 th. A video has been prepared for local TV. In addition, Nelson  Women Against Rape have circulated a  questionnaire on rape throughout their  community.  CRANBROOK - Material on rape, and  t-shirts will be available in local malls.  T-shirts are also on sale in some local  stores. There will be a radio .panel show on  rape on November 4th. A public workshop on rape has been prepared..  ARMSTRONG - They have prepared a  library display on rape and will be leaf-  letting on November 5th.  VERNON - A local TV program has been  arranged with a feminist commentator.  Show includes a hot-line. They have also  filmed a TV show with a panel of women  and a lawyer and doctor, discussing rape.  KELOWNA - A display and sale of anti-  rape material is organized for a local mall.  A radio talk show on rape is also planned  for November 5th.  BURNS LAKE — A radio spot and a newspaper column on rape have been prepared.  A public workshop on rape will be held.  Vancouver Women Against Rape are making  the following demands:  EDUCATION -  -Funds be allocated to establish and maintain worker-controlled rape crisis centre and  to provide staff for necessary services.  — A feminist analysis of rape and violence be  included in all aspects and levels of the education system.  — All guidance counsellors be knowledgeable  in a feminist analysis of rape and be conversant of the services offered by existing rape  crisis centres.  —Self defense be taught to all female  students and staff in the educational system.  —A feminist analysis of rape and violence be  included in training of all medical and legal  personnel.  — Free self defense courses be available in all  communities and work places.  SERVICES -  —Hospital teams comprised solely of women  be trained to deal with rape victims.  —Working conditions be improved to eliminate  the incidence of rape in the work  place.  — Safe transportation be available to and  from work after dark.  —Public transportation be available 24 hours  a day.  LEGAL -  —The crime of rape be reclassified as assault.  —No past herstory of women be used as evidence in court under any circumstances.  —A woman have the right to refuse a particular judge, prosecutor or police officer.  —A woman have the right to have a rape  crisis worker present throughout all police,  medical and legal procedures.  —Rape of a woman by her husband must be  recognized as a criminal offense.  —To   stop   the   incidents  of rape  within  women's prisons and mental institutions, all  staff must be female.  Nanaimo Women Against Rape have received  word that the following Canadian cities are  planning WAR actions for November 5th:  CALGARY, REGINA, SASKATOON, WINNIPEG, THOMPSON Manitoba, TIMMINS  Ontario, TORONTO, and OTTAWA.  WOMEN ARE NOT FETUS-FACTORIES  "Unwanted Babies Wanted" read the ad in  The Victorian. A group, identified only by a  box number, was offering to buy "every unwanted living fetus" in order "to save babies  from death by abortion".  The group was later identified by a media  probe as being the Physicians For Life,  "pro-life" supporters. Apparently the idea  of placing the ad was to draw fire from the  Attorney General's Department. If the ad  had been banned, the pro-lifers would have  been able to argue 'you won't let us buy  babies, but you will let women kill them by  having abortions'.  Apart from attacking women as murderers,  this ad is a particularly gross assault upon  low-income women. Women who are forced  to choose abortion because they cannot  afford to have a child are cruelly taunted by  the offer of money. page 3  4TH ANNUAL B.C.F.W. CONVENTION  by Gayla Reid  The fourth annual convention of the British  Columbia Federation of Women (BCFW)  met"October 7-10 in Abbotsford, B.C. The  Federation encompasses 47 women's groups  and centres, and represents 2,000 B.C.  women.  The convention called for the recognition of  women's rights in areas ranging from pornography to labour organizing. The convention's 80 delegates condemned current proposed right-to-work legislation: Bill 89, Bill  C24, and the proposed revisions to the  Federal Bank Act. "Such legislation makes  it harder for women to organized into  unions," commented BCFW spokesperson  Lorri Rudland. "BCFW actively supports  the principle of trade unionism. In particular, we support women's caucuses in existing  trade unions and trade unions formed of and  by women," she added.  Criticism of the federal government's funding policies was a feature of the convention.  BCFW expressed particular concern about  the anonymity of the Ministerial Advisory  Boards of Canada Manpower, which decide  ,who receives Canada Works funding.  Rudland said: "In a private document obtained by members of BCFW, it is stated  that the appointed members of Ministerial  Advisory Boards may 'avoid undue pressure'  by choosing to 'remain anonymous' until  after the projects are approved. We are opposed to this policy of secrecy and have  reason to believe that were the names of  appointees made public, instances of conflict of interest could be exposed.  "Our major concern is that all community  groups have the right to appear before the  Ministerial Advisory Board on behalf of  their project. Appointees' names must be  made public at the time of appointment."  Maternity rights was another priority issue.  Delegates called for the legalization of  midwifery and for government funding  of alternative maternity care programs such  as the proposed Family Centre in Vancouver. The centre would provide out-of-  hospital maternity care in an environment  that encourages parent involvement.  Section 46 of the Unemployment Insurance  Act which denies pregnant women regular  UIC benefits, was overwhelmingly condemned. In addition, BCFW supported a  moratorium on any further prison construction and called for decriminalization of  victimless crimes. It also advocated the  immediate removal of male guards from  the women's unit at Oakalla.  Violence against women was a major theme  of the weekend convention. Delegates  agreed that pornography is not freedom of  expression but a system of economic profiteering. Through its portrayal of women as  dehumanized toys, pornography condones  rape and assault towards women and  children.  Policy emerging from a convention workshop of Women and Violence urged that  assaults against women in marital relationships be regarded by enforcement agencies  as criminal matters. The Attorney General's  Department was called upon to foster recognition of wife assault as a charge to be heard  in criminal court, regardless of the relationship between the victim and the assaulted.  Human rights was another major area of debate. Telegrams of support were sent by the  convention to Kathleen Ruff, Director of  the B.C. Human Rights Branch. Recently,  the Branch has been under media attack for  its opposition to sexist and racist biases in  advertising.  BCFW, an umbrella organization consisting  of member groups of women from all over  B.C., including Prince Rupert, Nelson, Victoria, Vernon and Vancouver, can be contacted c/o 749 East Broadway, Vancouver,  B.C.V5T1X8.  STELLA BLISS UPDATE  Last month Kinesis launched the STELLA  BLISS APPEAL FUND. The purpose of the  fund is to raise the money for Bliss' lawyer  to take the case to the Supreme Court.  The Stella Bliss case challenges Section 46 of  the UIC Act. Under Section 46, pregnant  women are denied entitlement to regular  unemployment insurance benefits. If the  Supreme Court of Canada rules in Bliss'  favour, it would be a big step forward towards ending discrimination against pregnant  workers. Bliss' lawyers will argue that  Section 46 contravenes the Canadian Bill  of Rights by condoning discrimination on  the basis of sex.  Vancouver Community Legal Assistance  Society lawyers Al McLean and Lynn Smith  will be taking the case to Ottawa. They  need plane fate and filing fees.  How is the STELLA BLISS APPEAL FUND  faring? So far, we have raised about $300.  Our goal is $3,000.  The B.C. Government Employees' Union  (BCGEU) made a major and generous contribution of $150. Other contributions have  come from the women's movement, the B.C.  Federation of Women's annual convention,  and the B.C. Women's Studies Association  conference.  An important source of support has been  Kinesis readers' donations. Thank you! We  have been receiving a small but steady flow  of donations of $5—$25. We still have a  long way to go, so keep the donations coming. The appeal is an important one, and  without your support it could be a flop.  Ts'aiku Women's Centre, Burns Lake, has  contacted Kinesis for additional information  on the Stella Bliss case. They are planning  to devote one of their radio spots to the  Bliss case, and as well, they are setting up a  STELLA BLISS APPEAL FUND at their  own centre. Fantastic!  If any other women's groups are inspired to  do likewise, simply contact Gayla Reid,  Vancouver Status of Women, 2029 West  4th Avenue, Vancouver (736-3746). page 4  U.S. SENATE APPROVES BILL  REQUIRING PREGNANCY BENEFITS  New York (LNS)-If the House follows the  Senate's recent vote, a 1976 U.S. Supreme  Court ruling denying pregnancy benefits to  working women could soon be reversed. A  bill approved by the Senate in mid-September  would prohibit sex discrimination on the basis  of pregnancy in company disability plans.  If passed by U.S. Congress, the bill will require employers who provide medical disability plans to include maternity leave and reemployment rights to pregnant workers.  The 1976 Supreme Court ruling denying pregnancy benefits stemmed from a suit by 43  women against General Electric demanding  that the company provide maternity benefits.  As it was, the disability plan included benefits  from vasectomies, hair transplants and  cosmetic surgery.  In response to the ruling, a coalition of  women's, civil rights and trade union organizations formed the Campaign to End Discrimination Against Pregnant Workers to lobby  Congress for passage of the bill.  WORKING MOTHERS ON THE RISE  A sharp increase in the proportion of mothers  in the workforce was reported recently by the  U.S. Department of Labour.  A March 1976 survey by the Women's Bureau  found that 49% of all women with children  under 18 years of age now work outside the  home, up from 35% in 1965.  The statistics show that mothers are even  more likely than childless women to seek outside sources of income. The rate of participation in the labour force for all women is 47%.  (The Guardian)  ABORTION RIGHTS UNDER ATTACK  IN NEW ZEALAND  New York (LNS)-In New Zealand, the  government has launched the most serious  attack on women's right to abortion so far,  with the introduction of a Contraception,  Sterilization and Abortion Bill.  Under the Bill the only women who will be  able to get abortions in New Zealand will be  those who can prove to the proposed Committee that if they don't have the abortion  they will suffer serious danger their physical  or mental health, or that there will be substantial risk that the child, if born, would be  so physically or mentally abnormal as to be  seriously handicapped.  The only other allowable grounds for abortion will be when a pregnancy is a result of  incest, or if the "women or girl is severely  abnormal".  Both rape and special or economic circumstances are specifically rejected as grounds for  abortion.  It is poor women who will suffer the most  under the new bill, according to Whetu Trik-  atene-Sullivan, a member of Parliament representing Southern Maori. "For the rich, the  whole system can be side-stepped with a trip  to Australia, as everyone knows."  Sullivan denounced the Bill as one that "violates the rights of women ... and ignores the  reality that abortion is a fact of life practised  in all cultures and civilizations from time immemorial."  "Freedom from unwanted reproduction is the  very essence of women's equality," she  declared, "and it is fundamental to a woman's  ability to equally participate in society. New  Zealand women must have the right to  choose."  VICTIM OF INCEST JAILED  Noreen Winchester is now in Armagh  women's prison in Northern Ireland, sentenced to seven years for the 'manslaughter'  of her father. From the day of her mother's  funeral, when she was 13, Noreen was  raped by her father, who threatened to kill  her, her brother (9) and two sisters (6 and 7)  if she told the police what he was doing.  Passing sentence, the judge said she had been  "a willing partner for years" and had had  •'plenty of time to go to the police about the  incest" — showing a complete lack of understanding of pressures within the family.  (Excerpted from Spare Rib, September/77)  ABORTION RESTRICTION CHALLENGED  IN MASSACHUSETTS  New York (LNS)—A Massachusetts law which  states that a woman under 18 wishing an  abortion must have the written consent of  both parents or a court order issued by a  superior court judge is being challenged in  federal court. Bill Baird, a nationally-known  birth control and abortion rights advocate has  filed a civil suit against the law.  Baird charges that the law is unconstitutional  since it violates a teenager's right to privacy.  Under the law, the penalty for failure to  obtain written consent is a five-year prison  term for everyone involved, including the  woman herself, her male companion and her  referral source.  TOUCHBOURNE  WANROW UPDATE  Native American activist Yvonne Wanrow  has won another round in her 5-year bout  with the courts.  On September 22 the Washington State  Supreme Court ordered a review of the  constitutionality of the charges against  Wanrow, throwing into question the state's  retrial of the 32-year-old Colville Indian.  Wanrow was convicted by an all-white jury  in 1973 of murder and assault in connection  with the self-defense killing of a child-  molester rapist. The state's high court ordered a retrial last January, stating that insufficient attention was given to the question  of how unarmed women are to defend  themselves.  The latest court order that the felony murder charges be immediately reviewed came  only a few weeks before Wanrow's retrial  was scheduled to begin. The October 11  trial has been indefinitely postponed. The  retrial on companion charges of first degree  assault were also put off.  Beth Bochnak, one of the three-woman legal  team who will defend Wanrow, said: "In the  several cases that have been publicized recently — the Joann Little case, the Inez  Garcia case and Yvonne's case — this is the  first time that anyone has been able to specifically raise the question — how is a woman  going to be able to defend herself?"  Letters of support and defense donations  may be sent to: Yvonne Wanrow, Indian  Defense Committee, P.O. Box 49, Inchelium  Washington 99138. (Excerpted from The  Guardian)  FLIGHT ATTENDANTS FORCED ON  UNPAID LEAVE WHEN PREGNANT  New York (LNS)—A class action suit  filed on behalf of 3,400 women flight  attendants fared badly before a federal  judge in September.  He ruled that Pan Am can force a woman  onto unpaid leave as soon as the company  learns she is pregnant.  LESBIAN MOTHER STILL FIGHTING  The California courts put Jeanne Jullion on  trial, found her guilty of being a lesbian and  awarded custody of her two children to her  ex-husband.  After a 2-year separation during which  Jullion's younger son lived with her, she filed  for divorce last January and sought to regain  custody of her older son. "The first hearing  was three hours of me being on trial as a lesbian, which was brought out immediately in a  very degrading and belittling way," said  Jullion. After a second hearing the court  awarded custody of both children to her husband.  Jullion lost an appeal to reverse the decision,  but a defense committee is preparing for  another hearing in the next few months.  "Right now," says Jullion, "we're trying to  coordinate our efforts with Linda Gill, a  blind woman who lost custody of her three  children." (The Guardian, September 7/77)  For more information: Elizabeth Kera at  (415) 654-1797, or write Box 88447,  Oakland, CA 94662. page 5  SEXISM AT AIR CANADA  This is a short story about raising the consciousness of advertising people on sexism.  Chapter One — A feminist sends a letter to  VSW, alerting us to the sexism of an Air  Canada brochure "How to Get Your Boss  Out of Town". She refers, in particular, to  the graphic published on this page.  Chapter Two — VSW sends off an irate note  to the President of Air Canada, pointing out  that this brochure is demeaning to women  and men.  Chapter Three — Air Canada puts the word  to their advertising agents, Cockfield, Brown  and Co. Ltd., who send one of their employees around to VSW to explain their case.  Chapter Four - At VSW, the Cockfield  Brown representative has his consciousness  (only slightly) raised. His curiosity about  the phrase 'rapist mentality' is genuine. He  simply cannot see what the fuss is about.  We refute, with feminist emphasis, his predictable excuses: a) the artist was a woman;  b) she  did  not  intend to offend anyone;  c) most bosses are in fact male.  We point out that intentions are irrelevant  when facts contradict them. We also point  out that Air Canada, as a Federal Crown  Corporation, is supposed to be implementing  affirmative action. We show him our sexist  ad files. But most emphatically, we point  out that there are real connections between  ads which portray women as objects, and  rapists who treat women as objects.  Chapter Five — VSW offers to provide Cockfield, Brown and Co. Ltd. with a workshop  on sexism in advertising. They might even,  we suggest, provide the necessary funding...  PUBLICATIONS  PRAIRIE WOMAN, A Newsletter of Saskatoon Women's Liberation, is a new monthly  newsletter. The first five issues have been  excellent, with the most recent carrying a  feature section on education, and a report  on SORWUC's initial organizing efforts in  Saskatchewan. Subs are $4/year, to Prairie  Woman, P.O. Box 4021, Saskatoon, Sask.  INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF  WOMEN'S STUDIES will be publishing its  first issue in January 1978. Six issues per  year. Subscription is $30 from Eden Press,  1538 Sherbrooke St. W., Montreal, P.Q.  The pre-publicity announces: "The purpose  of this journal is not to further the political  aims of any particular section of the  women's movement. It will therefore  publish articles of high quality which present  any point of view whether radical, conservative or even antagonistic." (!)  IMAGES, Kootenay Women's Paper, Box  736, Nelson, B.C. presents Aging as the  theme of its most recent issue. Images is  consistently relevant and clearly written.  Subs are $4/year, $12 for institutions. Also  in this issue is a marvellous article by Marcia  Braundy on working as a carpenter. Don't  miss it!  "THE WOMAN IN THE HOUSE"  Equality of the sexes seems to mean, in B.C.,  an equal opportunity to be oppressed. You  ;will remember the old 'man in the house'  rule. A woman on social assistance could  .not live with a man. If she did, the government assumed a) that the relationship was  sexual, and b) that in return for sexual services, the man had a duty to support the  woman.  But under the present provincial GAIN  (Guaranteed   Available   Income,-for   Need),.  DO YOU THINK THIS AD IS SEXIST?  •  •  •  legislation, a person on social assistance can  co-habit with an income-earner and still be  eligible for assistance, as long as the income  is not shared.  Vander Zalm would like to change that. He  wants to see his department refuse social  assistance to anyone living with an income-  earner.  Leo Krebs, 19, was refused GAIN benefits  on the grounds that he was living common-  law with a woman. who was an income-  earner. He appealed to aa government tribunal, which supported his position.  Despite the tribunal's ruling, the Ministry of  Human Resources refuses to re-instate  Kreb's claim. Vander Zalm says that if he  cannot legally continue to refuse Krebs  social assistance, then he will change the law  so that he can.  MEDIA COALITION FORMED  The Coalition. for a Fair and Responsible  Media, composed of 40 minority groups from  the Lower Mainland, was formed October 5.  The Coalition is community response to recent sexist, racist advertisements in local  newspapers.  Kathleen Ruff, Director of the B.C. Human  Rights Branch, has been under heavy attack  for her opposition to such advertising. Doug  Collins, Vancouver Sun columnist, has made  her the butt of constant 'jokes'. Big Sister  Ruff, he calls her, from the Human Wrongs  Branch.  The Coalition will meet with members of the  local media, and with ad agency personnel.  They will draw up a charter, laying down  guidelines for fair advertising. Vancouver  Status of Women and B.C. Federation of  Women were represented at the founding  meeting, and will have input into the Charter.  The aim of the guidelines will be to alert  advertisers to the need for their products to  reflect the diversity of B.C.'s population.  Collins says of the Coalition: "Now all the  lefties and professional do-gooders have banded together ... to give solid kicks in the rear  to advertisers and anyone else who doesn't  conform to Kathleen Ruff's idea of how the  world should run."  YONGE STREET CLEAN-UP'  WON'T STOP SEXPLOITATION  by Mary Ellen Delany  TORONTO - After years of talking about  cleaning up the Yonge Street sex strip, the  Toronto and Ontario governments have recently jumped at the opportunity to plot a  repressive crackdown.  Angered at this- attack, Organized Working  Women held a meeting September 27 to discuss "The sex trade — who gains, who  loses?", and the related issue of the causes  of prostitution.  Participants in the meeting agreed it was impossible to eradicate prostitution in a society  which chains women to the most degrading  roles, forcing them to suffer extreme social  and economic oppression. High rates of unemployment have struck women hard, leaving hundreds jobless, with such options as  being a "waitress, computer operator, or  someone's wife." Working women are often  forced into low-paying job ghettos, merely  reinforcing bigotry towards women.  Lack of social services, the difficulty of obtaining welfare and low cost housing, were  seen by Lynn King, a Toronto feminist  lawyer, as other contributing factors to  female sexploitation.  Another speaker denounced a society which  spawns "economically deprived, poorly educated younger women," who are the building blocks of the prostitution business.  Many young women arriving in Toronto,  faced with the difficulty of finding a job and  a place to stay, turn to the streets and  bawdy houses as a means of survival.  Discussion at the OWW meeting also took up  the question: Should we legalize prostitution? Should we license women and treat  them as "government inspected meat", ensuring readily accessible female bodies at a  reasonable price?  Or do we decriminalize prostitution by  taking soliciting out of the criminal code?  As it stands now, when the policy crack  down on body rub parlors, it is women who  get harassed, not the pimps or those who put  the price tags on prostitutes.  Measures like the "clean up Yonge Street"  campaign often succeed only in moving the  sex strip one street back, perpetuating the  problem.  Short-term measures are fraught with dangers. The media hype surrounding the murder of Emanuel Jaques helped fuel a 'moral'  public hysteria and a 'law and order' syndrome accompanied with calls for "more  power to the police" and "capital punishment for perverts".  Related antigay attitudes resulted in brutal  beatings in the gay community. Waves of  'moral indignation' have resulted in more  censorship and sexual repression. This reactionary atmosphere has escalated and can  lead to further anti-civil rights, anti-woman,  anti-gay, and anti-union attitudes.  Sexual exploitation must be abolished, but  the Yonge Street clean-up is a diversion.  Those who are concerned about the question  should consider fighting for a decent living  wage for all, so women are not forced to sell  their bodies to survive.  A real, lasting solution can be found in a  completely transformed society, where  people are free of warped, alienated sexual  relations, where human rights are guaranteed  and where women's liberation is a reality.  (Socialist Voice, October 10, 1977) page 6  WHAT HAS HAPPENED TO THE G.A.T.E.  CASE AND WHY DOES IT MATTER?  On November 8th, the Gay Alliance Towards  Equality and the B.C. Human Rights Commission will appear before the B.C. Court of  Appeal to ask leave to appeal the GATE decision to the Supreme Court of- Canada. If  they are refused leave by the B.C. Court of  Appeal, GATE and the Human Rights Commission will appear before the Supreme Court  itself in November asking for leave to appeal.  A Brief History  This complaint was originally heard by a  Human Rights Board of Inquiry in 1975 when  GATE filed a complaint under Section 3 of  the Code alleging that they were refused a  public service by the Vancouver Sun without  reasonable cause.  GATE submitted an entirely innocuous ad to  the Sun, asking that it be published in the  business personal columns. The ad read:  "Subs, to GAY TIDE, gay lib paper,  $1.00 for 6 issues, 2146 Yew Street,  Vancouver."  The Sun refused, stating that in the interest of  maintaining public decency and protecting  the morals of the community, it was their  policy to avoid any advertising material dealing with homosexuals or homosexuality.  The Board of Inquiry ruled that discrimination had occurred. It found that the real reason behind the policy was not a concern for  any standard of public decency but a bias  against homosexuals and homosexuality. The  , Board held that' a refusal based on a bias  against homosexuality was not reasonable and  was contrary to Section 3.  The Vancouver Sun appealed this decision to  the Supreme Court of British Columbia in  July of 1976 and Mr. Justice McDonald  denied the appeal. He found that the Board  of Inquiry had not erred in law, had acted  within its jurisdiction, and he upheld the  ruling.  The Sun then appealed to the senior court of  the Province, the B.C. Court of Appeal, and  that court ruled 2 to 1 in a split decision to  allow the appeal, thus overturning the original  Board of Inquiry decision.  Mr. Justice Branca, writing one of the majority decisions states:  The subject matter of homosexuals or homosexuality is so notorious that some degree of  judicial notice may be taken of the subject  matter. Many people in our society may well  entertain a bias or some predisposition against  homosexuals or homosexuality on moral or  religious grounds. It Cannot therefore be  justly said that a bias so held has no reasonable foundation.  I am of the opinion, that in justice, a bias  motivated because of the belief of. some  people that the homosexual engages in unnatural practice or that their sexual practices  are immoral or against religions does not  make the conclusions wrong, in the sense that  it is unreasonable.  The Board did not find that the various individuals within the management of the appellant newspaper were impelled towards their  bias because of base views or spite, malice or  in bad faith or indeed, in circumstances other  than good faith. In the absence of a finding  of a bias based on bad faith, how can it be  justly said that the bias held by such individuals is one that might not have been reasonably and. honestly entertained by them? This  was never determined by the Board. If the  bias was honestly entertained, then there was  not an unreasonable bias. "  Mr. Justice Robertson agreed with Mr. Justice  Branca in allowing the appeal. He also stated  in his reasons that the Board of Inquiry had  added homosexuality to the attributes of persons which are specifically protected, namely,  race, religion, colour, ancestry, etc. by some  "quasi-legislative process which is not a function of the Board."  Why Does It Matter?  There are two reasons why this B.C. Court of  Appeal decision matters.  The original Board decision was the first legal  decision in Canada to assert that homosexual  people do have and should have the right  under the law to protection from discrimination. No Canadian legislation specifically  guarantees basic rights to homosexuals. The  B.C. Human Rights Code is singularly able to  afford protection, to this group because it  includes the provision that there be no discrimination 'without reasonable cause'. The  B.C. Court of Appeal decision not only overturns this first finding that homosexual  people do have rights under law, but it also  legitimizes discrimination against them.  The second reason why the decision matters  is that Branca's and Robertson's rulings  undermine the functioning of the Human  Rights Code not just for homosexual people,  but for any group that gets protection from  the 'without reasonable cause' provision.  Up to now, Boards have interpreted that provision as allowing them to extend protection  to groups other than those specifically named  in the Code. Board decisions have reasoned  that if the Legislature had intended the Code  to apply only to discrimination on the  grounds of race, religion, sex, etc., they would  not have included the prohibition against discrimination without reasonable cause.  Through the flexibility of this provision,  Boards have made rulings protecting pregnant  women, handicapped people, and landed  immigrants, as well as homosexual people,  from discriminatory behaviour, although none  of these groups is specifically mentioned in  the Code.  Mr. Justice Robertson's decision that the  Board exceeded its jurisdiction in applying  the Code to these groups threatens the  breadth and flexibility of the Code. That  breadth and flexibility has been the Code's  important strength and has made it a far  more enlightened and more useful law than  any other human rights legislation in the  country.  Mr.   Justice   Branca's   decision  that   a  bias  honestly entertained is not unreasonable also  undermines the philosophy and functioning.,  of the Code.  Most people sincerely believe in  their biases. If any honestly entertained  belief in one's bias becomes a defense against  a charge of discrimination, as Mr. Justice  Branca asserts it is, it will be difficult if not  impossible to win cases under the Code.  Since the B.C. Court of Appeal is the most  senior court to consider and interpret the  Human Rights Code up to now, this decision  affects interpretation in the junior tribunals  and courts. All cases presently under investigation or before the courts that fall under the  'without reasonable cause' provision are  damaged by it.  Thus the B.C. Court of Appeal decision is a  threat to the newly asserted rights of homosexual people and "to the whole functioning  of the Human Rights Code. Overturning it  is crucial.  What Has The Government Done?  -Nothing. Allan Williams, the Minister of  Labour, who is responsible for the Human  Rights Code, hasn't made up his mind yet  whether the government will be a party to  the appeal. Mr. Williams has had three  months to decide, but he continues to stall,  despite questions in the House. To a recent  question, he replied that the Human Rights  Commission was never a party to the complaint, implying that it was therefore a  private matter between GATE and the  Vancouver Sun. The Human Rights Commission has been a party to the complaint  at the Board of Inquiry, at the Supreme Court  of B.C., and in the B.C. Court of Appeal. Accepting that this statement arises purely from  ignorance strains the power to suspend disbelief. And we all know that Ministers are  not supposed to lie in the House.  The date for filing motion for leave to appeal  has passed, and the Human Rights Commission has been forced to proceed and file its  motion without government support.   Since  the Department of Labour for retaining legal  counsel, they are in the position of taking on  a crucial and expensive legal battle without  any money to pay for it.  It is quite clear by now that Allan Williams  and his Cabinet colleagues do not wish to be  associated with a fight for homosexual rights  in the highest court in the land. Because they  don't like the issue, they are also willing to  wash their hands of the legislation and the  rights of many groups which are undermined  by the B.C. Court of Appeal decision.  Those who have fought for human rights legislation in this country have always known  that the broadest and strongest functioning  of this legislation must be actively supported  by government. The basic rights of citizens  are a public matter, and if those rights are not  defended by government, we are all threatened. HOW  TO  FIGHT  RAPE  With Women Against Rape actions coming up  November 5th, it is imperative to clarify our  position on rape. What are the most effective  ways of working against rape? Should we undertake campaigns for legislative reforms or should  we concentrate our efforts on 'guerilla' street  actions? To further this debate, KINESIS  reprints here an article from PLEXUS, a Bay Area  feminist newspaper.  by Dale Thompson  A man is sitting at his desk at work. He hears  some commotion in the reception area. Suddenly  a crowd of people surround his desk. A woman  who he went out with a few weeks earlier steps  out of the crowd, looks him straight in the eye  and says, "That's the guy who raped me."  His co-workers are frozen at their desks, staring at  him. People in the crowd at his desk say, "We  know you raped this woman. You must really  hate women to do something like that. You have  a rotten attitude and you better work on changing it because you're not anonymous anymore.  We know who you are and that you're a rapist.  We'll be watching you."  This is a scene that has happened countless times  in Santa Cruz in the five years since Santa Cruz  Women Against Rape began. Luita, a member of  the anti-rape group, has been involved in at least  30 similar confrontations with accused rapists  Five years ago the women in Santa Cruz began a  war on rape without help from the police or  courts. Three years later the women were joined  by men who started Santa Cruz Men Against  Rape.  Don't  Mourn —  Organize  In an interview, Shalom, a member of the men's  group, told me the philosophy behind both  groups' actions. According to Shalom, "Rape  isn't a problem the police will solve. The  community must take responsibility to help and  protect women who have been raped or who are  being harrassed by men."  Luita added, "Most rapes'happen between people  who know each other. Because of this, rape  should be handled by the community. A raped  woman's friends should give her comfort and support and should let the rapist know that his action is totally unacceptable and shows that he has  real problems with women. The community  should forcefully encourage the man to change  and should praise him when he makes real efforts  to change."  Prison is Useless  Luita contrasted this to the ways we now combat  rape. "The way our society deals with rape is to  turn it over to the police and courts," she said.  "This will never end it. For one thing, it's almost  impossible to convict a man of rape. I've studied  800 cases in the last 5 years. With no exceptions,  all of the men who were sent to prison for rape  were poor or Third World men. Not one rich  white man of these 800 served time for rape."  She continued, "Even if a guy is convicted, the  last place he's going to change his ideas about  rape and women is in prison. Prison encourages  violence, domination and humiliation to gain  power over other people.  Confrontation Works  Confrontation is one of the methods the group  uses to get people to turn to each other rather  than to the criminal justice system for answers to  rape. It's a way a woman can retaliate legally and  non-violently without putting herself in the hands  of the police. Luita told me, "Often a woman  calls us if she knows the rapist and she doesn't  want to go to the police. If she wants, we'll help  her confront the man who raped her. But we prefer that she and her friends get together to confront the man."  According to Luita, the idea behind a confrontation isn't to talk to the rapist or to hear him out.  Instead, the point is to give the women some  direct power over a person who humiliated her at  a time when she was powerless. The group leaves  some literature for the man at the end of the  confrontation. The literature is aimed at showing  him how he can get rid of the idea that it's his  right to rape and humiliate women.  "A couple of weeks later we send him a follow-up  letter," Luita added. It says, 'We're watching  you. If you don't want to be accused of rape  again, you'd better change the way you treat  women.' "  Men Against Rape provides different services than  the women's group, said Shalom. "One thing we  do is talk to men whose wives, lovers or friends  have been raped." The men in the anti-rape  group do this to give other men a different perspective on rape. "Often, a man wants to take  the rape over as his own problem," he said. "We  tall him that the rape didn't happen to him and  that the woman has to make her own decisions.  The man has to realize that his role is to provide  the woman with the support and care that she  needs, not to take charge."  page 7  According to Shalom, the men's group works  closely with Women Against Rape. "If a woman  wants us to do a follow-up on a.confrontation, we  will. We wait a couple of weeks and then go to"  the guy's house. The" guy usually admits that the  incident took place but says, 'It wasn't rape.' We  tell him, 'Using force, doing something to a  woman against her will is rape. It's up to you to  stop, not to press the unfair advantage of size,  strength, or skill. Men are responsible for rape,  not women."  But how effective is the men's group in changing  macho ideas about women and rape? "Usually,  I get the feeling that the guy is listening by the  end of the conversation," said Shalom. "I think  we're successful but we have no way of knowing  if the man really changes or not."  There are other ways the anti-rape groups think  they've involved the Santa Cruz community in  doing something about rape. "Every month we  publish a description list," said Luita. "The list  contains a full description of all men who have  raped women in Santa Cruz in the past month.  We put as much information in it as we can, including names and addresses if we know them."  She continued, "The list isn't a tool of paranoia. We publish this list so women can gain  power in their lives.  Lists of Rapists  The groups have been criticized for confronting  accused rapists and for publishing descriptions of  them. People have told the groups that these actions are "like hanging a man without giving him  a trial." Luita responded, "Usually, I'm for the  rights of the accused as well as for the rights of  the victim, but in the case of rape I think that so  many provisions have been made for the accused  that it's practically impossible to convict or do  anything to a rapist."  Women Against Rape has also started self-defense  classes for women. According to Luita, "The  classes are structured so everyone, not just  amazons, can learn to defend themselves. Psychologically, a very important thing happens to  women in these classes: they learn to value themselves, their lives and their dignity. Women have  been taught not to hurt anyone's feelings. It was  a big revelation for me to learn that I was more  important than some creep who was hassling me."  . "In these classes," said Luita, "women learn to  love themselves above creeps, learn to value their  own safety above hurting a man's feelings when  they refuse something to him." This change in  the way women see themselves in relation to  others is important in ending rape because, says  Luita, "If a guy knew a woman would defend herself if he hassled her, he'd think twice about it."  The existence of Men Against Rape itself testifies  to the impact Women Against Rape has had in  Santa Cruz. Shalom said, "Most of the men got  involved in this either because someone close to  them was raped or because they knew women  who worked in Women Against Rape. We would  hear women talking about it and about being hassled. We realized that the fear or awareness of  rape is a part of every woman's consciousness."  Major Change  Necessary  I asked Luita if she thought a program based on  making the community aware of its responsibility  to end rape would work in cities such as San  Francisco or Oakland. "We've discussed that  among ourselves," she said. "We think it can  work only in smajl areas of a city, such as neighbourhoods. If there were several anti-rape projects throughout a city, one in each district, it'  might be possible to use our experience as a  model for ending rape in cities."  Luita and Shalom think that both men and women must change before rape will end. Women  must learn to assert their right not to be hassled  and intimidated and men must learn not to  assume that they can rape, that they have license THEY DO IT ALL TO YOU  The B.C. Attorney General has introduced  Bill 69, the long-promised amendments to  the Family Relations Act. And it sounds  ever so smooth. The new Bill claims to provide recognition of the "vital and time-  consuming role of homemaker within the  family". That role, it explains, is often performed largely or solely by one spouse, usually the wife. In the event of marriage  breakdown, injustice might result if the  'breadwinner' were able to exclude the  'homemaker' from any claim to property  which he or she had acquired with the assistance, financial or otherwise, of the other.  We notice that the Attorney General has  introduced the Bill in such a way that there  will be time for publicity, and supposedly  public debate, to occur before it is made  into law. Thus a sufficient period of time is  given to men with substantial assets to tuck  them safely away into investments that will  not be considered 'family assets' under the  new Bill.  yve*etv^  However, the Bill was introduced at the end  of a legislative session. That gives us time  now to rally support for substantive changes.  One problem is that the Bill alleges to recognize the value of work done within the home  and in child-raising activities. But it only  does so through the division of family assets  at the end of the marriage.  Family assets are narrowly defined. They  refer to any property which is normally used  for the benefit of the family, ie. pension  plans and holdings which have been obtained  for family use. Property or assets used solely for business purposes, including the family store or farm property in the husband's  name, are excluded.  The Bill also recognizes marriage contracts  which are signed between husband and wife  at the time of marriage. This could be used  as a means for husbands to contract out of  obligations where the wife is either not  aware enough of her rights or has little bargaining power. The Bill provides no possibility of redress once the contract is signed.  Clearly, there is no intention by this government to support the Berger proposals on  matrimonial property where it was argued  that if marriage is to be seen as an equal  partnership, each partner must have equal  economic power and control during the marriage.  There is already a provision in the Family  Relations Act which allowsfor the sale and  division of any property if it is needed for  the use of the dependent spouse. But this  section will be repealed because the government's contention is that there will no longer be dependent spouses.  The new Bill assumes that spouses will be  economically responsible for themselves  after marriage breakup and the division of  family assets. While there is a possibility of  applying for maintenance as a dependent  spouse, one will have to show that there is  special need. The 'dependent spouse' will  have to be actively striving for independence  or s/he may lose those benefits.  Given the tight employment situation, and a  society that pretends to be interested in  saving the family and protecting children,  this Bill seems faintly absurd. For women, it  will likely ensure that rather than equality  with men, there will only be more poverty  among women.  MOR€ POV€RTY  AMONG WOM€N  In an article condemning a similar Family  Law Reform Bill introduced recently in Ontario, Dorothy Kidd pointed out that the  Ontario Bill "is unequivocally based on the  premise that housewives are parasites." One  of the drafters of that Bill, Ed Ryan, put it  this way: "In the long run you won't have  the women who can't do anything except be  wives dumped on welfare rolls ... when a  marriage breaks down you will have a  woman at least a lot better prepared than  today to go to work." Dorothy Kidd  points out, what do they think we've been  doing in the home all these years?  Bill 69 will reduce the options a separated  wife has. She will not be able to choose to  stay at home. This pressure to take a paying  job comes at a time when women, are finding  it increasingly difficult to get wages which  are high enough to save them and their  children from poverty.  Because of the government's contention that  women must be economically independent,  even the provision allowing single mothers to  receive support from putative fathers until  the child is six, has been repealed.  Here are some possible results of Bill 69:  1. Women at the dissolution of a marriage  will not be able to choose to stay at home  and raise their children.  2. Women will be forced to compete for  the few jobs in female job ghettos. They  could be denied either maintenance or welfare if they refuse to look for work.  3. More women will be forced to leave their  children behind as they will not be able to  afford to keep them.  4. Men who want out of marriage will be  able to do so with impunity. Women will  be expected to maintain themselves. But  the skills they have developed maintaining  a home and raising children are not marketable!  CHANGES NEEDED  The government already interferes by regulating marriage. So let's make the marriage  a contract between equals.  Marriage contracts should be mandatory,  based on the assumptions of equal partnership as outlined in the Berger Commission  report. All property acquired after marriage  (excluding personal gifts and inheritance)  should be family property. Decisions affecting use of property should be made jointly.  Standard contracts stating legal responsibilities should be part of the marriage license.  Work in the home should be recognized in  economic terms through a guaranteed income for individuals. Provincial laws denying a woman's right to choose between  'homemaker' or 'breadwinner' should not be  made without providing proper compensation to those women who have accepted the  rolejhat society gave them as nurturers.  In short, this Bill is trying to force women  into economic independence without any  real base-for this to happen. page 9  THE RALLY STORY  $2.00 from Women Rally for Action (WRA),  c/o 2029 West 4th Avenue, Vancouver, B.C.  V6J-1N3. Add 50 cents handling. For  bulk discount, write to the above address.  Reviewed by Gayla Reid  Publication of THE RALLY STORY is an  event of real importance for the B.C.  women's movement. It describes how  women of British Columbia conceived,  planned and organized the largest mass  lobby of Members of the Legislative  Assembly in the history of B.C.  It is, in addition, a book the usefulness of  which-will be recognized far beyond B.C.  and outside the women's movement. In  clearly organized and precisely written detail  it outlines the procedures for a major lobbying action. Community groups continent-  wide will want to get their hands on it.  The book is two things: it is a celebration of  the events of Women Rally for Action  (WRA) and more importantly, it is a workbook which describes the process that WRA  went through, and analyzes that process and  its results.  First, the celebration. For a B.C. feminist,  the phrase "March 22" can refer to only one  date, one event. The March 22, 1976, the  day of Women Rally for Action in Victoria.  Those who took part in the action speak of  it with partisan nostalgia. The rest of us  lament that we missed out on herstory in the  making.  It is with this sense of celebration that the  book opens. There are a series of recollections: of the first move towards action, of  the action organizing, and of the day itself.  The personal opening works excellently:  I'll never forget Sunday, January 18, 1976._  It was a sunny day, the kind of day for a  mid-winter walk on the beach. Instead, I  went to a meeting in Vancouver in a smoke-  filled room with thirty other feminists ... we  were there because we were angry ...  The specific time and place, the first hand  account, catch me up. By opening with this  short series of recollections, the book solves  the problem endemic to delineations of  organizing: how can this be made human?  How can we recapture the excitement?  Women working together make dynamite  energy, but a flow-chart can't quite speak  to it.  Following these several personal introductions, the book moves into organizational  detail. A flow-chart illustrates the breadth  of the organizing (see illustration). Then the  work of each committee is outlined under  the headings Goal — Participants — Organization — Comments. It is this section which  will prove most useful to other feminist and  community groups.  This book was written and edited by some  of the same women who helped organize  Women Rally for Action itself. And it  shows. There is the meticulous, organizer's  attention to detail. Each committee is discussed, and there is an amazing array of  committees: finance, media, visual aids,  childcare, transportation, food and  sanitation ...  Groups will find the painstaking enumeration of the goals and duties of each  committee useful in several ways. First,  they will be able to survey the range of  committees   and   decide  which  would  be  XJflttll  relevant to their own action. Second, by  checking out the goals of each, they will be  able to make informed decisions about the  possibility of integrating several committees.  The number of participants are provided for  each committee, which will also enhance  realistic planning.  Most useful, however, are the frank evaluations by each committee of itself. The  language is happily devoid of sociological  mystification. The Central Communications  Committee, for example, which aimed at  ensuring effective communication between  the co-ordinators and involved women  throughout the province, has this to say  about itself:  ... the centre (whose members formed this  committee) is twenty miles from Vancouver  ...~ neither we or the co-ordinators were  dismayed by our distance from Vancouver.  The fact that we were working as a unit on a  specific and essential task more than  compensated for the odd inconvenience. We  hope it will be encouraging to groups in  other small towns to see that a small centre,  somewhat removed from the core of action,  can make a major contribution to an ambitious project.  And a final word of encouragement. Most  of the women from our centre who worked  on Intercom (the newsletter which the  • Central Communications Committee ■  produced) were married and had children in  elementary school. Our commitment to the  Rally and the long hours of work it entailed  — many of them at night — had a large  impact on our personal lives. Some firm  arrangements had to be made for the temporary conversion of fathers to single-parent  status, for frequent visits to drive-in restaurants, and for the reduction of family wardrobes to very basic items. We made those  firm arrangements!  Other committees admit to problems in an  equally direct manner. The Local Demonstration Committee discusses their problems  with the sound system and recommends  using speaker systems with independent  power sources. The Media Committee lists  numerous vital details which must be taken  care of. Who, for example, accepts responsibility for control of the microphone?  I hope I've managed to convey that The  Rally Story is a goldmine of information for  action organizers. It provides the myriad  turn to page 14 KiNESIS page 10  page 11 KINESIS  NICOLE BROSSARD is a Quebec feminist.  She is the author of six collections of poetry  and three novels. She is also the founding  co-director of the important Quebec quarterly La Barre du Jour (the phrase refers to the  first rays of light in the morning sky). A  recent issue of this journal was devoted entirely to writings by Quebec women. Her  latest book of poetry, Melcanique jongleuse,  received the 1975 Canadian Governor-General's Award. Two of her novels, A Book and  Sold Out, have been published in English by  Coach House Press in Toronto. Translations  of the women's writings from La Barre du  Jour will hopefully appear in a spring issue  of Room of One's Own.  As well as being a major literary figure in  Quebec, Brossard is a political activist. A  supporter of Quebec independence, she was  active in the campaign that brought the Parti  Quebecois to power. In the last few years,  she has made feminist organizing more and  more a priority. She is a member of the collective which founded and edits a Quebec  feminist newspaper Les T£tes de Pioche (the  phrase is idiomatic, usually directed at children, and approximates to 'Shut your  mouth!'). Nicole Brossard is currently very  active in a feminist group, Le Regroupement  des Qu£becoises.  In the final week of October Nicole Brossard  was in Vancouver to speak about feminism  and literature and Quebec, and to show her  film "American Feminists, New York,  1976".  KINESIS: Nicole, could you tell us something about the herstory of feminism in  Quebec?  BROSSARD: Well, of course we have in  Quebec what can be called the French wave  of feminism which came at the beginning of  the century. Women at that time focused  their demands on the right to vote. Every  year for twenty years, women marched on  the parliament of Quebec to obtain that  right. It was obtained in 1914.  As for most of the feminists in those years,  they concentrated all their energies on a very  specific aim. And of course, feminists were  saying, "Don't worry, we will keep on being  good wives and mothers!" As well as being  good wives and mothers, women were glorified'as being the ones who would preserve  the culture. Some sociologists even talk  about a matriarchy in Quebec.  What do they mean by a matriarchy?  It is true that after the conquest, women  were very strong and full of dignity while resisting the destruction of their culture and  their language. In our patriarchal society  they transmitted to their children the patriarchal values. It might have seemed that  Quebec was a matriarchy because we have  always lived with a man who had no political  and no economic power, without a culture  of our own. Everything was borrowed from  France in art until about 1929!  In fact, you could say that the real relation  between men and women that existed in our  society was for a long time the same kind of  relation that women had with the priest.  The priest in fact was full of power and did  he ever use it! The church and its priests  controlled everything that-was cultural. I  mean everything that was cultural in daily  life, work, of course, being controlled, at  least in the cities, by the American and  Anglo-Saxon powers.  What is the real relation between women and  men in Quebec today? How have things  changed?  Since 1960, the colonise* became more and  more aware of his identity, more competent  in himself, and more powerful in terms of  negotiating things with Canada. He is now  the government. I say that it is now, more  than ever, that women in Quebec have to be  careful. Because even though the government is the Parti Quebecois, and seems more  liberal than any other government, the P.Q.  is acting just like the other governments concerning women. Misogyny is quite well inscribed in the new bourgeois that is about to  come out with the independence or through  the wake of independence. As in any other  country, it is said that women, at crucial  moments of history, wait until we have settled that. Women of Quebec cannot afford  to wait. We know that from other countries.  We have to deal with women's issues before  the crucial moment and not after, so that  after, we will be strong enough to negotiate.  Could you tell us something about the major  forces for social change in Quebec today?  Do you see socialism and nationalism, for  example, as being related? What do you see  as being their consequences for women?  Lots of things have changed in Quebec  around the ideas of socialism. Socialism has  made the unions more and more powerful  and has introduced a generation of Marxists  fighting each other to find out if there can  be a revolution.  Another important factor was the weakening  of the control of the church. This was very  important for women. Women were allowed  to regain a certain control of their body because of birth control; and it also questioned  all the authorities while questioning the one  of God and the church. It weakened the  authority of the father and the altar.  Women of Quebec have been politicized by  the question of nationalism and independence, as women were in the States while  fighting for civil rights and against the Vietnam war. In 1970, a group of women concentrated around the Socihd des Femmes.  The group eventually collapsed due to ideological discord.  Actually we have in Montreal a women's  newspaper called Les T^tes de Pioche, which  is published by a collective and started in  March 1976. We have a bookstore which has  been operating for the past two years. We  have also a different group of women who  are publishing books that deal with women.  Out of the women's bookstore La Maison  des Femmes was organized. This is not a  women's centre which provides services, but  a place where women can organize, can prepare manifestations — protests. We also have  a Rape Relief centre and a shelter for  women who are being beaten. The shelter is  not open at night, so women must be beaten  between the hours of 9 and 5. These centres  are started on government funds. Then the  government takes the funds away ...  Sounds familiar ...  ... and we say that these are services which  must be provided on a regular basis for  women.  Things have been going very fast for the last  two years. Women are getting more and  more consciousness of their conditions and  some of them are getting more and more  radicalized. But things do not change concerning laws and the mentality of society in  general. It is a daily fight for dignity, identity and solidarity.  I would also like to say a few words on the  influences that Quebec women have had  from the States and from France. From  France came literature and ideology. From  the States came reality, movement, life and  action. We have been influenced by books  about feminism, most of them published in  Paris; and we have also been influenced by  the daily life and action of feminism as it  is lived in the States.  When I went to New York to make the film  "American Feminists, New York, 1976", I  learned a lot. Because what I saw there was  like the reality of Quebec for women for the  last five or seven years. But there, women  have been fighting for ten years.  And when I had finished the film, they  asked the question, "Can the women's  movement survive?". Most women who  have been active in the movement for a  certain time say: "Well, I only have one  life to live and I might as well take care a bit  of myself instead of all the time taking care  of everyone else."  What do you think ? Will the women's movement survive in Quebec?  Yes, I think the movement will survive. But  it is always difficult. It seems that we cannot transmit to our daughters, to the women  coming after us, our own experience. It  seems that it is always something that has to  be started again and again. You have to get  married; you have to have children. And  then you find out something is wrong. It  seems impossible to transmit your own experience to younger women.  ' Because the material conditions in Quebec  are different from those of, for example, the  States, does this mean that the features of  sexism are different?  Yes, sexism is different in Quebec from what  you would see for example in Europe, or in  the'States, or even in Canada. For sure, I  think that our own relation to religion and  the fact that we were colonized, makes our  relation to the men in Quebec different. It  is important, too, that in working for independence we share a common goal. Because,  as I said, the men of Quebec have had no  political or economic power. Often they  have been out of work, at home in the rocking chair, while the woman is out doing  domestic work in wealthy houses in West-  mount or something like that. The women  in Quebec have been dealing with reality  while the men have been dealing with  dreams.  That is why people have thought that  women were strong in Quebec, and that we  were matriarchal. It is the same analogy as  with the black woman in the States. We  have very strong women who transmit to  their children patriarchal values. It happens  the world over.  What would you say is the present relationship between feminists and the P. Q. ?  One thing that struck me on the morning  after the election was that everybody was  saying what they thought of the P.Q. and  the election, and there was actually no group  of women who were able to say why they  would be glad to have the P.Q. in power.  There is no voice for women in the political  situation. The women have been silent.  Really,  how strong is the women's movement within Quebec?   Is there a women's  caucus within the P.Q.? Are groups of  women succeeding in putting pressure on the  P.Q.?  We are now organizing. In a very small manner, but more and more all the time. There  is a group of women working within the P.Q.  At the last convention, they got a very important resolution on abortion passed. Although later, after the convention, Levesque  said that he did not think his government  would be interested in doing anything about  it.  As you know, I have been a member of the  P.Q., and I have worked in the party. But  now, I work outside the party, for women.  There is a group of women in Montreal,  Le Regroupement des Quibecoises, and we  are trying to pressure the P.Q. We want to  get string enough to negotiate for things.  What's the use of independence if it doesn't  change anything for women?  Nicole, you are a founding co-editor of  La Barre du Jour. You have recently begun  to work on it again, after an absence of some  years. How do you define its aims?  When I first worked with La Barre du Jour,  in the early sixties, I saw three important  elements: nationalism, the move towards a  lessening of the power of the church, and  socialism. Now I re-define these influences:  independence, feminism and Marxism. I feel  that, in literature, the importance of independence has come and gone. We have had  writers like Michelle Lalonde. The creative  work has been done. What would happen  now with writers is that they would repeat  themselves.  Out of nationalism came independence and  out of socialism came Marxism. I do not see  Marxism as being a source of great inspiration for writers as writers, although it is important politically.  I see feminism as being the influence that  can now inspire Quebec writers. It is this influence that can help writers write in an  innovative way. We can use it to explore  and to express what previously could not be  expressed.  Tell us something about Les T£tes de Pioche.  How did the collective start? How is it  funded? What would you say its politics  are? What are its aims?  The paper started from a collective of six.  For about six months, we simply met and  discussed what we wanted to do, and tried  to work out our personal problems and get  to be intimate with one another. Then we  each put in a small amount of money. Since  then, we have been able to keep it going on  subscriptions and sales. It comes out nine  times a year, so we get a break.  We want to reach as many women as possible. We do not pursue too much of a radical  line. The needs of women in rural areas are  different from those in Montreal, and we  want to reach all women. We have three  aims: analysis, education and information,  and we try to provide a mixture of each in  every issue of-the paper.  Do you manage to integrate your politics  with your creative writing? Do you see editing Les Testes de Pioche as being an activity  quite separate from writing novels and  poetry?  Yes, they are different. But I want to write  as a writer and as a woman. I think my most  recent novel, L'Amer (ed: the word means  "bitter", but it is also a pun on "mother"  and "the sea") does, for the first time, bring  the two together ... page 12  "IT'S SO HARD BEING A LIBERATED  MAN WHEN THERE ARE SO FEW  LIBERATED WOMEN"  Comments on Warren Farrell's Lecture for the  B.C. Women's Studies Association  by Diana Smith  - This heart-rending remark followed a lecture  on men's liberation given by Warren Farrell at  UBC recently. Jack, a member of the audience, received laughter and protest, especially  from the women who made up half of the  audience. But Jack persisted, asking the men  how many of them felt responsible for their  partner's sexuality. On being prodded "Come  on, be brave", the majority raised their hands.  Fortunately, a woman demanded that he ask  the same question of the women. He did and  received an identical response. This episode  illustrates the pseudo-serious, entertaining  tone of the evening.  Farrell's talk preceded his two-day workshop  at Cold Mountain Institute called "Breaking  Free from the Sex Role Trap". I went to the  lecture sceptical and came away feeling (besides amused and angry at Jack's remark) that  the content of Farrell's lecture was limited  and liberal. But in the vacuum of men's involvement and action in liberation, I was at  least thankful that 'something' was happening. The 150 people present received a consciousness-raising, that initial important stage  of the liberation process familiar to most  feminists.  Farrell began his talk with an anecdote about  Ralph, a rich and powerful middle-aged man.  Ralph's proverbial climb up the ladder had  been at the expense of a meaningful relationship with his family. What was interesting to  me was Farrell's perspective on power. He  had two definitions: the first, which men  have a monopoly on, is roughly defined as the  ability to control the external reward system;  the other, as the ability to control one's own  life. He saw Ralph as having power by the  first definition but very little according to the  second. He seemed to imply that the more  you had of one, the less you would have of  the other. It reminded me of the cliche that  money does not bring happiness, and its  counter-remark that if a person is going to be  miserable it would be better to be rich than  poor.  Aside from feeling sorry for Ralph, Farrell  gave numerous examples of how men, along  with women, are oppressed within the:  confines of sex role stereotypes where the  pressure and expectations for men are high,  especially in the areas of work and sexuality.  Men are seen as success objects, socialized to  be rapists, have insecurities about sex, and  after being socialized to have big egos, are  constantly expected to put them on the line.  Reciprocally, women are seen as sex objects,  socialized to be masochists, repress their  sexuality and protect the male ego.  Farrell spent most of his lecture focusing on  the area of sexuality and love as expressed in  heterosexual relationships. He got the audience to participate in a role-reversal dating  game in which the women (playing the men)  tried to 'score' with their 'date' (the men),  and a men's beauty contest in which the men  were judged on their physical attributes.  Farrell did, however, touch on the political  as well as the personal when he mentioned  that change was necessary on both the personal and societal level. The changes he  envisioned include paternity leave, child care  centres staffed by both_sexes, male birth control, new forms of sport, freedom from job  specialization, and sex-role study courses instead of women's study courses. His strategy  for making these changes seemed to centre on  the goal of sex-role liberation rather than the  need to challenge existing power structures.  The assumption seemed to be that, given  Ralph-type executives getting in touch with  their feelings and weighing them against ulcers  FACT: THERE IS MORE  ENERGY EXPENDED IN  ONE HOUR OF BALLET  THAN IN AN ENTIRE  FOOTBALL    GAME-  and heart attacks, these structures would  simply decay from lack of use.  His ideal for men was freedom of growth and:  the awareness to know when they had!  reached their level of job satisfaction, rather'  than rising to a level of excessive pressure and  alienation — in choosing jobs, to "make a  profit on things we care about and that have  meaning to us".  This perspective, along with Jack's, I was  most critical of, given my own sensitive feminist perspective. While not under-estimating  the need and desire for individuals to relate to  each other in meaningful ways, including fulfilling • sexual experiences, focusing on this  does not seem the most effective way to liberate anybody. Nor is it a priority for many  people, especially women who are poor and  /or overburdened with child care.  Both personal and political dimensions are  interdependent and ideally change needs to  happen simultaneously on both levels, but my  perspective is polarized when I hear men such  as Jack complain about having to take the  initiative in sexual relationships and not being  able to find liberated women.  If he were as concerned with women's equality in the areas of economics and power as  with sexuality, he might decide to work towards this end. Ironically, this is where he  might just bump into women, at various  stages of liberation, who are also working towards this goal. Another, less direct route  might be to share child care with a single  mother, giving her the privilege and opportunity to take personal growth workshops to  liberate herself from restricting sex roles.  There is no guarantee that Jack would benefit  personally, but in a collective way he surely  would, by working to liberate people (mostly  brothers) from economic power and sexual  domination over others.  THE DOMINANCE ETHIC  by Linda Hourie  The following report outlines recent research  into sex-role stereotyping in elementary  school readers — primarily Holt, Rinehart &  Winston's Language Pattern Series, Grades  1-3, the series purchased by B.C.'s Department of Education.  The educators mentioned are part of the team  which conducted the research. Dr. Kahn  teaches educational counselling at the University of British Columbia, and Dr. Lorimer is  in the Department of Communication Studies  at Simon Fraser University.  Dr. Lorimer found in his studies of elementary school readers a more subtle type of  stereotyping than sex-role stereotyping. All  roles are presented in a hierarchical framework. This means that stereotyping occurs  not only on the basis of sex, but also along  class, economic, and social1 lines. The stories  and characters tend to be largely one-dimensional, with a standard complement of roles,  ie. the authority or power figure, the passive  nurturer, the novice or follower. As one  might guess, these roles are' generally played  respectively by man-father-policeman,  woman-mother-teacher, and child or pet. If  a story doesn't include all the figures, for  example, if the man-father is missing, generally only the top of the hierarchy gets played  out. That is, rather than woman-mother  playing her role, she moves into the man-  father-authority role.  What children learn from this, in effect, is  that only the dominant roles are important;  the -b-domiriant roles do not really matter.  Where does this leave women, not to mention  children? The stories minimize different  sensibilities, ie. when the mother "takes over"  turn to page 13 WOMEN & MENTAL HEALTH  A WORLD PERSPECTIVE  Following are excerpts of a speech given by  Rosemary Brown to the World Congress on  Mental Health, held in Vancouver in August.  There is something every woman wears  around her neck on a thin chain of fear  — an amulet of madness. For each of us  there exists somewhere a moment of  insult so intense that we will reach up  andfip the amulet off, even if the chain  tears at the flesh of the neck.  (Robin  Morgan, "Going Too Far")  I have taken the approach that the criterion  for therapy is "change", not "adjustment",  moreover, this thesis is based on the proposition that to a large extent the symptoms of  "mental disease" in women are a result of  their response to the oppressions of society,  and that all too often treatment is in the form  of helping them "cope" with a society which  is intolerant, and in many instances, no longer  relevant to them. Furthermore, I accept that  "madness" may largely be a social creation...  ...There will be no attempt by me to deny  that there are forms of mental illness that go  beyond reaction to life events, but since all  research indicates that most women who are  diagnosed mentally ill bear the diagnostic  labels of neurotic or psychotic — and when,  and if they are hospitalized, it is for "depression", suicide attempts, anxiety neuroses,  paranoia or promiscuity — my comments will  be focused on those labels — labels which  indicate that the mental illness of women is  indeed a reaction to intolerable social and  living situations.  Because an attempt to give a "world-wide  perspective" on women and mental health  seemed an incredible responsibility for one  person — I rationalized that a look at the  women of the world should not be confined  to the narrow parameters of my personal  experience and my reading. I convinced myself that it should be enriched by drawing  upon the experience and perceptions of other  feminists in the community who had declared  and demonstrated a concern for the mental  health, as well as the design and delivery of  mental  health services aimed at women.  oppression is.  ...Oppression is poverty; oppression is exploitation; it is forced dependence; it is being  property, yet not being valued as other forms  of property; it is being confined to work  ghettos; being held solely responsible for the  rearing of children; it is unwanted sex; being  beaten; being raped; it is having no control  over one's body. It is low self-esteem, it is  fear of aging, of being alone, it is not liking  oneself very much, it is learning at an early  age that one is not quite tall enough, slim  enough, pretty enough, competent enough —  oppression is never being able to accept that  as an individual, one is not solely responsible  for and the cause of one's poverty, exploitation, dependence and fear.  To understand the mental health of the  women of the world, one must first understand their oppression.  ...Look at the statistics on poverty for any  country in the world, and it soon becomes  apparent that of the 60% of people living in  utter misery, the shocking reality is that  women and children outnumber men by an  incredible margin; and that of the 800 million  illiterates in the world, 500 million are  women. But poverty, painful, destructive  and debilitating as it is - is only one form of  oppression which women around the world  experience...  ...I would also like to look at some other areas  of oppression which can.be held directly responsible for the development of what society  and community have come to accept as the  alarming incidence of mental illness among  women. The first factor is the existence of  woman as property — certainly we learn from  the law of the land in different countries that  sometimes the status of property is the only  thing that gives her any "value"...  The second reality is woman as dependent...  To ensure that dependency is held in high  esteem by women in North America as  elsewhere, it is equated with femininity. A  truly feminine person remains dependent on  a male, not only for room and board, but also  for guidance and advice and for decisionmaking...  The third reality is based on the acceptance  that women have all the responsibility for  children — some kind of genetic extrapolation  which concludes that she who bears the child  should rear the child.  economics -  the final  reality  ...Women in North American and European  society are isolated both by the very nature of  the family structure and by the emotional  loyalty that women feel, not to appear to be  unable to cope — ■ loyalty that emphasizes the  personal failure of' individual women rather  than the political nature of their problem...  In other societies where the extended family  exists, women/mothers are still deemed responsible for the rearing of children, and this  is one factor (among others) used to imprison  them within the family unit — barring their  entry into the outside world. Even in those  countries where "parenting" is publicly stated  to be the joint responsibility of both parents  (Sweden, Cuba), enforcing this policy is  having limited success.  The final reality is that economic factors and  the labour market have forced women workers into sexual ghettos where their rights to  low pay, poor working conditions, absence of  advancement or promotion are well protected...  This partial list of examples is an indictment  of the systems which oppress women. These  systems occur in many (if not all) societies,  whether it's the middle class woman in New  Zealand surviving on tranquilizers, the woman  in Jamaica with repeated entries into Bellevue  Hospital, the native woman in Canada dependent on alcohol, the beaten wife in Japan  being treated as pathological rather than as a  victim of custom, mores and economics, the  rich wives imprisoned by their wealth and  custom behind walled homes in Saudi Arabia,  the Black women in Australia who are taught  that the facts not withstanding they are never  raped since they are over-sexed and therefore  welcome this type of treatment, and where  the rape of very young Black girls is countered with the information that Black girls  mature early. The reality remains that these  oppressive systems cut across all class lines*  national boundaries, all worlds (first, second  or third) and all conditions of women...  page 13  B.C. WOMEN'S STUDIES ASSOCIATION  3RD ANNUAL CONFERENCE  The B.C. Women's Studies Association held  its third annual conference at Capilano College on October 21 and 22.  The conference was planned around two  series of workshops — one on strategies, the  other on content. Strategy workshops dealt  with rural women, surviving institutions,  dealing with women's studies as a feminist  enterprise, and with increasing enrolments,  among other issues. Content workshops  ranged from proposals for a women's studies  journal to a theatre group.  Women from all parts of the province  attended, facilitating information exchange  about the status of women's studies B.C.-  wide. A new Standing Committee for 1977-  1978 was elected at the conference.  ICKNEY,  Women  s Studies Assoc.  continued from  page 12  she doesn't bring her own way of dealing with  the world, she becomes a "substitute man".  She is not a person, merely a device for acting  out a societal role. Characters' actions are  generally explained in a psychological context  — almost never in a social context. Stories of  groups of children playing and cooperating  (as children, not as characters acting out set  roles) just don't exist. There are almost no  themes  of community or interdependence.  In summary, children learn more from school  readers than how to read. They are also learning to accept and adjust to a hierarchical,  individualistic society, one that rewards  competition, not cooperation.  New reading series are available that attempt  to grapple with the problem of a hierarchical,  one-dimensional, acontextual view. These  try to present multiple perspectives (ie. from  more than one character), portrayals of child-  adult interaction from the child's view, inclusion of work as an element in people's lives,  ethnicity, and a view of production that contrasts the over-riding view of consumption.  The research team's report, Reading; Consider.  Content: An Analysis of Two "Canadian"  Primary Language Arts Reading Series, is  available from Simon Fraser University. The  authors have also developed a series of supple-^  mentary guides to aid teachers, and parents in  counteracting the inadequacy and 111 effects  of these readers. The supplementary guides  are called The Other Guides to Language Patterns 1, 2 and 3. VSW has a copy of the  guides available for viewing, or they can be  ordered through the Communications Department of Simon Fraser University. The Rally Story   continued from page 9  details of what must go on behind the  scenes, and provides them in an open and  non-elitest way.  I also want to stress that The Rally Story  speaks at length about the actual mechanics  of lobbying. How does a lobby team get  together? How do they decide which are the  priority issues for their own riding? How do  they obtain some clues about their MLA?  How can they go armed against their MLA's  characteristic brand of power-tripping? How  can they find out which issues might be of  concern to the MLA?  The process of sleuthing for all this is  clearly recounted. Women Rally for Action  had (you guessed it!) a Lobby Workshop  Committee which provided a workshop at  which all lobbyists could collectively learn  lobbying skills. The preparations for this  workshop, and its agenda, are included, right  down to the number of minutes each section  of the agenda occupied.  Effective and ineffective lobbying techniques were dramatized by a Skit Commit- $]  tee. There were five participants. One 2!j  played the "Minister of Absolutely Everything Important", another the "Executive  Assistant", and the rest acted as the lobby  team.  A community group which is involved in  lobbying bureaucrats at any level would find  this section extremely enlightening. It  would be just as useful to a small group of  a half-dozen as it would be for a mass rally.  An account of the follow-up to Women  Rally for Action is included in the book's  closing sections. Press coverage is surveyed,  and there is a collage of press clippings on  the inside covers. The Epilogue stresses that  Women Rally for Action was throughout, a  genuinely collective action. As such, it  encompassed women from different political  ideologies who were united by our common  oppression.  Women Rally for Action: Epilogue is an  assessment of the action from a feminist  perspective. WRA said: "...on March 22,  we, the women of B.C., will present our  most immediate and urgent concerns to our  elected representatives with the goal of  finally obtaining from them a firm commitment for quick and effective action."  Quick and effective action, certainly, has  not been forthcoming. Does this mean that  the action was a failure? Was lobbying the  MLAs a reformist waste of time?  Emphatically, no. The Rally Story writers  explain:  The Rally had far reaching effects for the  growth and politicization of the women's  movement in B.C.  Through the process of preparing for,  and participating in, the Rally, women  gained lobbying skills, a knowledge of the  political    process,    confidence,    and    the  support that comes from this united'effort.  Myths about government and elected representatives were debunked — most MLAs  didn't really know about women's concerns,  and many didn't care to know.  A word about the layout and design: this  book is a beautiful piece of work. It is easy  to read! And for a book about organizing,  that's important. Photographs on every  page, boxes of commentary set off in italics,  point by point enumeration, harmonious  use of bold heads, reproductions of maps,  posters, timetables ... It's great!  Women Rally for Action - March 22, 1976.  It was an impressive demonstration of unity.  It was an equally impressive demonstration  of careful, scrupulous, democratic organizing. The Rally Story is its fitting testimony.  As such, it is an essential workbook for anyone committed to collective organizing.  WHO'S SELLING THIS PRODUCT & WHY  ARE WE BEING TOLD IT'S THEATRE?  Cruel Tears, the reviewers said, is "one of the  most original and creative works of theatre to  emerge from Western Canada in many years."  I went to see it, and I think they're lying.  The plot is a mid-20th century small-town  up-date of, Shakespeare's Othello, a romantic  story of the disastrous results of jealous love.  This well-worn plot fails to be original and  creative for a number of reasons.  For one thing, Shakespeare's corner on insightful portrayal of human nature may well  be slipping at mid-20th century. I was hoping  for self-conscious comment to relieve the trite  tale, and was rewarded with only a few lines  now and then offering some contemporary  perception, none of which built into the plot  in a significant way. Janet Wright, in a  Joanne Woodward-type part as wife and  mother, was given a major scene or two, but  these were somewhat gratuitous to the plot.  As a result, it felt as though the hard-done-by  woman is being paraded for the sake of a little  pathos.  Staging and musical backup effects during the  fated couple's romantic proposal add a playful and healthily self-conscious note, but the  wedding itself is played straight, for its full  sentimental value.  More seriously, the Othello plot is used to deliver a very powerful class message. The petit-  bourgeois fears of the working class held by  the heroine's father are vindicated. Working  class men do beat their wives, just as Daddy  said, and the punishment for crossing class  lines is death at the hands of your working  class lover, or for the male, finding the monster in yourself turned loose. These 'truths'  were applauded by comfortable audiences in  $5.50   seats  at  the  Playhouse,  praised  by  A Review of the Canadian Hit Musical  CRUEL TEARS  by Val Embree  reviewers in the media, and are already packaged into paperback editions for use in high  school Canadian Literature and Drama classes.  Which brings us to the third point. I hunger  to see the work of Canadian writers, and  believe that this should be actively encouraged. Cruel Tears, to my dismay, felt like a TV  situation-comedy made in small-town USA.  The few crusts of a couple of dancing Ukrainians, and vague references to Calgary and  Regina failed to convince me that I was being  shown the inner workings of a Canadian  prairie town. What I saw was post-high school  American Graffiti. This production didn't  "emerge out of Western Canada" - it  emerged out of the boob tube and English  100.  Why is it making cross-country tours and  being produced on an adequate budget at the  Playhouse, unlike most Canadian plays?  Maybe some of it has to do with its author  being an English professor at a prairie univer  sity, and having sold a number of scripts to  the CBC already. Maybe because the play is  colourful — comfortable to a middle-class  audience who are pleased by a play which  picks up on the Othello plot line, and doesn't  say anything new about Canadian society.  A last word of sympathy to the cast. They  are enthusiastic, skilled and talented. The  musical backup made a significant contribution, some of the choreography was excellent,  and set design was flexible, interesting and  didn't intrude upon the acting, which isn't  always the case in Vancouver theatre productions. I feel angry for all the professionals put  to such thin use in this sham of a contemporary Canadian play. Who can have the courage to go on if the promise of 'making it' is to  play the lead in something like this? Go to  New York, to London, to Hollywood — loyalty to this kind of Canadian theatre is not required.  The question remains — why was this play  promoted by producers, critics, and govern-,  ment funding agencies?" Is it so difficult for  mainstream theatre critics to see that a rewrite of Othello in 1977 is not "original and  creative"? Is it so risky to attempt more'  honest reflection? page 15  WOMEN'S INTERART EXHIBITION  by Judith Sandiford  Is there such a thing as feminist art? Do  women make art from a different perspective than men? Is this observable in the  ictual art objects?  These often debated questions were in the  air at the 2nd Annual Show of the Vancouver Women's Interart Society, held at the  Helen Pitt Gallery from October 24 to November 5.  As a member of the Society and a participant in the exhibition, I can vouch for the  fact that there is no consensus among us  about how feminist our art or our group is  — we all have our own points of view.  But looking at the show objectively (trying  to, that is), I note a number of definitely  feminist works, or putting it more broadly,  political works.  First, however, let me offer some unabashed  praise for ourselves. The exhibition is great!  It is much more interesting than last year's  show. How can I justify that? It has the  same wide range of media as last year's, but  somehow all the individual pieces seem  stronger, so the range of interest seems  broader.  The gallery space is used better than last  year. (Having the new mezzanine space for  the photographic work helps.) The arrangement of the pieces flow better, different  works are balanced against each other,  everything is less crowded and easier to view.  Twenty-two artists contributed work. Herewith is my version of a list of these.  Photography by four women:   Holly Devor,  Barbara Keyser, Sharon Lovett and Maggie^  Shore (how different each one's approach  is).  Two large fibre pieces: one a vibrantly  coloured sisal hanging in a braiding technique by Karen Chapnick, the other an  airy crocheted banner by Lee Turner.  Several other fabric-based works: phoenix  designs on silk by Julie Kemble, block-  printed fabric by Wendy Stockstad,  Shyamali Tan's painting "Freedom Struggle"  and Jeannie Kamin's punchy fabric collage  "Portrait of an artist at her opening night  plus two critics".  Ceramic work included bowls by Lynette  Pederson and these sculptures: Valerie  Pugh's intricate whimsical other-worlds,  Persimmon Blackb ridge's vitally alive  female figures, Phyllis Green's sculptures  of buried women.  Prints and drawings: Claire Kujundzic (a  visionary "Life Drawing/Time of Change"),  Diana Kemble (three very subtle and  thoughtful drawings about variation and  transformation), Judith Sandiford (lithographs), Karen Schoonover (drawing), and  Josie Cook (a tempera and crayon series).  Yes, paintings too: Marjorie Clark's  "Angela", three vigorous paintings by  Barbara Seamon, Maria Fitzgerald's political  (and witty) works about neutron bombs and  Tridents, and an oil by Rita Baruss.  Now out of all that work, one can find many  interesting aspects to talk about. Variations  on a theme, for instance, in Keyser's cacti  photographs or Kemble's drawings, etc. Or  use of colour in Seamon's paintings, or  Chapnick's hanging, etc.  But let's go hack to the question of feminist  art. Phyllis'Green, Marjorie Clark, Josie  Cook, Persimmon Blackbridge, Holly Devor,  and Claire Kujundzic are all making statements specifically about women.  TOP — Background (1 to r): art by Jean Kamins, Wendy Stockstad, Barbara Seamon.  Foreground (1 to r): sculpture by Persimmon Blackbridge, Valerie Pugh.  MIDDLE — Left to Right:  Maria Fitzgerald, "A Neutron Bomb is a Neutron Bomb  is a Neutron Bomb"  Persimmon Blackbridge, "Moon/Rising"  Josie Cook, "Virgin Transformation"  BOTTOM — Foreground: Persimmon Blackbridge, "Juggler 3".  turn to page 16 page 16  RIKA RUEBSAAT - FOLKSINGER  by Wyn LeRoux  Rika Ruebsaat is a powerful feminist folk-  singer. She understands the value of music  and its potential as a tool for social change.  Rika and her singing partner Jon Bartlett  go to where people are — schools, union  conventions, rallies, demonstrations, etc.  to sing. If anything makes her mad, it's the  attitude that singing isn't as important as  the speeches.  "Music is powerful," she says. "If we don't  make singing an active part of our lives it  can do things to our minds like all that sexist  crap that comes over the radio. Singing is as  real an expression as making love, talking to  people or hitting them over the head."  Rika recognizes that in her work she is giving  back to people what really belongs to them.  "I am a vehicle for where they're at, for the  language that in many ways has been taken  from them, for their anger, their common  work experiences, their solidarity. It's not  something I'm telling them. Many ballads  give back to the people their own history,  that has been edited out officially."  How does she choose the material she sings?  "If I decide to learn a song, my first impulse  is because I like the song ... it feels good to  sing. I have to be able to stand behind that  song, and have a reason for singing it."  What if it's a sexist song? "It must have a  place in who we all are, in where we've come  from, where we are now and where we're  going. Women getting beaten up, getting put  down, getting treated as objects — that's part  of where we live. It's not as if you just sing  the song without comment. The way you  introduce a song, or juxtopose two songs  hopefully gets the message across."  Rika spoke of her own development as a  singer: "Singing was something I got into by  my situation. It wasn't something I decided  to do and then went and did it."  Prior to 1974, Rika had been touring/managing with a political theatre group. For  numerous reasons, she quit, only to realize  later that some of the flak she had been  taking was because she was a woman.  She joined another singer who had already  planned a cross-Canada tour singing Canadian folksongs. "I enjoyed singing and I  thought it would probably be less hassle  working just with one other person, than  with nine other people, as in the theatre  company. Besides, I was aware of cultural  imperialism, and the U.S. domination of  Canadian culture." Rika saw what she was  doing as legitimate political work.  At that time, Rika and her partner Jack,  "did women's things for political reasons,  but I don't think I knew personally what  I was doing. We sang mostly traditional  stuff. Placing the position of women in an  historical perspective. It was a kind of  intellectual feminism."  Then they sang at a benefit for a Women's  Centre. They shared the bill with Rita  MacNeil.  "Here was a woman that was extremely  shy. She could barely look me straight in  the face. Then she got up there and sang."  My first reaction was envy, besides being  totally blown away. She grabbed those  women in a way I'd never seen anyone grab  an audience before.  Rika realized that Rita had to sing and write  the kind of songs she .does "because it's like  a scream of pain, almost. It was a very  visceral kind of feminism." Rika wanted  that kind of connection with the audience,  but didn't know how to get it because she  was coming from such a different place.  Frankie Armstrong, the British feminist  folksinger, was an important influence on  Rika. "Frankie sings with a tremendous  power and conviction. Her song is out  there ... she just happens to be the person  singing it."  "Now Frankie and Rita make interesting  comparisons. Rita comes from a working-  class background. She does her- music  because she has to.   She can communicate  her feelings through music. Frankie, on the  other hand, came from a backgrouncTsimilar"  to mine — middle-class. She hasn't gone  through one-tenth the shit Rita has. Frankie's power and intensity was something she  had to develop."  In the last two years, Rika explained,  Frankie has re-thought the way she uses her  voice. "She is finding her own voice rather  than the nice voice everyone told, her she  had. She's finding her own voice as a  woman."  Rika also sings in her own powerful and  deep voice. "I have learned one can go further," she says. "It's not just a question of  learning new and better songs, but of understanding not only intellectually but emotionally what you're doing and the responsibility  you have as a singer, what role you're playing in making this a better place to live."  Rika is a working singer. She sings Canadian  folksongs with her partner Jon Bartlett in  B.C. high schools. How does she relate her  current work in the schools to feminism?  There isn't much demand for feminist  material as such, to be sung. But they do  include songs about women in their  program.  Probably the most important feminist element of their work in the schools is their  presentation. Rika and Jon perform as  equals. Rika's voice is just as strong as Jon's.  People do a double-take when they hear  Rika sing in the same voice as she speaks*  with. In this way, Rika provides a startling  and persuasive contrast to the image music  teachers often try to cram down girls'  throats.  Can singing change the world? I ask. Rika  responds that it would be naive to expect it  to be simple. But if "one person connects —  even if they forget about it the next day —  something has happened." That's what Rika  Ruebsaat is into — making things happen,  through her singing.  In addition to working with school students,  .Rika is also heavily involved in the Vancouver folksong society. She edits "The Three-  Quarter Times", their monthly newspaper.  She organizes "Folk Song Circle", a twice-  monthly get-together for folksong people.  She works on "Folk Circle", a radio show  on Co-op Radio about folk music and its  role in society. She also works on the committee that operates the Green Cove Coffeehouse, every Friday night at the Britannia  Community Centre coffeehouse.  Most importantly: RIKA WILL BE APPEARING Wednesday November 23 at THE  FULL CIRCLE COFFEEHOUSE, 152 East  8th Avenue, Vancouver. Door opens at  8:00pm; first performance at 9:30pm.  FEMINIST AM"  continued from page 15  Persimmon's exuberant ceramic figures and  Holly's direct open faces (photographed)  convey similar feelings — strong positive  energy. At the opposite extreme is Phyllis'  enigmatic and disturbing work — women are  buried, unheard, unrecognized.  Claire's works are full of anger and distress -  at the state of the world, or woman as  victim. Josie perhaps is also angry; her  "Virgin Transformation" shows a pale bride  change in three panels to a black-shrouded  figure with a harsh mask face.  Then there is Marjorie's ironical treatment of  stereotypes about femininity (a vagina-image  in "girlish" pink).  These artists are all working from the point  of view of being a woman, using this consciously in their work. Whether you might  say that all women artists have a woman's  point of view (different than men's), because  they are women is arguable.  My own opinion is that the basic issues of  art — why one makes art — are human, universal. Art should go beyond specifics and  reach that deeper common level which has  to do with seeing, perceiving, feeling, being  alive.  But debating these ideas is invigorating and  that's why it's great to have a group show  like Interart's which promotes dialogue  among women about their art.  FLASH - WE NEED HELP!  The Women's Research Team of Vancouver  Status of Women is seeking money for the  publication of our research on the status of  women in B.C. We have been working on  this research for five months and our report  will be the only comprehensive report on the  status of women in B.C. since the Royal  Commission Report of 1970.  If you are an employee of IBM, Crown  Zellerbach, Xerox or any other company  that has a Community Grant Program you  can be of help to us. We can apply for funding for our publication through your company, if you aire a member of VSW and your  company has a Community Grant Program.  Please contact Summer McGee at VSW —  736-3746. page 17  BOOKS  Population Target: The Political Economy of  Population Control in Latin America, by  Bonnie Mass is an eloquent, well-documented  attack on population control programs, in  particular those of American government and  industry.  Mass asks, what is the advantage gained by  American Foreign Aid in expensive contributions to population control programs in  under-developed countries? Why is half of  the budget designated for health aid spent on  population control? The answer, according to  Mass, is that population control, in the form  of sterilization or birth control, performs a  vital service to the capitalist system of profit  accumulation.  In North America, women have been struggling for control of their bodies, for the freedom to obtain abortion on demand. A simplified typology of 'the enemy' is the sexist,  powerful man who seeks to confine the  woman to the role of homemaker, mother  and servant.  In under-developed countries, women have  been historically provided with sterilization  and birth control to a degree unavailable to  middle class women in North America.  Why is it politically expedient to press for  birth control in under-developed countries  while desiring the reproduction of American  middle class men and women? Is it possible  that both a woman in an underdeveloped  country and a middle class woman in North  America are victimized by the same economic  system which in each case promotes such a  differing lifestyle? It would seem so, according to Population Target.  In under-developed countries, the aim of the  multi-cultural corporation is resource extraction to provide raw materials essential to  production in the homeland. For example,  bauxite found in South America is extracted  by low-paid unskilled workers and shipped to  a location where available hydro-electric  power facilitates the conversion of bauxite to  aluminum.  In a formerly primitive agricultural country,  transforming the economic base to a single-  resource-extraction industry causes traumatic  changes in population density. Cities spring  up. The emphasis on food production is  replaced by luxury or packaged items produced for wage-earning consumers in the industrial city. Food shortages are inevitable as  farmers are displaced from the land and move  to the city in search of work.  According to Population Target, unemployment and food shortages in a capitalist structure clearly result not from the inability of  the earth to sustain its population but from  the manipulation of food markets. For  example, American and Canadian governments provide farmers with incentives to decrease wheat production in order to drive the  price of wheat upwards in the resultine shortage.   Of course the farmer does not benefit;  the middleman reaps the benefits through  buying and selling wheat on the food exchange.  Population control has been instituted in  under-developed countries under the guise of  the 'population boom' theory (ie. that, because the earth cannot feed its masses, population must be controlled). Population Target  argues that the answer to starvation and  unemployment is a redistribution of wealth.  From WOMEN'S EDUCATIONAL PRESS:  POPULATION TARGET - A Review  by Maureen Bostock  Furthermore, there is the awesome fact that  poor people in under-developed countries are  experiencing genocide because they are economically expendable and in the way of industrial exploitation by the foreign investor. Any  large frustrated population on the doorstep of  a multi-national corporation's operation in an  under-developed country is a threat to the-  stability of the company's profits and hence a  threat to the foreign government's survival as  a power in that country. Mass quotes  Eduardo Galeano:  In Latin America, it is more hygenic and  effective to kill guerilleros in the womb than  in the mountains or in the streets.  In the case of the U.S., Latin America is a  threat to American political stability in the  West, as many countries below the U.S.  border seek socialist alternatives to exploitation by foreign imperialists.  Population Target presents an excellent historical outline of the development of population control theory and research in the U.S.  Most important of the issues discussed is  documentation of the link between American  foreign aid to under-developed countries and  population control. The U.S. has developed a  policy that in order for an under-developed  country to receive foreign aid, the country  must institute an acceptable population control program. Enforcing sterilization of the  surplus labour force in an under-developed  country has been easily woven into the benevolent aid package which American prides  itself on giving so generously to needy  nations.  Success is indicated in the statistics provided  in Population Target. By 1968, 25% of the  married women of child-bearing age in Panama City had been sterilized. In Puerto Rico,  by 1965, 35% of women of child-bearing age  had been sterilized. Two-thirds of these  women were in their 20s.  Perhaps as insidious is the research conducted  on women in under-developed countries by  the birth control industry. Cheap, convenient  and long-lasting birth control alternatives are  distributed widely in under-developed countries regardless of the hazards to health.  Depo-Provera, for example, is a 3-month  injectable birth control device. It was withdrawn from the American market in 1974.  However, it is presently marketed in 44  nations and an estimated 700,000 women use  it regularly, despite the danger of infertility,  and side-effects of irregular bleeding and  severe disruption of menstrual cycle. It is  available through legitimate population control agencies. Further, birth control research  is being conducted indiscriminately, using  poor and oppressed women as guinea pigs.  Population Target presents the reader with  the socialist answer to population control in  which, through redistribution of wealth and  consideration of the relationship between production and need (as opposed to the capitalist's emphasis on the "production and profit"  relationship), control of the population has  no role. Rather, birth planning is taught; the  concept being that a woman is free to choose  how many children she wishes to produce  according to her contentment with her lifestyle. Contraceptives and abortion are free  and easily available to all women.  Returning to the consideration of American  middle class women and their struggles, is it  possible to conclude that the women's movement has struggled towards a misleading objective? That, rather than seek specific freedoms for specific groups of women in our  society, women ought to question the quality  of life for all peoples in our society under a  profit-oriented structure. Minorities and  other low-status groups, will always be  oppressed and alienated from the mainstream  of social existence, because as long as profits  increase, the women and men at the bottom  of the social ladder pay more and more for  the benefits enjoyed by those above.  Understanding the oppression of women in  disadvantaged situations, Bonnie Mass indicates, is now a necessary step for the emancipated middle class woman. I would add a  final comment, that historically the process  of oppression has been one of 'divide and  conquer'. Until the privileged of North  America, who enjoy freedom and job mobility, recognize and work with and in support  of, native women and lower class women, the  battle for freedom from oppression shall not  be won. Furthermore, it is time to look at  our own country and ask: Does genocide  accompany resource extraction in Canada as  it has in Latin America? 1  K.INESIS  page 18  %   courses  conferences  media  militant merrymaking  *  FULL CIRCLE COFFEEHOUSE  152 East 8th Avenue, Vancouver (874-7119)  Opens at 8:00pm - Admission $2.00  Wednesdays  November 2:    Starshine - local singer and  songwriter  November 9:  Patti Tutti — singing traditional  folk  songs and ballads that  focus on women in the past  November 16: Verna Jahnke — poet  November 23:    Ulrika Ruebsaat — local folk  musician  November 30: Cathy Ford — poet  Fridays (Women Only)  November 4: Mamie Wildeman — poet and  author of "Barn Clothes"  November 11: Carol Street — local singer  and songwriter  November 18: Pumpkin Pumpeteers — feminist puppets for grown-ups  November 25: Mary Schendlinger — readings  from her journal, and short  Sunday Nights — Drop-In for Women Only  (Free)  Special Events  Monthly Party — Scorpios especially welcome  Saturday, November 5th at 8:00pm. $1  Women only.  Creative Writing Workshop (with Susan  Hamilton) — Journal writing, children's  writing, introduction to professional  standards (publishing), written criticism  of your work done in workshop, poets  welcome! Starting Saturday, November 5  from 1:30-3:30pm. $30 for 6 weeks.  Women only.  WOMANSONG, a Salt Spring Island group, are  offering the following fall workshop weekends.  Fee is $30.00 for each. WOMANSONG is within  walking distance of the Fulford Harbour Ferry,  which leaves from Swartz Bay. For more details,  write to them at the address below:  Women's Sexuality November 11-13  Women's Groups November 18-20  Woman Talk: Mind To Mind ? November 25-27  Separatism: To What Degree? December 2-4  Relationships: Open vs. Monogamous      Dec 9-11  Woodland Setting — Tipi Accommodation  For further information write Womansong,  Fulford Harbour, B.C. V0S 1C0.  NORTH SHORE WOMEN'S CENTRE  WOMEN'S PILGRIMAGE: A caravan of  women and children walking the West Coast  to articulate their concern as feminists about  the state of the world. This is a proposal put  forward by a member of North Shore  Women's Centre. To discuss the feasibility  of such an idea and its manifold possibilities,  there will be a workshop at the Centre  Tuesday, November 29 at 7:30pm.  RICHMOND WOMEN'S RESOURCE  CENTRE  11051 No. 3 Road, Richmond  Wednesdays at 7:3 0pm  November L6:  Food Co-ops  November 23: You and Your M.D. — Linda  Gould from Vancouver Women's Health  Collective.  November 30: Fitness Testing for Women —  Kathy Staley from Cambie 'Y'.  December 5:  Steering Committee meeting.  December 14; Women and Religion: Past,  Present and Future (non-denominational)  N.B. — Babysitting can usually be arranged.  For more information contact Nina  (271-9186), Marielle (277-3086), or Naomi  (271-8951).  _ if*1  7Q27f*  WOMANVISION  A Feminist Radio Program  Co-op Radio - 102.7 FM  Tuesdays at 6:30pm  November 1: A Program About Rape, Part  II — Interviews with Rape Relief, Women  Against Rape, and Deborah Lewis (author of  a book about sexual assault).  November 8: Linda Allen — Folk musician  from Bellingham, recorded live at the Full  Circle Coffeehouse.  November 15: Judi Morton — lesbian  feminist poet, recorded live at the Full  Circle Coffeehouse.  November 22: Diane Campbell — Victorian  folksinger, recorded live at the Full Circle  Coffeehouse as part of her West Coast tour.  November 29: Just you wait and listen!  HAN SU-YIN VISITS VANCOUVER  Han Su-Yin will be in town Sunday November 20th. She will give one lecture at 7:30  at the Orpheum Theatre. Tickets are $2.50  from China Arts and Crafts, 33 E. Hastings,  and all Duthie Books stores.  Han Su-Yin's many books are efforts to  explain the momentous social changes  that are occurring in China. Recently, she  published two volumes of a projected five  volume biography of Mao Tse-tung, The  Morning Deluge and The Wind in the Tower.  For more information, contact Bonnie Koo  of the Canada-China Friendship Association  at 687-6498.  Vancouver  Peopled  LawSchool  2110C West Twelfth Avenue, Vancouver. B.C. V6K 2N2 (604)734-1 126  ON THE NORTH SHORE  'WOMEN AND THE LAW: Capilano College  Women's Resource Centre and the North  Shore Women's Centre are co-sponsoring  two informative evenings that pertain directly to areas of the law that women are  frequently involved with — Family Court  and Property Division due to Divorce or  Separation.  FAMILY COURT PROCEDURE: Wednesday, November 9, 7:30-9:OOpm, Room N.B.  101, North Campus. A brief introduction to  procedures for various kinds of remedies and  reliefs in Provincial Court Family Division.  Where to go — what to do — when do you  need a lawyer.  PROPERTY DIVISION: Tuesday, November 15, 7:30-9:OOpm, Room N.B. 101,  North Campus. This evening will discuss the  new proposal for community property in  B.C. and discuss various proposals that have  been presented, ie. Berger, plus a picture of  the situation in general in Canada regarding  property.in relation to divorce or separation.  THE RAJJjCY STORY  i* kwu auaiMPe  52 pages describing the most comprehensive  lobby action in the history of B.C.  "WOMEN RALLY FOR ACTION"  The book includes organizational  information, analysis, tactics,  photographs, quotes and much more.  get gout ccp'm HOW  $2.00 eoclt  plus .50^ postage  (for orders of 4 copies or more ....  please enquire re: bulk mailing rates)  •  Send cheque or money order made out  WOMEN RALLY FOR ACTION  and address to:  THE RALLY STORY  c/o 2029 W. 4th Ave.,  Vancouver, B.C. Canada letters     #  ads  *  KINESIS  page 19  NOVEMBER  ISSN 0317-9095  OUR READERS WRITE  I'm recently separated, so this has compounded my financial situation. I debated  not subscribing to Kinesis at all, but decided  I wanted to keep in touch with the women's  movement locally — and this was the way!  More facts and less emotions re issues presented please. Keep up the good work!  I think Kinesis would be a more effective  publication if some of the articles were  condensed and edited. Otherwise, keep up  the good work.  Your presentation  at City Hall on Equal  Opportunities was very good.  Since I have been a member continuously  of this illustrious group since its inception  on January 10, 1971, I intend to "hang in  there, baby!"  Please renew my membership for another  year. Sorry I can't send more but I'm  presently unemployed.  I take Kinesis to work with me and I find  my fellow workers have become aware of  many issues and problems of womankind  through discussion of its articles.  As a Canadian living in the U.S., I find  the paper very informative.  One small complaint. I have been getting  Kinesis for the past year and usually I  don't receive my copy until about the 12th  of each month. Can I have it sooner?  Ed. response: Don't we know it! All you  can do is urge the Post Office along. Meanwhile, we have started to deal with these  delays by treating Events as a mid-month  to mid-month section. In this issue, notice  our announcement for December events!  A recent issue appeared to me to be more  radical and perceptive of basic problems  than previous issues. Patching things,  reforms, etc. might be fine, but the cause  of our problems and its eradication is THE  thing.  Have just realized that Kinesis is the best  feminist newspaper in Canada.  Reading old copies of Kinesis helped me  piece together a seminar on the feminine  mystique which will make up half my  English marks this seminar ... thanks isn't  enough!  StlBSCRfBe Cc  w  jo  Q -C  $0   0)   Sh   !n  tQ   g   0)   <U  £>^   »   <  t3s 23 CQ <:  Kinesis is published monthly by the Vancouver  Status of Women. Its objectives are to enhance  understanding about the changing position of  women in society and to work actively towards  achieving change.  Views expressed in Kinesis are those of the writer  and DO NOT necessarily reflect VSW policy. All  unsigned material is the responsibility of the  Kinesis editorial and production crew.  SUBMISSIONS: VSW welcomes submissions  from the feminist community and in particular,  from VSW members. We do reserve the right to  edit, and submission does not guarantee publication. Include a SASE if you want your work  returned.  CORRESPONDENCE - Kinesis, Vancouver  Status of Women, 2029 West 4th Avenue, Vancouver, B.C. V6J 1N3.  You can help our subscription base by delivering  free copies in your community. Call VSW and  we'll send you some: 736-3746.  CLASSIFIED ADS  CHARGE:   50 cents per line (at 35 characters/line).    Payment in full  must accompany classified ad copy.  DEADLINE: The 20th of the month preceding publication. Changes  in copy or cancellations will NOT be accepted after the  23rd of the month.  FOR INFORMATION AND RATES ON DISPLAY ADS  CONTACT GAYLA REID AT VSW - 736-3746  T—SHIRTS,BUTTONS,  BUMPER STICKERS  Women's T-Shirts   $6.00 each  We now have T-SHIRTS available:  Slogans:.  1. VANCOUVER STATUS OF WOMEN  2. MS  3. SISTERHOOD IS POWERFUL  4. "A WOMAN WITHOUT A MAN IS LIKE A FISH WITHOUT A BICYCLE"  Colours: Red, White or Blue  Sizes: Women's -Small, Medium or Large  if come into the office and pick one out!  Buttons $1.00 each  ±co<tv4  Bumper Stickers  $1.00 each  VANCOUVER STATUS OF WOMEN  SISTERHOOD IS POWERFUL  Children's T-Shirts    $5.00 each (by order only)  Slogans:  • prices  include tax  1. MS  2. SISTERHOOD IS POWERFUL  Colours:  Red, White or Blue  Sizes:      S(6-8), M(10-12)  (Some older children may be able to fit a Woman's  small size - see adults T-SHIRTS above)  ORDER BY MAIL or DROP INTO THE OFFICE  Children's T-Shirts must be paid for at time order is placed. ***      LATE NEWS       ***      LATE NEWS       ***      LATE NEWS       ***  WE'VE GOT ITi  Vancouver Status of Women now has the tax status of 'Charitable Organisation'  (this means your donations are deductible from your income when computing for  income tax purposes).  We will be using all monies received in donations to continue with the service and  education aspects of our work.  We offer programs to schools and other organisations  on how sexism pervades all aspects of life.  We organise conciousness-raising  groups, assertiveness-training groups and self-help advocacy groups to assist  women in self growth and in learning to take control of their own lives.  These are the only free feminist services of this kind offered in Vancouver.  But, we need money - for rent - salaries - stationery - childcare - postage -  telephone - etc. - etc. - etc.  This is your organisation and we cannot operate without your support!  Our registration number is 0494653-59-27.  ^^9^^WW^. °-°-9°-9? 9090099009999090900  CHRISTMAS PARTY ^f /]  This year the V.S.W. Christmas Party will be at Kits House Wednesday D&cxanlHU^JLQfch.  at 7.30pm - 2305 West 7th Ave. Vancouver (7th & Vine).  There will be an open house at the office on the same day from 2.30pm - 7.30pm  (For those who don't know the office address is 2029 West 4th Ave, Vancouver)  All members and interested women are welcome'  Entertainment and Refreshments\  QUARTERLY MEETING  Early warning: Our quarterly general meeting is to be held at Kits House on  Wednesday 18th January at 7.30pm  Our quarterly meetings have not been very lively of late - Few members turn out  but, now, we have changed our meeting place from the Bored Room to the friendly  atmosphere of Kits House, so, let us have suggestions for a stimulating meeting  from our members.'  THE GREATEST CHRISTMAS GIFT EVER.'  KINESIS Subscriptions - Only $8.00 and guaranteed to last 12 months!  Fill in the form below, mail with your cheque and we will send a beautiful card to  the lucky recipient and mail out a 1 year subscription starting January, 1978.  Qr % % %%%%%%%% %  FROM         TO        Please mail this to arrive before      Vancouver Status of Women,  the 10th December to ensure prompt     Kinesis Subscriptions,  processing. 2029 West 4th Ave.. Vancouver, V6J 1N3