 >p  February 1987  $1.75  News About Women Thatjs Not In The Dailies  MOTHERPEACE • ABORTION CLINIC COALITION • PHILIPPINES  ROSALIND FRANKLIN AND DNA • CHILEAN ARPILLERAS Kinesis welcomes volunteers to work on all aspects  of the paper. Call us at  873-5925. Our next story  meetings are: Thurs., Jan  8 and Thurs. Feb. 15 both  at 7:30 pm at the VSW offices, 400A West 5th Ave.  All women welcome, even If  you don't have any experience.  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE: Isis, Dr. Aletta Jacobs, Lee Saxell, Alllsa  McDonald, Lesley Seddon,  Esther Shannon, Nancy  Pollak, Noreen Howes, Ann  Doyle, Jody McMurray,  Maura Volante, Ann Doyle,  Grace Scott, Alana Sewld,  Marsha Arbour, Ivy Scott.  COVER: Design by Marsha Arbor  EDITORIAL BOARD: Esther Shannon, Isis, Lisa  Hebert, Kim Irving, Emma  Kivisild, Maura Volante,  Noreen Howes, Sharon  Hounsell, Patty Gibson, Alllsa McDonald.  CIRCULATION AND DISTRIBUTION: Vicky  Donaldson, Cat L'Hirondelle, Meredith Bolton  ADVERTISING: Vicky  Donaldson, Jill Pollack,  Isis.  OFFICE: Vicky Donaldson, Gall Meredith.  Kinesis Is published 10  times a year by the Vancouver Status of Women.  Its objectives are to be  a non-sectarian feminist  voice for women and to  work actively for social  change, specifically by  combatting sexism, racism,  homophobia and Imperialism.  Views expressed In Kinesis are those of the writer  and do not necessarily reflect VSW policy. All unsigned material Is the responsibility of the Kinesis  Editorial Board.  SUBSCRIPTIONS: Individual subscriptions to Kinesis are $17.50 per year or  what you can afford. Membership In the Vancouver  Status of Women Is $25.50  or what you can afford. Includes subscription to Kinesis.  All submissions are welcome. We reserve the right  to edit and submission  does not guarantee publication. All submissions  should be typed double  spaced and must be signed  and include an address and  phone numbers. Please  note that Kinesis does not  accept poetry or fiction  contributions. For material  to be returned, a SASE  must be Included. Editorial  guidelines are available on  request.  DEADLINE for features  and reviews Is the 10th of  the month preceding publication. News copy, 15th.  Letters and Bulletin Board  listings, 18th. Display advertising: camera ready,  18th; design required, 12th.  Filipino women organize aganist the chip multinationals.  page  14  Arapillera artists:  Chilean women who sew art from hardship and  resistance. page 18  INSIDE  ww  Feds nix R.E.A.L. Women 3  Motherpeace Eight acquitted 3  Educational restraint report 4  Abortion clinic coalition 5  City budget facing cuts 6  Immigrant organizing 7  Women prison guards 8  Whores meet in Brussels 10  Notes from the Countryside 11  by Judith Quinlan  Rosalind Franklin and DNA 12  by Kirsten Emmott  Filipina Women 14  by Lynn Bueckert, Rachel Epstein, and Christine Micklewright  Am  Margaret Laurence: a tribute 17  by Cynthia Flood  Chilean Arparillas 18  by Sima Elizabeth Shefrin  Blueswoman Katie Webster 19  by Connie Smith  Movement Matters 2  Beans (formerly No Name) .9  Periodicals in Review 16  Night Reading 18  Letters 20  Dyment 22  Bulletin Board 22  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status of  Women, 400A West 5th  Ave., Vancouver, B.C. V5Y  1J8.  Kinesis Is a member of the  Canadian Periodicals Publishers Association.  Typesetting by Baseline  Type and Graphics Cooperative. Camera work by  Northwest Graphics. Laser  printing      by      Docusoft.  Printing   by   Webb   Press  Graphics.  Second class mall #6426  KINESIS   February   87 Movement Matters  Movement Matters is designed to be a  network of news, updates and information of special interest to the women's  movement. Submissions to Movement  Matters should be no more than 500  words, typed, double-spaced on 8| by  11 paper. Submissions may be edited for  length. Deadline is the 18th of the month  preceding publication.  Young dykes  Two young women are working on the  formation of a lesbian youth group in Vancouver. Intended to be both a social and a  support service, the group will be sponsored  by the Vancouver Lesbian Centre (VLC).  Their first meeting will be held at the VLC,  876 Commercial Drive, on February 13th at  7:30 pm. The first meeting will be short for  those women wishing to attend the Valentine dance.  The two women, Dina and Ramona, hope  to have something for everyone. As a reflection of this, there will be two types of meetings: formal and informal.  The formal meetings will be ... more  formal. Among the planned activities are  speakers, discussions on a wide range of subjects of importance to these youth, lesbians,  and women, as well as support for women  coming out. They will also have information on everything from local happenings,  including what is open to the underaged.  The informal meetings will be social activity oriented, just plain fun, and will not necessarily always be on Fridays.  They also feel that it is important to emphasize that all lesbian youth are welcome,  including able-bodied and disabled.  The group will meet formally at the VLC  every second and fourth Friday of the month  from 7:30 pm to 11:00 pm starting Febru  ary 13th. It will also meeting informally every first and third Friday starting February 20th at various locations. The group is  open to all lesbians under 25 years of age,  and there will be a $2.00 charge for formal  meetings to cover the rent of the room. If  you want more information call the VLC at  254-8458 or Ramona at 521- 7331 (for Ramona evenings are best, don't worry about  how late it is.) It would be appreciated if  people would call either place for an informal registration so that the organizers will  have an idea of the number of women that  they can expect on the first night.  Women's building  Last March VLC started a job development grant to investigate community economic development. The project is now in  the final stages of a study to see if it is  possible to pull together a number of political groups, services and businesses into a  women's building.  Our work has been divided into two main  areas: gathering the economic information  necessary, and trying to gain clarity about  the politics and the political vision of such  an undertaking.  If the building is run by a tenant cooperative board (for lack of a better term at the  moment) what kind of policies will we need  for occupancy/administration/day to day  operation? What basis of unity do we need  as building occupants? What kind of policy will we need for casual rentals? Will we  rent to groups that include men? If so, under what circumstances? What kind of policies will we need for businesses—i.e. women  owned vs. woman controlled. Will we ask for  agreements about employee policies—i.e.  unionized/co-op/profit-sharing/wage scale/  no policy of ours? Will we ask for agreements from services re. sliding scale? Would  we give rent breaks to those who have a sliding scale? Would the building have a sliding  scale for occupants? If a tenant board sets  on-going policy for building, then who is  eligible—and can occupants be eligible and  choose not to sit on the tenant collective?  We're trying to anticipate as much as  possible what decisions will be necessary  and we hope that others will be discussing  these ideas and questions too. In the spring  we will be holding a series of community  meetings to share the information that we  have gathered and to talk about what the  next steps might be.  In the meantime, we would very much appreciate any feedback, comments, questions  or suggestions that anyone might have. We  have also collated the results of bur initial  questionnaire and they are available to interested women. To reach us, please call Bet  or Brenda at 254-8458 (VLC, 876 Commercial Drive) or at 873- 5804 (CED Project).  Breaking  the   barriers  "Breaking Barriers," is the theme for the  4th Annual B.C. Regional Lesbian and Gay  Conference being held at the University of  British Columbia's Student Union Building.  This year, the conference will be moving to a new time slot—the May long weekend, instead of its usual time in February. This year's conference, sponsored by  the Vancouver Gay & Lesbian Community  Centre, boasts a major increase in input by  women. The organizing committee, which is  fifty percent lesbian, has made a commitment to dramatically improve lesbian visibility at the conference—at least half of  the workshops will be planned and facilitated by women. Childcare will be available  for all events. A sliding scale for registra  tion fees based upon income has been introduced. As well, the planning committee intends to have two keynote speakers, a lesbian and a gay man.  The conference organizers still need help  on various sub-committees. If you are interested, phone the Vancouver Lesbian Centre  at 254-8458, or the Vancouver Gay & Lesbian Community Centre at  IWD gets  underway  The International Women's Day Committee is pleased to update the progress of  our organizing endeavours.  After lively discussion, it was decided  that the theme for the 1987 Vancouver International Women's Day would be "Women  Everywhere United". Women around the  world have gained new solidarity in their  efforts due to the struggles encompassed in  the women's movement, internationally.  Some women have already volunteered  for some IWD 1987 tasks which call for a  march and rally with signing for the deaf.  Displays will appear at the Vancouver Public Library and at Carnegie Centre. The  Vancouver Lesbian Connection will be presenting the IWD dance and part of the proceeds will go to IWD endeavours. The dance  will take place on Friday, March 6, 1987.  Planning for the parade is progressing  well. A committee was formed to meet with  officials to obtain a permit, arrange for insurance, handle costs associated with the  parade, plan the route of the parade and to  make plans for security. Fundraising is progressing also, and letters for donations have  been sent out. We encourage your organization's participation in continuing IWD  planning. For more info, on future meetings  please contact Sherry at 872-5847.  qNESIS ////////////////m^^  //////////////////////^^^^  ACROSS  B.C.  Feds nix R.E.A.L.Women  by Nancy Pollak  R.E.A.L. Women of Canada, despite support from the Conservative caucus and their own vigorous lobbying, has once again been  refused operational funding by the  Secretary of State's Women's Program. In mid-January, Secretary  of State David Crombie informed  the group, which is best known for  its attacks against feminists, homosexuals and the Women's Program itself, that their application  for $566,620 was denied because  they failed to meet the program's  eligibility requirements.  In his letter, Crombie told  R.E.A.L. Women that his ministry supports groups which "promote understanding and action  on status of women issues" and  "projects concerned with better  educational and job opportunities,  quality day care, equal pay, improved pensions, maternity leave,  and women's needs in the home  and in the work place."  R.E.A.L. Women, claiming to  speak for the woman in the home,  has gone on record as opposing  choice on abortion, universal day  care, no-fault divorce, pensions for  homemakers, equal pay for work of  equal value, and human rights protection for lesbians and gay men.  Crombie also reminded  R.E.A.L. Women that he needs  to see "a proven track record of  project management before committing operational funds." At a  meeting last December to discuss  the rejection of their previous application for $1.4 million, Crombie had told R.E.A.L. Women that  there was no precedent for granting operational monies before a  group had successfully completed  a project funded by his ministry.  Despite this, R.E.A.L. Women  made no effort to apply for project  funding and instead continues to  complain about the core funding extended to the National Action Committee on the Status of  Women (NAC). Ruth Grant, a  Crombie aide, states, "NAC went  through five years of project funding before receiving operational  assistance."  Peggy Steacy, leader of the British Columbia chapter of R.E.A.L.  Women, was disappointed by the  rejection and questioned the significance of "proven track record."  "We've had four annual general  meetings, appeared before Parliamentary Committees, and been  complimented, and we've lobbied  the members of Parliament," said  Steacy. In Toronto, founding member Gwen Landolt stated that  R.E.A.L. Women expects to eventually receive a "paltry" project  grant from the Secretary of State,  but details of any project are unavailable.  British Columbia's regional representative for NAC, Jane Evans,  was pleased by Crombie's decision.  "Obviously they are not qualified  for funding by Secretary of State's  present qualifications," she said,  and noted that R.E.A.L. Women  oppose the equality section of the  Charter of Rights and Freedom.  R.E.A.L. Women's public quarrel with the Women's Program has  had, and will continue to have,  reprercussions for feminist orga  nizations. In his letter, Crombie  apologized for the way R.E.A.L.  Women's earlier application was  handled and promised them fair  treatment in the future. Meanwhile, the women's program is undergoing an internal review of its  procedures, in part as a result of  R.E.A.L. Women's agitation.  The Vancouver Status of Women has written to Crombie expressing support for his decision, but  sounded a cautioning note as well:  "Although we can appreciate  your desire to be fair in handling the question of funding  for R.E.A.L. Women activities,  we must point out to you that  R.E.A.L. Women themselves have  been most unfair in their representation of feminist goals generally  and the policies and practices of  both NAC and the women's program ... We believe it is incum-  bant upon you, in your capacity as  Minister, to correct at every available opportunity the misinformation given the Canadian public on  the question of equality for women  and call upon you to take up the  task of articulating the "country's  goals in this area."  In the wake of Crombie's action,  an Alberta Conservative M.P. has  declared that the province's federal caucus considers getting federal funding for R.E.A.L. Women  to be their "number one priority."  Letters in support of the Secretary of State Women's Program and David Crombie's decision on funding for R.E.A.L.  Women can be sent to David  Mary Sullivan and Gloria LeMay, two Vancouver midwives convicted  of criminal negligence, were sentenced last December. They are  required to do 200 hours of community service (unrelated to pregnancy and childbirth) and not be present at births for a three year  probation period. Sullivan and LeMay, represented by former judge  Thomas Berger, have filed an appeal which will be heard sometime  this summer.   Crombie, Secretary of State,  Parliament Buildings, Ottawa,  Ontario, K1A OA6. Letters  should also be sent to Barbara McDougall, Minister Responsible for the Status of  Women, Parliament Buildings,  Ottawa, Ontario, K1A OA6.  No postage is required.  by Maura Volante  The acquittal of eight women,  charged with trespassing on Department of National Defense  (DND) property during the Motherpeace Action last August, can be  credited to the movements of the  sea.  It was established at the trial, in  mid-January in Parksville Provincial Court, that Winchelsea Island, the computer headquarters  of the Canadian Forces Maritime  and Experimental Test Range  (CFMETR), is DND property  only above the high tide mark.  Because the "Motherpeace Eight"  conducted their symbolic protest  picnic below the island's high water mark, they could not be convicted of trespassing.  One of the women's motivations in rowing out to the island, two kilometres off Nanoose  Penninsula in the Georgia Strait,  was to be arrested and draw attention to the testing of nuclear-  powered submarines carrying nuclear weapons in Canadian waters. Although some information  on activities at CFMETR was exposed at the time of the action,  the women were disappointed that  they didn't have a chance to air  the issues in court.  Sharon Bradshaw, one of the  eight women on trial, said "I felt  a bit frustrated. I feel good in that  we were acquitted. But we didn't  disclose the information on nuclear  issues that I thought was really  crucial—like what they're actually  doing out there on the test range.  The United States is preparing for  war out there."  Motherpeace Eight  acquitted  Update  from Trail  - by Noreen Howes  do more actions. We learned that  the DND does not in fact own the  shoreline, which frees us up for  some other types of actions."  The eight acquitted women are:  Anne Lindsay of Duncan, Laurie  McBride of Gabriola Island, Nina  Westaway of Nanoose,  Sunshine  Goldsteam and Sharon Bradshaw  of Hilliers, Miriam Leigh of Denman  Island,   Betty  Fairbank   of  Hornby Island and Carole Roy of  Merville.  •g      The Motherpeace Action was  -2 just  one of many actions taken  > in   the   past   several   years   by  2 the   Nanoose   Conversion   Cam-  ,* paign (NCC), though this was the  first to come to trial. NCC and its  Fourteen women members of  the United Steel Workers of America (USWA) who had filed a Section 7 complaint against their  union charging that the union  acted in bad faith and in a discriminatory manner, have withdrawn  their complaint at the Labour Relations. Board (LRB).  The women, who worked at the  Cominco plant in Trail B.C. were  laid off by the company last March  and were angered that the union  refused to fight the lay offs through  the grievance procedure. Under  Section 7 of the B.C. Labour Code  union members can charge their  union with failing to represent  their best interests.  The complaint was withdrawn  THE MOTHERPEACE EIGHT  Top: Carole Roy, Nina Westaway Middle: Sharon Bradshaw. Betty  Fairbank. Laurie McBride Bottom: Sunshine Goldstream. Anne Lindsay, Miriam Leigh  Others felt more positive, trusting that the media have printed a  lot of information, whether or not  it came out in court. Miriam Leigh  said, "I feel like I've had my say.  I've talked and talked and talked  for the last twenty-four hours to  anybody who'd ask me a question.  Also, it was important that the  judge heard that we were there  non-violently, that we didn't destroy any property, and that we  didn't go beyond any barricades—  that we are non-violent people who  are working to make peace."  It was apparent from the beginning that the trial judge would  not   allow   the   trial   to   deviate  from a straightforward trespassing  case. The first questions from defense attorney Tim Leadem which  related to weapons testing was  judged irrelevant to the case. After testimony from the two arresting officers, the judge asked the defense if they wanted to make a motion (of no evidence). A quick conference was held with the accused  and their lawyers and they decided  to go for the acquittal which was,  in effect, being offered to them.  Although the Motherpeace eight  felt a certain letdown after such  intense trial preparation, the outcome had its positive aspects. As  Bradshaw admitted, "We're free to  ■° predecessor groups first researched  -g the issues of nuclear submarines  ■g, and their weapons, coming up with in late November pending the suc-  alarming findings on the presence cessful bargaining of a job descrip-  (neither confirmed nor denied by tion, said Charleen Davidow, a  Canadian and U.S. military) of nu- cleaner in Trail and USWA local  clear weapons on the submarines, 480 member,  and the poor safety standards of A job description, she ex-  the submarines themselves, each plained, which has since been writ-  one a floating nuclear reactor. ten by the cleaners themselves, de-  Actions began with peace walks fines them as an exclusive bargain-  and demonstrations at the base ing unit—workers on a five hour  of the gates. Then a peace camp shift instead of the eight hours  was established in tipis on the worked by other Cominco em-  shore of Nanoose Bay, where a ployees. This job description plus  vigil was maintained for sixteen a non-bumping addendum to the  months. Blockades followed, of the collective agreement should pro-  gates and of the submarines themselves, with small boats and rope  strung with bleach bottles.  The Motherpeace Action was  the first all-women action, but  from the sounds of it, it won't be  the last. One of the eight, asked  on the day after the trial how she  felt, replied, "Ready for another  action!"  tect their jobs.  Once the job description is  successfully bargained, Davidow  added, the women will reactivate  their grievances regarding the lay  offs, and the union will be legally  bound to process these grievances.  If they fail to do so, the women  will return to the LRB and con-  tinue the Section 7 complaint.  KINESIS  February '87 ^^^^^^  Educational restraint report  by Kinesis Staff Writer  The Canadian Research Institute for the Advancement of  Women (CRIAW) has just completed its second report examining the effects of government  "restraint" on women in post-  secondary education. As expected,  the study shows a levelling off  of women's participation at colleges and institutes indicating a  downward trend that will become  clearer over the next few years.  In terms of immediate impact,  however, the report shows that  the situation for women working  in post-secondary schools is quite  different from that of women students. While women students still  make up fifty-two percent of the  total student body, women employed by the post-secondary system represent only thirty-six per  cent of the professional and instructional staff.  Only 3.7 percent of all women  employed in the B.C. College- Institute system were working full  time in  Women's overall participation  in full time positions decreased  by twenty-two percent in 1984/85,  while their participation rate in  part time work increased by sixty-  eight percent. In the same year five  colleges and institutes saw a fifty  percent or more reduction in their  female full time staff.  Although the situation for women students is less dramatic, they  continue to lose ground among  full time enrolled. Over the last  six years they experienced their  greatest rate of participation in  1980/81, two years prior to the  B.C. government's 1983 legislative  1 . : VSafr3 WHERE tHE JOBS ARE  ■  ~—  Raise in less work  by Kinesis Staff Writer  Almost 85,000 British Columbians are employed on a part time  basis, according to a recent Statistics Canada survey.  Involuntary part time work increased 388 percent in British Columbia from 1975 to 1985 giving B.C. the highest number of  part time workers in the Canadian work force. Involuntary part  time work has also increased dramatically across Canada but B.C.  shows the highest rate of increase.  Part time work is figures prominently in the retail, service, and  tourist industries, all sectors key  to the provincial government's  "job   creation"   strategies.   Part  time work is particularly attractive to employers because it means  less money is needed for benefits,  including vacation pay, overtime,  unemployment insurance and pensions. The Conference Board of  Canada estimates that contributory benefits paid to full time employees are often worth between  fifteen and twenty-five percent of  their salary, noting that savings to  employers of part time workers are  substantial.  The dramatic increase in part  time work has been attributed to  the recession of the 1970s, when  part time job openings far outstripped opportunities for full time  work.  873-5^25  package which severely cut back  education funding, altered the administration of post-secondary education and shifted the focus of  many programs and courses toward the private sector.  The report stresses that part  time studies remain an important  avenue of post-secondary education for women and that women  continue to be concentrated in  university transfer courses. In  1984/85 they made up over half of  those students at every institution  except one. This trend, says the report, was even more significant at  B.C.'s northern institutions.  There is also some evidence that  women are now choosing career  technical over university transfer.  At nine institutions in 1984/85 female enrolment had shifted so that  career technical was the most popular program area for female students.  hi an effort to popularize  CRIAW documentation, the College/Institute Educators Association of B.C. has published a  brochure pinpointing other areas where restraint has adversely  affected women in the post-  secondary system.  In 1984/85 only three colleges  taught any academic Women's  Studies courses and by 1985/86  Women's Access Co-ordinators  had been eliminated from every college except Douglas. The  brochure also notes that the increasing cost and lack of child  care services has meant many  women with dependents are finding it impossible to enroll in college/institute programs.  The 1983 elimination of provincial government student grants in  combination with dramatically increased tuition fees also hampers  women's access to post-secondary  education.   The   brochure  points  out that a single woman living  alone and enrolled in a two year  nursing program would receive approximately $7,500 each year in  federal and provincial government  student loans. If she were to repay the loan at 12.25 percent interest, her monthly payments would  be $226 for 114 months. Her education would cost her $25,764.  Those wishing a copy of the  current CRIAW report, or the  report which preceded it, should  contact Mary-Lynn Stewart at  the Simon Fraser University  Women's Studies Department.  Copies of the CIEA brochure  can be obtained by calling their  office, 291-8598  V* •"£'$ j  Ml  mm  iy?  J t:  Conference full of interest  by Kinesis Staff Writer  As we get closer to International  Women's Day one of the exciting  upcoming events will be a conference bringing together Latina, Native and Canadian women to be  held February 27 to March 1 in  Vancouver.  This conference, in solidarity  with the women of Latin America,  the 5th in Canada since 1981, will  be open to all women and will focus on such issues as the psychological impact of being women in  exile, dealing with the aftermath  of torture, the effect of the external debt on the lives of women and  children in Latin America, and  the links between Native women  throughout the Americas.  Other workshops will look at  women and peace, life for women  in El Salvador, Nicaragua, Honduras and Guatemala, and the  question of women's political development. Speaking on these  themes will be major women political leaders from Chile, Nicaragua,  Guatemala, El Salvador, Canada  and possibly other Latin Countries. Among them, Fabiola Lete-  lier, from Chile, a world-renowned  human rights lawyer and Sylvia  McEwen, head of AMNLAE, the  women's association in Nicaragua.  Cecelia Mascayano, a Chilean  organizer who attended last year's  conference in Toronto says, "This  is an opportunity to share and  learn and bring up issues that are  very important for the development of solidarity among Canadian and Latin American women  and between all Latinas here in  Canada. For me personally this is  a profound political learning experience at all levels."  The weekend promises to not  only be a rich opportunity for.  meeting and listening to the stories  of Latin women but also for enjoying a full cultural exchange. The  conference will be held at the Native Education Centre, a beautiful  space in itself, and will be enriched  by Native and Latin womens' art  work. On Saturday evening a "ve-  lada" will take place with dance,  singing and drumming and on  Sunday evening, March 1st, Am-  paro Ochoa, one of Mexico's leading women singers will bring the  conference to a close with a performance at Robson Square Media  Centre. Amparo Ochoa uses traditional Central American and Mexican folklore in her songs about  women and the people's struggles.  The conference will also fall at  the end of a month long exhibition  of "arpilleras", patched fabric pictures made as political art stories  in Chile and on show at Women in  Focus. (See review, page 18 this issue).  Conference fees are $20 for the  unemployed, $30 if you're employed. If you're interested in the  lives of women in Central and  Latin America, and of Native  women, we urge you to attend.  For more information on  food, childcare and the conference schedule or if you're willing to help, including billeting  women, please call 878-2257.  UBC Harassment clinic  by Kinesis Staff Writer  Students at the University of  British Columbia (UBC) have established what they believe is the  first sexual harassment clinic in  Canada.  The clinic intends to give support to women dealing with sexual harassment on campus and  compile information about the incidence of sexual harassment on  campus.  Currently, a committee made of  four faculty members is studying  the issue of sexual harassment and  intends to develop a set of policies  and procedures for use at UBC.  The absence of student and staff  representation on the committee  has already generated criticism as  many students are concerned that  a committee which is not fully representative of the university community will not be effective.  UBC is one of the few universities in Canada with no formal sexual harassment policy. Students with harassment complaints  travel through various channels in  cluding the Women's Student Office, deans and department heads.  The Women's Student Office deals  with from four to eight cases a  year, although they have no overall  reporting process to monitor the  level of sexual harassment on campus.  The faculty committee has issued a working paper which students believe has serious gaps. The  students point to the absence of  an advocate or support person to  help the complainant, the number  of 'hurdles' for the complainant to  overcome in following a complaint  through and the fact that that  faculty representation on a committee dealing with a complaint  against a faculty member is taken  for granted but a mention of student representation is followed by  a question mark.  According to one of the students  involved in organizing around sexual harassment on campus, "Having an advocate for the complainant is crucial to redress the  inequality inherent in cases of sexual harassment between students  and professors."  KINESIS   Februa, ACROSS  B.C.  Abortion clinic coalition forms  +  by Noreen Howes  Plans are now underway to open  a free-standing abortion clinic in  Vancouver within the year, announced members of the newly formed British Columbia Clinic Planning Coalition.  Over 200 pro-choice supporters met in Vancouver late January, and after much debate hammered out a final resolution listing two priorities: that women's  reproductive health clinics be established throughout the province,  and that these clinics include abortion services funded by the provincial medical services plan (MSP);  and that, in the interim, there  be an abortion clinic established  in Vancouver, also with services  funded by MSP.  Initial debate at the conference concerned which strategy to adopt: the immediate  establishment of a comprehensive women's reproductive health  clinic in Vancouver—which would  also be mandated to perform  abortions—or the establishment  of a free-standing abortion clinic  based on Ontario models.  Delegates favouring a comprehensive health clinic argued that  the provincial government would  find it more difficult to attack such  a clinic since it would be servicing all women's health needs. The  public would also be more supportive, they argued.  Supporters of this position also  pointed out that establishing a  comprehensive clinic would "pose  the political issue, which is the  denial of women's reproductive  rights."  Other delegates argued for a  free-standing abortion clinic, saying that  a more  comprehensive  Welfare work  plan criticized  model is too ambitious a project in  terms of finances and energy, and  that in any case the public will  view any clinic which performs  abortions as an abortion clinic,  even if its mandatere is more comprehensive.  One delegate speaking in support of a free-standing clinic cautioned the group that several  women's reproductive health issues are controversial, and that  the establishment of a more comprehensive clinic could cause dis-  sention within the women's movement.  The resolution was finally passed, and was effectively a compromise between these two positions.  After the question of "what  kind of clinic" was resolved, delegates   questioned   the   planning  Our goal is to  open a clinic  within a year.  committee as to when a clinic will  actually open. Although the mainstream media have reported that a  Vancouver abortion clinic will be  opened within eight months, the  planning committee said it made  no such claim.  "There were no decisions, no  announcements, we just left this  open," said Penny Tilby of Concerned Citizens for Choice on  Abortion (CCCA). "Our goal is to  open a clinic within a year." The  media, she said, drew their own  conclusions.  Pat Brighouse, a representative  from  CCCA,   told  Kinesis  that'  by Kinesis Staff Writer  The provincial government has  announced a new plan to put  welfare recipients to work. The  province intends to establish computer lists of all employable welfare recipients in selected areas  which, according to the government, will make it easier for them  to find work.  The program will focus on finding employees for joint federal-  provincial job creation programs.  Anti-poverty activists have criticized the plan saying it will be  used as a threat against welfare recipients and that most people who  find work through the program  will see their incomes reduced.  Surrey welfare advocate Linda  Marcotte said the jobs the province  will try and get people will be minimum wage jobs. "A single mom  can't afford to take a minimum  wage job and pay day care," she  said.  Marcotte also told reporters  that "... the jobs on their computer lists are the same jobs that  are at the unemployment office.  There are no new jobs."  Claude Richmond, Minister of  Social Services, has said that the  program is voluntary but also said  that people who turn down jobs  found through the program could  be cut off welfare.  Richmond denied reports that  single parents who refuse to participate in the program could have  their children apprehended by the  social services ministry.  Sue Harris of the Downtown  Eastside Residents Association  said single parents on "ilfare are  so fearful of losing , • children  to the ministry that ti jy will do  what they're told, even if it means  earning less money.  "They think if they don't do  this, they are going to come and  take my children away," she said.  "The whole purpose of this program is to create a cheap pool of  labour."  According to the ministry, the  program is slated to start as a pilot project in three B.C. communities: Kamloops, Surrey and White  Rock. Its effectiveness will be assessed before it is introduced to  other communities.  "The will is there to have a clinic  opened within a year. Once the  doctors see that there is the support for them from the newly formed clinic coalition, then they'll  start putting it together."  Doctors willing to work inside  the clinic have yet to come forward, but a group calling itself  Physicians for Choice prepared a  statement which was read at the  conference, voicing their support  for the establishment of an abortion clinic which they "hope to see  opened within the year."  At the close of the day, and after  some discussion on general coalition membership requirements, a  twenty-two member interim steering committee was elected, composed of several CCCA members,  representatives of various women's  groups, health care workers, trade  unions and provincial New Democratic Party members.  Conference participants were  united in their opposition to Premier Vander Zalm. Statements by  the premier were outlined in various workshops and included:  • a threat to close down the clinic  as soon as it opens;  • an accusation that B.C. women  use abortion as a form of birth  control;  • a threat to cut money provided  to doctors for therapeutic abortion services;  • " ... changing the adoption  system to encourage women to  bear their children for others"  (CCCA Statement to the Media, Jan. 1987);  The delegates were particularly  concerned with Vander Zalm's  recently announced intention to  "study" the abortion issue—with  no consultation from outside the  Social Credit government.  Fearful of the report's bias,  CCCA demanded that Vander  Zalm set up a bi-partisan inquiry,  including members from both  sides of the legislature, women's  groups, and various other concerned parties who can offer positive solutions to the present abortion crisis in British Columbia.  At press time CCCA had received no response from the premier.  Abortion  clinic in  Vancouver?  Vancouver Status of Women  Nominations are now being accepted for the executive of the Vancouver Status of Women.  In order to run for the executive, you must have been a member of VSW in good standing  for at least six months. If interested, send your name and phone number by March 30, 1987  to Vancouver Status of Women, 400A W. 5th Ave., Van., BC, V5Y 1J8; Attn: Nominations  Cmtee. vsw AQM  Date: Thurs. May 7, 1987  Time: 7:30 p.m.  Place: VSW offices, 400A W 5th  Vancouver, B.C.  For information call 873-1427  Memberships in VSW are $25.50 per year. Both members and non-members are welcome  at our meeting. If you want to join our organization write: VSW, 400A West 5th Ave.,  Vancouver, B.C. V5Y 1J8. Memberships include a subscription to Kinesis, Canada's oldest  and most news-oriented feminist magazine.   KINESIS  February '87 Are cutbacks in store for city?  Sue Harris is a trained  nity worker with the Downtown East-  side Residents Association (DERA).  She is also a Committee of Progressive Electors (COPE) member, and was  elected on the COPE/Unity slate as a  Parks Board Commissioner from 1984-  86. She will be a regular contributor to  Kinesis and will focus on the municipal  scene.  by Sue Harris  While Mayor Gordon Campbell and the  Non Partisan Association's (NPA) aldermen have endorsed the same political program, Campbell's aldermanic machinery is  apparently not well oiled to deliver the desired results.  The first sign of division surfaced around  council's pay increase. At Council's first  meeting in December proceedings barely  started before the NPA-dominated council  approved substantial pay increases for the  mayor and aldermen. This pay raise consisted of a twelve percent increase for the  mayor, bringing that salary up to $61,000  from $54,000 and an aldermen's raise from  $21,000 to $27,000.  The Committee of Progressive Electors'  (COPE) Libby Davies and Bruce Ericksen,  NPA's Philip Owen and independent Carole Taylor voted against the pay hike. But  before the council's new pay rates could become effective, council had to amend Vancouver's indemnities by-laws. The amendment was approved, by a six to four vote,  at council's first meeting in January.  NPA alderman Jonathon Baker broke  ranks with his colleagues, however, and was  joined by Taylor, Davies and Eriksen in voting against the by-law change. (Owen was  absent from the meeting).  These increases did not follow the suggestion of the previous council which had recommended much lower pay increases for the  incoming council. Their recommendations  called for a choice of either the equivalent  of the pay increase for city hall senior staff,  or a percentage based on the increase in the  cost of living, whichever was the lower.  Campbell also had no power over council  members when his "consent agenda" item  came up for discussion. The result of the  debate was a unanimous 'no' vote, killing  his proposal. The "consent agenda" proposed that council would deal with "non-  contentious" issues in one sweeping, non-  debatable motion, an efficiency tactic which  raised serious concerns about democratic  procedure.  Campbell's approach to governing also  did not work with his NPA colleagues,  closely aligned independent Taylor or  COPE's Davies and Eriksen around another  of his projects, a "shirt sleeve workshop".  Campbell's proposal consisted of council sitting down with an outside consultant to discuss city concerns and goals for the next  two years. He did not even get a chance to  get into details before this idea was unanimously voted down.  The biggest battle council will face in the  next several months will be dealing with  Campbell's proposals for down-sizing city  hall staff, reducing community and cultural  grants  and cutting city  services  such as  garbage collection, library and recreational  programs.  Unfortunately for Campbell and the  NPA, a confidential memo addressed to city  manager Fritz Bowers, outlining proposed  cuts, slipped into the hands of the media.  The memo reads, in part:  "By Friday, January 16, I (Campbell)  need from you an overview of your departments, the net civic budget (1986) with  an indication of priorities, specifically you  should identify the most dispensable activities costing about five percent, the next  most dispensable activities costing a further  five percent ... I would urge you to refrain  from game-playing such as listing activities  known to have high visibility with the public or council members ....  The memo goes on to say that budget  cuts and reductions in service are not the  intention of this review. But Campbell also  says that he does not want the budget to expand more than the rate of inflation. Further statements in the memo show cause for  concern:  "... This is, however, a serious exercise  to find out what flexibility there is to do  some reallocations, and to make the savings  required to meet Council's financial targets." City staff, community members and  organizations were outraged upon learning  of this proposed major budget revision.  Single parent, Freda MacLellan is angry  about the threatened move towards slashing city services, including recreational and  cultural programs. MacLellan says, "I don't  think we, as a community, can afford to have  city services cut." In particular MacLellan  is concerned that recreational services will  fall under the ax.  "People don't think poor people should  have recreational services. The free facility  pass for the use of the city's swimming pools  and ice skating rinks enables poor people to  let their kids be a part of the world they live  Organizations such as the Tenants Rights  Action Centre (TRAC) reflect the anxiety  that community groups are feeling with the  budget plan. TRAC spokesperson Suzi Kil-  gour says, "The present council is so full  of contradictions that we have grave concerns that the selective departmental cuts  could doubly backfire on tenants ... Here  is a council which gives itself a twenty-seven  percent wage increase and then considers  abolishing fair wages for city workers."  Along with the mayor's various agenda  items, Campbell has also been busy reorganizing the council's Standing Committees, changing their chairs and in the process, basically doing away with a public forum where city development and planning  are discussed.  The past council's four Standing Committees have been replaced with only three  committees, these three being the arenas  in which most civic issues are initially discussed and studied. But there is not one  committee left which will deal with planning, a critical concern in the development  of the city.  In Campbell's inaugural speech he stated  that all city by-laws and the development  permit process will be completely reviewed  during the next two years. Is Campbell de-  emphasizing planning in order to get rid of  discretionary zoning? And if he is, then who  will be the beneficiaries of such a radical  policy change?  Vancouver Planning Commission member, Jean Swanson, states that six new appointments have been made to this special  council committee. Two new members are  Grant Burnyeat, who was active in Campbell's campaign, and Stan Hamilton who is  involved in real estate and on several related boards. Swanson says that, "We (the  community and committee) need to keep an  eye on Campbell and his new appointees.  As well Swanson adds, "The developers  are always talking about red tape. We at  the Planning Commission want to maintain  public interest in the development process  and sometimes it takes time. And a developer might think that six weeks is a long  time to deal with the development permit  signs. But this is part of public input."  Campbell's snappy, quick-paced mayoralty style also puts a burden on the three  remaining committees. The former coun-'  cil's four committees worked very hard,  with both the Community Issues and Planning and Development committees often  stretched to the limit. It will be important  to carefully monitor how well these committees function, which issues are discussed and  those which are either down-played or ignored.  Although Campbell is apparently trying  to proceed as quickly as possible, he did  slow down his pace to tread softly on the  issue of council's seventeen special committees. These committees include the Planning Commission, Disabled People, Peace  and Affirmative Action for Women in the  Work force.  Council voted nine to two in favour  of retaining the special committees with  the rider that they only be re-established  for one year during which a committee of  Campbell, Taylor and Davies will review  their functions and report back to council  with their findings.  NPA aldermen George Puil and Jonathon  Baker voted against retaining these committees.  Alderman Libby Davies says that even  though she is involved in the review committee she "... will be actively involved  in protecting and acting as an advocate for  these committees."  In particular, women should be concerned about the future and direction of  the Committee for Affirmative Action For  Women in the Workplace. Both civic unions  and management have been working together on this committee with varying degrees of co-operation, depending on the  kind of leadership exhibited by the liaison alderman. Under the stewardship of defeated TEAM alderman, Marguerite Ford,  the committee's work was often at a stalemate. It wasn't until Davies was appointed  to the committee that real progress could  be seen by all parties involved.  Davies comments, "This committee was  just beginning to look at pay equity, the  root problem with women in the work  force". Davies predicts that if the NPA's  cuts to services and resulting staff lay-offs  become a reality, the committee will be  "mere window-dressing".  It's clear that the new NPA dominated  city council with its rookie mayor at the  helm, has had a hard time in making consensus decisions. It is doubtful, however,  that on more important matters, such as the  budget, the ward system and major planning issues, the NPA will break ranks.  In the meantime, the battle of this council's first year will be on the proposed budget cuts slated for March. Due to a motion  of COPE's Davies and Eriksen, and an almost unanimous vote from council, (with  the exception of George Puil), a public hearing on the budget should occur after the interim budget is presented in March.  Vancouver and Municipal Regional Employees Union (VMREU) Secretary Treasurer David Cadman recommends that  "Citizens should be vigilant through their  organizations and as individuals. We hope  that council will have the good sense to retain services that the public clearly wants."  While the NPA's full agenda is not  yet known, indications from their first few  weeks in office, point to a very different program from the last council's. Suzi Kilgour  from TRAC predicts, "People's issues will  be axed for a new Vancouver skyline." It  certainly looks that way.  If you and/or your organization want  to have a say on the kind of Vancouve  you want, you will have an opportunity  at the public meeting on the city's new  budget. Details on time and place will  be announced in the March issue of Ki-  6    KINESIS     February   87 ////////////////////^^^^^  ////////////////////^^^^  Across Canada  Ontario:  Lesbians, gays win rights Epp delays childcare  to develop strategy  by Kinesis Staff Writer  Lesbians and gays in Ontario  have gained protection against discrimination in housing, services  and employment as a result of  the Ontario legislature's passage of  a controversial amendment to the  province's Human Rights Code in  early December.  Ontario is the second province  in Canada to add sexual orientation as a prohibited grounds for  discrimination to its human rights  legislation Quebec gays won similar protection in 1977.  The battle to have sexual orientation added to the Ontario code  has been going on for almost fifteen years. Its final passage was  over the adamant opposition of  right wing groups, the Catholic  church and all but four of the Progressive Conservative members of  the legislature.  The amendment, proposed by  New Democrat MLA Evelyn Gi-  gantes, had the support of all three  party leaders but still required  four days of emotional and exhaustive debate before it was approved.  A hastily organized Coalition  for Family Values, the Ontario  Conference of Catholic Bishops,  and the National Citizen's Coalition, a right wing think tank,  mounted a well financed province  wide scare campaign against the  legislation.  The groups argued that the  amendment would give gays and  lesbians "special rights", would  open the door to bestiality and  paedophilia, destroy the traditional family and ruin the fabric of  society.  Speaking in favour of the  amendment, Gigantes told the legislators that they must speak out  against a society dominated by  male sexual oppression.  "I feel deeply offended", Gigantes said, "that some men will  organize in religious and business  groups to say that men who are  not like them are traitors to a system where sex is a rightful means  of oppression."  The passage of "the Ontario  bill adds great momentum to the  struggle for gay and lesbian rights  elsewhere in Canada. Federally,  the Progressive Conservative government will come under strong  pressure to include sexual orientation as one of the protections  envisaged by Section 15 of the  Canadian Charter of Rights and  Freedoms. As well, Manitoba and  the Yukon currently have human  rights legislation pending and will  be hard pressed to ignore Ontario's addition of sexual orientation to its Human Rights Code.  Complainants may lose protection  by Kinesis Staff Writer  A major test for the rights  of women in criminal cases is  presently before the Ontario Court  of Appeal.  Section 246.6 of the Criminal  Code—the section which limits  the admissibility of evidence relating to a rape complainant's  past sexual history with any person other than the accused—was  struck down in 1985 by the Ontario Supreme Court which ruled  that the section violated the constitutional rights to a fair trial of  two men charged with sexual assault.  Noting that in the past attitudes prominent in the legal profession made rape trials a traumatic ordeal for female complainants, Brian Traf-  ford, the lawyer for Ontario's Attorney General urged the Court to  consider the purpose of the section  in deciding whether it violates the  Charter.  "It's important to realize",  Trafford told the Court, "that the  purpose of the section is to improve the administration of justice, to facilitate the reporting of  sexual offenses, and to reduce the  anxiety of rape complainants in  court."  The Women's Legal Education  and Action Fund (LEAF) and the  Canadian Civil Liberties Association (CCLA) gained intervenor  status to make arguments before  the Court.  LEAF takes the position that  to the extent that Section 246.6  authorizes the exclusion of evidence significantly relevant to the  defense, it is inconsistent with  Charter provisions that guarantee  Canadians legal rights (Section 7  and lid) and, to that extent only,  of no force and effect. LEAF further argues that as Section 246.7 of  the code only has the effect of excluding irrelevant or minimally relevant evidence, it is not contrary  to the Charter.  LEAF believes the two sections  should be upheld given that the  accused would be able to claim  Charter rights in a particular case  where the evidence is significantly  relevant to the defense but for  all other cases the sections should  stand.  The CCLA argues that the sections' restrictions are too severe  and that the section should be  re-written immediately to permit  questions to be put to the complainant about her previous sexual  partners when the defense is able,  in a voir dire hearing, to establish  Toronto conference:  that the evidence is strongly relevant to the issue of guilt or innocence.  LEAF clearly fears that if the  sections are struck down rape complainants will once again be forced  to endure humiliating cross examinations on their sexual conduct.  It is not known when the five  justices hearing the appeal will  make their decision.  Immigrant organizing  by Kinesis Staff Writer  A national organization to provide a united voice on immigrant  policy, language programs, social  services and race relations for  women was founded in Toronto in  late January.  The National Organization of  Immigrant and Visible Minority Women will press for readily  available English or French language programs for immigrant and  minority women, says president  Betty Lee, of Fredericton. The organization, which expects to set  up an Ottawa office with a paid  co-ordinator, will also lobby for  improvements in immigration law,  health and social services for immigrant women.  Glenda Simms, a speaker at the  organization's founding meeting,  told the group that Canadian feminists have ignored racism in their  ranks.  Simms, supervisor of intercultural and race relations for the  Regina school board, said that  the women's movement, "has been  very much, up to now, a middle  class, white women's movement.  We have tried to put brown faces  or red faces on their ideology but  now we have to construct our own  ideology."  Simms told the meeting that,  "... the issue is that there  is a racist society in Canada.  That's the message we're going to  tell mainstream Canadian women.  We're going to get together and  show them what a real women's  movement should be."  Simms also said that women  must not tolerate the notion that  sexism in their own ethnic communities is part of some semi- sacred  "cultural" tradition. According to  Simms, some older women of Jamaican origin "... believe that if  a man doesn't beat you, he doesn't  love you."  "We also know there are some  judges in northern Canada who  say that native women are beaten  because it is part of the indigenous  culture. Let me tell you that no  woman wants to be beaten. And I  don't think men like it either."  Patsy George, volunteer chairman of Vancouver's Pacific Immigrant Resources, said that without  adequate language training programs, "many women are trapped  and isolated in their homes, as well  as being confined to poorly paid  jobs and loneliness."  She cited a recent case her organization was involved in where  a Central American refugee, who  had been raped by two men in her  rooming house, was afraid to tell  police because in her home country of Guatemala, the police are  feared.  George also said that the newly  established organization, " ...  wants to reach out to a lot of  women who are isolated and who  are really not active like ourselves,  so it doesn't become a middle  class, professional women's elitist  group."  by Kinesis Staff Writer  Despite commitments from the  Conservatives as recently as early  January, Jake Epp, Minister of  Health and Welfare told a special  meeting of federal and provincial  social service ministers that no additional money will be allocated  for provincial child care subsidies  in this year's federal budget.  Instead Epp proposed a five  month delay on child care action  so that a national strategy could  be developed. He promised that by  the end of June the federal government and the provinces would be  ready to put a plan in place.  Barbara McDougall, Minister  Responsible for the Status of  Women, had earlier told reporters  that a plan for child care was in  the offing and would be presented  at the Minister's meeting; a meeting largely devoted to women's issues.  Lise Corbeil-Vincent, co-ordinator of the Canadian Day Care  Advocacy Association, said the  government is not showing an  awareness that "child care is in crisis". "We're disappointed because  it's a question of money. Families  are hint ing now because there are  no services and what services there  are are too expensive for the large  majority of Canadians, who cannot access subsidies as they exist  now."  One result of the social services minister's meeting is certain  to alarm feminist and day care  groups. At the insistence of Ontario and Alberta, it appears that  the federal government is inclined  to go along with providing government funds to subsidize commercial (i.e. profit-making) day cares.  Epp has said that he is "philosophically not opposed" to providing assistance to commercial day  cares.  Prior to the minister's meeting,  Epp's comments on child care generated such negative reaction that  federal opposition parties called  for his resignation.  In an interview with the Globe  and Mail, Epp—who later said  he was misinterpreted—seemed to  suggest that parental care was a  preferred option over expanding  Canada's current day care system.  He went on to say that he  would make no apologies for "trying to preserve the traditional family", and that child care is not  a woman's issue but a family issue. "Women often have to take  greater responsibility than men.  But let's not fall into that trap  that it (child care) is simply or primarily a women's issue or women's  responsibility. As a father I have  equal responsibility".  According to Barbara Cameron,  child care spokesperson for the National Action Committee on the  Status of Women (NAC), "There  are thousands and thousands of  children in unsafe and not very  healthy child care situations. If  you look at the total picture there  are only four percent of our kids  in licensed day care." "It's quite  hypocritical to say you support the  family and then do nothing to support the family", Cameron said.  Margaret Mitchell, New Democratic MP, told reporters that  Prime Minister Brian Mulroney "  .. . should replace the inept Mr.  Epp with a woman minister who  has an understanding of what today's families are facing."  KINESIS Across Canada  Women on guard for male values  by Birgit Schinke  A new domain has opened for women  and that is working as guards in prisons for  men. We can be pleased, as finally, women  have made it into one of the last male  strongholds. Or, using a feminist perspective, we note that once again women are exploited for their nurturing, caring qualities.  Statistics  While the first women to work in prisons  for men were nurses, the training of female  security officers began four years later in  1975. There is now a very aggressive affirmative action program for hiring women—  it's hard to tell if the Correctional Service  of Canada just wants to keep up with the  times or if they are taking advantage of the  peaceful effect women have on prison culture. The mandate of hiring women is so  strong that they now hold almost thirty percent of Correctional Service of Canada jobs.  That compares well to the sixteen percent  women held only seven years ago.  Stumbling Blocks  So one out of ten prison guards is a  She is working in a man's world, implementing those male values which help put people  in prison in the first place. It is extremely  difficult to get information about these  women—the Correctional Service doesn't  like to talk, the guards themselves don't like  to make waves, and prisoners are hard to  reach. Please remember that the following  is based on individual experiences. Corrections wouldn't be so enlightened as to release a survey on what's really going on for  prison staff.  It's already been shown that promotion  and upgrading are a major problem for  women working in security. Three of the  earliest women hired as guards lament that  "they watched many of their male counterparts receive promotions and transfers.  Men with considerably less experience and  knowledge of the correctional system routinely got promotions while the women did  not even make the list of the top qualified  candidates". (Sakowski 1986)  Dy 1988 nineteen percent of all prison entry  level positions will be held by women  including maximum security institutions.  But statistics can be misleading. The Criminologists think that the lack of  bulk of the women are still working in female-guard role models leave many women  classic female positions. Ninety percent are floundering. There are very few well-  employed in the administrative support practiced female veterans who can offer ad-  category—that is clerks, secretaries, etc. As vice to the fish (newcomers). A female se-  of December 1985 there were six women curity officer needs to find a role in which  in top management positions compared to she feels comfortable and which leads to ad-  the eighty-eight men in the same cate- vancement. A cynic once remarked, "Must  gory. France-Marie Trepanier, the affirma- I learn to spit and chew to get promoted?"  tive action director, said at an International (Crouch 1985)  Women's Day luncheon that "we're still Sexual harassment is another stumbling  struggling to bring females into senior man- block which women guards face. Although  agement." Almost fourteen percent of cor- it is not as overt as has been in the past it  rectional/living unit (guards) jobs belong to is still alive. "Offensive comments about fe-  women. It is hoped that by 1988, nineteen male genitalia are no longer common, how-  percent of all prison entry level positions ever, suggestive remarks about the sexual  will be held by women, including maximum activities of the women are routinely made",  security institutions. (Sakowski 1986)  Gossip is vicious in prisons and is used  to harass and intimidate. Women have to  work very hard at proving to the prison society that they are not promoting on their  back. "You really have to prove yourselves  in there. You have to show that you can be  one of the boys and still be a woman. It's  a dual role. You get ribbed a lot like 'can  you really use that gun?'. A lot of that sexual crap. It's so macho in there, they will  take you out for a drink and say they f...ed  you even if they didn't. I heard that about  myself and I should know, right? They will  slander you at every opportunity." (Owen  There is a grievance procedure that  women can use but France- Marie Trepanier  says that "women are still afraid to use this  mechanism for fear of becoming outcasts  among their colleagues." To this end the Association for Women in the Justice System  was formed to act as a network for women  needing support and encouragement.  Resistance  Surprisingly enough resistance to female  workers comes more from the male prison  guards than from the prisoners themselves.  A prisoner from Mission Institute recently  wrote: "As most women are younger and  better educated than their male counterparts, established roles and basic male job  security has been threatened. Many men  in Correctional Services have reacted angrily in various degrees and are uncomfortable with women in the prison. Thus women  have to work harder to earn respect or even  have a working relationship with convicts  and male prison staff."  That is not to say that all is well  amongst prisoners. Claire Culhaine, a prisoners' rights activist, says she receives many  letters from men who are insulted by the  lack of privacy when female screws watch  them shower and use toilets. The Globe and  Mail reported that tensions at Kingston  Pen are mounting with one of the issues  being female guards and privacy. (Feb. 6,  Used Again?  The competence of women prison workers is not questioned anymore. In fact, the  presence of women has profoundly positive effects. Academics in various research  papers show that women 'normalize' the  prison world (Potter 1980); create a more  relaxed environment in which inmates are  less super-macho (Harm 1980); and promote  better dress (Ingram 1980) and behaviour  (Peterson 2982) among inmates.  The prisoner, also quoted previously,  would agree. "Most contemporary women  in the CSC feel comfortable utilizing feminine charm and charisma in relating to inmates. The fact that L.U.'s (living unit officers) don't wear uniforms helps some cons  see female staff as women first and as guards  secondarily, relating to them in a more polite and personal manner. Many inmates, especially the younger ones, find it easier to  communicate with women staff than with  men."  Although it is important for women to  have new types of employment on the equal  opportunities platform, the cynic in me  thinks that women are being had by the  prison service. They receive this wonderful opportunity to participate in the survival of an oppressive male institution. (I  am as dubious about the role of women in  the army and the police force.) They use  their female qualities of compassion, intuition, and thoughtfulness to diffuse conflict  and maintain the status quo. They help  make life bearable for prisoners and peers  alike, warding off the explosions that would  force the re-evaluation of our chronically ill  justice system. But can you pit this idealism against the real worlds of women trying to feed and house their families? A job  is a job, and unfortunately most decisions  are based on economic factors.  The conclusion? If you really want to  form the prison system, stop recruiting men  immediately. Enforce a rigorous program of  positive discrimination to get women into  all the top jobs and into the most sensitive tasks. Bibliography available upon  request  KINESIS  February '87 /////////'/////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////■////////////////////A  ////////////////////^^^^^  /////////////////////^^^^  LIFE STORIES  No Name Column  finds itself  by Nora Randall  This is the first anniversary of my  column being in Kinesis. Last year at this  time I was so worried about just writing a story that was interesting (about  three to five pages long that was finished on the fifteenth of the month) that  I couldn't manage to think of what to  call it. I mean I wasn't even sure what  I was going to be talking about. So I applied the first principle of deadline writing, which is—just do it and figure out  what the hell it is later—and the "No  Name Column" was born.  Looking back over the ten columns,  the most striking thing to me is that  they got better. I am plagued by this  hard-dying idea that practice is something you can do in the privacy of your  own workroom and then when it's perfect you can go public. It doesn't work  that way because firstly, doing it in public is what I needed to practice and secondly because there is no fixed point at  which a column will be perfect. Each  column is only a step like one sentence  in a conversation. For me it has been a  process of opening doors which I must  walk through. I hope it has been that interesting for you readers. Thanks for allowing me the space to develop.  In fact I have developed eo much over  the last year, that I've come up with a  name for this column. From hear on in  the "No Name Column" will be called  "Beans". Why "Beans" you may wonder. Well, beans are a cheap source  of nutrition, something you can rely  on when your income is not all that  thrilling. Also, when I was growing up  my older relatives often told me that I  was "full of beans" and I have come to  hope that it's true. So "Beans" it is and  "Beans" to you.  I went to visit friends in San Francisco  in December since my job as a school bus  driver evaporates when the children are not  in school. My friend and I met a woman at  a bus stop in San Rafael who told us a story  which I shall try my best to pass on to you.  Deedee and I had gone to a party in San  Rafael, stayed the night and were catching  an early morning bus back to San Francisco.  A friend drove us to the bus stop where we  made a bee line for the bench. Our most  fervent wish at that point was to spend our  waiting time in catatonic splendour recovering from the night before. As soon as we  were seated we were approached by a middle aged woman in a trench coat who was  undaunted by our glassy eyes. Her opener  was the classic: "The weather's cold. I hope  it's not this cold in San Francisco." Deedee,  who knows more about weather patterns,  being a native, said it wasn't that cold and  it would be colder in San Francisco than it  was here.  "You know what happened to me," the  woman said. Clearly the weather was not  the main topic of this conversation. "I got  arrested last night. Can you believe it, over  fifty years I've never been arrested then last  night I got charged with being drunk and  disorderly in public. I guess I must have  been a little unsteady on my feet, but I was  taking a taxi. Then along come these cops  and I may have made one or two gestures  and before I know it they arrest me. They  put me in the drunk tank. It's like a rubber room. I was there four hours. I've never  been so scared in all my life."  "Why did they bother you if you were  taking a taxi?" I asked.  "That's what I wanted to know," she  said. "They said I could have been killed for  the money I had on me. I got about six hundred dollars in here (she held up her purse).  They said somebody could have killed me  but I said I thought it was going to be them.  There I am minding my own business, I was  getting into the taxi to go home and my  friends were going to drive me back to my  car the next day. I would have been fine.  They come along and arrest me, they frisked  me and searched me, they took my money  and my keys and threw me in the clink. I  don't care anyway, I've got all this money  on me because I quit my job.  Volunteers Wanted  to work in VSW's resource centre and library.  Tasks range from basic filing to purging the older files and updating.  Time requirements vary from a few hours once to ongoing part time.  102.7 FM  International Women's Day Radio on Coop Radio CFRO 102.7FTI,  Sunday March 8th,  8 am to 2 am - all women's programing  (including conmmity groups  iged  for 18 solid hours.'    All wooer  individuals, programmers and ex-programners) <  to participate.    Mo experience necessary!     Foi  call Ina 435-5772,  Louie 738-8236,  or Sue 251-3857.  "I work for this agency. I got this good  job taking care of this woman who has  twenty million dollars. I got $1200 a month  plus benefits but I quit after a week. It  wasn't worth it. She had this fireplace and  she wanted it kept going from 5:30 in the  morning to 11:30 at night. Carrying all that  wood. Then she told me she wanted me  to work Saturdays and Sundays too and  that $1200 was what I got paid a month.  I wouldn't get more for working the weekends. Well, I told her forget it. I don't need  that. I can go back to working for this  other lady in San Francisco. She's got sixty  million dollars. I worked for her before. It  wasn't bad. She at least was manageable.  She reads novels."  "You mean like romance novels?" I asked.  "Yeah, novels," she said. "All I have to do  is go out and buy her a bunch of novels and  she stays out of my hair. This other lady,  the twenty million dollar one, she's anorexic.  She wouldn't eat. She took laxatives. Sixty-  eight years old and she looks ninety-eight.  I had to feed her. She wouldn't eat herself.  She told me to leave her alone, she could  take care of herself. I said, listen, if you  could take care of yourself, you wouldn't be  needing to hire help. Now eat this.  "She had twenty million dollars and she  wouldn't even pay me for the weekends. I  tell myself, I'm not going to be good to these  people, and I'm not. They don't deserve it.  The way she treated people. She didn't get  back the rest of petty cash either. One hundred and eighty-three dollars, I kept it. The  way she rode me. I'm not a slave. I'm going  to the agency tomorrow. I'll go back to work  for this other one. It's not great, but it's not  so much trouble. I don't need it," she said.  The bus came and we wished her a Happy  New Year. She needs one. Don't we all.  Airheart  Co-operative Travel Centre  DEBORAH BRADLEY  ELLEN FRANK  JAMES MICKLEWRIGHT  FRANCES WASSERLEIN  Ellen Frank, formerly of Travel Unlimited  is thrilled to announce her move to  Airheart Co-operative Travel Centre.  Airheart, a new worker owned and  controlled co-operative venture, will  be opening February 2, 1987.  2149 Commercial Drive. Vancouver, B.C. V5N 4B3 • (604) 251-2282 • CompuServe 71470,3502  CCEC CREDIT UNION  Our whole business is  Community Economic Development  Come to the Credit Union which has  specialized in helping you  and your community  Instant  Tax Receipts  WITH A CCEC  RRSP  No User Fee — Market Rates  Deadline for 1986 Tax Year  is March 2, 1987  ASK US ABOUT RRSP LOANS  CCEC CREDIT UNION  33 EAST BROADWAY  VANCOUVER, B.C. V5T 1V4  MON. &. WED. 11 am-5 pm  FRIDAY lpm-7 pm  876-2123  We are a full service credit union.    We keep your  money in your community. That's our bottom line.  KINESIS  February '87 International  XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX^  ^XXX^i^XXXX^^  N$SxXX^XXXSx^^  Whores meet in Brussels  Whores from all over the world  converged in Brussels in October for the Second International  Whore's Congress.  The gathering of 150 prostitutes, ex-prostitutes, sex workers  and prostitute advocates from sixteen countries was organized by  the International Committee for  Prostitute's Rights (ICPR), and  GRAEL (Rainbow Group of Socialists and Progressives in the  European Parliament). Much to  the horror of some delegates, the  Congress was held in the European  Parliament buildings.  Except for a discussion on  feminism, all the sessions were  closed to reporters. Information  was given by the ICPR and other  involved groups.  The ICPR states "Denial of  human rights to prostitutes is  publicly   justified   as   a   protec-  by Kinesis Staff Writer  tion of women, public order,  health, morality and the reputation of dominant persons or nations. These arguments deny prostitutes the status of ordinary persons and blame them for disorder  and/or disease and for male exploitation of, and violence against,  women."  Thai and Philippines women  said women were being transported to the West under false pretenses for the purposes of prostitution. A Dutch study confirmed  that trafficking of Third World  women is increasing.  According to this study women  were being "deceived by the  promises of good, well-paying jobs  which did not exist. They were  brought to the Netherlands and  they were coerced to work as prostitutes. If they refused, they were  beaten and threatened."  Health in general, and AIDS in £  particular, was a hot topic of dis-g  cussion. c  The current AIDS scare and  scapegoating of prostitutes are, in  reality, not much different from  the historic blaming of prostitutes  for sexually transmitted diseases  which has invariably justified the  social and legal control of prostitution as a public health measure.  A control which has not been justified by results, however. According  to Priscilla Alexander, of the California NOW and COYOTE (the  National Task Force on Prostitu  tion in the United States), at the  beginning of World War II 60,000  prostitutes were interned in concentration camps in the U.S.; but  the VD scare didn't' go down correspondingly, as "civilians" women  stepped in to fill the "need." Only  condoms were able to reduce the  spread of venereal disease.  In the U.S. research physicians  have continually expressed concern about the possibility of prostitutes transmitting AIDS to the  Beijing Lesbians  by Eunice Brooks  1 the <  education classes, and even i  popular press. j  The general loosening of news The AIDS scare in the West has '  coming out of China brings with loosened long held tongues. A re-  it talk, at least among the intellec- cent issue of Duzhe Wenzhi, a  tuals, of same-sex love. The sub- popular publication, carried a fea-  ject has come up in journals, sex ture on the psychological causes  of homosexuality that referred to  Freud and other Western psychologists. In China, homosexuality is  illegal and the official stance is  that it does not exist.  It was only last year that sex  education was introduced in the  schools in larger cities. Statistics on Western gays are used  in instruction. However, films and  books from Hong Kong show that  same-sex love can touch Orientals.  in fact, prostitutes who are not IV  are probably unlikely to pass  on the virus, since they commonly  use condoms in their work.  Other concerns expressed include the difficulty of getting good  health care due to the stigma attached to prostitution. Occupational diseases or health problems  like bladder and kidney infections  are commonly blamed on the prostitute herself. In contrast, said  Priscilla Alexander, doctors do not  tell mine workers it's their 'fault'  they have black lung.  Because prostitution is not defined as a legitimate occupation,  no prostitute is eligible for disability insurance or Workers' Compensation for any injuries or diseases that are job-related. In the  U.S., where health care is basically  private and prohibitively expensive, prostitutes do not qualify for  lower- cost group plans. In many  countries, prostitutes are subject  to forced medical registration and  certification, more as a form of social control than as a guarantee of  good medical care.  The draft statement on health  prepared by the ICPR calls for  a repeal of health laws and  testing that discriminate against  prostitutes; widespread education  and regular (anonymous) screening for sexually transmitted diseases among all sexually active people; and health insurance  and compensation benefits for all  workers, including prostitutes.  Argentina  divorce  furor  by Eunice Brooks  Disappearing Iraqi women  by Eunice Brooks  In July of 1984 the International  committee for the Release of Detained and Disappeared Women in  Iraq was established. For the past  eight years women have been the  special victims of terror and the  war with Iran. Many women disappear without a trace, while others  Women by the thousands have  been held with their children as retaliation for men who have joined  an underground opposition to the  government. Many of these men  are said to have deserted the war.  Anyone who would be interested in writing petitions for the  women can contact Amnesty International, 1955 West 4th, Vancouver, B.C., V6J 1M7, or the  ICRDDWI, BM, Box 9308, London, WC1N3XX.  Many persons are expected to   Last r^ a television serial about     are tortured before their release,  begin divorce proceedings in the   a Tang dynasty empress showed  shadow of a recent Argentinean   same-Sex love among the imperial  Supreme   Court   decision   which  ruled the nation's ban on divorce  unconstitutional.   Attorney   General,   Juan  Octavio  Guaza,  said  that the court had overstepped its  authority in a matter that should  elite. Still, most people in China  are totally unaware of homosexuality.  It has been reported that there  are about seventy well educated  be decided by the legislature. He   ^biaf JjTM« m a cpnunmiity m  i, f*r from ft. onlv Mm\Amt. Th«   Chma s BeiJm8 province. For the  is far from the only dissident. The  Catholic church, through the bishops, said holy  be denied to anyone making divorce legal.  most part they are divorced and  should over t^'rty* Homosexuals can, by  law, be sentenced to hard labour  camps. A first offence may just receive criticism, while a second may  Divorce is being looked at by lead to counselling and forced re-  the President, Raul Alfonsisn, and form. Some gays have been treated  his democratically elected sen- by psychiatrists in Guangdong  ate. Priests call this government hospitals.  a pornographic democracy, and  have vocally linked the government with drug abuse, and street  crime which they say is on the increase since the military dictatorship was swept aside. Church leaders have also argued that divorce A recently issued story by  legislation would be an insult to Raana Bahar, tells of her stay  the Pope, who plans to visit Ar- in Iran where she studied the  gentina in April. lives of ordinary women touched  But the situation the govern- b? the eight-year long war with  ment has to deal with is one neighboring Iraq. It is her opinion  in which citizens have obtained that there is widespread discon-  divorces  in  other  countries  and    tent against the Islamic Republic's  Targeted women are activists,  women who oppose the Ba'ath  Arab Socialist ideology. The government rules by secret police, and  has banned any ideology that is  different.  Among the well-known who  have been arrested is Aida Yassin,  known as Um-Ali, a member of  the Supreme Committee of the  Iraqi Women's League, who was  detained by security men in July  of 1980 and who has not been  seen or heard of since. Hundreds  of women have been similarly arrested, raped and tortured, and  their plight has been well documented by Amnesty International.  Police raid abortion  clinics in Spain  by Kinesis Staff Writer  germent of the mother's life. But  bureaucratic obstacles made it dif-  A series of police raids on ficult for most women to actually  abortion clinics took place across obtain abortions even in those lim-  Spain throughout October and ited circumstances. (Of the tens  November, threatening a burgeon- °f thousands of women qualifying  ing feminist-inspired quasi-legal f°r these legal abortions, only two  abortion network and putting the hundred received them during the  country's socialist government in a nrs* year the law was in effect,  bind. while many thousands obtained il-  In July  1985  the government    legal abortions-)  of Prime Minister Felipe Gonzales  liberalized Spain's abortion laws,  making abortion legal in cases of  rape, a malformed fetus, or endan-  Iranian women are war's victims  by Eunice Brooks  have already remarried. The pending divorce legislation would make  the offspring of such marriages  legitimate, and would give second spouses full inheritance rights.  Only six other countries still prohibit divorce.  regime. Calling the war "holy" has  worn thin among the rank and file.  The Iranian government has put  together a secret police force in  response to resistance. The government has also introduced a reward system,  a lump sum paid  to families of the war's victims.  Since the government cannot afford equipment, it depends heavily  on manpower. There is, however,  massive unemployment with consumer goods in short supply and a  thriving black market.  Bahar says that poverty contributes to the war effort. Many  disillusioned women have joined  the army reserve and last March it  was announced women in the military will be trained as front-line  soldiers. In the past army women  prepared food, sewed clothing,  nursed the wounded, and worked  in secretarial positions.  The role of motherhood must  fit in with the war. The working  woman must still maintain all her  traditional womanly duties in the  home. It is rare to see a woman  who is not in mourning for some  member of her family.  The psychological state of the  nation, according to Bahar, is as  low as it can go. Depression is rampant, shell shock is common and  witnessing constant death is taking its toll. Bahar visited one hospital where the survivors of battle were being treated with electric  shock and tranquilizers.  In response to this situation, a  network of family planning clinics  backed by feminists began to disregard the law and perform ab<  tions. The Gonzales government  took no action against these clinics, and agreed in November to  modify the law to eliminate its  bureaucratic "evaluation commission" and to allow abortions for  "psychological" reasons. But while  the government announced these  limited changes, police in several  cities raided clinics and arrested  many health care workers.  Representatives of Gonzales's  government deny any responsibility for the police actions, which  appear to have been ordered by  conservative members of the Spanish judiciary who oppose the liberalized abortion laws. Clinics and  feminists continue to openly defy  the law.  io KINESIS f Notes from the countryside  by Judith Quinlan  With over a foot of snow on the ground,  and icicles decorating my eaves like Christmas ornaments, it seems a strange time to  be thinking about agriculture. Then again, I  often feel that this period of rest from growing things is an important part of the cycles of nature. It gives the earth a chance  to sleep, and me a chance to think over my  plans for next year's garden.  I didn't grow any vegetables last summer.  Just dug over the garden and composted a  run wild among the weeds. He does no digging, no mulching, no thinning. What a  dream for a part time farmer with a short  growing season!  I have tried to imagine how these ideas  can be applied to this region. Here on the  high central plateau, summers are short, hot  and dry. The natural soil layer is thin, over  a hard clay subsoil and shallow bedrock.  In its natural state this is an ideal area  for grazing—grasses grow rampant, and for  browsing—there is a lot of forest, but the  forest is being rapidly depleted by logging.  The native people in this area once had a  good knowledge of wild foods available, and  have traditionally hunted deer and moose  which were once plentiful. But this wisdom  is dying quickly, and the wildlife is getting  lot. Instead I worked on other things. The  summer is so short and intense here that  it never seems possible to do everything I  planned the winter before. That's part of  the reason I was so interested in a book  a friend loaned to me—The One Straw  Revolution. Written by a Japanese farmer,  it promised immediately a way of farming  with minimal work. The more I think about  it though, the more I see in this idea.  Basically, his plan is to minimize cultivation, to eliminate inorganic chemicals, and  to use nature as a partner in farming, rather  then an adversary. His methods are specific  to his region of Japan, but the principles  are sound anywhere. He doesn't till the soil.  Each time the earth is ploughed, its most  valuable layer of organic materials is exposed to sun and air which destroy much of  its strength. Instead he uses serial plantings  of materials that work to enrich the soil, replacing nutrients used up by one crop with  nutrients produced by another. Both crops  produce food for the farmer, and the soil  gets richer with every planting.  Seed is broadcast, natural insect and disease control is encouraged, and his labour  consists of minimal irrigation and harvesting. He uses only a little compost in his vegetable patch, which consists of seeds thrown  where they fall, and vegetables allowed to  There's something about the idea of  "nudging nature" rather than raping the  land that I believe is essentially feminist. I  have always winced at the sight of a newly  ploughed field, all that topsoil blowing away  or caking in the sun. But for even the smallest farmer here, a tractor is essential equipment I have a pasture of about six acres that  I would like to manage in a caring, woman's  way. It's thin and scrubby, and doesn't even  feed my horses through the summer. There  is a new idea here, imported from New  Zealand, about intensive grazing. I like it.  Basically, grazing animals are penned  into a small area until they have completely  grazed it, then they are moved to another  small area. Left on their own, grazing animals will eat all the most nutritious grasses  first, leaving weeds with less food value to  re-seed themselves. Over a period of time,  a large pasture will become more and more  dominated by the least nutritious and least  palatable foodstuffs. With intensive grazing  they are forced to eat everything available,  including the things they don't like as much.  Then this piece of land is rested as they are  moved to another patch, and over a period  of time, the better grasses and weeds begin  to thrive and take over. In New Zealand,  where this method has been practiced for  a number of years, pastures that were  I useless have been brought back to life, and  j the number of sheep that can be grazed in  | a given area has been doubled. This has  been done without any ploughing, seeding,  i or fertilizer. The only equipment needed is  j a moveable electric fence.  I I think Mr. Fukuoka, who wrote The  One Straw Revolution would approve of  this idea. But to truly implement an agricultural system of this sort, much work must  j be done. Working with nature instead of  ' against nature requires a detailed and intimate knowledge of the land and its bounty.  : It is so much easier to just start from  scratch and follow a department of Agriculture handout about farming. This is why  I think this is a type of agriculture that  women are best suited to and that feminists  need to espouse.  The agriculture industry is a multi-  million dollar one. Basically, it supplies  something that has always been the traditional realm of women—food for the family.  It does it in a way that actually destroys the  ability of the earth to produce food. And as  more and more of the natural plants of the  earth are destroyed through farming, the genetic pool for developing new crops is depleted.  I believe that it is entirely possible for a  small community of people to live entirely  off the natural plants and wildlife of this  area. And this is not a breadbasket area,  nor is it a rich delta such as the Fraser Valley. But as the rich farming areas are slowly  being destroyed it becomes more important  to develop new methods for marginal farming. I don't think that this means we must  look to subsistence living—harvesting only  the wild berries and hunting only the wild  animals. Wild plants thrive under the right  conditions, and farming is merely finding  the right plants for the prevailing conditions, and maximizing their potential with  a little human intervention.  This means that the first job of the fem-  mist farmer is to familiarize herself with  the edible wild plants of the area. Then  she must observe carefully to learn under  what conditions these plants do best. She  must notice what insects and birds eat these  plants, and what methods nature provides  to control these insects and birds. Fukuoka  describes a point in his experimenting when  his field was covered with an almost continuous silvery web, and although this was very  beautiful with the morning dew collected  on it, he was most concerned—until he discovered that his field was being invaded by  spiders that were the natural predators of  mites that were attacking his grain. Now he  looks forward to the spider infestation every year, which comes to a degree proportional to the number of mites in the field.  Next year I hope to be able to afford electric fencing, because the first job is to prevent my horses from continuing to destroy  the pasture with their very selective gra«-L  ing. I am also working on a small rock garden that is full of wild plants gathered from"  the surrounding woods. This is my laboratory to learn what these plants like. I am  also going to have a vegetable garden, because I'm not ready to understand how not  to. But I'm planning to concentrate on a  few vegetables that I already know grow  well here, so that I can experiment with  letting them go wild. My rhubarb is already transplanted around the lawn, and  will become part of the once-flower beds.  I've transplanted some wild raspberries and  hope they'll survive the winter and flourish  on my land.  I would bve to find a sympathetic  botanist familiar with this area to help me  cut a few corners. I don't see why ten acres  couldn't provide me with all the food I need,  although it will take me some years to learn  how. I have the advantage of a very strong  native community nearby. But the knowledge I need is dying with the elders, and I  don't speak Shushwap and they don't speak  English.  In spite of the loneliness and all, I sometimes think that living here has reminded  me of some very basic things. That w  all on this planet earth together and if we  don't figure out how to treat her better no  amount of equal rights legislation is going to  save us. That there are natural cycles to life  and if we ignore them we ignore the essence  of our nature. That we are all so dependent  on structures outside of ourselves that we  are easily controlled by them. That nature  provides us with the clues for our own survival, because we are products of the earth,  not masters of it. That rural women still  don't have much of a voice in the urban,  feminist movement, and I'm honestly begii  ning to believe that any woman who thinks  of herself as "politically sophisticated" feminist should plan to spend at least a portion  of her life outside of the womb of the cities,  away from the networks that support her,  beyond the tiny circle of her consciousness,  and look at her world from another angle.  Judith Quinlan would love to hear  from her sisters about these ideas and  any others. She say3 she is trying to develop a women's retreat/conference centre on her land. Call her at (604) 895-  4721, or write to Zone Three, C 44,  Imp. Ranch., RR #1, 100 Mile House,  B.C.   VOK 2EO.   Visitors always wel-  «■ * • 111 vi 11 .• • Wmk  For the best in Foreign Films  and Independent Quality Films  Non-Sexist, Coffee Bar, Crying Room for parents  with small children  16th and ARBUTUS STREET  Phone 738-6311  $2.50 on Tuesday, $4 students with  valid student cards.  Ue-i^<«J-6  THE  mNCOUVER  OUTDOOR  CLUB  FORWOMEN  ORGANIZED AND RUN BY WOMEN  LEARN NEW SKILLS  For more information phone:    Deb  255-5288 or Linda 876-3506.  (Jh£. CauxU.%  PIGEON  Pro^l°l  eliven'es  and  sa"e a bundle!  683-1610  683-2696   VANCOUVER WOMEN'S   BOOKSTORE  Hours: Monday-Saturday  ll:00-5:30pm  684-0523  Ask about our new book club.  31 5 Cambie Street     Vancouver, B.C. V6B 2N4  KINESIS by Kirsten Emmott  Rosalind Franklin and DNA by Anne  Sayre. W.W. Norton & Company (New  York) 1975. $8.95  In 1968, James D. Watson published The  Double Helix, describing how he and Francis Crick in 1953 established the molecular  structure of DNA—the discovery that won  them the Nobel Prize.  The book was, and remains, an enormous best seller, hailed as a fascinating account of science behind the scenes. Why,  then, did Francis Crick describe it to Anne  Sayre as "a contemptible pack of damned  nonsense?" It seems that Watson got a lot  | wrong, and along the way, he cruelly libelled  \ a remarkable woman, Rosalind Franklin, a  scientist who almost beat Watson and Crick  to DNA, who should have shared their Nobel Prize, who cannot defend herself against  a grotesque misogynist caricature, for she  died in 1958.  Sayre knew Franklin, and has written her  story not only to defend her friend, or simply to expose Watson and his self-serving  lies, but to show us how easy it is to destroy a woman's accomplishments by calling her a homely feminist. The pity of it is  that Franklin wasn't much of a feminist at  all. Had she been, supportive friends might  have protected her from the isolation and  stumbling blocks that robbed her of the rewards she deserved.  The Double Helix, says Sayre, is "written as a kind of memoir, frank and chatty  and sometimes gossipy ... it provided one  man's view of the world of science and its  inhabitants ...  "... (Watson) presented in The Double  Helix a character named 'Rosy' who represented, but did not really coincide with,  a woman named Rosalind Franklin whom I  had known, admired, and liked very much  ... the technique used to change Rosalind  Franklin into 'Rosy' was subtle, but realfy  not unfamiliar; part of it, at the simplest  level, was the device of the nickname itself,  one that was never used by any friend of  Rosalind's, and certainly by no one to her  face ... the figure which emerged was plain  enough. She was one we have all met before, not often in the flesh, but constantly  in a certain kind of social mythology. She  was the perfect, unadulterated stereotype of  the unattractive, dowdy, rigid, aggressive,  overbearing, steely, 'unfeminine' bluestocking, the female grotesque we have all been  taught either to fear or to despise.  "... we are told, at the outset, a true  fact, which is that Rosalind was working  in 1951 in a laboratory at King's College  (London) and then, at once, an untrue  one, which is that this laboratory was under the direction of Maurice Wilkins ...  we are even assured that her presence in  that laboratory was intended only to speed  up Wilkin's research. The relative positions of two people have been defined, and  with what follows, the "Rosy" character instantly emerges. For Rosalind claimed, Watson says ... that she had been given the  DNA problem for her own, and so refused  to 'think of herself as Maurice's assistant.'  12 KINESIS  February '87  ROSALIND FRANKLIN  ACCOMPLISHED   SCIENTIST  IGNORED BY HISTORY  In the circumstances Watson has sketched  for us, such as refusal can only have been  uppish, mutinous. Who on earth, we are led  to ask, does that lab assistant think she is?  And so we accept, barely noticing what it  is that we have accepted, a perfectly clear  picture of an aggressive, perhaps belligerent, female subordinate with no respect for  her superiors, and an unlovable tendency to  get above herself ...  "... but the picture rests upon air;  the facts contradict it. The organization at  King's College in which both Rosalind and  Maurice Wilkins worked was under the direction of Professor (now Sir John) Randall,  and in this laboratory they were on a level of  equality, each supervising a group—in Rosalind's case, a very small one—engaged in  entirely different research activities, though  both were concerned with DNA ... one  aspect of the research being done upon it  was certainly Rosalind's responsibility, for  this approach made use of X-ray diffraction  methods, and this was a technique which  she commanded that Wilkins at the time  did not. She had, in fact, been brought in to  Randall's organization in the first place in  order to organize, supervise, and carry out  that aspect of the DNA work, while Wilkins  specialized in biochemical and biophysical  studies. And suddenly it appears that the  young woman who refused to think of herself as Maurice Wilkins' assistant was quite  justified in her reluctance, for this she never  was, nor was ever meant to be."  Rosalind Franklin's nature was reserve'  yet forceful and definite; she had "presence", says Sayre, not just because of her  striking good looks or vibrant physical energy, but also a certain intensity. She was  a passionate person, and what she did with  her capacity for passion was to devote it to  science. Single minded devotion to science  and a capacity for painstaking hard work  made her an extremely skilled experimentalist. It also won her the respect of all those  who were capable of looking beyond stereotypes.  VY.  f atson claimed that Franklin refused to  emphasize her feminine qualities "by which  he means (and it is his idea of femininity)  that she is badly dressed, wears no lipstick,  does nothing interesting with her straight  black hair ... of course she peers out at  the world from behind her spectacles, and  we know she does because Watson muses  upon how she might look if ever she removed them ... people with whom Rosalind Franklin worked in both England and  in France thought her rather smart, always  well- groomed, discernibly English in her  style, but far from habitually dowdy. The  unadorned lips that Watson found distressing simply indicate him to be unobservant—  the lipstick was almost invariably there.  And of all things, he cannot really have wondered often or long how Rosalind would look  without spectacles, for he cannot often have  seen her wearing any. Rosalind had the eyesight of an eagle, and resorted to magnifying lenses only for the closest of fine work."  Sayre apologizes for defending her friend's looks. What do they matter? Only  that Watson's blunder over the spectacles  tipped her off that this witness is unreliable;  that Watson was concocting an illusion.  Who was Rosalind Franklin? She came  from a family of rich, hardworking and  philanthropic Orthodox Jews. Her grandmother, Caroline Jacob Franklin, devoted a  lifetime of service to education, as well as  founding a boys' club, running a mothers'  welfare service, helping prostitutes and raising six children. Her daughters became socialists, trade union organizers, and active  workers for women's suffrage (Rosalind's  uncle Hugh went to prison in 1910 for beating up the anti-feminist Winston Churchill  with a dog whip}. Rosalind's father Ellis  Franklin was a science teacher at the Working Men's College. Her mother Muriel Wa-  ley also came from a talented family of scientists, parliamentarians and social workers. The two gave Rosalind and their four  other children a happy childhood and an excellent education.  Her father doubted the usefulness of professional education for girls, and suggested  voluntary social work; fifteen-year-old Rosalind resisted. She wanted to be a scientist. Although she loved children, she recognized the vast difficulties of combining  child-rearing with a full time career, particularly in those days. She felt that motherhood would be totally incompatible with  the commitment she felt to science, and so  she decided against marriage.  "... this was what she gave up as the to-  i ken and sign of her sincerity and her com-  ; mittment, and it is possibly because she felt  ! the sacrifice deeply that she made the innocent assumption that rational people would  easily understand without further demon-  !  stration that she deserved to be judged not  as woman scientist, but as a scientist pure  : and simple. But there is not that much rationality in the world, and only an invincible  innocence could imagine that there was."  "... she was 'feminist' only in the widest  philosophical sense, not in an activist one. It  : is not always easy for men to see the difference, but to Rosalind it was a clear one ...  for herself she asked no favours, privileges,  or special, softer standards of judgment because she was a woman, which meant that,  to her, equality was taken for granted. To  have it raised, then, as a separate point was  maddeningly illogical. All this was plain as  day to her, and she never saw why it was,  in so many other minds, so cloudy."  A  t Newnham College in Cambridge,  Franklin was influenced by, and eventually  lodged with, Adrienne Weill, a metallurgist who had escaped from Nazi-occupied  France with her young daughter. Weill made  clear her disapproval of educating women  merely to waste their talents, and encouraged Franklin to follow her star.  Unfortunately, she and Wilkins hated one  another on sight; nobody knows why. Sayre  concludes it was just an unfortunate personality clash. Franklin made a suggestion  which Wilkins took as a sneer, and they  never were able to patch things up. Wilkins  didn't like her forthright way of talking,  j nor did he get on well with women (he  ; didn't take a female graduate student until 1971). King's was a sexist institution.  Male staff had a comfortable dining room;  women staff lunched in the students' hall.  Franklin's friends were all in France. Her  sole graduate student got on well with her,  but she was isolated from her (nearly all  male) colleagues; she was lonely; soon they  were talking behind her back.  By November of 1951 Franklin gave a lecture at King's which clearly stated that the  j long-sought structure of DNA was a helix  with phosphate groups on the outside of the  molecule. She could not prove this with the  data at hand, nor could she see any point in  starting to build wire models without better  data. But Watson and Wilkins both claim  that she overlooked the helical structure.  Neither paid much attention to her lecture,  and as a result, Watson and Crick built a  DNA model with the phosphate groups inside. It was incorrect and Franklin quite correctly criticized it. (There were two forms  of DNA, one of which Franklin doubted  was helical, and Watson muddles her views  enough to make Franklin look a mulish, obstinate fool.)  ^ hewasafeministonly inthewidest  philosophical sense. She asked no favours,  privileges, or special, softer standards of  judgement because she was a woman.  To her, equality was taken for granted.  Rosalind, at twenty-two, boldly gave up  a teaching fellowship to do research into the  microstructure of coal. Within four years  she published five papers and in 1945 obtained her PhD. She then spent four happy  years in France, fitting easily into the social  and scientific activities of her colleagues and  making warm friendships. She also learned  X-ray crystallography.  Franklin knew that she was happiest and  most productive doing independent work.  She would not have taken a job as someone else's assistant. She cared nothing for  empty ambition and titles; but she had done  excellent work already and had no need  to aim lower. In 1951 Randall offered her  a research fellowship on the understanding  that she would be put in charge of building  up an X-ray diffraction unit at King's College. Franklin had spent years doing physical chemistry; now she wished to study biological molecules. There were a lot of interesting problems being studied at King's  and a good many people were working on  different aspects of DNA. One was Maurice  Wilkins, and it was his DNA samples that  Franklin began to study.  Soon Franklin was unhappy enough at  King's to be looking for another job, and  she avoided Wilkins as much as she could.  Alone, by April 1953 she did enough significant work on DNA to be within weeks  of coming up with the correct solution.  Crick later told Sayre she would have gotten the answer within three weeks, certainly  no more than three months.  Watson and Crick were working at the  Cavendish laboratory at Cambridge, but  they often got together with Wilkins. In  early 1953, Wilkins confided that Franklin  had a new structure for DNA, and he  showed Watson her beautiful X-ray pictures. For the first time, Watson knew that  DNA was a helix. Randall also circulated a  report about Franklin's work in his lab, and  a Cavendish scientist (again without permission) showed it to Crick. In a burst of  creativity the two built one wire model after  another, until they hit on the double helix.  Using Franklin's data, Franklin's pictures  and Franklin's ideas, Watson and Crick triumphantly published their theory of DNA  in April 1953.  Their accomplishment in pulling together  many unrelated pieces of evidence was brilliant. Franklin recognized this at once. She  published a supporting paper in the same  issue of Nature that carried news of their  breakthrough. She showed no disappointment, only pleasure at what they had accomplished. "She was a very good scientist  who knew her subject and could not help  but recognize the perfect solution when she  saw it. It was, come to think of it, one of the  best compliments Crick and Watson ever received."  Soon after, Franklin moved to Birkbeck  College in London to work with J.D. Bernal.  In the few short years that remained to her,  she did important work on viruses; she published seventeen papers; she was happy. But  then she developed cancer. In April, 1958,  at the age of thirty-seven, she died.  In 1962 Crick, Watson and Wilkins  shared the Nobel Prize. Bernal, among others, has said that Franklin would have been  given the honour had she lived. Encyclopedias scant her; one book gives credit for  her work to Wilkins; Linus Pauling, in a  1974 retrospective did the same; the DNA  molecule exhibit of the British Museum only  recently listed her name after years of ignoring her contribution. "Rosalind has been  robbed, little by little."  When Rosalind demonstrated to Crick  "how foolproof was her assertion that the  sugar-phosphate backbone was on the outside of the molecule," Watson subsequently  reflected upon this in a curious vein: "her  past uncompromising statements on this  matter thus reflected first-rate science, not  the outpourings of a misguided feminist."  "The notion that accurate statements  made by a woman scientist are first to be  i regarded as likely outpourings of feminism,  j and only under the strong pressure of ir-  ! refutable demonstration as science is Wat-  i son's own contribution. So is the fictional  'Rosy'.  "Unfortunately these Watsonisms have  been widely believed. From scientific publications to discussions in the popular press,  I   both Rosalind's views and her contributions  i   to the solution of the structure of DNA,  I   and sometimes her personality as well, have  been either misrepresented or overlooked,  and in all cases the source for this treatment  l   appears to have been Watson ... ."  Watson remains completely unrepentant.  Franklin's family forced him to  add an  epilogue to his book in which he praises  |   Franklin and her work. But in an interview  ;   with Sayre in 1979 he insisted that Franklin  I   was made miserable by an non-supportive  family;  a family whom Sayre knew, but  Watson did not. She writes: "... this view  I   of the Franklin family, and their family life,  i   is not only ludicrous, but wholly wrong. Nor  :   is there any belief on the part of those who  i   knew Rosalind well, a number which includes myself but does not include Watson,  that Rosalind was a 'tortured' person suffering from a deep, chronic 'unhappiness'.  "She was, of course, unhappy about  things which objectively required that response. Almost anyone would have been  miserable working in the atmosphere which  surrounded her at King's College. But her  personality was fundamentally buoyant, energetic, vital and optimistic. She got an  enormous amount of sheer fun out of life.  "... It is also worth noting that Rosalind herself had no idea, ever, how crucial  her contributions were to the Watson-Crick  structure, because she never knew the extent to which her data had passed into other  hands or had been talked over with Wilkins.  All that she was aware of having provided  was what went into her seminar in November 1951, and what she had to say in criticism of the Watson-Crick model ... ."  Sayre objects to the way Watson carelessly robbed her friend of her personality.  Why did he invent 'Rosy', a character who  never existed? To Sayre, it is clear; Watson  "unorthodoxly obtained, and made use of,  data which originated at King's ..." and  he took advantage of Wilkins' confidences.  The average reader—a target at whom  Watson aimed The Double Helix with  very great accuracy—will never know the  difference. The average reader will buy the  package, and come up in the end full of sympathy. The ethics of science, then, become  roughly the same as those of used-car dealers. If you have a secretary around the office  who is like that Rosy woman you are perfectly justified either in exploiting her or firing her. Was this why 'Rosy' was invented?  To rationalize, justify, excuse, and even to  'sell' that which was done that ought not really to have been done?  Sayre sees a gloomy precedent in the  whole tone of Watson's book. The race to  publish first, the justification for shady behaviour; a generation of graduate students  has read the book and now know how to get  ahead. After all, nobody thinks less of Watson, do they?  Sayre concludes: "There seems to me  almost no way in which a good and  greatly gifted person—Rosalind Franklin,  now dead—can be used for wrong and embittering purposes that she has not been  put to, helplessly and virtually undefended.  Certainly she has been used, thanks to The  Double Helix, to menace bright and intellectually ambitious girls. I went once to  a public meeting of a local school board  and heard a man stand-up to demand that  science requirements for girls be dropped  from the high school curriculum because he  had a daughter, and he 'didn't want her to  grow up like that woman Rosy—what's-her-  name—in that book.' ... that man has a  daughter, for all I know an intelligent and  gifted one, and I do not really like to contemplate her future."  Sayre wants that man, and the high  school students who are given The Double  Helix as a science text, and everyone else, to  know what Rosalind Franklin accomplished.  "What she did do was fine science. What she  was, as a person, was both noble and lovable. My pride is that she was my friend."  KINESIS s$ssss$^  International  Prostitution:  last  chance  for  survival  by Lynn Bueckert  As a participant in the Micro-technology  Conference held in the Philippines in October, I had the opportunity to spend several days outside of Manila and travelled to  the Batman Export Processing Zone and to  Olongapo City. While I found most of my  experiences on the five day exposure tour  totally overwhelming my visit to Olongapo  City had the most profound impact in that  it provided me the context for the economic,  political, and social conditions the Filipino  people are currently struggling against.  Olongapo City is approximately a four  hour drive from.Manila and is adjacent to  the Subic Naval Base, one of the fourteen  American bases in the Philippines. It is difficult to .imagine that Olongapo used to be  a small fishing village as it now has a population of 250,000 people. As early as 1885  the Spanish designated Subic Bay a main  naval station. In 1901, while the Philippines  were under United States control, President Theodore Roosevelt designated 70,000  hectares of land around Subic Bay as a military reservation.  The Philippines are no longer formally  under United States control; however, the  continued presence of American military  bases in the Philippines was the condition  of independence granted in 1946. The Subic  Base played a strategic role in World War  H, the Korean War, and the Vietnam War  and today continues as a major military operation. Presently the base employs approximately 60,000 personnel and headquarters  the United States' Seventh Fleet which consists of ninety ships. A single aircraft carrier with escort ships may bring as many as  9,000 marines into port at any given time  and port stay is generally five to ten days.  For thousands of Filipino women Olongapo City offers a last chance for economic  survival. Women come to Olongapo from all  over the Philippines with the hope of finding a job on the base or with the dream  of marrying an American sailor and moving  to the United States. Once in Olongapo the  women realize there is not work available  on the base; however, desperate for money  for themselves and to send to their poverty  stricken families they end up working in the  bars, nightclubs, massage parlours, or on  ■ the street.  It is estimated that there are fifteen to  seventeen thousand prostitutes in Olongapo  City. Five to six thousand are registered  hospitality women who work in bars and are  considered to be legal prostitutes. The other  ten to eleven thousand women are street  walkers. Street walkers are illegal and can  be arrested and imprisoned at any time.  There are five hundred bars in Olongapo  City. They are fifty percent Filipino, forty  percent Chinese, and ten percent American, owned. The Chinese owners, however,  control approximately eighty percent of the  capital. In order to work in a bar in Olongapo a woman must obtain a Mayor's Pre-  mit which includes a chest x-ray, venereal  disease (VD) smear, blood test, and a stool  I  Jfg OCT.SIS. 1386  MANILA  4k mmtmtmt  EZilipina  Ourstruggle  as our  test. The cost of the permit is one hundred pesos ($5.00 U.S.) which is paid by the  woman herself. A woman must be eighteen  years old to work in a bar; however, many  women lie about their age in order to get  work. Consequently, there are fifteen, sixteen and seventeen year old women working in the bars. While working for a bar a  woman must have VD smears every other  week and bi-annual physical check-ups at  the Social Hygiene Clinic. The clinic is financed and operated by the city health department but all the medication is provided  by the United States Navy, free of charge.  If a woman's VD smear is positive the bar  is contacted and she has to report for treatment and stop working until she is well. Inevitably, this means she will be fired.  There are several different jobs to be had  in a bar: cashier, waitress, entertainer, and  go-go dancer. Not all these women work as  prostitutes though. For instance, cashiers  and waitresses seldom go out with the customers. The women's salaries vary depending on the job but all of them tend to be  paid low wages. It is the commissions that  earn the women their dollars.  Commissions are earned on Ladies'  Drinks and Bar Fines. A Lady's drink is a  mixed drink the sailor buys for the woman  he wants to talk to while in the bar. The  cost of the Drink ranges between twenty-five  and forty pesos, of which the bar owner receives more than fifty percent. The Bar Fine  ranges in cost from 250 to 1200 pesos and  is paid by the sailor to the bar owner when  he takes a woman out of the bar. Again,  the woman receives less than fifty percent  of this fee for her commission.  A lot of pressure is placed on the women  working in the bars to bring customers and  money into the bar. If a woman lives at  the bar, for instance, she may not be allowed to leave the bar unless a Bar Fine is  paid—even if the woman is not on duty. As  well, some bars require the women to bring  in a certain number of Bar Fines a month.  Failure to do so could well cost them their  job. Not only does this create a lot of anxiety in the women to bring forth business,  but it also creates competition and rivalry  amongst the women themselves.  An American ship was in port the night  we were in Olongapo City and the streets  were crawling with thousands of overbearing American sailors. A walk down the main  street gave me a strong sense of the intense control and domination the Americans  have, not only in Olongapo, but over the  Philippines as a whole.  Efforts to end the poverty and oppression in Olongapo is obviously not isolated to  Olongapo alone; rather, it is part of the Filipino people's struggle for economic, political, and social change for the entire Philippines. And so clearly, it will not be until  all the United States military bases are removed from the Philippines that the Filipino people can begin to be free.  Micro-  technology:  impact  on  women  workers  by Rachel Epstein  In October forty women from twelve  countries gathered in the Philippines for a  ten day meeting called "Micro-chip Technology: Its impact on the Lives of Women  Workers." Participants were workers, educators and organizers who work directly  with women affected by the new international division of labour or "global assembly line" that has developed as part of the  microelectronics industry. They came from  Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand, the Philippines, Hong Kong, Japan, the Netherlands,  Trinidad, Jamaica, Mexico, Canada and the  United States.  The global assembly line begins in North  America, Europe and Japan where the research and design for micro-chips is carried out and where assembly workers, often immigrant women, fabricate "wafers" or  large sheets of micro-chips. These wafers are  sent to factories in Third World countries,  particularly Southeast Asia, where women  factory workers, working for poverty wages  under dangerous working conditions, cut,  bond, and test the chips for re-export to  the home country where they are assembled,  again often by immigrant women, into a  multitude of products including office equipment.  Of course, introduction of this new office equipment into offices in industrialized  countries is creating new and serious health  hazards for women workers, as well as increasingly routinized work, new forms of  management control and the prospect of  massive unemployment.  A new twist has stretched the global assembly line back to the Third World as corporations have begun to "export" data processing to regions where they can reap the  benefits of women's high literacy skills and  low wage levels. American Airlines, for example, exports all of its data processing to  the Caribbean.  The meeting in the Philippines was organized jointly by three women's groups in  the Philippines: the Centre for Women's  Resources, the Women's Centre and the  KMK (women worker's movement); and  the Participatory Research Group and the  Women's Program of the International  Council for Adult Education in Canada. It  was an opportunity for women workers and  organizers to share information and organizing strategies and to put in place an international network and strategy to continue the struggle against the global impact  of the microelectronic industry.  The five-day exposure to the Philippines  which began the meeting was informative  and inspiring. All of us were struck by  the high level of organizing in the Philippines and particularly by the integration  of the different political movements—the  trade union movement includes a national  and international perspective in its education work; the women's movement, though  it has strong and independent organizations, is not separate from the movement to  organize workers.  The inspiration we felt on seeing and  hearing about political organizing in the  Philippines continued to grow as we learned  about organizing efforts in other regions:  • Women  from  Malaysia  and  Indonesia  spoke   about   their  efforts  to   organize  women electronics workers in the face  of regimes which outlaw any kind of organizing and which divide workers on  the basis of race and/or religion.  Still  women organizers attempt to reach other  women, through day care centers, grocery stores, and by talking to other work-  Filipino workers perform skit on organizing.  w  omen  will continueas long  hearts beat  ers in the factories. Since 1978 they have  been trying to organize a union in the Export Processing Zone. In Penang, women  workers occupied a government building  when they were laid off and the government denied them any compensation.  • In Hong Kong women workers organized  a union in a Fairchild plant by beginning  with a sewing club. But the union was unable to prevent the closure of the plant.  • Workers at Stanford Microsystems in the  Philippines have been on strike since  June 30, 1985 and are trying to locate  Cristino Concepcion, the owner of the  plant who left the Philippines for the  United States with money belonging to  the workers. (See:"Let Them Eat Chips",  this section)  • Women in the Netherlands have formed  the Housewives Union which is a member of the Federation of Unions and fights  for the rights of women. Another group  called SOBE (Foundation for Research  Electro-technical Industry) is working to  make links between workers employed by  the Philips corporation around the world.  • An activist form the Silicon Valley in  California, formerly called the Valley of  Hearts Delights and now known as the  Valley of the Shadow of Death, described  the on-going battles being fought there to  protect the health of workers and their  communities from the devastating chemical hazards of the industry.  Each woman's report crystallized a picture of the world wide operations of multinationals (MNCs): MNCs are moving from  region to region depending on the availability of cheap labour and other monetary incentives which are provided by host governments, who for the most part work to  safeguard the capital and interests of the  MNCs.  It became clear that in response to  the worldwide operations of MNCs, feminist and worker's movements are growing,  women are finding new and innovative ways  of reaching each other and organizing.  At the strategy session which ended the  meeting, we agreed to a number of actions:  to strengthen our efforts to organize women  workers; to include an international perspective in all our work; to plan further exchanges of workers and organizers from different regions; to organize solidarity and financial support for campaigns and appeals  in different regions; to translate relevant  materials and learn new languages—an essential part of international solidarity.  At the closing of the meeting we sang  "The Internationale", each of us in her own  language. The song somehow had a new  meaning after having spent ten days with a  group of women from all over the world so  full of strength and determination and a will  to continue to struggle. As Evangelina from  Mexico said, "our struggle will continue as  long as our hearts beat."  Stanford strike:  let  them  eat  chips  by Christine Micklewright  In 1979 a sobbing woman stumbled into  the union office at an integrated circuit factory in Manila. An irate supervisor had  forced a silicon chip into her mouth when he  discovered that it had been wrongly marked  as a defective piece. The union was outraged  at the maltreatment and demanded the termination of the supervisor. The management refused and the workers walked out.  Four days later the supervisor was transferred to another division and the workers  ended their strike.  The company, Stanford Microsystems  Corporation, used to make integrated circuit chips for military missiles. The factory closed down production six months  into a strike over technological change.  Prior to the strike, Stanford experienced  rapid growth and healthy profits. Operations expanded dramatically from one hundred workers in 1973, to 3,000 by 1978 and  had reached a peak of 6,500 in June 1985.  There were two unions in the plant. Eight  hundred belonged to the Stanford Technical and Office Staff Union while 5,000  were members of the Stanford Microsystems  Corporation Laboratory Union (SMTLU).  Working conditions were poor. Workers  were exposed to dust from molding materials, trichloroethylene (an all-purpose solvent for oils, waxes and greases) and x-rays.  There was no health and safety protection for workers, while great care was taken  in the handling of silicon chips. Workers  were provided with hair caps, masks, gowns  and rubber gloves. Stanford workers used x-  ray machines to check the circuits and many  women gave birth to unhealthy children.  To distract the workers from their environment the employer held beauty contests to select "Miss Stanford" and awarded  1,000 pesos ($71), a trophy and sash to the  winner. Competitors were required to wear  shorts and a sleeveless blouse and the employer, Christo Concepcion, enjoyed the role  of judge.  As in many Philippine factories the practice of "lie down or be laid off" was common  but the women are reluctant to talk about  sexual harassment, although it is clearly  rampant.  Letty Tabora is twenty-eight years old.  She worked as a quality control inspector for Stanford and holds a union representative position with SMTLU. Since June  Evangelina Corana  by Rachel Epstein  The two women from Mexico  who attended the meeting in the  Philippines were there representing the September 19 Garment  Workers Union. They related the  founding of their union out of  the devastation resulting from the  September 19 earthquake. Many  of the garment factories were gutted tenement buildings which were  among the first to collapse with  the force of the earthquake. An estimated 5,000 women were killed  and thousands injured. Women arrived at work to find their workmates and friends crushed under  rubble; the owners finally arrived  to rescue the sewing machines.  Women who had worked for fifteen  to twenty years were left with no  compensation and without jobs.  On October 18, 10,000 workers  marched demanding the registration of an independent union for  garment workers; on October 20,  the union, which now has 4,500  members, was registered.   1985 she has led her members in the strike  against technological change at Stanford.  That strike protests the automation of chip  production which turned five manual assembly jobs into one which only requires the  monitoring of an automated process. Hundred of jobs were eliminated and the work  week was cut in half to only three days. It  has been a vicious dispute with the company  employing both goons and the military.  Picketers were attacked with stones and  bottles and two women strikers suffered  third degree burns to their chests and backs  when hit by a shower of sulpheric and nitrate acid. A male colleague received eight-  five airgun pellets in his chest.  Blacklisted by employers because of her  role in the strike, Letty refuses to give up  the fight for the workers despite a year and a  half on the picket line. More than fifty of the  strikers have build small dwellings outside  the factory where they continue their struggle. Some of the workers have found other  employment while others have gone abroad  as mail-order brides or to work as domestics  in Western countries including Canada.  The owner of Stanford has absconded and  the Far East Bank has foreclosed on the  company yet a large number of the striking  workers continue their struggle. They are  demanding one month's severance pay for  each year of service. They also hold onto a  small hope that the bank will re-open the  factory and hire the workers. Their case is  now before the Security and Exchange Committee awaiting a decision.  The Stanford plant ceased operations in  December 1985 and Christo Concepcion disappeared into the United States with $32  million. Letty opens the company's Annual  Report for 1984 and points at the smug face  of Concepcion. "If you can find out where  he is", she pleads, "let us know. He has our  money"  For more information contact PRG,  # 809-229 College Street, Toronto, Ontario, M5T 1R4- Also available from  PRG are two booklets: Short Circuit:  Women in the Automated Office and Short  Circuit: Women on the Global Assembly  Line; and a slide-tape show Who's in Control: Micro-technology and Women's Work.  Cleofe   Zapanta,   Secretary-General   of   KMK   (Women   Workers'   Movement)  Philippines.  KINESIS  KINESIS Arts  by  Wendy   Frost  and   Michele  Valiquette  Just as long as newspapers and magazines   are   controlled   by   men,   every  woman upon them must write articles  which are reflections of men's ideas.  Susan B. Anthony  In 1970, when the second wave of the  North American women's movement was in  its infancy, a group of women seized control  of Rat magazine. Like Susan B. Anthony,  they recognized that only when women had  control of the publishing process would we  have power over our own words and images.  Seventeen years later, not only do women  across the continent regularly produce hundreds of newspapers and journals, they run  feminist bookstores, feminist presses, feminist writers' groups; and, there are feminist distributors, feminist librarians and  feminist archivists. Holding this network of  women in print together are a series of ongoing publications, which address both daily  concerns and long term goals, and various  guides to resources.  Eleanor Wachtel's Feminist Print Media and her Update on Feminist Periodicals, reports submitted to the Women's  Programme of the Secretary of State in  1982 and 1985, give the most comprehensive  overview to date of contemporary feminist  newspapers and magazines in Canada. In  approximately 100 pages Wachtel presents a  cogent summary of mainstream media coverage of women's issues, the history of feminist periodicals in North America, and the  social impact of Canadian feminist periodicals. She puts all of this together to demonstrate women's need "for our own voice."  But Wachtel is not content to let the report rest on a rhetorical flourish—almost  half of her work is devoted to careful description of the mechanics involved in actually making our voices heard. Drawing on  responses to an extensive questionnaire, she  details the nuts and bolts of producing a  feminist periodical, from editorial structure  through budgets to distribution. And in doing so, she documents both the obstacles  facing feminist periodicals and the efforts  women make to surmount them.  Wachtel's conclusion is unequivocal: Inadequate funding is the central problem  of feminist editorial collectives. The rec  ommendations in the first report led to  the Feminist Periodicals Conference held  in Montreal in summer 1985; if the recommendations in the second are adopted  we can expect further interesting developments. These reports are essential reading  for all women involved or interested in feminist periodicals. They are available free  of charge from The Women's Programme,  Secretary of State, Ottawa, Ontario, KlA  OM5.  As feminist bibliographers ourselves, we  know both how vital and how difficult indexing feminist periodical literature is. So  we were delighted by the appearance of the  Lesbian Periodicals Index, just out from  Naiad Press.  the  Lesbian  Periodicals  Index  Compiled and edited by Clare Potter and  her team of researchers, the Circle of Lesbian Indexers, the Index is an author and  subject guide to forty-two American lesbian periodicals, ranging from Vice Versa,  the oldest known lesbian journal which began in San Francisco in 1947, to current  publications, Out and About and Feminary. The Ladder, the best known pioneering lesbian periodical, which published  from 1956- 1972, has already been indexed  in a separate volume, The Index to the  Ladder, edited and compiled by Jan Watson, from Naiad.) All but these last two of  the publications indexed are now defunct;  as Potter explains, the index is "primarily  a retrospective index to selected titles that  have ceased publication and are now a part  of the collective lesbian past."  If the Government in Ottawa  gets its way,  they may take this magazine  right out of your hands  The Great Depression; two world wars; a small, spread-out population;  recessions; inflation; overwhelming competition from the U.S.-none of  these could kill Canada's magazines...  ...but the current Government in Ottawa just might.  The Government is considering demolishing the delicate structure of postal, tariff and tax-related incentives that helps keep the  Canadian magazine industry alive. If this happens, many Canadian  magazines will die.  Those that survive will cost more to readers and publishers  and will be more vulnerable than ever to competition from foreign  magazines that have the advantages of huge press-runs and lower  per-copy costs.  Those that survive will be less profitable and, therefore, more  likely to succumb to adverse economic  circumstances in the future.  CANADA'S  MAGAZINES  ..a voice of our own  Familiar titles like Amazon Quarterly, The Lesbian Tide, and Laven-  dar Woman are joined by others more  ephemeral: Cowrie, Dykes and Gorgons,  Satin for Gay Women. And, as Potter  points out in her introduction, the journals  indexed in these 400 pages represent only  a fraction of the lesbian periodical literature available. The Preface, by Joan Nestle  and Deborah Edel of the New York Lesbian  Herstory Archives, gives a capsule history of  lesbian periodicals and lesbian culture, and  stresses the importance of work like the Index: "It is ... a chronicle of a people's conscious attempt to know what is important  to them; it is a key to a public communal  diary."  The Index is divided into four sections: 1.  Authors and Subjects; 2. Lesbian Writings,  which includes Diary and Journal Entries,  Humour and Satire, Stories and Poems; 3.  Book Reviews; and 4. Visual Arts, which  includes Cartoons, Drawings, Photography  and Miscellaneous.  The largest section, Authors and Subjects, lists authors of articles and detailed  subject headings, which have "helped provide a framework within which to conceptualize the particular information and the  more general issues of lesbian history and  culture." (Preface)  This book is both an invaluable resource  and a piece of living history. As Potter says,  "the essential path breaking role of bibliographies and indexes is a necessary first  step towards a more comprehensive lesbian  studies." May this giant step inspire more  along the same path. Available at the very  reasonable price of US$29.95 from Naiad  Press, P.O. Box 10543, Tallahassee, Florida,  USA 35302.  inist publishing. Brief announcements of  new books, staff changes and other internal  developments, prizes and new periodicals  make up the bulk of the magazine—half,  in the sample issue we saw. Three pages  were devoted to reviews, approximately 200  words each, and a "Query" column listed  calls for both materials and editors.  As in all publications we looked at this  time, there is ongoing discussion in FPN of  the goals of the women in print movement;  Volume H, Number 1 contains draft suggestions for a feminist publishing creed. Available for US$15 per year from Frog in the  Well, 25A Buena Vista Terrace, San Francisco, CA USA 94117.  orcLs  .to the  ise  by Andrea Fleck Clardy  s  The Feminist Writers' Guild  Words to the Wise, Andrea Fleck  Clardy's "writer's guide to feminist and lesbian periodicals", is an annotated listing of  more than 100 book and periodical publishers. This forty-eight page booklet includes two very useful charts, one on feminist presses and one on periodicals, citing information about payment to contributors, publication response time, acceptance  of unsolicited manuscripts, circulation figures, etc. It also includes a list of academic presses that publish women's studies  books, and a section on related resources.  Published by Firebrand Books, and first in  their "Firebrand Sparks Pamphlet" series,  Words to the Wise is available at the Vancouver Women's Bookstore.  We first learned of the existence of Clare  Potter's wonderful Lesbian Periodicals  Index in the Feminist Publisher's News  (FPN). This publication, which comes out  five times a year from Frog in the Well  Press, is full of other similarly helpful items.  It's here that feminist publishers, reviewers, librarians, booksellers, readers and  writers will discover what is new or forthcoming from the feminist presses, and generally what's going on in the world of fem-  The Feminist Writer's Guild, .a U.S. organization founded in 1977, is "dedicated  to furthering the writing and networking of  all women who identify themselves as feminists." The Guild publishes a quarterly national newsletter which functions both as  a networking tool and an information resource. Usually twenty to thirty (8|Xll)  pages long, the Newsletter includes articles, interviews with feminist writers and  publishers, reports on conferences, features  on new feminist presses, and news from local chapters of the Guild.  The Calls for Materials section would  be especially valuable to writers—it offers information on feminist presses seeking  submissions for anthologies or new series,  theme issues of periodicals, writing contests,  calls for papers at conferences, new periodicals seeking submissions, etc. A regular column entitled "Sharing" gives Guild members the opportunity to send short descriptions of their own published work, a useful  way to spread the word.  The Feminist Writer's Guide Newsletter is available four times a year with  membership in the Guild, US$15 per year.  Send to: The Feminist Writer's Guild, P.O.  Box 14055, Chicago, 111., USA 60614.  Although it's primarily directed at feminist bookstores, Feminist Bookstore News  (FBN) will quickly become addictive reading for any women involved in the women in  print movement—or, for that matter, any  feminist reader. We read both our sample copies cover to cover as soon as they  arrived, and were left craving more. The  core of FBN, which has been publishing  for ten years, is up-to-date listings of feminist books from feminist and mainstream  publishers. Published six times a year, and  usually around 50 pages, it features stories,  columns, letters, news on women's bookstores and women's presses, and all kinds  of unclassifiable tidbits of feminist publishing news. The book listings are organized in regular columns, "From Our Own  Presses", The Small Presses", "The University Presses", and "On Publisher's Row".  Each includes a short description of the  book and publication information.  If the idea of reading a book catalogue  seems dry to you, this one is anything but.  Carol Seajay, the editor, is a "gossip" in the  best sense of the word (and if you don't  know what we mean, look it up in the Feminist Dictionary!); her listings are personal  and readable, like talking about women's  books with a friend. The personal note is  there in the entire journal—reading it leaves  you feeling in touch with the women's publishing network.  continued next page  ; KINESIS Arts  ////////////////////////^^^^  Margaret Laurence: a tribute  Margaret Laurence, considered by  many to be Canada's most accomplished author, died at her home in  Lakefield, Ontario, on January 5th. She  was sixty.  Laurence was held in high esteem as  a writer and an activist. Her novels,  the most famous of which are the four  which make up the Manawaka quartet,  feature women as their central characters, women who often found themselves at odds with the puritanical nature of small town Canada, or perhaps  small town anywhere.  The Stone Angel was generally regarded as her most substantial work,  although its critical success was overshadowed by her final novel, The Diviners, which was probably her best known  work; in part because of its graphic  description of an abortion and a sexual encounter. Eventually The Diviners  and others of Laurence's books, were  condemned by an Ontario school board  which threatened to remove them from  school reading lists.  Laurence, who was never to publish  another novel after The Diviners controversy, attributed part of her inability to  the hurt she suffered as a result of the  finally unsuccessful attempts to ban her  books.  In the years before her death she took  up the cause of anti-nuclear work and  was one of that movements' most forceful and moving champions. Laurence  was also instrumental in the establishment of the Writers' Union of Canada,  from which she eventually resigned because the organization continued to accept grants from the Canada Council.  In the following tribute Cynthia  Flood, a Vancouver writer, talks about  why Margaret Laurence's writing affected so many people so deeply.  by Cynthia Flood  She can't be dead.  There will never be another Manawaka  novel.  So we begin to mourn for Margaret Laurence, whose death teaches us again that,  although we know everyone dies, we don't  believe it. Think of Canadian literature.  There, in the middle, the point of coherence,  stands that sturdy maternal figure with the  shock of dark hair and the intelligent loving  eyes. Surely a permanent figure? No.  A friend on the phone, crying at the news,  reflected that "All over Canada, women are  weeping." I'm sure they were, that men were  too, that thousands and thousands of people  who had never met Margaret Laurence wept  as if they had lost a friend and a companion.  What was her art, that people grieve so?  Margaret Laurence had in full measure  several of the talents required to make fine  fiction. Hers always has narrative drive, always bountifully meets our need to want  to know what happens next. Her descriptions of landscape and of domestic interior  are rich with sensory detail, so we feel we  are truly in those places. Her themes—often  difficult—are treated honestly and without fear or hedging. But above all Margaret Laurence's fiction creates character.  Her people move off the pages and into her  readers' lives.  En route to work a few days ago, I saw an  old woman. Stout, slow-moving, unconventionally dressed, with an expression at once  bad-tempered and determined, she paced  across the intersection, ignoring the change  of light and taking her own damn time. Ha-  gar. She is in our aging mothers, our aging  selves, in the old women at the supermarket, the doctor's office, the library, the park.  So is Morag. Middle aged, alone, she is glad  for and jealous of her daughter's new found  love, berates herself, speaks her feelings, is  comforted and comforts herself, and notes  another landmark on the road to the end.  What a complicated process, and how real.  The power of the reality that Margaret  Laurence created on paper was forcefully  demonstrated to me in a class some years  ago in which we read A Jest of God. Contrary to my fears, the jocks in the back row  did not laugh at Rachel. Guided, persuaded,  changed by Margaret Laurence's words,  they expanded their consciousnesses and  they empathized with that unlikely heroine.  They met Rachel and in some way felt what  she felt, although her life-experience in no  way corresponded to theirs.  Vanessa's struggles to understand the  chains of family, Stacey's to conquer her  chosen role, Christie's to give the young  Morag a sense of history, Pique's to define  her own identity, Brother Lemon's to convert Africa, Grandmother McLeod's to repress her emotions—with all these, readers of diverse backgrounds and experience  can identify. Such identification is liberating and empowering to human beings, and  I believe it accounts for the love so many  people feel for Margaret Laurence's work.  Two elements in her fiction, especially, facilitate this identification. The first is the  claim her fiction makes that all human actions have moral importance, and the second is her pity for human struggle.  At some level, all of us know that our  lives are little. Margaret Laurence's fiction recognizes that. Nonetheless it asserts that the quality of our small actions  is important, hi her created world, Good  and Bad and Mixed are real and active  in each character, and their interactions—  their shifts and shaping, their dominance  and succumbing—are intensely important.  They are so not because of some feared  Margaret Laurence, author and activist  judgment after death, but because they are ings are not entirely of their own making. To  the meaning of a human existence. That Ha- my mind, Grandfather Connor best exem-  gar takes the bedpan to Sandra matters; the plifies her ability to understand and to feel  action is one of two that transform the old for a person so hardened and corroded by  woman's life. Laurence's readers draw the life that he in turn becomes harsh and cor-  inference. If this act is important, then so is rosive to others. Laurence shows us, through  what I do in my days. her character Vanessa, how it is possible to  Laurence is unsparing in her exposure of JTM1TM? to, a Pj3" where °"e caf m«?* ,the  her character's pride, cruelty, spite, weak- memory of such a Person not only Wlth for"  ness. Yet she never condemns, and she is  at pains to show how many of people's fail- Laurence cont'd page 21  continued from previous page  Articles provide a real forum for feminist  publishing issues. The Sept/Oct 1986 issue,  for instance, carries a report on the Second  Annual Feminist Book Fair in Oslo, and an  article on gay and lesbian books being seized  by British customs.  Because it's primarily a trade journal,  FBN is available only by subscription. It's  a bit pricey for individuals, since it's regularly US$40 a year (plus $6 for Canadian  postage), but Carol has offered us a real  deal for Kinesis readers—one time only—  you can get a year's sub for the US equivalent of $40 Canadian, as long as it's paid by  a money order in US funds. (US banks apparently now charge $30 for cashing international cheques, so you can't send a personal  cheque in US funds). You might try pooling resources and getting a sub among two  or three women. Send to: P.O. Box 882554,  San Francisco, CA USA 94188, and mention  this column for the special rate.  After dipping into any one of these publications, you'll probably have no trouble  agreeing whole heartedly with FBN's promotional material: "The CIA thinks the  Women-in-Print network is what holds the  women's movement together. So do we."  Readers interested in learning more  about the women in print movement  and about resources for feminist readers and writers will be interested in the  workshop we are giving on Feb. 7 at the  Kootenay School of Writing, 10 am to  4 pm. See the workshops section of this  paper for details.  OPEN SEVEN DAYS A WEEK  10am to 7:30pm  • KIDS play space  • FRESH produce —incl. organic  NEW convenient location  10% OFF for seniors, Wed. & Thurs.  1034 COMMERCIAL  254-5044  1146 Commercial * 253-0913  KINESIS ss**s$********ss***s******^^  Arts  ARPILLERA  ARTISTS  STITCH  REAL LIFE  IN CHILE  by Sima Elizabeth Shefrin  With needles, scissors and tiny scraps  of fabric, the arpillera artists, women of  Chile, cry out through their tapestries of  their pain, their anger and their hopes. In  a voice that has never been completely silenced by the authorities (perhaps because  it is only women's work), they tell the outside world of their hunger, their housing  shortages, their missing family members,  and of their strength and survival. Illegal  within Chile, these small appliqued pictures  have been quietly exported: for sale since  1976, and distributed world-wide, through a  human rights organization. Eighty of these  arpilleras are currently on display at the  Watch for the  return of  Connie Smith's  next month  Women-in-Focus Gallery, and a number of  others are available there for sale.  The exhibit is organized by the Salt-  spring Island Voice of Women, and in particular by Sheila Reid and Donna Clark,  who recently visited Chile and some of the  country's fifty arpillera workshops. In these  workshops, which are mainly situated int he  shanty towns surrounding Santiago, women  come together to be with other women, to  earn a little badly needed income, and to  speak of the many political injustices under  which they live.  "It was to help each other that we joined  this workshop, because if one stays in isolation, one doesn't know how the neighbor  suffers, and it is better to do things united"  reads the messages from one of the artists  in the show.  Small in scale, (approximately 40 by 50  cm), depicting tiny people in domestic settings, the arpilleras with their powerful stories are in no danger of being seen as cute  or charming. According to Reid, while the  design and stitchery of each arpillera is the  work of an individual woman (unsigned to  protect the artist), the themes of each workshop are decided collectively by its members.  The pictures speak movingly of the intolerable hardships which make up Chilean  daily life. The employment agency bears a  sign reading "no jobs"; the children's hospital can offer neither milk nor medicine. In  the open air soup kitchens, lines of people  wait, clutching their empty bowls.  Other works speak of the resistance of the  Chilean people; leaflets, demonstrations for  the "disappeared", candle light vigils. We  see also the price of this resistance, as people in the streets watch the departure of a  bus full of prisoners.  Still other arpilleras are made in hope,  depicting "life as it should be", thriving  markets, good health care, recreational facilities, a peaceful countryside.  After the exhibit closes at the end of  February, the organizers hope it will be  able to make an educational tour of the  province. Teacher's kits consisting of sample arpilleras, photographs, and other resource material will be available for loan to  local schools visiting the exhibit as part of  a human rights component of the curriculum. The British Columbia Teachers' Federation has plans to start the ball rolling,  by hosting the exhibit at their annual general meeting this spring.  In addition, the Saltspring Island Voice of  Women, in conjunction with the University  of British Columbia Museum of Anthropology, is hoping to present a second and different display of arpilleras which would open  at the Anthropology Museum next fall, and  subsequently across Canada.  " ... between the lines: Chilean  Arpilleras" is on display at Women in  Focus, 204-4^6 West Broadway, January 14 to February 28, Wednesday to  Saturday, 12 noon to 5 p.m.  Housebroken: a novel of equality  by Eunice Brooks  CLAIRE  SIGNPAINTER  GRAPHIC TECHNICIAN  COMMUNICATING DESIGN   254 • 8892   Housebroken  by Leona Gom  200 pages. NeWest Publishers Ltd., 1986  #204-8631 109 Street  Edmonton, Alberta, T6G 1E8  Everyone agreed that one day a feminist writer would gain the skill to create a  feminist character that everyone could hate.  Leona Gom, sweeping her images past the  reader in her most poetic style, has done  it. Ellen Grey, a middle-aged widow living in Chilliwack is destined to become the  scoundrel of Canadian literature.  Housebroken is the story of a relationship between Susan and Ellen. It begins with their images in transparency-form  sandwiched, mouths laughing in unison,  hands joined in fierce sisterhood. It ends  with the women singularly apart. Other  characters have little impact on the story,  but a great deal of push and shove in the relationship. Susan's husband is the jack Gom  uses to pry the women apart.  It is not easy to hate Ellen. She's politically correct, generous, intelligent, and  she tells us that she is physically attractive.  Maybe that is when we begin to feel uncomfortable with Ellen, when she dwells so lovingly on her outer self. She has no need to  work; nor has she financial burdens. That  sets her apart from most feminists. We feel  envy. But Ellen is far from idle. She cooks  and cleans, shops and attends literary readings, and almost never misses her aerobics.  When Susan crumbles amidst the pressures around her, Ellen sends over hot  meals, brings books, and keeps the husband  amused so that he has no need to turn on  his wife. When Susan goes to ground, the  reader feels empathy. But Ellen can not.  Empathy is alien to her. Sisterhood is just  a word.  Gom, who has five collections of poetry  to her credit, and who is well known in literary circles, has a gift for prose that makes  Housebroken a novel difficult to put down,  yet its chapter images are complete so that  it would make an ideal bedside reader. Humour slips and slides about the tale like a  duck on ice. There is not a word out of place.  Gom has accomplished the almost impossible feat of making a novel of quality about  two people. Ellen tells the story, and by the  time she is through she has told far more  than she realizes.  Susan talks to us through her journal,  which Ellen reads, and through her poetry  and a play that she has written.  This remarkable novel cries out to be reviewed with no word of assault, but there  must be some. While Gom is an outstanding writer, she is no medical diagnostician,  and she fails to show us Susan's agoraphobia in clear light. No one should read into  Susan's behaviour a diagnosis of a disease  that is disabling to many women. But this  is a small thing set against a large accomplishment.  I recommend this novel to anyone who  wants to understand relationships or to  those who prefer to read about real people.  k  NEED   INFORMATION?  WANT  TO   TALK?  (604) 875-6963  Weds & Sun.7-10 p.  400A West 5th Ave.  r, B.C. Canada V5Y1J8  Lesbian Information Line  Support your local  |||ll||||llllll»IIIII"«lllli||c  WOMEN'S  ANNUAL SALE  FEB. 14-21  10%-80% OFF  Spartacus Books  1 West Hastings Street  Vancouver, B.C.  688-6138  18   KINESIS    FeorL ARTS  //////////////////////^^^^  Blues player blessed  with a style of her own  by Connie Smith  When Kathryn Thome was thirteen,  they called her Big Mama" Cat. "At that  time I was quite heavy and I would do  dances and splits and I would stand up  on top of the piano stool and play". After her marriage at fifteen to Earl Webster,  they called her Katie. And after just a few  short years as a session pianist, some musicians called her by the wrong sex. "So many  guys before they met me thought that Katie  Webster was a man. They thought that the  name was just like A Boy Named Sue because they said no woman plays the piano  like that. I have run into some guys that  don't even want to come on stage after my  performance is over. They say, put me before her, do not put me after her, because  she will make me work myself to death."  "I don't categorize myself as just a blues  singer or boogie woogie pianist, because I  do so many different types of music: jazz,  gospel, blues, urban blues, folk music. Plus I  do Stevie Wonder-type songs, Fats Domino,  Dinah Washington. But I do them my style,  because I was blessed with a style of my  own."  Katie's style began in the 1950's in Beaumont, Texas. "My father was a minister  and my sisters and brothers were all in the  church singing gospel and I wanted to play  rhythm and blues and boogie woogie. I knew  that if I stayed at home during that time  there was no way. So I left home (Houston)  and went to stay with an aunt of mine in  Beaumont. And with her I could march in  the drill squad with those little short dresses  on, and stuff that I couldn't do at home. But  I was very conservative about not wanting  anything to happen to me that would embarrass my parents. So I went to school and  finished school. I took the music that my  mother wanted me to take and when I went  home I would play the classics for her, and I  would play the gospel music for her. I know  so many beautiful gospel songs I was raised  up singing."  But on the weekends she worked as a session pianist in the Goldband studios in Lake  Charles Louisiana. Although not always  credited, Katie played piano on over 500  records before she was eighteen years old,  including cuts by Clifton Cheniere, Smiley  Lewis, Lightnin Slim, Lonnie Brooks, and  Dolly Parton's first recordings. "I would be  doing my homework in the back of the station wagon while I was going across the  state line, because I would play on the weekends and go to school during the week."  Then in 1964 she put herself in the position to be discovered by Otis Redding. He  was so impressed with her that he asked her  to leave with him that night. She said "In  the morning" and she travelled with him until his tragic death in an airplane crash in  December 1967. At the time, Katie told me,  she was eight months pregnant with her second child and "was too big to fly", or she  would have accompanied him.  Despondent over his death, Katie did  not perform for some time. But when she  began again, she opened for B.B. King,  Bobby Blue Bland, Johny Copeland and  Etta James. Her repertoire grew to include  over 3000 songs.  In 1974 she took another break from her  career to care for her ailing parents. "Even  though my mother and father have passed  away now, I will never forget their teachings". After their deaths in 1978 and 1979,  she returned to work and hasn't stopped.  In Katie's thirty year career, she has  made sixteen tours of Europe, released numerous 45's and half a dozen albums, married twice (Earl Webster was killed in Viet  Nam), and raised five daughters. Recently  she received the 1986 Performer of the Year  award from the Bay Area Women in Music  organization.  Although Oakland, California is now her  home, she is rarely there. And her current  tour will bring her to the Savoy in Vancouver on Monday, February 9, for two sets  beginning at 10 p.m. The following night  Katie will begin a five night run at the Al-  hambra Hotel in Victoria.  Katie's first and last visit to Vancouver  was in 1985 at the Vancouver Folk Music Festival where she was an overwhelming  Katie Webster, the swamp boogie queen  by C.T. Sand  Landscape For A Good Woman:  A Story of Two Lives  by Carolyn Steedman  168 pages. London: Virago Press, 1986.  Every once in a while a book comes  along to remind me of the power in original thinking and intellectual courage. Landscape For A Good Woman delves into  the political and psychological realities of a  working class white woman's life, her childhood in Britain and her complex relationship with her mother. Carolyn Steedman is  a social historian and the cultural criticism  with which she is familiar does not include  her—so she wrote this book. Using the narrative form of the case study Steedman dramatizes her mother's life and her own. In  choosing this form she writes that it "shows  what went into its writing, shows the bits  and pieces from which it is made up, in the  way that history refuses to do, and that fiction can't."  My father was/is a bitter/angry man  who constantly reacted to the inequities and  hypocrisy of society—what he understood  by experience to be a class bound society.  My mother tried to control and contain his  bitterness by maintaining that he was just  jealous of the rich. She tried to shame him  into silence. Steedman's mother expressed  her envy in the same daily consistent way  that my father did and Steedman looks at  the politics of such envy, validating it and  using it as a potent tool in her exploration  of class consciousness. In a unique way—  combating the personal and theoretical—  Steedman gives voice to people "who know  that they do not have what they want, who  know that they have been cut off from the  earth in some way." Her work is extremely  significant for me personally and should be  for other readers exploring the nuances and  contradictions of class and gender in their  lives.  Between Women:  Domestics and Their Employers  by Judith Rollins  261 pages. Philadelphia: Temple University  Press, 1985.  In her work of oral history entitled Silenced, Makeda Silvera presented the daily  lives of West Indian domestic workers in  Toronto (Williams & Wallace, 1983). Judith  Rollins incorporates the day to day lives of  American women of colour who work as domestics for white women into a theoretical  exploration of the significance of this work  arrangement. Rollins is primarily interested  in how hierarchical systems are maintained  and perpetuated. She argues that "while  the types of economic systems that have institutionalized inequality have been varied,  all have included interpersonal rituals that  somehow reinforced the desire for accepting the systemic inequality of entire categories of people." She examines these rituals as they emerge in her oral history work  with both black domestic workers and their  white female employers and in her own experience as a domestic servant. The result is  a provocative and fascinating study of race  and class issues between women.  Rollins' work is a potent indictment of  both the economic and emotional relation  ships between white women and their black  domestic servants. One of the most interesting chapters entitled "Deference and Ma-  ternalism", examines the covert and overt  exploitation that characterizes this material arrangement. Not only does domestic  service free up middle class women from  the drudgery of housework—at a cheap  cost—but the arrangement reinforces a conservative and hierarchical social system.  Rollins cites three types of linguistic deference which characterize all the relationships  under her scrutiny: the fact that domestic  workers are called by their first names, the  employers by their second; the word girls  is used when describing domestics, by both  the workers themselves and their employers;  and "employers appreciate respectful and  deferential terms like Ma'am." Rollins details her arguments with acumen and the  result is a book motivated by a fundamental belief in social change. This sociology is  accessible and interesting and a significant  contribution to feminist thought.  Dykeversions:  Lesbian Short Fiction  186 pages. Toronto: The Women's Press.  1986  This is the first collection of lesbian fiction to be published in Canada. A first, comparable to the 1981 publication of Lesbian  Fiction edited by Elly Bulkin and published by Persephone Press in the United  States and the 1984 publication of The  Reach and Other Stories: Lesbian Feminist Fiction, edited by Lillian Mahin and  Stella Suhnan by London's Only Women  Press. Comparable in the feminist historical context at least.  Dykeversions is the first effort of the  Lesbian Writing and Publishing Collective  in Toronto, which was formed in 1984, "to  assist the publishing of writing by and  about lesbians." Contributors range from  the well-known such as Anne Cameron and  Suniti Namjoshi, to the beginning writer  like Michele Paulse. At least one contributor, Oriental-Asian Coyote, does not identify as a writer "although the idea excites  her." The editors explain that many of the  contributors needed a lot of personal attention in order for them to find the confidence  to submit work and by this effort and the  completion of their first project, they hope  to encourage what they refer to as lesbian  writing.  Like all reviewers I have my biases and  literary tastes and from within that framework I found the anthology to be an overall disappointment. I am not convinced that  we encourage writers by publishing works  in progress or someone's beginning efforts.  I know that many readers will disagree, especially readers hungry for stories of lesbian lives. There are many of these. In fact  virtually all of the material is self-narrative  in style and perspective. The stories bear  witness to lesbian couples dealing with violence, sexual identity and commitment.  Compared to the proliferation of coming out  stories of a few years ago, these glimpses  of lesbian lives deal mainly with the nitty-  gritty of women loving women. The collection reflects the'everydayness' of living outside the sexual norm.  I thoroughly enjoyed Nora Randall's  "The Haunting of Blue Lake" which lightens up the whole arena of lesbian familial relationships with a Rubyfruit Jungle-  like defiance. Anne Cameron dramatizes the  excitement of a loving and orderly domestic life between two women with her usual  precision, wit and embellishment of detail.  It left me feeling energized and warm, like  strong tea. The terrible tension of self-hate  and fear is evoked in A Figure of Speech  by Mary Louise Adams which dares to dramatize violence between women. It is a crisp  and provocative story. The collection ends  with Nila Gupta's "Out Of Her Skin, Out  Of Her Voice" which is a poignant tale of  feminist consciousness jand rage.  One of the most valuable aspects of this  anthology is its articulation of the political  struggle against racism within the women'  movement in a series of introductory statements. Although much too brief, the statements raise pertinent questions about feminist literary production in terms of the anti-  racism work that needs to be done. But as  a whole the anthology left me feeling that  the work was rushed to the printers much  too soon—that political and artistic questions are dangling, unanswered by a movement in transition.  KINESIS     February '87 19 Letters
BCFed critical of Kinesis coverage
Kinesis:
The article by Noreen Howes in your
December-January issue of Kinesis regarding the problems faced by women cleaners
at Cominco's operation in Trail, B.C., falls
far short of the standard of journalism for
which Kinesis is known. We can only assume Ms. Howes' article was severely edited
to meet space requirements or she did not
do the kind of objective research demanded
by such an article.
It is important to put the story in context. United Steelworkers of America Local
480 has done a good job of representing the
women to whom your article refers. These
women were hired by Cominco at a wage
rate eighty-two percent of the base rate. Lo-
Last month's
crossword solution
I'w?i fU'rmuTrI'g,i'e■'£!'£ lYI'fc !
i'ftlFIRIofclEldlLKIoltfiyi
"Km rriAiTiulriyiMfftiRic!/ \a 1
HHI 5 ■ R Hi      F   ' Jf
'■2Mt\p 1E H   1 / 1 (,|£ \S ■Lsi/I
\*\oU \KMV\A\i\T\tmy\uM
\Mv\T\$W1b\"\T\o\?m'bW\ri\
\M/\'r^\£m^\U\rl\5\lM^W\D\s\
\c WM^\u\m^M^\fW\^\e\r
\F^m%\o\T>w$n
Wr\E\m
■'^Jolr!/ ■   ■
v«;rBc
'rr\%/\£\V\AW\b \e\l\L\1r\sMtt
'$,-/l\mzmQW5\T\y\£\EW\£
cal 480 took the company on over this issue in 1981 bargaining and won, raising the
wages of women to the base labour rate contained in the collective agreement. This is
an early example of "equal pay for work of
equal value" and "pay equity*.
The company never provided these women with a job description as required by the
collective agreement. The union prepared a
job description and presented it to the company. The company refused to agree with
the job description and the union took it
to the job description arbitrator and have
been attempting to get the matter resolved
for some time.
In the job the women did, they accumulated seniority in two ways: "plant seniority" and "company seniority", both of which
are designed to protect the worker. "Plant
seniority" is applied to the specific area of
work in which the worker is involved. It protects their position within that area of work.
For example, a worker with ten years seniority in plant "A" cannot use that seniority to bump a worker in plant "B" who has
only nine years seniority, simply because the
worker in plant "A" thinks s/he may like
the plant "B" job better.
"Company seniority" applies to reductions in the work force by layoff. When
Cominco decided to lay off workers after the
bottom fell out of the world metal markets,
they did so by reverse order of seniority. The
women in your article had company seniority and were treated in the same way as all
other workers at Cominco.
This problem started in February of 1986
when Cominco laid off 300 members of Local 480 in one day. When a layoff of this
magnitude takes place, a lot of people's lives
are disrupted as bumping rights are exercised throughout the bargaining unit.
When the employer reassigned some of
the work of office cleaners to full-time positions, there were eight workers who had
more company seniority than did the workers doing the cleaners' work. Under the
terms of the collective agreement, it is permissible, when layoffs occur in one area of
the plant for those workers to "bump" other
workers in other areas of the plant, who
have less company seniority than they do.
This is what happened in the case of the
women cleaners.
UAAAAAAAAAAAAA
Kinesis is
available
across
British
Columbia
Cody Books, Port Coquitlam; Everywoman's Books,
Victoria; Friendly Bookworm, Dawson Creek; Ha-
ney Books, Maple Ridge;
NDP Bookstore, Gibson's
Landing; Nelson Women's
Centre; The Open Book,
Williams Lake; Port Coquitlam Women's Centre;
Quesnel Women's Resource Centre; South Surrey/White Rock Women's
Place; Terrace Women's Resource Centre; Unemployed Action Centre, Nanaimo.
AAAAAAAAAAAJJl
The "letter of understanding" referred to
in your article, applies to "plant seniority".
Layoff, bumping and recall are all determined by "company seniority", therefore,
the letter of understanding does not agree
to layoffs, which is what these women faced.
Clearly, these women believed that they
had not been treated fairly. Local 480, on
the other hand, knew it had done all it
could under the circumstances. The Local
had taken a similar case through to arbitration and had lost; it did not believe that it
stood any better chance with this one. The
union explained to the women they could
file a complaint against the union under Section 7 of the Labour Code. This the women
did. The union put all the pressure it could
on the Labour Relations Board to expedite
the hearings so that the women would not
be left hanging in limbo for months, as is
sometimes the case in LRB matters.
On November 27th, 1986, the LRB hearing ended when the women acknowledged
there was no sexual or other discrimination
in the matter. I find it alarming that even
though the matter had been settled, Kinesis still found it appropriate to run the article in the December-January issue without
noting the outcome.
In addition, I have discussed the issue
with Ken Georgetti, then the President of
Local 480, and he advises me that he did
an extensive interview with Ms. Howes outlining the details of the matter from the
union's perspective, yet Ms. Howes found it
appropriate only to use one comment from
that interview and that comment was taken
out of context.
In closing, I wish to point out that cases
such as the one in Trail are most troubling
for both workers and unions. The Rossland-
Trail area has lost 4,000 full-time jobs over
the past five years. Steelworker members of
Local 480 themselves have faced continuous layoffs and have seen the elimination of
1,800 bargaining unit jobs since June 1981.
These are complex matters which should
not be lightly dealt with in the media. In my
opinion, you and Ms. Howes have done your
publication and all workers in Trail a major disservice by not dealing with the story
in the complete and detailed manner it deserves and demands.
Yours in solidarity,
Cliff Andstein  Secretary  Treasurer  B.C.
Federation of Labour
Noreen Howes responds:
Your letter raises a number of points
to which I must respond. First, the
November 27 Labour Relations Board
(LRB) hearing unfortunately coincided
with our press time for the December/January issue. Further, Kinesis learned that as a condition of the dispute's
settlement a press blackout was imme-
Ariel Books
Open 10 am-6 pm
Monday to
Saturday,
Sunday 1-5 pm
2766 W. 4th Ave.   733-3511
diately imposed, which did not allow either party to comment on the result.
More importantly, however, I believe
the context you have lent to the situation is not complete and while it
raises some issues that have bearing on
the women's situation, there are several
points where the women differ from you
in their perceptions.
For example, you failed to mention
that during the 1984 Cominco lay-offs
women cleaners were also adversely affected; forty-six women originally performing these jobs were reduced to 28.
These women did not complain at that
time, and it is my understanding that
the remaining women received constant
assurances from both the company and
the union that their jobs were secure. If
this was indeed not the case, the union
should have better prepared the women
for bumping. Secondly, there appears
to have been a strange metamorphosis
from the original five hour shifts which
the women worked, to eight hour shifts
for the men. This obviously gave the
women some problems with the process.
While I can appreciate your lengthy
explanation of separate seniority lists,
it is important to note that having more
than one seniority list can, and obviously has in this case, worked against
the women's jobs. I understand that this
has been an issue with trade unionists
and that, as a result, some unions have
insisted upon one seniority list in contract negotiations.
Finally, as a Kinesis reporter I was
primarily concerned with the situation
as it affected the women involved and I remain concerned that there appears to be
a problem with the way in which the
women were dealt with by Local 480 executive.
The fact that the union encouraged
these women to file a Section 7 with
the LRB, instead of supporting their
grievance regardless of the outcome, is
an important consideration, when looking at the case from the women's point of
view.
These women first filed a grievance
in March, 1986. The fact that they
struck together this long suggests to me
that they had a legitimate cause for concern, whatever the outcome at the LRB.
I appreciate the time you have taken in
responding to the original Kinesis report.
Clearly you have an interest in the case
and I encourage you to follow through
with regards to this particular case and
as it surfaces in future situations re
garding women in trade unions.
Homemakers
pension
Kinesis:
In my article "Older Women Need Pension Parity Now", in the Dec./Jan. issue,
I mentioned credit-splitting and survivor's
benefits. I ought to have made it clear that
common-law spouses as well as married couples can credit-split one year separation.
Also a surviving common-law spouse can
benefit from the deceased spouse's pension.
I included a paragraph on the homemakers' pension as well, basing my information
on a variety of commentaries. However, the
pension for homemakers was dropped from
the amendments prior to their passage. The
homemakers pension needs more support
before it will be included in the Canada Pension Plan.
Yours truly,
Alison Sawyer
20   I^JNESIS February   87 Disappointed  by 'Nursing'  Kinesis:  In response to "Nursing: A Profession  Comes of Age", very disappointed and angered can best describe my feelings after  reading this article. Let me explain.  I have worked as a nurse in various settings (both hospital and community) for ten  years. I trained in a hospital and went back  to school and studied nursing in a university. I feel I'm in a good position to discuss  nursing.  Nursing very clearly is not a profession,  nurses are not autonomous health care practitioners. Nurses are employed by a hospital  or a community agency. What nurses do in a  particular hospital or agency depends upon  their employers policies, policies which meet  physicians or administrator's needs. Thus  a nurse working at a hospital in northern  Canada can perform all sorts of procedures  that are usually performed by physicians in  urban hospitals.  Nursing theories define nursmg as a practice which can be all things to all people.  Standards of practice, too, are very general  and only deal, for the most part, with technical skills which are often performed by  health care workers who are not necessarily nurses. Essentially nursing does not have  any "unique knowledge" on which to base  itself.  I am currently employed as a nurse. I  like my job. I participate in my union,  whose members are not necessarily nurses  but are workers who, like me, are vulnerable to management and their 'policies'. I  seek continuing education from a variety of  resources. I do not obtain continuing education from Schools of Nursing nor do I  belong to any professional associations, as  both analyze nursing in terms of what they  feel nursing ought to be rather than what  it is. The previous article, "B.C. Nurses—A  Growing Working Class Consciousness" did  not do this, it was like a breath of fresh air  to me.  By the way, I've never seen a nurse  with graduate education work in the "front  ranks", who is she trying to kid? Nurses are  people, people work where they can be comfortable, "front ranks" is not comfortable.  Those that work there do so in order to earn  money and it is what they know, not because of any noble feeling such as "pride in  bedside nursing".  Fanchea Knoll, B.A.A.N. R.N.  Reader  updates news  Kinesis:  Thank you for your International section.  As a Canadian in New Zealand I appreciate the links being made across the world  as women keep each other informed. Inspiration empowers us!  I'd like to follow up on the June 86 article "NZ women policy setters".  According to Jill Abigail of the now operating Ministry of Women's Affairs, what  is accepted as policy by the party does not  necessarily become government policy once  the party gains power. The party platform  must undergo approval in Cabinet. This  puts Labour Party women in a particularly difficult position after being given the  chance to form policy, as Cabinet is made  up of mostly men.  Women's policy making conferences are  more important than ever, but the women  in government, and especially Cabinet,  must be tenacious. The Minister of Women's  Affairs, Anne Hercus, fought long and hard  to establish the Ministry of Women's Affairs, only to be given the Ministry of Police as well as reward (?) for her efforts!  Although the policy written by concerned  Labour women has a good chance of being  accepted by the party as a whole, as Nancy  Pollak reports, it is only by the perseverance of a few isolated women that it becomes government policy. And New Zealan-  ders are learning that the Labour Government is more conservative than its policy  platform suggested during its campaign to  form a government two years ago.  In sisterhood,  Martha Bell, Christchurch, N.Z.  Writer  responds  Kinesis:  Brig Anderson's letter about China in the  last issue of Kinesis was interesting as an  example of Western standards applied to  developing countries. This attitude is a major barrier to understanding the situation  of women who cannot afford the energy to  work for, say, pay equity because their most  basic needs for adequate food, shelter, and  health care are only barely assured.  In my own lifetime, Chinese women have  come from concubinage, forced marriage  and absolute political exclusion to a condition where social and political equality  are at least in sight, if not a present reality. The women to whom we spoke are  well aware that they have a way to go but  are extremely proud of the advances already  made.  wanted to go abroad and marry a white  man, this is less an indictment of the Chinese system than a rather sad reminder of  the lure of Western materialism.  In sisterhood,  Jane Evans  New  AIDS link  Kinesis:  AIDS, FEMALE CIRCUMCISION AND  AFRICAN WOMEN. The spread of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome, ADDS,  in Africa may be connected to the practice  of female genital mutilation, according to an  anthropologist with the University of California.  Uli Linke, a doctoral candidate to the  University of California at Berkeley has  been struck by the fact that the epidemiological pattern of AIDS in Africa, where the  disease strikes men and women equally, differs from that in the United States where  it has predominantly affected intravenous  drug users and homosexual men.  As she read the research literature on  AIDS, Linke noticed a "prevailing assumption that the same cultural factors were at  work in the transmission of AIDS in Africa  as those in Europe and the United States—  namely, sexual promiscuity, (the use of unclean) hypodermic needles and homosexuality. None of these points explain the equal  ratio of men and women contracting the disease in Central Africa."  The bottom line in the transmission of  AIDS is the exchange of body fluids particularly blood, "which gave me the idea, that  it might be related to female circumcision"  Linke says.  This new theory has disastrously increased the dangers that have befallen millions of African women where female circumcision is practiced and has prompted  urgent need for eradicating this barbarous  practice.  We of this Women's Centre had long experienced the dangers inherent in female circumcision and have vehemently condemned  this practice. We have persistently called  upon various African governments to legislate against the practice. Only one country to our knowledge (Sudan) has legislated  against female genital mutilations, but no  action by the government has been taken to  enforce the legislation.  We have recently taken the first local  initiative to launch a massive campaign of  education by home visits, countryside enlightenment tours, newspapers, radio and  television, against this age-long practice.  The campaign is still in progress, but as  a non-governmental, voluntary organization  we have no solid financial base to run the  campaign. We have appealed to all our  womenfolk, groups, networks and organizations to come to our aid by donating to our  campaign fund, but unfortunately the response has not been encouraging. So far,  over 58,000 people have died of AIDS in  Africa since 1984 and three quarters of these  are women. We are convinced their deaths  may be connected to the practice of female  circumcision as this research study has revealed.  We therefore once again appeal through  your journal to all our womenfolk, networks,  groups, other interested persons or organizations, to come to our aid as our greatest problem is lack of funds to run the campaign, by donating to our cause. Why many  of our rural women are suffering under obsolete and superstitious age-long traditions  such as the so-called female circumcision is  because of lack of practical information that  could change their lives. We shall accept donations by cash (bank notes) or cheques in  any currency. We shall also accept material aid such as projectors, films, cassettes,  electrical equipment, and literature. Please  help us fight against female genital mutilation; help us fight against the spread of  AIDS among African women. For together  we shall succeed.  For sending of funds, aid, donations or inquiries, write to: Mrs. Hannah Edemipong,  Women's Centre, Box 185, EKET, Cross  River State, Nigeria, West Africa.  In Sisterhood,  Hannah Edemikpong,  (for  the   Women's   Centre)   Cross  River,  Nigeria  Open Door  closes down  Kinesis:  The time for us to say goodbye has come  upon us quite by surprise. The Open Door  has run as far as it could and we've had the  opportunity to say just about everything on  our minds. We believe that The Open Door  has had an important purpose in our lives,  connecting us to you, making the reality of  rural lesbians' lives tangible to our urban  sisters and bringing lesbian energy strongly  into our rural living rooms.  Now it's time for someone else to imagine a new way for us to know each other.  Perhaps a B.C. lesbian magazine, perhaps  the cultural calendar. We mustn't let our  recognition of each other slip away and so  we will continue to work here for lesbian  rights and we will support other lesbian action in B.C. Tell us what you're thinking  about. Through inspiration to action.  We have to pass on a file of letraset, some  graphics, lots of contacts and lots of experience. Let us know what you need. We have a  little money which will go towards books for  the Northern Lesbians library unless other  requests come in.  Northern Lesbians will continue to main-  tab a library and we ask those who exchange newsletters, magazines, newspapers,  journals with us to consider continuing to  send copies to us for our library, but only if  you can afford it; If any of you wish to obtain the library list please write to us and  let us know.  So grab a goblet of wine, a glass of fresh  cow's milk, a cup of spring water and toast  three fine years of rural lesbian connections  through The Open Door. We will not forget  the intense pleasures this work has given us,  nor will we forget you. Thank you and all  the best.  In sisterhood,  Maureen & Elizabeth  Laurence from page 17  giveness but also with love. Her pity for the  fierce and terrible people of this world tells  her readers that we too may forgive and be  forgiven.  Newspaper accounts of the memorial service held for Margaret Laurence in Neep-  awa, Manitoba, state that the eulogy was  given by her former English teacher, who  apparently described her as a model pupil.  My guess is that Laurence would have been  amused and touched by this assessment, and  in two ways gratified. The judgment may  appear limiting, but it is not, for the business of a student in an English class is after all to write well. Indeed Margaret Laurence was, and is, a model. It is also pleasing, though ironic, that the voice of small  town Canada, which said so many ignorant  and vicious things to Margaret Laurence,  should in the end speak such an honorable  epitaph.  Goodbye, Margaret Laurence. Thank you  for all you wrote.  Bibliography  THIS SIDE JORDAN  MacClelland and Stewart  Toronto, Canada  1960  THE TOMORROW TAMER  MacMillan  Toronto, Canada  1963  THE PROPHET'S CAMEL BELL  American title:  NEW WIND INA DRYLAND  MacClelland and Stewart  1963  THE STONE ANGEL  MacClelland and Stewart  1964  A JEST OF GOD  MacClelland and Stewart  1966  LONG DRUMS AND CANNONS:  Nigerian    Dramatists    and    Novelists  1952-1966  MacMillan  1968  THE FIRE D WELLERS  MacClelland and Stewart  1969  A BIRD IN THE HOUSE  MacClelland and Stewart  1970  A TREE FOR POVERTY:  Somali Poetry and Prose  McMaster University Press  Hamilton, Canada  1970  JASON'S QUEST  Illustrated by Staffan Torell  MacClelland and Stewart  1970  THE DIVINERS  Knopf  New York, USA  1974  THE HEART OF A STRANGER  MacClelland and Stewart  1976  THE OLDEN DAYS COAT  Illustrated by Muriel Wood  MacClelland and Stewart  1979  SIX DARN COWS  Illustrated by Ann Blades  James Lorrimer  Toronto, Canada  1979  THE    CHRISTMAS    BIRTHDAY  STORY  Illustrated by Helen Rucas  MacClelland and Stewart  KINESIS Bulletin Board  Irld^lllrHAi IMfflriEHSMJa  THE MOST FUN YET!  Judy Radul. Lovie Sizzle, Lorna Bo-  schman's Smash the Plates, esoteric  recorded dance music and visuals by Lai-  wan. Poetry, comedy and video brought  together at Women in Focus. 456 W.  Broadway. Fri. Feb. 27. More info Rachel  872-4251.  FULL MOON ON FRI. FEB. 13TH  Come join Maura. Norma and Isis at La  Quena, 1111 Commercial Drive for an  evening of song and story. Have a howlin"  good time. Show starts at 8 pm. $2 at  door.  COFFEE HOUSES  The Vancouver Lesbian Connection will  be hosting coffee houses every 1st and  3rd Fri. of the month, starting Feb. 6  at 876 Commercial Drive. 7:30-11 pm.  For info, about entertainment phone 254-  8458. Donations at door.  VLC VALENTINE'S DANCE  Vancouver Lesbian Connection will be  hosting their 3rd Annual Valentine's  Dance. Fri. Feb. 13 at the Capri Hall.  3925 Fraser. Childcare off-site. Wheelchair accessible. $4-$6 donation.  STRINGS  Finally, a full length play that deals with  the trials and tribulations of lesbian-  feminism in the '80s. Written by Vancouver writer. Cindy Filipenko. Strings  examines one woman's often humorous  odyssey from being part of a dual income  suburban family to becoming a hip, now,  trendy, lesbian-feminist. Strings will be  unravelling at Vancouver Little Theatre,  3102 Main St. Mar. 5-7, 12-14, 19-21.  Curtain 8 pm. Reservations 876-4165.  FIVE WOMEN SHOW  Unromantic as a Monday Morning, a  showing of 5 women artists at Surrey Art  Gallery, 13750-88th Ave. Feb.5- Mar.l.  Keychain. formerly Women's Blues and  Jazz band will be performing 2 pm Sun.  Feb.8. Reception to follow. More info:  596-7461. Free.  MAIN STREET PLAYERS  The Main Street Players, based in the  Vancouver Little Theatre, 3102 Main St.,  are opening their 1987 season with 2-  one act plays by local playwrights. Minus Male and The Solstice. Gala opening  Feb. 5. Running Feb. 6,7,12-14, 19-21  . Curtain 8 pm. Tix $5. Reservations 876-  4165. Portion of proceeds to Food Bank.  IWD RADIO  International Women's Day Radio on  Van. Co-op Radio. Sun. Mar. 8. CFRO  102.7 FM presents all women's programming from 8 am - 2 am. 18 solid hours  of music, theatre, panel discussions, humour and local writing. All women (individuals, community groups, programmers, ex-programmers) are encouraged  to participate. No experience necessary!  Info Ina 435-5772. Louie 738-5236 or Sue  251-3857.  NAME OF ERITREA  Thursday-at-Noon talk given by Lynn  Hunter based on her 5 week trip to Africa,  sponsored by Oxfam. Slides. Feb. 19.  Victoria. Status of Women Action Group  (SWAG) 381-1012.  HEATHER BISHOP  On tour to celebrate the release of her  new album A Taste of the Blues. Heather  Bishop performs with Kris Purdy and  Sherry Shute. Van. East Cultural Centre.  1895 Venables. IWD Sun. Mar. 8. Tix  $10. Reservations 254-9578.  WOMEN'S FACES  Masks by Persimmon Blackbridge on display Jan. 12 at VLC. 876 Commercial  Drive. 11-4 Mon. to Fri.  RESOURCES  FAMILY OF WOMEN  The Family of Women: Stories From  a World Gathering is a six part radio  series produced with material recorded  at Forum '85. held in Nairobi. Kenya.  Five award-winning radio producers bring  their perspective to the issues of women  and politics, women and work, third  world women and marriage, women as  peacemakers/ women as warriors, reproductive freedom and special reports  from the conference. Info and ordering (213) 931-1625. Pacifica Program  Service/Radio Archive, 3729 Cahuenga  Blvd. West. N. Hollywood CA 91604.  BEAUTY WITHOUT CRUELTY  Is that dab or rouge worth it when you  know it has been forced into the eyes of  rabbits held in confining collars? Mascara is fed to guinea pigs until they  die. toxins are inserted under the skin of  mice, acid is dropped in rabbits eyes? For  women who can't or won't give up cosmetics, deodorants, and toiletries, write  to: Beauty Without Cruelty. 175 West  12th St.. #166, New York, NY 10011.  WOMEN AND AIDS  Women and AIDS workshop. VLC. 876  Commercial Drive. Sat. Feb. 14 10 -  5 pm. Morning: specific questions addressed. Afternoon: discussion about issues concerning women's/lesbian community. Follow-up to Nov. workshop.  New participants should definitely attend  in morning. Facilitated by Lezlie Wagman  of AIDS Vancouver. Pre-registration encouraged. 254-8458.  co/t* oMF  6 o'clock!  you havt U \JAl<z up  **} in swimrnin<r  2 h5v<2 #ie smdtft  pituitary j/an<J  w A;5 'locker  L4J  RESOURCES! WORKSHOPS  TYPEWRITER & XEROXING  Any woman needing the use of a typewriter may drop in Tues. and Thurs. at  VLC. 876 Commercial Drive. 11-4 pm.  Xeroxing also available.  VLC LEGAL ADVICE CLINIC  Ruth Lea Taylor will hold a legal advice  clinic at VLC, 876 Commercial Drive. Any  woman needing legal advice is welcome.  The clinic will be held on the last Sat. of  the month between 9 am - 12 noon. This  MOTHERHOOD  Is there motherhood after feminism? Is  there feminism after motherhood? Feb.  21. More info, ideas and suggestions  call the Status of Women Action Group  (SWAG) office in Victoria 381- 1012.  All listings must be received no later  than  the  18th  of the  month  preceding publication. Listings are limited to  is a free service.  75 words and should include a contact  name and telephone number for any clar  WORKSHOPS  ification that may be required. Listings  should be typed, or neatly handwritten,  double-spaced on 8| by 11 paper. Listings will not be accepted over the telephone. Groups, organizations and individuals eligible for free space in the Bulletin Board must be, or have, non-profit  objectives.  Other free  notices will  be  items of general public interest and will  appear at the discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $4 for the first 75 words  or portion thereof. $1 for each additional  25 words or portion thereof. Deadline for  classifieds is the 18th of the month preceding publication. Kinesis will not accept classifieds over the telephone. All  classifieds must be prepaid.  For Bulletin Board submissions send  copy to Kinesis Att'n Bulletin Board, 400  A West 5th, Vancouver, B.C.. V5Y 1J8.  For more information call 873-5925.  SUNRAY MEDITATION SOCIETY  Public lecture—Feb. 27. location TBA.  Peacekeeper workshop—Feb. 28 - Mar.  1. Registration requested 2 weeks in advance. Sunray Meditation Society is an  international spiritual society dedicated  to planetary peace and rooted in Native  American wisdom and Buddhist teachings. Info and registration 253-0145 or  255-6026.  PARENTING  Family Services. New Westminster is offering workshops and courses for parents who want to learn new parenting  skills or simply to enhance their relationships with their children. Phone Diane  525-9144 for info on positive parenting,  coping with toddlers, teen parenting, and  your child's self esteem.  HEART OF THE FAMILY  A parenting workshop with Naomi Ser-  vano. who has done extensive training  with Virginia Satir and in the Adlerian  model, Sat. Feb. 14. Vancouver Health  Enhancement Centre. 201 - 1644 W.  Broadway. 10:30 - 3 pm. Bring a bag  lunch. $35. Phone registration 734-4408.  FEMINIST PUBLISHING  Workshop is designed to provide readers  and writers with access to the world of  alternate feminist publishing. Focus will  be on getting work into print and tapping  into the vast resources of the contemporary Women in Print Movement. Sat.  Feb. 7 10 am - 4 pm. Kootenay School  of Writing Office. 105-1045 W. Broadway. Register 732-1013. Fee $30 em-  ployed/$25 otherwise, $3 photocopying.  Instructors Wendy Frost and Michelle  Valiquette.  SEXUALITY  Women's Sexuality workshop. Feb. 13-  15. What can I do? A relationship workshop for women, Feb. 28 - Mar. 1. Preorgasmic women's group, Mar. 2 - Apr.  2. Info and registration 531-8555, 8 am  to 8 pm. Anne E. Davies, M.A. Counselling and Therapy. 210-1548 Johnston  Rd.. White Rock, B.C. V4B 3Z8.  22 KINESIS //////////////////^^^^^^  //////////////////////^^^^^  bulletin Board  M   I    S   C.    GROUPS  MOTHERS WITHOUT CUSTODY  Vancouver Status of Women is compiling information on mothers who have lost  custody of their children in the Canadian  courts. If you have information to contribute to our research contact Patty Gibson at 873-1427.  ARTWORK WANTED  To coincide with IWD in Mar., and a  new book called Fat Women Measure Up.  the VLC Artwall would like to organize  a group art show portraying fat women  as healthy, positive and strong individuals. Any artworks of a 2 dimensional nature (paintings, prints, drawings, photos)  or relief or hanging sculpture by women  artists welcome. For showing and info  SherryLynn 596-2430.  GROUPS  FEMINIST ARTISTS  Feminist artist? Group meets for art-  making and discussions focusing on sexuality. Open to new members. Heather  734-4408.  KAMLOOPS LESBIAN DROP-IN  Discussion, information, conversations &  coffee. Wednesdays 7:30 - 10 pm. Kamloops Women's Resource Centre, 190-  546 St. Paul Street, 374-3383. No charge.  VANCOUVER LESBIAN CENTRE  Open Mon. to Fri. 11 - 4 pm. Library,  housing board, referrals, women's art exhibits, coffee, social events calendar, pool  table, and more. 876 Commercial Drive.  COMING OUT GROUP  Lesbian Coming Out Group. Support, education and action. Mondays 8 pm starting Feb. 9. $2. drop-in fee. Information  and registration 254-8458.  YOUNG LESBIANS  A young lesbian support and social group  will be held every 2nd and 4th Friday of  the month starting Feb. 13, at VLC 876  Commercial Drive, 7:30 - 11 pm. Drop-in  fee $2. Info 254-8458.  VIOLENCE IN LESBIAN RELATIONSHIPS  VLC is sponsoring a bi-monthly program of discussion, support and peer  counselling bi-monthly Tuesdays, starting Feb. 10. $2 drop-in fee. Info 254-  8458.  LESBIAN MOMS IN CRISIS  Parents in Crisis is a child abuse preventative support group based on self-help.  To get going PIC Society must be shown  need. 2 lesbians needed to be volunteer  group sponsors. Child care $ provided if  needed. Info Anita 255-9275 or Lynette  251-6055.  SINGLE MOTHERS' SUPPORT  The Single Mothers' Support Group of  New Westminster meets Mondays. 5:30  - 7:15 pm at Family Services. 201-604  Blackford St. (at 6th St.). Free drop-in  group. Under 7 childcare on site. Support, friendship, resources and a break  from the kids.  SUBMISSIONS  GRACIOUS LESBIAN LIVING  Lilith Publications Inc. is looking for writers to contribute chapters (2,000 words)  and original black ink drawings for a book  whose working title is Guide to Gracious  Lesbian Living. Topics to include the A-Z  of lesbian life, all from a seriously humorous perspective. Deadline: May 1, 1987.  Inquiries welcome: 32 Lipton St.. Winnipeg. Man. R3G 2G5 (204) 777-7960.  LESBIAN ANTHOLOGY  Scholarly papers are invited for a book intended to document the diversity of lesbian experience, the extent of discrimination, and the survival strategies of lesbians in Canada. In particular, articles  are sought which discuss old. visible minority, disabled, francophone, small town  and lesbians who came out after marriage  and children. Send abstract and/or completed paper by May 1 to: Sharon Stone,  Dep't of Sociology, York University, 4700  Keele St., Downsview, Ont. M3J 1P3.  GOING STRAIGHT—COMING  BACK  Two lesbians researching for a lesbian  anthology want to hear from other lesbians who have tried to go straight. For  more info, write to: Options Research,  c/o Box 2761, Stn. D. Ottawa. Ont. KIP  5W8. or call Ev (613) 726-0634 or Jean  (613) 232-4900.  CLASS  F ED  SURVIVING PROCEDURES  AFTER A SEXUAL ASSAULT  By Megan Ellis is an invaluable guide to  the legal system as it pertains to survivors of sexual assault. Ask your bookseller or order from Press Gang Publishers, 603 Powell St., Vancouver B.C. V6A  1H2 $6.95 plus $1.50 handling.  SHARED ACCOMMODATION  Third person wanted to share co-op  house in East Van. $225/mo. Student  preferred. Call 251-6083.  SHARED HOUSE  Non-smoking woman, 30-40 years, wanted to share east side house, $300  monthly plus one third of utilities. Phone  877-0671  Womens' Wednesday Workshops  facilitated by Linda Gayle Galloway  A series of eight (8) workshops for women around  the subject of "putting the T back into L O V E."  Themes will include Identitity, communication,  relationships, sexuality, empowerment, parenting/  parents, money, etc.  Workshops will be held in the Gallery' at Kitsilano Neighbourhood House.  2325 West 7th Avenue at Vine Street. Workshops start February 4th and run to  April 1st, 1987.  For information and registration call Lois: 734-7486  Most fun yet! Poet Judy Radul with comedian Lovie Sizzle, Lorna Boschman's Smash  the Plates and more on Friday Feb. 27 at Women in Focus. See events for details.  CLASS IFIEDICLASSIFIED  SEX THERAPY/COUNSELLING  I work with people with these concerns:  avoidance of sexual activity; guilt; sexual enhancement; differences in sexual interest between partners; sexual dysfunctions (i.e. pain during sex, arousal difficulties, etc.), difficulty initiating sexual  activity with a partner; monogamy/non-  monogamy; coming out; incest; sexual  assault; all sexual orientations. Individuals, couples and small groups. Sliding  scale. Lori Van Humbert, MSW, Clinical  Intern in Sex Therapy. 224-3356.  ROOM MATE WANTED  4th lesbian wanted in large Chinatown  house. Veggie garden. N/S house with 2  smoking porches. $180. plus utilities.  COMMUNITY SOUND SERVICES  Complete three-way P.A. plus operators  and truck, available at socialist rates.  Phone Communique 253-6222.  TYPING OR CARPENTRY TRADE  Can you type or do carpentry? Persimmon Blackbridge needs help on new  sculpture project. Will trade art pieces for  clerical or carpentry work. 253-6792.  DARKROOM  Woman to share fully equipped black and  white darkroom. Gastown. Susan 734-  8938 (evenings).  ROOMMATE NEEDED  Non-smoking,   cat-tolerant   woman  share mostly furnished 3 bedroom with  view home in Pt. Grey with same.  $450/mo. plus utilities. Deposit required.  Julie 228-1678.  HOUSE TO SHARE  North Vancouver. Own large semi-furnished suite with private entrance and  fireplace. Share kitchen and laundry.  $350./mo. Including utilities. Louise 984-  8738 or 520-5462.  fAirheart  Co-operative Travel Centre  Ellen Frank CTC  Travel Consultant  2149 Commercial Drive  Vancouver, B.C. V5N 4B3  (604)251-2282  CompuServe 71470,3502  «*?**  KINESIS     February  87 23 Just bumped into Kinesis?  Why not subscribe?  "SXg"  Published 10 times a year  by Vancouver Status of Women  400A West 5th Ave., Vancouver, BC V5Y 1J8  D VSW Membership-$25.50 (o  □ Kinesis subscription only - $17.50  □ Institutions - $45  D Here's my cheque  D Bill me  r what you Can afford)-includes Kinesis subscriptio  □ Sustainers - $75  □ New  □ Renewal  □ Gift subscription for a friend