 vms/dc  3 Support the concerned  Aboriginal Women. We  present their issue in their  own words  ^ She couldn't work as a  janitor because women  have babies, and besides,  it's dangerous in the dark!  5 Nola,Landucci's gone, but  human rights concerns  6 Indian Homemakers  gathered to discuss the  apprehension of their  children  9 VSW tells Applebert that  women are  underrepresented in the  arts in B.C.  1 "I The New Right  mounts an assault on our  reproductive rights as the  battle escalates  I © Autonomy = independence = separatism  revisted. The man question,  one more time  20 Life is full of flux, and  vice versa. Stay tuned  2 1 Kinesis discusses all  the news we've time to  print  SAFE AND EFFECTIVE  BIRTH CONTROL DOES  EXIST—a Health Collective  feature  4  JULY. AUGUST 81  KIMEJIJ  news about women that's not in the dailies  SUBSCRIBE TO KfJfflZJ  Published 10 times a year by Vancouver Status of Women  400A West 5th Ave., Vancouver, B.C. V5Y 1J8  Subscriber  Member/Subscriber  Institution  Sustainer  $10  By donation  $20  $50  Payment Enclosed   Phone  Please remember that VSW operates on  funding — we need member support! July    August 81  ACROSS B.C.  Supporters of Vancouver  Relief reports that they  Rape Relief at the 1981 Walkathon, which raised another $17,000 towards the rape relief shelter. Rape  currently in negotiations for the house and expect to have it within the next few months.  Provincial judge hands down anti-poster decision  By Joni Miller  In early July provincial court Judge Randall Wong made an historic decision on the  poster controversy in Vancouver, finding  Don Stewart guilty of affixing a poster to  a pole and handed down a one year suspension of sentence.  Stewart was also issued a $200 peace bond  on the condition that he "keep the peace  and be of good behaviour" or find himself  back in court.  This marked almost a year since the controversy began. Groups who depend on  postering as their main form of advertising and expression of opinion protested  the city bylaw passed by Vancouver last  September declaring that anyone found postering would be subject to a maximum penalty of $2,000 or two months in jail.  Women's groups, theatre groups, political  organizations and others fought back with  posters declaring, "this is a poster, it  has a right to be here." There was a large  demonstration at city hall where Bob  Mutant and friends stormed city council  chambers and stuck a poster up behind then  mayor Jack Volrich's head.  The local press and public have also been  behind the "poster people" evidenced by a  favourable editorial in The Vancouver Sun  and a pamphlet endorsed by more than 60  local groups circulating at the same time.  Before his sentence was handed down, Stewart said he would continue to poster. He  said the anti-poster law is comparable to  attempts to stifle dissidents in China,  the Soviet Union and fascist Argentina and  added that making postering illegal distorts the way events or views are advertised, and people may not attend.  Stewart said after his sentencing, "I have  postered before the trial, during the  trial, and I will continue to poster..."  He added that Judge Wong's ruling means  that he and other poster people have a  long struggle ahead of them. City officials insist that the anti-poster by-law is  merely an attempt to save the city the  $14-,000 it annually spends to remove the  posters form poles.  Harry Nicholson, assistant city engineer  in charge of the by-law's enforcement said,  "My whole purpose in life is to get rid of  nuisances." According to Derek Creighton,  city prosecutor, "A ban on postering may  amount to a loss of freedom of speech but  there are other things to consider - like  littering."  Now that the test case is over, the courts  have the go ahead to start processing the  20 people who have subsequently been  arrested for postering.   0_  On strike all these years  It was a dubious victory but striking  Service, Office and Retail Workers Union  of Canada members wanted to get a contract  at the Muckamuck restaurant or shut owners  Doug Chrismas and Jane Erickson down.  "We wanted to get a contract or shut him  down. We shut him down and that's a  victory," SORWUC vice-president Jen Moses  said of the strike, which began in the  spring of 1978.  Moses said -40 or 50 people met June 2 at  English Bay for a rally and celebration to  mark the third anniversary of the Muckamuck strike. The restaurant has been  closed since November 1980.  After the employees of the restaurant had  come to SORWUC to organize, the owners  refused to negotiate with their employees  or recognize the union. The union went  on strike.  "I don't think they (the owners) ever gave  reasons for not negotiating, they always  stormed out of the negotiations," said  Moses, who added the owners claimed the  employees had presented non-negotiable  items.  "I think it was stubborness and  pride. They never did negotiate."  She added that the Muckamuck victory has  had some effect on other unionization  attempts in B.C. "I think it always has  effects. This was brought up directly in  our negotiations with Maz Tudor (restaurant) in Kitimat. We are presently  certified there." 0.  Nanaimo Haven House  finally opens  Nanaimo Haven House, a refuge for battered women, officially opened July 1st. The  house, run by three paid staff members and  Board of the Vancouver Island Haven Society  operates through funding from the city of  Nanaimo and the provincial Ministry of  Human Resources (MHR).  The opening went smoothly but the struggle  for funding has been a long one. Application for funding started as long ago as  1979 and only in January of this year did  the city of Nanaimo come forth with a  grant enabling the Society to rent a house.  Clearly, a house without the means to equip  and staff it is insufficient but the additional funding came only recently from  MHR. This turn of events happened after a  2500 name petition was taken to Victoria;  a funding contract with MHR was signed  two weeks later.  Local community support has been excellent  and has not ended with signatures. The  Carpenters and Electricians Unions donated  time and labour and local merchants helped  out with lumber and bedding. The house  still needs furniture, clothing, food, donations and...volunteers to handle the on-  call shifts.  There are concerns for the future. The  house has a limited capacity and is not  expected to be able to meet the needs for  this city in six months time.  If you live in the Nanaimo area and need  help for yourself or a friend, or, if you  can donate time or other needed articles,  please call 754-7123. <j>  Port Alberni Shelter for women opens  Port Alberni has also recently opened a  House for Battered Women. However, even  as it opens, the house is struggling to  survive on practically nonexistent funding.  It's hard to find a house where the neighbours don't object and when you do — the  zoning isn't right. This in turn means no  grant from the city to pay for rent. The  provincial government has also refused  funding, although although a funding contract is being discussed for next year.  The Ministry of Human Resources (MHR) is  presently paying room and board allotments  for women who stay at the house. This  money is paid only after the women stay  there and, as it stands, if the house is  empty on a given, day there is no money  paid at all. The money is not enough to  maintain the house or pay staff members.  The house's survival at present depends on  individual and group donations and is now  staffed by volunteers. Many of the latter  are paying out of their own already thinly-lined pockets in order to help keep  the house afloat.  Talks are underway with MHR, community  support via petitions and media contact is  being sought, and volunteers are organizing.  Numbers to call are: Emergencies: 724-2223  and Women's Resource Centre: 724-0313 0.  Watch for another Kinesis  September 15  Although printing Kinesis became impractical during the recent strike by the Canadian Union of Postal Workers, work on the  paper went on nonetheless. We'll be coming  out again in mid-September. Look for:  * an account of the strike by a CUP.V activist  * interviews with Native women at the occupation of the DIA offices  * features on co-ops; on alcholism and women  * interviews with women performers from the  Vancouver Folk Music Festival  * resolutions from the Lesbian Conference.  By the end of the next issue, we will have  cleared out our accumulated news. In October we will revert to our old habits of  mid-month deadline, month-end publication.  m. Kinesis       July   August 81       3  HUMAN RIGHTS  Support the concerned aboriginal women  Amelia Productions  Native women gathered at Britannia High school  on August 9th to exchange support. The concerned aboriginal women  spoke about the problems that they faced and issued the following  statement along with their three demands that the regional  department of Indian Affairs director Fred Walchli resign, there be a  full-scale inquiry into the department, and a meeting with Indian affairs  minister John Munro.  For many years, we the aboriginal people of this land have taken  physical and mental abuse from the Department of Indian Affairs  through their paternalistic policies and restrictive regulations. We have  experienced countless frustrations in dealing with this bureaucracy and  as a result we live in houses that are poorly constructed and overcrowded; our people are unemployed; our young women are being  sterilized unnecessarily; our babies are dying in high numbers; many  suicides occur; frequent incarcerations; our young people are dropping out of school; increased alcoholism; the loss of our traditional  hunting, fishing, trapping and gathering rights; sicknesses resulting from  poor water and sewage facilities; interferences in our Indian Governments decision making authority; child apprehensions and adoptions;  and the list goes on endlessly.  One example of our endless frustrations comes to us from our concerned sisters from the Blueberry and Cowichan Bands. These people  have had hydro installed and a water system connected to their homes,  but for many years they have had to live with no electricity and no  We can no longer stand for this oppression and for this reason we, the  aboriginal women, occupied the Department of Indian Affairs offices  here in Vancouver. For eight days we attempted to negotiate and  lobby to have our three demands met; I) a meeting with John Munro in  Vancouver, 2) the immediate dismissal of Fred Walchli as Director  General of DIA in B.C., 3) and a full and independent public inquiry  into the activities of the DIA. As of today, Honourable John Munro has  not yet responded to our demands.  Many aboriginal women and non-Indian supporters became aware of  our stand through the media, support then began to pour in. On the  first day of the occupation there were 50 women, two days later  there were 120 women. We were and still are a solidified group  physically, mentally, spiritually and emotionally because our concerns  hav affected every part of our lives. Strength to carry out the position  of our aboriginal women stemmed from our traditional decision  making body which was our older women. Their advice, direction and  renewed strength bonded the aboriginal people together. The struggle  for our demands will be our responsibility to pursue because we  organized and made the decision to expose the problems, hurts and  sufferings caused by the Department of Indian Affairs. It is a grave  insult to our aboriginal women's integrity to say the Union of B.C.  Indian Chiefs subverted the occupation, as Fred Walchli has insinuated  to the press. The UBCIC has given their full support to our stand and  has provided many of their facilities for our aboriginal women's use.  We are proud to say we initiated this movement for our people, and  we give the utmost respect to our leaders and men who stood by us  with courage to show their support and receive our direction.  On the eighth day of our occupation, the Vancouver City Police  forcefully removed the aboriginal women and men. 53 of our people  were charged with public mischief and were dragged off to jail where  we were held overnight and subjected to verbal harrassment by the  city police. We were treated as hardened criminals in court the  following day, all handcuffed two by two. For your informatio we have  become aware that the federal government spent $60,000 removing  our bodies from the DIA offices.  In court the judge demanded that we stay away from the Department  of Indian Affairs and certain conditions were given to everyone. He  also made a statement in court that clearly indicates a very paternalistic attitude. He stated, "Strength in numbers is frankly something I  don't want you to have again." It became apparent that the judge and  the system were working against us to break down our strength as the  DIA had shown by the arrest and by the many attempts over the last  I 14 years.  Our action is not a criminal one, it is political. Our concerns are legitimate, our demands are justified and no authority can deny us these  demands. We are a people who have existed on this land since time  immemorial and derive our authority to govern from that premise.  We will only begin to be peoples unto ourselves when our governing  bodies are instituted by and for our own people on our own land.  We want the real truth told to the general public in Canada, because  we feel that you deserve to hear the real trut of the Department of  Indian Affairs mismanagement and corruption. Our people have  neither protection nor security at the community level, the  Aboriginal women sit in at the DIA office  occupation of the DIA offices was necessary because we have no  recourse within the system, the simple fact is we cannot strike for  better living conditions. In recognition of this, we the aboriginal  women, are demanding that all 53 charges be dropped, we do not  want the courts to make political decision on our behalf.  We are also demanding a full and independent public inquiry be held  into the Department of Indian Affairs in B.C. now. We are fully  prepared to undertake the responsibility of conducting our own public  inquiry into the adminsitration of DIA in B.C. because we do not want  our concerns to be swept aside by the insensitivity and self-interest of  one man, namely Fred Walchli. We feel that DIA must become  accountable to our people and our communities and with your support  we can begin the inquiry now!  We held our first session of our own inquiry with Senator Ray  Perrault, Sgt. Campbell of the Vancouver City Police and various press  peoples on the seventh day of our occupation. For seven hours our  aboriginal women and men provided evidence of the deplorable living  conditions of our communities. We were fed up before we sat with  Perrault, but after listening to him give his support for an inquiry, we  became even more fed up. As a Senator, Mr. Perrault has no real  power on authority to push for our demands, in fact he was there on a  voluntary basis.  We, as aboriginal people, have so much to offer society, but with the  despair our people are in, it is no wonder we are looked down upon.  We are fighting for our very survival and the DIA is not assuming any  responsibility for its negligence, but is making the situation much  worse. The occupation would not have taken place if the Department  of Indian Affairs had assumed its responsibilities and been sensitive to  our issues at the Band level, for their job is to have a good sense of all  the issues and must therefore make recommendations to the Minister  for parliament to consider.  The truth must come out into the open for our people want to again  grab hold of their dignity, honour, respect and honesty by bringing  truth and justice out which our people so well deserve.  Once again our position as concerned aboriginal women has been  voiced and unchanged. The stand we take must be heard by all if our  demands are going to be activated. Again we demand that we have a  meeting with Honourable John Munro in Vancouver, we demand the  dismissal of Fred Walchli, we demand a full and independent public  inquiry into the DIA in B.C. and we demand the 53 criminal charges  against our aboriginal people be dropped.  We will not be ignored because we will not quit until our demands are  fully met. We will keep pressing, because we have seen our people  suffer in pain for too long.  We hope all aboriginal women here today can see and understand  precisely what we are talking about in our stand because I am sure that  we have gone through many of the same frustrations. Kinesis       July   August 81  LABOUR  Coquitlam School Board denies woman janitor's job  By Ursula Kernig  "A Port Coquitlam woman has tattled to the  B.C. Human Rights Branch because School  District 4-3 won't let her clean their  floors." (The Columbian,  June 3,  1981)  Early in 1980 I attended the five week  Building Service Worker's (B.S.W.) course,  taught by two male instructors at the  Pacific Vocational Institute. The objective of the course is to teach the basic  skills required for the cleaning of hospitals, schools, stores, offices, warehouses, workshops, etc. Of the 11  students attending with me, five were women.  In the mornings we usually studied theory  — becoming familiar with the 'Iduties,  obligations and responsibilities of the  B.S.W."; learning the routines of general,  daily cleaning; treatment of different  kinds of floors and carpets; about germs,  dust, stains, the chemicals used for  cleaning and their dangers, how to clean  light fixtures, blinds, windows, walls;  about safety and security procedures; and  much more.  The texts for the course refer to the  B.S.W. in a number of instances as "he",  though an effort to substitute them with  the pronouns we, you, one, seems evident.  One of the "tidbits" of information I  gained was that in a large department  store in Vancouver, usually the women clean  under the counters and display tables and  the men clean the aisles.  I can imagine  which chore is physically more demanding.  But I forgot to ask if their rate of pay  is the same, or if the women get paid  more, commensurate with the difficulty of  the task.  Looking for employment  Most afternoons we stuffed ourselves into  green coveralls (smocks were offered to  the women, but were declined) and headed  in groups of three "man" crews, armed with  assorted cleaning paraphernalia out  onto the campus, applying in practice what  we had learned in theory.  The instructors were helpful with referring students to potential employers, and  vice versa, though most of the men did  not need that help, as they had jobs  already lined up.  A few days after the end of the course I  received a call from the Surrey School  Board, asking if I would like to come for  an interview.  The next day I.left my application with  them and talked to the head of the janitorial department. In early March 1980,  I started work.  As I found out later, three other women  who had attended the E.S.W. course with me  had been hired also. Two quit after the  first day because of commuting difficulties. The other woman I sometimes see at  union meetings. The last time I talked  to her, she was working the graveyard  shift.  As it simply seemed more sensible to work  closer to home, I decided to apply for  janitor work with the Coquitlam school  board. On June 5, 1980 I went to their  offices. ;f  "Because it's dangerous in the dark."  I told the receptionist there that I wanted  to inquire about job opportunities and fill  in an application form. She asked me  what kind of job I was looking for.  When I told her that it was janitorial  work, she responded by saying that the  Coquitlam School Board does not hire female  janitors.  '//hen I asked her why, she replied: "Because it is dangerous in the dark and  because women have children." I felt like  I had received a slap in the face —  stunned, and anger welling up.  I asked  her to give me an application form anyway,  and told her that I'd see what I could do  with it. .  After thinking it over for a few days and  reading the B.C. Human Rights Act, I  decided to file a complaint with the B.C.  Human Rights Branch under the following  section:  7. No person shall use or circulate any  form of application for employment,  publish or cause to be published any  advertisement in connection with employment or prospective employment, or make  any written or oral inquiry of an  applicant that  (a) expresses either directly pr  indirectly any limitation, specification, or preference as to race,  religion, colour, sex, marital status  age, ancestry, or place of origin of  any person.  Rights investigation is under way  Since I wanted to take the summer off and  the Surrey School Board had promised to  hire me again, I delayed filing the complaint until September 15, 1980, when I  had my job back. Sometime in November  1980 I spoke for the first time to the  Human Rights officer assigned to my case.  The investigation is currently underlay  with the result so far that indeed no  woman janitors had been hired in the Coquitlam School District during the last  eight years, despite the fact that women  had applied for the positions.  During the recent CUPE strike in the Vancouver area (I was on strike myself, since  non-teaching school board employees are  CUPE members) I went to the press with the  intention of having my case publicized,  hut had no success.  My purpose at that point was to shed light  on the fact that firstly, the categories  of inside and outside workers, on which  many of the arguments against "eaual oay  for work of equal value" hinged, were inappropriate .  Janitors, for example, are inside workers  in most cases, and most of them are men,  and they are better' paid than most office  workers.  Secondly, since overt and covert discrimination are a reality, women can't just  exchange a lower paid job for a higher  paid job, as was suggested during the  strike on several occasions.  A third point is that many women know from  experience the numerous stress factors of  office work. For example: endless repetition of tasks, or frequent interruptions  when concentration is necessary; no control  over the pace of work; confinement under  close, constant and surreptitious supervision, ; incessant noise from office  machines; fumes from chemicals and paper  dust; bad lighting; ill-designed furniture;  confinement to one position (either sitting  or standing) for long periods of time;  restrictions against social interaction,  etc.  Having worked for many years as office  maid for everything, file clerk, in duplication, and as a key punch operator., and  now as a janitor, I certainly don't need  an expert to tell me which line of work is  more stressful.  It's precisely the reason why I don't do  office work anymore, aside from the lousy  pay in most instances.  I can change my  routine now to some extent, adjust my  pace more to how I feel physically; I can  move around; my digestion works well, and  I don't smoke, drink coffee, or eat out of  boredom any more.  I don't have a boss  constantly breathing down my neck.  Though it's still work, and my feet are  tired sometimes from all that walking, and  I wonder what the dust and some of the  cleaning chemicals will do to me in the  long run, I feel much better physically  and mentally.  As more and more women become employed in  "non-traditional" jobs, we can expose the  myth about there being generally more  stress, etc. in "men's" work, and put it  in its proper perspective.  It's ironic too because at one point in  history cleaning generally was women's  work, as it still is in the home. One of  my great-grandmothers was a cleaning  woman. She spent most of her working  time on her knees though, scrubbing and  waxing floors with simple utensils and  compounds, which was hard work. In the  meantime, new and easier to maintain  building materials have come into use,  along with simpler and more efficient  cleaning methods. During this .time the  cleaning business has become largely dominated by men.  A century after my great-grandmother's  time I ?m being put into the position ,  of, in effect, not being allowed, despite  my skill, to clean the schools my two  daughters are attending.  Employers not liable?  On March 25, 1981 the B.C. Court of Appeal  decided that under the B.C. Human Rights  Act employers cannot be held liable for  acts of discrimination by their employees.  This decision affects many human rights  cases.  Since very rarely you and I are in a  position to deal with the employers,  owners directly — who are they anyways?  — this decision leaves us pitted against  members of our own class, in my case even  against a sister union member.  It's  clearly justice determined by class, which  is not justice at all.  It lets the big ones get away and the  little ones end up holding the bag and  fighting each other, which happens so  often in this society. Therefore, I ask  you to petition MLA's and Labour Minister  Jack Heinrich who has jurisdiction over the  B.C. Human Rights Branch, to pressure him  to bring an amendment before the B.C.  Legislature as swiftly as possible to close  this loophole in the B.C. Human Rights  Act. 0 Kinesis       July    August 81  HUMAN RIGHTS  Landucci's gone, but human rights concerns continue  By Mary Sims  June's issue of Kinesis carried an article  "Is there reasonable cause for asking  B.C. Human Rights Director Landucci to  get packing?" (An Inside Look at the  HRB) It seems that I was not the only one  to question the effectiveness of the  Director in dealing with human rights  issues in B.C.  On Friday, July 3, Landucci was shuffled  out and Hanne Jensen was shuffled in as  the acting director. As of this article's  writing, no official word as to why  Landucci was asked to leave has been  given. I can only guess. There had been  increasing criticisms of Landucci's leadership in the Branch by staff and ex-staff  members. NDP MLA Emerey Barnes had also  said Landucci should go.  I bid a bpn voyage to Nola and wish her  luck in whatever she chooses to do. As  for the acting director, Hanne Jensen,  her experience in human rights in B.C.  (a senior human rights officer at the  Burnaby office for the past six years, and  recently, acting director of compliance);  her reputation among the minority and  women's community can only serve to set  the Branch back on the right track. I  can only hope that whoever the government  chooses to replace Landucci will be as  well respected as Hanne Jensen.  Her removal is just the tip of the iceberg  However, Landucci's removal as director is  only the tip of the iceberg. There still  exists some uncertainty about whether the  government is sincere in its approach to  human rights. The labour minister Jack  Heinrich, who is responsible for the  Branch, has appointed a disproportionate  amount of Inquiry Boards in relation to  the number of unsettled cases. Will this  change in the future? Will Heinrich  offer support to the Branch and its work?  The community should adopt a wait and  see attitude and gauge the future actions  .of the government, rather than reacting  just to Landucci's dismissal.  The release of the McAlpine report on the  Ku Klux Klan and the introduction and  passage of the Civil Rights Protection  Act all indicate a change in the government's attitude towards human rights. The  real test of the government's sincerity  will be when the Human Rights Commission's  recommendations for changes in the Human  Rights Code is brought up before the  legislature.  The commission's recommendations include  explicit language on forms of discrimination currently dealt with under some  sections of the Code based on the "without reasonable cause" clause. The Commission recognized that certain forms of  discrimination needed to be spelled out  (sexual orientation, physical and/or  mental disability and sexual harassment).  Contrary.to what the former branch director was striving for, the commission also  recommended expansion of "without reasonable cause" to other Code sections to  offer further protection to minority  groups. Other recommendations deal with  tenancyy employment inquiries, family  status (nepotism and anti-nepotism policies), mandatory retirement and equal  pay.  Additional recommendations that deal with  the Code's administration are also important. An addition to section 19 of the  Code to deal with "the Employer's liability for discriminatory actions contrary to  the Code perpetrated by his employee or  agent..." means that an employer can be  held responsible for the discriminatory  conduct by their employees while on the  job.  The primacy of human rights legislation  over other legislation is also recommended. "In some cases, careful consideration must be given to the relationship  bewteen the principles of human rights and  the principles of confliction legislation."  (for example, insurance legislation).  The most exciting and interesting recommendation deals with the Code's enforcement. The commission recommends that:  "A single, integrated Human Rights  Commission be established with authority and responsibility to inquire  Equal Opportunities restored  at city hall  A recent decision by Vancouver's city council has reinstated the ill-fated equal opportunities program which was chopped by  the NPA dominated council in 1979 after its  two year existence.  Equal opportunities program officer Shelagh  Day was accused by council members of aiming  for a quota system and advocating reverse  di scrimination.  Day's job description included boosting job  opportunities for women and minority groups  at city hall. She and the councillors who  supported her, worked under the premise that  the city should guarantee people should  not be discriminated against on the basis of  sex, race or handicap.  One of Day's toughest fights was with Vancouver fire chief Armand Konig who maintained  that women, because they are shorter than  men, would be unable to reach the rungs of  a city fire department ladder. Konig said  he also feared that women firefighters would  drive his men into fits of desire, they  would monopolize the bathrooms putting on  makeup and plugging up their sinks with their  hair.  Konig eventually threatened to resign unless  Day was removed from office. Council complied.  rhe recent council decision of July 21, passed with a 6-5 vote along party lines,overtur-  into and investigate complaints under  the Code, and to make reviewable decisions, giving reasons, on their  appropriate disposition. These  powers would include power to dismiss  a complaint if it is unfounded, power  to approve a settlement if an appropriate remedy has been made, and power  to refer an unsettled complaint to a  Board of Inquiry for a public hearing."  The only problem with this recommendation  is where we have, instead of the labour  minister deciding whether an unsettled  case should go to a Board of Inquiry, we  have a Commission making that decision.  Board needed for substantiated,  unsettled cases  An unsettled case that is substantiated  through the investigative procedure  should   be referred to an inquiry board,  Further, clarification of that recommendation and/or why the Commission doesn't  feel that a substantiated unsettled case  should go to a Board of Inquiry for a  public hearing is needed.  I would also  like to know if there is criteria for  referring a case to an inquiry board.  It will be interesting to see how the  government deals with the commission's  recommendations and how strenuously  Heinrich will argue for those amendments  to the Code. It is important to remember  that Heinrich is not bound to introduce  all the Commission's recommendations to  the legislature. Even if he does, not  all of the amendments will be easily  approved by the necessary majority.  We must keep up the heat  I urge all women and minority groups to  keep up the heat. Although we may have  won a battle, we have not won the war. It  is essential that the government realize  that our voices will not be silenced  until positive action is taken and the  government's current attitude towards  human rights is changed. Please continue  to write to your MLA and Heinrich to urge  them to support the Commission's recommendation in its entirety. Q  ned the 1979 decision to close the post.  The new $35,000 a year job will involve  overseeing hiring practices in city departments and acting as an ombudsperson for  applicant's charges of discrimination.  The post is expected to be filled this  fall or winter.  For VSW, which had worked on the setting  up of the program since'day one, this reinstatement has the sweet smell of success.  Feminist Studies Association  launches fall programming  Feminist women are invited to participate  in a unique course, Feminist Theories in  Canadian Contexts,  being offered this fall  by the Feminist Studies Association.  This course will provide a forum for women  from varying political and educational  backgrounds to meet with each other and  discuss issues such as: the intersection of  theoretical and practical feminism; the  development of a Canadian Feminist theory;  the application of international feminist  theory to the Canadian context, and the  value of being "politically correct."  Dialogue between the academic women's community and local feminist groups is essential, says the Feminist Studies Association, to the creation of a synthesis between theory and action.  Share your political experience and intellectual skills with other feminist women.  Academic background is irrelevant.  Course Times: Wednesdays, 7-9 p.m. from  September 23 to December 2, 1981. And from  January 13 to March 31, 1982.  Register at the Women's Bookstore, at Octopus East or at the UBC Women's Centre,  SUB Rm 130 from September 8 - 11, 10 a.m.  to 4 p.m. For details call 874-2564 or  734-7756 evenings. Kinesis       July    August 81  INDIAN WOMEN  Family Unit Concept was Indian Homemakers dominant theme  By Kathleen Jamieson  At an International Women's Day gathering  last March a fieldworker for the B.C.  Indian Homemakers' Association was asked  a rather interesting question:  "What is  the Indian Homemakers' Association and what does it do...perhaps you help  out in Indian homes where the mother is  ill?"  The short answer to this question is,  "No."  But a lot of people are understandably misled by that term, 'homemakers'. The name  goes back to 1937 when the Department of  Indian Affairs set up the first Indian  Homemakers' Association in depression  Saskatchewan with the stated objective "to  assist Indian women to acquire approved  practices for greater home efficiency."  For the B.C. Indian Homemakers there is  no contradiction in their title since they  see no division between the domestic and  public domain: these are interrelated in  their lives and work and always have been.  Donna Doss, editor of Homemakers' excellent newspaper, The Indian Voice, recently  wrote that the Homemakers are being accused  of being 'too political'. Both the government and male-dominated Indian groups object to their independent views.  Indeed, the male groups have attempted to  divert Secretary of State funding from  The Indian Voice, endangering its continued existence.  Government officials have demanded that  the Homemakers restructure their organization and that they develop new aims and  objectives, ostensibly to conform with  funding criteria.  Addressing 55 delegates and friends at the  17th annual Homemakers' of B.C. conference,  held from April 27 to May 1 in Vancouver,  Rose Charlie, Homemakers' president, noted  that "after 27 years of struggle, our  aims and objectives have not changed. We  still try to encourage, support and assist our women and, of course, our men,  to build a better future for the generations to follow."  She went on to examine in some detail and  very frankly both the Indian leadership in  B.C. and the role of the federal government in manipulating funding to Native  groups.  "B.C.'s political atmosphere is turbulent"  she commented, "and we, as Indian women,  are especially in danger. There seems to  be a scheme underfoot to annihilate the  Indian Homemakers' Association.  "In the past, we have not allowed external  forces to disrupt our work or bur future  plans, and we will continue to operate in  this manner.  "For many years, the Native women of this  province have struggled, while working on  a shoe-string budget, to better the living  conditions of our people. The male-dominated Indian organizations have ignored our  women's achievements and it is only recently that the provincial and federal governments have begun to recognize the work we  are doing.  Indian Voice gives fine coverage  "Our paper, The Indian Voice, is the only  consistent, non-political newspaper in  B.C. We believe we have given the widest  possible coverage of news events relating  to our people with the small amount of monies to use each year by the Secretary of  State's Communications Program.  "Because the Indian Homemakers' Association  and The Indian Voice have received funding  only up to the 1980-81 fiscal year, I want  to mention to you that a telex has gone  to the Hon. Francis Fox, Minister of the  Secretary of State. This telex indicated  our concern over the actions taken by his  regional staff who delivered the ultimatum:  to let them reorganize our association,  change our constitution and to decided our  future planning, or our applications would  not be considered...  "Are the Native women's groups here in B.C.  getting caught in the cross-fire from the  struggle which is ensuing between the male-  dominated organizations and the federal  government?", Rose Charlie asked.  On the second day, Lou Gerwitz, a US lawyer and advocate for Indians was invited  to speak to the delegates. He said that he  found the inattention of Canadian government officials at the conference so disturbing that he felt "like slapping their  faces." Almost everyone who had been flagging a little woke up after that!  The Family Unit Concept, a proposal for a  unified family treatment centre, is modeled on a concept developed in the US by the  At the Indian Homemakers Conference  It became evident during the conference  that Rose's forthright, gloves-off assessment of the situation was not unique.  The delegates themselves spoke up frequently, grilling the bureaucrats without mercy.  They also spoke of the many projects they  are involved in — crisis intervention,  alcohol and drug abuse programs, legal aid  and advocacy, housing programs, fishing  and business ventures.  One woman described in detail an imagin- i-  ative attempt to set up a factory for processing rabbit meat and furs, which would  have given several people employment. But  start-up funds have repeatedly been refused.  Indian women protest apprehension of  their children  There was, however, a single concern which  dominated the entire conference: the Family Unit Concept.  This was the title of a study released at  the conference. The dominant theme of the  study, and focus for the women's concern,  is the apprehension of Indian children and  their removal from their families and communities by provincial child welfare authorities, who place the children in white  foster homes.  Many non-Indians are convinced that such  procedures are in the child's best interests.  On the first morning of the conference,  for example, in a workshop on the "Legal  Rights of the Native Child," a family  court judge saw no problem in defending the  present system: many Indian children live  in dreadful conditions, proof of which is  that they get lice and scabies. Clearly,  the judge said, they are better off in  white foster homes.  At this point an Indian, John Sparrow, jumped up and tried to use his own experiences  to point out the flaws in the judge's assumptions and conclusions.  The answer from the elegant young judge  was patronizing, devastating in its ignorance, "You are a very anxious person," he  observed.  In most of the panels, however, such blatant ethnocentrism was unusual.  Native American Rehabilitation Association  (NARA-). The idea is not one suddenly appropriated by Homemakers, but is "reflective of Indian Homemakers' Association resolutions" going back to 1969.  The proposal is, in fact, a detailed follow-  low-up of their first presentation of the  concept at their 1980 conference.  The paper is in two parts. It begins by  stressing the crucial importance of the extended family to Indians, and then discusses the destruction of Native families by  "institutional abuse" perpetrated by "bur-  eauracies, churches, schools (that) have  set out deliberately to alter or destroy  major institutions in Indian society."  What is going on, the paper stresses, isn't  a case of abuse against any one individual.  Rather, it is a case of social institutions in one culture "abusing whole segments  or classes of persons in another."  The paper deplores -the vast amount of money  expended by a proliferation of government  agencies making "sporadic and isolated  attempts" to deal with a crisis situation.  The most serious problem is seen as alcohol  addiction, which is directly related to  the extremely high rates of native people  in prisons. Various estimates are cited  of 50$ to 60$ of prison populations in Canada being composed of Native people.  Alcohol addiction is also related to deaths  from violence, especially among young people (at least four times that of non-natives ).  And it is directly related to the large  number of Indian children taken "into care"  — 20$ of all children in care are Native.  Alcoholism is one symptom of "institutional abuse" which has also left many Indians  in poverty, stripped of their self-esteem,  unemployed and discriminated against in  the job market.  Family Unit Concept based on successes  The solution offered in the model — the  family treatment centre, based on the NARA  model — would entail pooling the monies  from all the government bodies presently  involved in the various Indian welfare t> Kinesis       July    August 8  INDIAN WOMEN  and crisis intervention programs.  A unified, "holistic" program would be set  up, combining family, alcohol, vocational  and spiritual rehabilitation centres.  Similar centres have been operating successfully in Portland, Oregon, for the past  nine years, the paper states.  Sites and buildings throughout B.C. which  could be adapted and used for such centres  are also described in the study.  The philosophy underlying the concept is  based on the principle of self-actualization.  It is designed to be flexible enough  to accommodate all native individuals whatever the degree of assimilation to non-  Indian cultnre.  There is an emphasis on integrating traditional Indian practices such as the symbolic burning of sweet-grass at meetings.  The program would also include day care  centres, schools, child development workers, programs for parenting skills and  cultural activities.  Promises were made at the conference by  several senior bureaucrats. They said they  would immediately look into the feasibility  of initating such a program in Canada.  Indian Homemakers delegates sounded optimistic and spoke strongly in support of  the family unit concept.  They have proposed a solution already proven effective.  It will be interesting to  see whether the Canadian politicians and  bureaucrats have any real intention of  putting the proposal into effect.  White Canadians like to congratulate themselves that they have treated their Native  people more kindly than the U.S.  Historically, this is debatable. Today,  looking at the desperate situation of  most Native people in Canada, and at the  feeble efforts being made to rectify it,  that myth is quite clearly exposed.  Promises are not enough.  * 'We must insist... that Indian  includes our children''  By Kathleen Jamieson  The deep, sweet and extraordinarily powerful voice of Doreen Pelke swelled through  the conference hall. She sang an Indian  song of grievance for the tragic death, the  previous weekend, of John, teenage son of  another member of the B.C. Indian Homemakers ' Association, Barbara Kobierski.  It was the opening morning of their annual  conference. It was also the morning of  the funeral. The song was a forceful reminder of how much tragedy and sudden death  is an unconsionable part of the daily lives  of B.C. Indians.  Doreen Pelke is a leader of her long-house,  a spiritual leader, and one of the many  strong articulate women who challenged the  government bureaucrats during the Homemakers ' conferenc e.  Strong as she is, however, Doreen's voice  trembles when she talks about her children  and her grandchildren. She and her husband  of 32 years have brought up 10 children  of their own, and 20 others.  Yet both still fear that those children  may be taken away and put into foster care  because their present Indian home is, by  white Canadian standards, overcrowded.  Indeed, the impression I carried away from  those who spoke at the conference and from  the material presented there is that Indians in B.C. almost have to prove that  they are fit parents before they are allowed to keep their children, so assiduous are  welfare workers in removing Indian children from their homes and communities.  The data available on children taken into  care in B.C. supports this impression.  Philip Hepworth, writing in 'Foster Care  and Adoption in Canada' noted that about  20$ of all children in Care were Native,  and goes on to say that this is a conservative figure. Compare this with the fact  that Native people make up about four per  cent of the Canadian population.  In their 'Constitutional Proposal on Native  Children - 1981' (which supported the position taken in the Family Unit Concept),  the Indian Homemakers argued that the welfare of Indian children should not be a  provincial matter.  "We must insist," they say, "that 'Indians'  as defined in the BNA Act include our children, who are the most defenceless of our  Rose Charlie  people. We therefore call for a federal inquiry into the state and welfare of Indian  children in care of the provinces and those  who have been adopted out to non-Indian families."  For the first time ever, this year an Indian Affairs Minister put in an appearance  at the Homemakers' conference. John Munro  showed up, ostensibly to respond to the  Family Unit Concept proposals.  Interestingly enough, his speech suggested  that he had written most of it himself.  "I don't manage to get home nearly as much  as I would like to these days...no matter  how we may succeed in business, in education, in sports or politics or whatever,  none of it means too much if we don't have  a decent home to return to at the end of  the day." He goes on to praise the skills  of the homemaker.  He did hold out a faint hope of a special  federal measure to protect Indian children, "One alternative is a special Indian  Child Welfare Act, and parliament could  certainly enact such legislation.''  Later in the day Munro was asked about the  Indian Act legislation. Under section 12  (l) (b) of that act, Indian women who marry  non-Indians lose their status. Parliament  has called for a 'moratorium' on that discriminatory section, and Munro himself  called it 'indefensible', promising that  the new Charter of Rights and Freedoms  would render 12 (l) (b) inoperative.  But what about reinstatement of those Indian women who have lost their status.because of that discriminatory clause in the  Indian Act? Was the minister contemplating the restoration of full Indian rights  to them?  "It doesn't obliterate every act of  discrimination."  "No," he said, very carefully. "The legal  opinion is that .the new constitution would  obliterate 12 (l) (b) but it doesn't obliterate every act of discrimination that has  taken place back to the genesis of man."  Warning bells. The minister is saying  something new and alarming here. What appears to be implied by theoe remarks is  that once the new constitution, with its  Charter of Rights and Freedoms, comes into  effect, there will be no question of retroactivity.  Legislation that has retroactive application, you see, must state so specifically  (the War Measures act, for example, did so)  If it does not, and the new Charter of  Rights and Freedoms does' not, then it is  held to be 'prospective', and does not have  any effect on any previous events.  Indian women who have lost their status under 12 (l) (b) and who seek redress under  the new legislation will be whistling in  the wind.  The message is clear for Indian women contemplating marriage to a non-Indian. For  the next three years at least: don't do i1.  VSW  Vancouver Status of Women's AGM focuses on  feminist response to wife battering  ByGaylaReid  It was the first annual general meeting of  VSW's second decade. It felt good to be  there, part of a seasoned, tenacious and  effective feminist organization whose work  becomes more and more important was we enter the 80s.  Highlight of the evening was a presentation  by feminist lawyer Ruth Busch. She examined  the legal response to the crime of wife battering, outlining the research-in-progress  currently being undertaken by the Women's  Research Centre.  That research questions the current practice  of removing the woman, not the batterer,  from the family home.  It also challenges  the deeply embedded prejudice that domestic  violence is somehow different from, and  lesser than, all other violent acts.  Election of a new executive was a major task  of the evening. VSW is proud to welcome new  women to executive: Marg Verrall, Roseanne  Moran, Andree Buchanan, Joanne Ranson, Barb  Bell and Barb Findlay. And to welcome back  again Debra Lewis, Cole Dudley, Jan Lancaster and Pat Piller.  The AGM provided an opportunity to introduce new staffers: Jeannie Grapebatch,  who replaces Debra Lewis as legal researcher, and Paddy Moore, who takes  over from Gillian Marie as coordinator .  of VSW's programming. Susan Hoeppner, a  former staff and executive member, returns after two years at South Vancouver  Family Place to become the legal advocate, a position triumphantly reinstated  due to our winning funding from City  Hall.  A review of the past year's activities  formed part of the AGM's proceedings,  and a report was presented which interested members may obtain by contacting  our office. The report enumerates our  extensive public education and outreach  work, at conferences, meetings and speaking engagements, as well as outlining  our information and referral services.  Strengthened by the addition of an extra  staff position, and rejuvenated by the  presence of a new executive, plus new women on the VSW staff, we are now preparing our programming for the fall. Watch  for the announcements in the mid-September Kinesis. Kinesis       July   August 81  CULTURAL WORK  VSW tells Applebert: women artists are discriminated against  By Julie Wheelwright  When the Applebaum-Herbert federal cultural policy review committee came to town  last month, Vancouver Status of Women  brought the dismal position of Canadian  women artists to their attention.  Jillian Ridington and Sylvia Spring,  representing VSW on the problem of women's  art in Canada, said, "it is essential,  present but unseen."  They addressed the cultural heritage of  women's art, the definition of this art  and how the preservation of it has been  neglected. "We decry the attitude of  'cultural institutions' who fail to see  artistic merit in works that have.function  as well as beauty."  Carr forced to paint on cardboard  The brief also discusses many Canadian  cultural institutions for failing to preserve the work of women artists such as  Emily Carr. Because of her economic  circumstances, Carr painted on cardboard  rather than wood and thus her works have  deteriorated more rapidly than many other  works of the same period.  The Vancouver Art Gallery waited until  Carr's paintings began to disintegrate  before they started a campaign to preserve  them.  "Because women's art has not been  highly valued, it has not been enshrined,"  Ridington and Spring stated.  They pointed to another example of women  artists being neglected. The National  Gallery in Ottawa's photo collection  exhibits only one woman photographer,  Margaret Bourke-White, an American.  This  happens despite the fact that one "Mrs.  Fletcher" advertised her services as a  daguerreotypist in Montreal's paper, two  years after the process was invented.  Vast majority of administrators male  At the administrative level, women are  vastly underrepresented, according to  Spring and Ridington. They point out that  women constitute only about 12 per cent of  the judges who rule on Canada Council  grants.  "The vast majority of instructors  in art schools and in university level art  courses, are male. The faculty of Vancouver's Emily Carr College of .Art is 87  per cent male."  This underrepresentation at the administrative and educational level means that  women's art is under-rated.  "Because the  recognized artists, judges of art, and the  conti-ollers of capital in this society  have been, and continue to be, predominantly male, work grounded in women's  experience has been undervalued and under-  represented. " Only when the work of  women artists is equally distributed to  the percentage of women artists in that  field will "the principle of shared  cultural experience be furthered."  Spring and Ridington also charge that much  of our 'enshrined' art comes mainly from  one class and one gender and is inaccessible literally and symbolically to most  Canadians.  The authors speak of the experience that  Canadian women artists face: "One of our  members is a playwright of considerable  public stature. Despite her credits,  talent and perserverence, she finds herself continually having to fight for her  right to speak from her experience as a  female."  Her perspective is constantly misunderstood — or worse, dismissed as irrelevant  or 'strident'. Any attempts to speak,  however symbolically or metaphorically,  about the very real struggles of women is  discouraged or labelled 'political  rhetoric'. With one or two exceptions  the power of artistic decisions in Canada  is made by men, she observes. Male arti  stic directors continually choose plays  and subjects which speak to them and their  experience.  "The theatre is only one of the performing  arts in which women are ghettoized."  Radio and television scriptwriters and  producers, filmmakers, composers and musicians all experience the same problems.  Real changes, not rhetoric, needed in CBC  The CBC also came under fire for its  inaccurate portrayal of women. Although  the corporation, under pressure from  women's groups, set up an affirmative  action program within their personnel  department, they have assigned one woman  to deal with the problem of sexism in  broadcasting.  "We hope that real changes,  rather than rhetoric, will indeed take  place within the CBC."  Another of Canada's cultural institutions,  the National Film Board, also fails to  deal with women's issues and women artists.  "It is our observation ... that in dealing  with the NFB, women are again in a Catch-  22 position. Studio D was set up to deal  with women's issues and participation but  it was given a very small budget with  which to do this." Again the result of  this program has been to ghettoize women's  contribution to the NFB.  "Female casualties from the local CBC and  NFB are many and their stories are variations on a theme."  The CFDC has also traditionally been run  my men and have given women film makers  very little support, according to the  report's authors.  "Again, serious  women film makers have, had to limit their  visions and impact by scaling down their  ideas to the small Canadian Council film  grants they sometimes get."  Another major problem that women artists  must face is economic marginality. While  all artists face this problem, it is even  more critical for women for several  reasons.  "In times of slow economic  growth and restrictions on government  spending — conditions which have existed  in Canada for some years now — artists  suffer, and women artists suffer even  more."  The authors cite an October 1978 national  survey of visual artists which found that  one out of every five Canadian artists  earned a gross income of more than $5000  annually. Sixty per cent of those  earning less than $5,000. were women. The  $5,000 figure doesn't include the high  costs of materials the artist must buy.  New policies should reflect  perspective on past imbalances  Spring and Ridington conclude their report  with a list of recommendations on what  the government should and could do to  help women artists. Any new policies  should reflect a consciousness of the  previous imbalance of male/female input  and control of the Canadian culture, and  a concerted effort should be made to  correct that imbalance.  The recommendations also make it clear  that artists should be recognized as "the  valuable cultural resources they are, and  that that value be rewarded monetarily."  Child care, social benefits, allowances  for work expenses would help Canadian  women artists economically.  Governments should encourage women  Culturally, the government could encourage  small scale exhibitions, performances,  etc to make women's visual and performing  arts available to women, living in isolated and remote areas. Demanding that  CBC enforce its guidelines regarding  sexism in programming and employment,  would also be beneficial. Endorsing  recommendations made by the CRTC Task  Force on Sex-role Stereotyping would also  ensure that broadcasters would not neglect  or omit women. 0  Manitoba women artists underrepresented, too  A recently released report from the Manitoba Provincial Council of Women charges  that women artists in their province are  under-represented and experience sexism  in almost all areas of artistic endeavour.  "While most people recognize that women in  the labour force do not have equal opportunities, few are aware that this applies  to women in the arts as well," says council member Sharron Zenith Come.  Women artists in Manitoba also suffer from  under-representation in their provincial  art galleries, such as the Winnipeg Art  Gallery, the third largest in Canada.  "A survey of the gallery's permanent collection and group exhibits reveals that  few works by women are included," the report points out. Only 10.5 per cent of  the additions to the permanent collection  in 1976-78 was work by women, although  this increased to 24- per cent during 1979  and 1980.  Although the Canadian average for women  artists represented in group exhibits from  1975-1977 was 29.8 per cent, the Manitoba  1978-80 average dipped to 15.4- per cent.  A November 10 1980 count of art works displayed in the Winnipeg Art Gallery found a  total of 273 signed works, with only eight  of those pieces by women.  The report also includes recommendations  suggesting how the provincial government  could better the position of their own women artists. "Equal opportunity programs  are a major means of integrated women into  all areas of Canadian life."  Accordingly, fine arts departments of colleges and universities should establish a  policy of hiring female faculty members,  especially in full-time and higher ranking  positions.  The authors also recommend that cultural  institutions establish special historical,  contemporary and one-person shows, highlighting women's arts, and that women be  represented equally on committees and juries.  Government arts funding bodies should also  appoint a central advisory committee of women to improve the status of women in the  visual a-"ts.  These are just some of the suggestions. But  the message is clear: women are experiencing discrimination and there is something  that governments could be doing to improve  that situation. Kinesis       July   August 81  ACROSS CANADA  Mary Two-Axe Early receives  degrees, but no status  By Kathleen .lamieson  That indomitable Mohawk matriarch and  fighter for Indian rights, Mary Two-Axe  Early, received an honorary doctorate of  laws from the University of York on June  11. The Quebec government held a reception  afterwards in its offices in Commerce  Court in the heart of Waspland. Corinne  Levesque herself had planned to attend;  but cancelled.  The Quebec government has of late been  taking an unusual amount of interest in  Native women. Last November it announced  it would no longer respect the federal  government's divisions between Native peoples (into status, non-status and metis).  The occasion of that announcement was the  Quebec Native Women's Annual Conference.  The Quebec Native Women's Association was  delighted with the news. But since then  they have written to ask the government  what concrete effect this promise will  have on Indian women in Quebec who have  been deprived of their status under 12 (l)  (b) of the Indian Act.  They would, for example, be exempt from  some provincial taxes if they were considered to come under the same provisions  as status Indians.  So far, no response from the provincial  government of Quebec.  Since Indian rights come under federal jurisdiction, it is unlikely that the provincial government has the power to make  those substantial changes, anyway.  Meanwhile, what the government's promises  presumably add up to is that a Native woman getting an honorary doctorate outside  Quebec will be given a reception, which  Corinne Levesque may or may not attend.  Perhaps the Quebec government is getting  worried that its once pristine reputation  — outside Quebec, at least — with regard  to Native people is getting more than a  little tarnished. In fact, the recent  descent on the Restigouche reserve by 40  Quebec-riot police, complete with helicopter backup and tear gas, is a culmination of a series of repressive incidents.  Mary Two-Axe Early won Persons Award  This honorary degree is not the first major  recognition that Mary Two-Axe has received.  Two years ago she was one of the five women to be given the "Persons Award" by the  governor general, the first year such  awards were made in celebration of the fiftieth anniversary of the decision by the  British Privy Council that Canadian women were legal persons.  Mary is naturally very pleased with all  this recognition of her commitment to the  lone and often bitter fight to achieve  equal rights for Indian women. Unfortunately,  it looks as if Mary, and indeed all these  Indian women who have waged the battle for  equal rights will not see their status  restored.  Mary became "non-status" when she married  a handsome young Irish New Yorker some 50  years ago. In the late 1960s, after her  husband's death, she wanted to return to  live on her natal reserve of Caughnawaga,  in Quebec, where her mother had left her  a house.  Mary soon discovered, however, that the  band council would not allow Indian women  who had married non-Indians to return to  the reserve — ever. Indeed, they had stepped up a campaign to evict non-status women who were still living on the reserve.  One of these women was Mary's best friend.  Having received her eviction notice, she  had a heart attack and died.  Mary has been able to remain on her reserve because she is living with her daughter, Rose, to whom she has given the house.  Mary's daughter is married to a status  Indian and although non-status herself, has  the right through that marriage to live and  own property on the reserve. Which is  convoluted and crazy.  All the awards in the world cannot compensate for the misery that section 12 (l)  (b) of the Indian Act has brought to  Indian women.  The so-called 'moratorium' announced by  the federal government last July, which  ostensibly allowed Indian bands to suspend  operation of 12 (l) (b) has been a farce.  Few bands have availed themselves of this  option.  This inaction makes Indian band councils  look very bad indeed. But the truth is  that even by this spring the Department of  Indian Affairs itself had not determined  Mary Two-Axe Early  exactly what the effect of the removal of  12 (l) (b) might have on other Indian Act  legislation and were thus unable to give  information to the bands.  Rumours abound that the effect would be  retroactive, and some bands feared that  with no explanation and no word of any increase of government funding for housing,  etc, many Indian women and their families  would return to their reserves, putting  an additional burden on the already limited resources.  Many male-run band councils — and the entirely male band councils were a tradition  instituted and enforced by the Indian Act  legislation up until 1952 — are quite  happy with the present bias in favour of  men. It's a useful tool for keeping the  women in line.  Indian women will have to wait for three  years after the constitution is patriated  before the proposed Charter of Rights and  Freedoms comes into effect, wiping out  12 (1) (b). Even that might not be the end.  The whole matter may go through the Supreme  Court. That would take another two or three  years. Or even more, given the vastly  larger role that the Supreme Court is expected to play under the new constitution.  Mary Two-Axe Early and many other non-status Indian women have been fighting for  their reinstatement as status Indians.  But Mary, and many of her friends, are now  either approaching seventy or older. They  cannot wait seven years, or more. Perhaps  the federal government is counting on this.  If it can procrastinate long enough, these  women will all be dead. Q  Rape is a joking matter for  Manitoba judge  It is no wonder that women have no faith  in the criminal justice system in Canada  when provincial court judges such as Robert Trudel of Manitoba reveal their true  colours.  A Globe and Mail story recently recounted  how Trudel angered his audience by telling  a joke about rape during a banquet speech  at the 11th annual Canadian congress for  the prevention of crime.  Trudel's tale was about a speaker who told  an audience that statistics show a woman  in New York can expect to be raped every  four and a half years. To which an audience member remarks it's too bad she had  to wait so long to enjoy it.  At least 30 of the 650 delegates left before the judge finished his speech, which  was laced with sexist humour.  Judge Trudel refused demands from several members  of his audience for an apology.  "I said at the opening of my remarks it  was an interlude" that was meant to be humorous, he told the outraged delegates.  Nona I.'unro, principal of a Vancouver  school for juvenile delinquents, was cheered when she told the audience that she had  worked with rape victims "and I want to  tell you that if I were raped, I wouldn't  enjoy it."  Several delegates, many of them rape victims, .'relatives of rape victims, or case  workers who deal with rape victims, said  they were shocked the judge would make  such a joke.  Others said they were shocked by the audience reaction to it. Q  Human rights tribunal awards  geologist $9500 for dismissal  on the basis of sex  A.female geologist, dismissed in 1978 by  Eldorado Nuclear from a summer geological  survey camp in Northern Quebec, has been  awarded $9,500.  The human rights tribunal found that  Marthe Archambault's dismissal had been  motivated partially or totally by her sex,  and was therefore discriminatory according  to Section 7 of the Canadian Human Rights  Act.  Archambault and another student, Isabelle  Cadieux, were the only two women in a  party of fifteen based 180 miles northwest  of Schefferville, Quebec. Both were  dismissed ostensibly because their tent  was used for informal parties which disturbed some employees. None of the male  participants were cautioned or disciplined,  The tribunal observed that the real motive  for Archamault's dismissal was that camp  director Robert Tremblay felt the presence  of only one woman could cause quarrels  among the men.  Archambault's dismissal left her without  funds for the year and postponed her  graduation and entry into the job market.  The tribunal awarded her $1,500 for lost  salary from the summer job, $6,000 for  loss of a professional year and $2,000  for personal damages. Q  Gays in trouble "not their bag"  Telecare Ministries of North Bay, Ontario  believes that offering gay counsellors for  gay callers on their crisis lines reveals  a lack of "personal and emotional maturity  Cate Lazarov, a lesbian phone volunteer ha  been asked to leave as a result of her objection to a log entry in which a gay caller was told his problem "wasn't the counsellor's bag".  Another caller seeking a gay counselling  service was refused the number of a local  gay support group even though their number  is on file as a legitimate reference. Beside the log note of this incident the  director of "Telecare" commented: "If anyone ever asks again, tell them it's none  of their business."  When Lazarov complained to the christian  Board of Directors, they requested her  resignation for disruption of the work  atmosphere, and showing personal and emotional immaturity. Telecare director refused to comment but did say:"We treat  everybody as equals. There is no prejudice." Body Politic Kinesis       July    August 81  NEW RIGHT OFFENSIVE  Family Protection Act attacks women, children, promotes Right  By Helen Minn  Although abortion is the most visible  issue around which the right in the United States has consolidated its powers  thus far, the Family Protection Act offers  us a view of the overall objectives of  the New Right.  According to the Centre for Constitutional  Rights in the U.S., the Family Protection  Act is based on the concept that the  "rugged heterosexual, white Christian male  will prosper if given free reign in a  free enterprise society. The rest of us  are merely here to make sure that he does."  The FPA's self-proclaimed goal is to  "protect ... and strengthen the American  Family and promote the virtues of family  life ..." The bill envisions the family  as a force for right wing social control.  Through some 35 measures, the bill seriously threatens many of the victories of  the 1960s for women, for racial minorities  for lesbians and gay men, for youth and  the poor.  The Family Protection Act was written by  Robert Billings, executive director of  the Moral Majority.  It was first introduced into the senate in 1979 by Senator  Paul Lexalt who was chairman of the  Reagan campaign and, we are told, a close  friend of Ronnie's. American activists  are expecting to see the bill reintroduced  in this session.  The Family Protection Act is an all-out  attach on the rights of women. The bill  attempts to push American women and  children into the home and keep them  there defenceless and dependent on a man.  Under the FPA's tax scheme, women who do  not work outside the home or who perform  volunteer jobs would be eligible for tax  breaks.  In addition to the existing  deductions for dependents, families would  receive generous tax breaks for each  child a woman bears.  The obvious programs to target in order to  complete the subjugation of women and  children to the male "head-of-the-house-  hold" are services for- battered women  and children.  Funding for shelters would be wiped out  And that's exactly what the FPA does.  The bill would eliminate federal funding  for programs or shelters for battered  women as well as juveniles and, except in  a limited number of cases, for abused  children.  Programs that fail to notify parents before providing contraceptive, abortion or  abortion counselling to unmarried minors  would be denied federal funding.  Doctors or clinics that fail' to notify  parents within 24 hours of the commencement of treatment for venereal disease  for an unmarried minor would be fined  $5,000. The intent of these acts would  be to place the morality of children under  the thumbs of their parents.  Further, the ability of women and children  tc fight legally against exploitative  . situations would be severely limited.  In  cutting the heart out of federally  funded legal services for the poor, the  bill would prohibit federal aid for any  litigation involving divorce as well as  abortion, or gay or lesbian rights.  According to Andrea Eagan of the feminist  journal, "HealthRight", "the bill would  extend the financial, legal and ideological powers of the state to the male  headed household. A man would be a king  of his castle once more, free to treat his  wife and children as his property and in  any way he sees fit."  Because of the threat to the hegemoney of  the heterosexual family represented by  gay men and lesbians, the FPA vehemently  attacks gay and lesbian rights. The bill  prevents federal funding for any individual or group "which presents homosexuality,  male or female, as an acceptable lifestyle ."  The government's Congressional Research  Service has commented that this clause  would mean that "no person who was a.  homosexual or who even ... intimated  that homosexuality might be an acceptable  lifestyle could receive any federal funds  under such programs as Social Security,  welfare, veteran's programs or student  assistance.  'Similarly, any organization that indicated that homosexuality might be an acceptable lifestyle would be ineligible for  any government assistance."  The intent of this bill is to force liberal reformers to choose between support  for gay and lesbian rights on the one  hand and continued federal funding for  essential social service on the other hand.  If successful, this bill would leave gays  and.lesbians isolated and without allies  prepared to defend them. This would be  the perfect set up for scapegoating — for  the victimization of gays and lesbians.  The Family Protection Act demonstrates  the right's understanding of the importance of control over the education  system and the content of curriculum  materials.  The Act would, offer considerable tax  incentive to private schools as well as  to parents sending their children to  these schools. According to the New York  Times, Protestant and fundamentalist  schools are opening at the rate of three  per day.  This year, the Association of Christian  Schools International has a membership of  almost 1500 schools, which enrol over  289,000 students. These figures represent  an increase of almost 200 schools and  79,000 students compared to 1980. All  teachers in association schools are  required to be "believers" and many have  gotten degrees from Christian colleges.  Most of them do not have state certification as teachers.  The Accelerated Christian Education Inc.  (ACEI) sells a curriculum package to over  4000 church-related schools.  "We teach  ?reationism without apology," said Roland  Johnson, ACEI vice-president in charge  of development. "We feel that sex education is best left up to the parents, but  in the health classes we do teach  Christian manhood to the boys and Christian  womanhood to the girls ..."  With a view to the perpetuation of the  ideas of male dominance, the FPA would  deny federal funds for any educational  materials in any schools which would  "tend to denigrate, diminish, or deny the  role differences between the sexes as it  has been historically understood in the  U.S." Federal funds would be withheld  from states that do not have voluntary  prayers as a part of every school day.  At the same time as the hand of independent and religious schools and the parents  who send their children to these schools  would be strengthened by this bill, there  is provision to make sure that teachers do  not become too powerful. Federal funds  would be denied to any school district  which requires a teacher to join a union.  Frightening implications for education  The Family Protection Act would have  particular repercussions for the education  of the poor and minorities. States  would be given complete control over  teacher qualifications, selection and  promotion.  School districts would also be permitted  to determine their own attendance regulations. This would allow racist school  boards to determine their own criteria for  who is eligible to attend school.  With many absentees and low achievers in  the public school system coming from poor  and non-white backgrounds, the implications of such a practice are frightening.  Further, the FPA anticipated the budget  proposals that were put forward by Reagan  himself when it proposed the replacement  of categorical aid for education of the  poor with block grants to be used at the  discretion of each state.  The bill would also cut food stamps for  college students thus making a university  education even more the privilege of individuals with their own financial  resources.  The potential of this bill is truly  frightening. And, according to Sarah  Schulman of the Committee for Abortion  Rights and Against Sterilization Abuse,  the right wing is not planning to go down  easy on this one.  Their strategy is, rather than pushing the  bill through in one lump, to propose  many of the individual points separately,  thereby enhancing their changes of  passage and diffusing the energies of the  opposition.  This is an American bill. However, it  can stand as a harsh warning to us here.  Right wing forces are growing in numbers  and visibility in B.C. and when we examine their activities, we can see that  bhey have moved in all the same areas as  the Family Protection Act targets.  The Ku Klux Klan is growing in B.C. and  the number of attacks against racial  minorities, particularly East Indians is  on the rise.  Fundamentalist church congregations are  multiplying at an outstanding rate. For  a number of years the fundamentalists were  a militant force in some school districts,  particularly Surrey and Langley, where  they were pushing to alter the content of  the school curriculum. We can probably  credit their virtual disappearance from  this area to the increase in provincial  support for private schools.  The right has made alarming gains in their  campaign to deny women choice on abortion.  The battle over the funding of the Vancouver Status of Women in city counsel was  largely waged over the question of VSW's  support for lesbian rights.  We cannot afford to stand back now and  watch the right organize against us. Q Kinesis       July   August 81  NEW RIGHT OFFENSIVE  The U.S. Right mounts assault on reproductive freedoms  By Julie Wheelwright  We've got to stop the million and one  half murders a year:  the holocaust.  - Ken Vanderhoff, president of Human  Life, Seattle.  Holocaust. The word burns, conjuring up  horrific images of innocent people being  led to slaughter by some inhuman monsters;  images of swastikas, jack-boots, bloody  graves, a numbing reminder of our ability  to kill. The word is emotionally charged.  It is a weapon currently being emp]oyed by  anti-choice forces in the United States to  take away a woman's right to safe, legal  abortion, even in cases of pregnancy by  rape, or incest. Even if the woman is a  girl of 13, even if the baby will be born  with severe deformities, it must be carried  to term.  At the beginning of this year the anti-  choice forces brought in their heaviest  artillery yet. Senator Jesse Helms (R-NC)  and Henry Hyde (D-IL) introduced bills to  the senate and the house of representatives  which would guarantee that human life  "shall be deemed to exist from conception."  The bills were worded exactly the same.  The Human Life Statute and Human Life  Amendments are clear in their intent and  their impact will be mammoth.  "It's scary and it's not just this issue,  this is just part of a whole movement,"  says Deejah Sherman-Peterson, a National  Abortion Rights Action League organizer in  Seattle, Washington.  "We got a nasty letter from a 'pro-lifer'  today with gory pictures and covered with  stickers like 'Planned Parenthood is anti-  family. This came and it was sent to all  the NARAL groups. I've been in this organization for seven years and my skin is  thick, but that hurt ... me, a mother with  two kids, a baby-killer?"  What makes the fight so bitter is that the  stakes are so high. According to Sherman-  Peterson, all contraceptives which act to  prevent implantation of a fertilized egg  would be made illegal by the statute. And  that includes the IUD and 35 per cent of  birth control pills. A badly deformed  fetus, pregnancy by rape or incest, would  no longer be considered grounds for abortion.  'Defect' is also disregarded as a  basis for depriving an unborn child of  life.  Back to the dirty little rooms  According to Marilyn Knight, a spokesperson for Seattle Planned Parenthood, the  statute will affect the women that need  abortions the most. Knight says that women  who can afford to go somewhere else for  abortions have always been able to, b\it  women on low-incomes will be forced to  either raise another child or seek illegal  abortions.  "It will outlaw abortion but it won't stop  it. Women will have to go back to back-  alleys and dirty little rooms."  But Knight adds that it won't be an easily  won fight for the anti-choice groups.  Annually more than 30,000 women have therapeutic abortions in Washington state where  abortion has been legalized for ten years.  "If people are alarmed enough, and I think  they are, they wouldn't be willing to  give up that right over their reproduction  without a fight."  She says that the consequences of the  statute would be "very bad, just the  social upheaval would be enormous."  Barbara Banfield, a lay health worker at  Seattle's Aradia clinic, agrees. "This  would have disastrous effects on us (the  clinic) economically as well as taking  away women's rights to reproduction,"  she says, adding that these are personal  opinions.  IN1982,IFYOUHAVEA  MISCARRIAGE YOU  COULD BE PROSECUTED  FOR MURDER.  First Defensive, Planned Parenthood Ad, New York Times, May 10 1981  "Right now we're feeling the crunch for  money. If abortion is made illegal,  that's another source of income that will  dry up," Banfield adds. Aradia currently  offers the lowest rate for abortions in  Seattle: $110.  She adds that she doubts whether the  statute will actually pass though the  possibility that the right-wing forces  will "steam-roll this thing through"  exists.  "A lot of us are feeling paralyzed by  what's happening in this country. But  there's a lot of progressive groups getting organized in Seattle."  If the statute did pass, Banfield says  that she would forsee a network of doctors  going underground to provide women with  services denied them by the state. Abortion has been legal in Seattle long  enough for doctors to know how to perform  safe operations and this may counteract  fears of a return to the back alley  butchers, she adds.  "Abortion in Seattle is extremely available. We do so many, there are so many  places that do, I have a hard time believing that women will accept that."  She says that within the anti-choice  movements there are many splits and some  members even think outlawing the IUD and  the morning-after pills is "going to far."  According to Sherman-Peterson, 35 per  cent of birth control pills would fall  under the definition of abortificants;  contraceptive methods which work to prevent implantations rather than ovulation  or conception.  Some direct results of the statute will be  seen by a jump in mortality rates, more  child abuse, increased numbers of women  dying or contacting crippling infections  from unclean, botched abortions and  300,000 more teenage pregnancies a year,  she adds.  There is also the fear that doctors will  have difficulty ?<nowing whether a woman  has had a spontaneous or induced abortion.  Before abortion was legalized in Washington state, says Sherman-Peterson, women  who went to hospitals with miscarriages  were often harassed by doctors.  She tells of one woman who was five months  pregnant when she miscarried.  "The doctors didn't believe it wasn't an abortion.  They surrounded her and kept saying, 'who  did it?"  "How far are they going to go to investigate a miscarriage which is a euphemism  for a spontaneous abortion?"  According to Ken Vanderhoof, president of  Human Life in Seattle, the leading anti-  choice group, doctors can always tell  whether a woman has had an abortion.  "There's all kinds of positive tests to  tell whether a woman has had a spontaneous  or induced abortion," says Vanderhoff.  However Meg Hickling, education director  of Vancouver's Planned Parenthood, says  Vanderhoff's statements are "very hard to  believe."  And Laura Lynn Brown, a counsellor at  Vancouver General Hospital's surgical daycare unit says "for the most part that  kind of evidence isn't apparent." She  adds only in cases where the uterus  has been punctured can doctors clearly  distinguish between a miscarriage and a  crude abortion attempt.  "We'll always have those who do wrong"  The statute will force many women back to  the days of unsafe, often lethal abortions.  "I'm extremely concerned about that,"  Vanderhoff claims.  "I'm going to try and  make sure there aren't back street abortionists. They do two things: they destroy the baby and the mother."  He adds, ironically, "We'll always have  those who will do wrong."  Since no birth control method is 100 per  cent effective, many American women who  otherwise could have chosen abortions,> Kinesis        July    August 81  Kinesis       July    August 8  NEW RIGHT OFFENSIVE  would be forced to carry their pregnancies to term.  The majority of those  women in Seattle are either teenagers or  women on low incomes, according to Marilyn  Knight.  Last year more than 8,000 teenagers had  babies in Washington state and only  3,000 gave their children up for adoption,  says Knight.  The consequence of the statute would be to force even more single  mothers onto the welfare rolls, she says.  "The social costs would be enormous.  Nobody likes abortion. No one does it  happily. But there's always such things  as contraceptive failure and ignorance."  She adds that most of the women who come  to Planned Farenthood for abortion counselling are poor. Eliminating abortions  "would be a very difficult thing to have  to do."  But Vanderhoff says that he is not concerned about the added social costs. Nor  is he concerned about the added number of  unwanted children born to che 30,000  women who had abortions in Washington last  year.  "Abortion is very dangerous to women.  That doesn't mean that I have to say the  baby has to die so the mother will feel  good.  I want to eliminate the holocaust  for mother and baby."  He adds society must realize that  even though it is much cheaper to have an  abortion than raise a child, that sacrifice must be made.  "We have to address the fact that it is  more expensive to raise a child.  Economically it is cheaper to kill people.  I  can arrange an abortion for $125."  The readily available abortions in Seattle,  he says, "encourage that." But now that  congress has suspended medicaid funds for  women wanting abortions, even in cases of  rape or incest, that $125 is going to be  an even greater sacrifice for those women.  The Human Life president also adds that  women act with "less than reasoned thought"  when they decide to have an abortion.  "Pregnancy is a very substantial impactor.  Even when it's totally wanted and planned  it's beautiful but traumatic.  I think  many women are put in the position where  they can't tolerate that change in their  lives."  Interestingly, Vanderhoff says he believes  that women who become pregnant must either  deliver their babies at full term or to the  hands of "murderers."  "The reality is that it's not their choice  to have that child. They have to deliver  that child."  The Human Life Society is also unalterably opposed to NARAL and Vanderhoff  charges them with having "not a shred of  a value system."  Anti-choicers into NARAL-bashing  It seems that NARAL-bashing is a nationwide occupation for the anti-choice groups.  According to a recent edition of Time  magazine, Paul Brown, head of the Life  Amendment Political Action Committee made  a vicious personal attack on NARAL's Karen  Mulhauser:  Brown said, "I hear that Karen claims she  was raped. Well, let me: tell you, Karen  is not the most beautiful creature in the  world, so when I hear her say she was  raped, iry response is 'You wish'".  Mulhauser had been raped by two men, at  gunpoint, and both attackers were caught  and convicted.  Brown's attack, as head  of a group fighting for the 'morality' of  anti-choice' legislation was indicative of  the hypocrisy of the fight.  One of the weapons the anti-choice groups  are using along with exposing the 'immorality' of their opponents, is emotion.  They used such heavily charged words as  murder, holocaust, slaughter, and children  instead of infants. Charges Moral Majority  leader Reverend Jerry Falwell, who held  an 'I Love America1 Rally last May in  Olympia, '"ash., "Abortion stands as an  indictment of murder against America for  killing unwanted babies. America has the  blood of all those babies on her hands."  Says Vanderhoff sarcastically: "I'm sure  that NARAL is deeply concerned with the  fact that women have a right to kill their  children."  has recently started its organizing.  "The politicians are going to go in the  direction of the majority of the voters.  Our viewpoint is that they have to hear  from people on our side because we know  we're the majority," she says.  The pro-choice groups work to ensure that  pro-choice politicians remain in power and  anti-choice candidates are defeated.  to be growing. According to Sherman-  Peterson, "we get people in their 80s who  write in with donations and say, 'I wish  I could give you more but I'm on social  security.'  The question is whether enough  of those people are going to come out."  She adds that very few people are hostile  when.asked for support. "Very few people  come up to us and say, 'go to hell.'"  choice forces) can strike in the hearts of  the congressmen.  They have access to the  White House and to social service departments.  The tone of the administration  lends itself to giving those people a  hearing."  But there is little that Planned Parenthood can-do to stop the passage of the  HLS.  "We can ask people to write to their  I bote vmwiftn'* UVfeer  dyKeS.  And 1 hate fo^ots onA  niters of\6 yws ona  cofttrroes o«d olA people  on social security*  tmi I wiiVi -tViey vieCe  all dead.  ill  Knd -then at last we'U  achieve a -kue <m\of i-ty:  because 4V>en *Us  country *ould he pure  again: a £hinina  €>ompte for -*V*  yor\<\.  W -tV* onty way +o  purify fte country i$  to destroy tf* \mpwe  ones, iW aooojgrous ones,  -foe aqly one? >mY\o 6a<e  -lobe different.  unanimity.  The other weapon that the anti-choice  movement has access to is the government's  ear. When President Ronald Reagan came to  power it was with the backing of the Moral  Majority and other anti-choice groups.  Vanderhoff is confident that their forces  will be able to pass the statute through  both House and Senate. "I have no question  about winning. It's moving very rapidly."  One of the tactics the anti-choice groups  use to convince the public to join their  fight is to show them pictures of aborted  fetuses. "The reality is when people see  the results of the murder of the unborn  child ... they're becoming horrified.  Abortion lias always been outlawed in history because it doesn't make sense," says  Vai.derhoff.  A recent federal court of appeal  struck down a provision to the Massachusett  legislature requiring a woman to read a  detailed description of her unborn fetus  before an abortion.  In Washington anti-choice groups are,  according to Vanderhoff, "educating" their  state senators through a letter-writing  campaign, urging them to vote in favour of  the statute. He adds that the bill will  probably be considered before the fall.  Statute would allow states  to rule on abortion  The statute will allow individual states  to declare abortion illegal, overturning  its 1973 Supreme COurt decision, but specific court decisions will have to be  worked out for charges, he says.  Human Life claims a subscription list to  their state-wide newsletter of 4-0,000; has  28 affiliates in Washington state and drew  more than 700 delegates to their last  annual convention. Washington state  residents have been the only Americans to  vote on the issue of choice on abortion in  1970 at a state-wide referendum and passed  a pro-choice ruling.  But Vanderhoff claims  the referendum passed with a small majority of 100,000 and says that majority, has  now changed its mind.  NARAL's campaign is similar. They also  hope to put pressure on federal representatives through a letter-writing campaign based on community organization,  says Sherman-Peterson.  She warns that,i"unless people are ready  to take action the situation is going to  get worse and worse."  NARAL uses an organizing model where one  woman will invite her friends to a meeting  at her home to discuss theissue'of choice  on abortion and what can be done to defeat  the HLS. Already 2,500 people in Oregon  have become involved and Washington state  "We're trying to get the baddies out and  the goodies in."  But the majority of politicians are reluctant to become involved with such a controversial issue, she says. "Mast of them  are men who don't give a damn. They just  wish that we'd go away." The anti-choice  groups are better organized, better  funded and in a more powerful position at  this point, although, says Sherman-Peterson, the majority of Americans are in  favour of choice on abortion.  "It's like Reagan. He wasn't elected by  a landslide: 50 per cent of the population  didn't go to the polls. It's that type  of thing."  She says the biggest problem is getting  the women who have had abortions to come  out and fight the statute. "If only those  women who've had abortions would write to  their congresspeople ... that would impress  congress."  Support for groups like NARAL does appear  NARAL raises funds not only through donations but by holding street fairs where  volunteers sell T-shirts, buttons and bags  with pro-choice slogans. Currently the  Seattle NARAL annual budget stands at  about $4-8,000 says Sherman-Peterson.  "The majority of people are on our side  but they're still hiding in the closet.  We're going to have a real split in this  country."  The HLS may well pass because it only has  to have a simply majority in the house and  congress. Once that happens there will be  increasing pressure placed on the state  legislature to treat charges of abortion  like homicide, she says.  "The more conservative states will be hit  the hardest. There will be a lot of  pressure on state legislators to severely  punish women who have abortions."  Says Planned Parenthood's Marilyn Knight  on the question of the HLS passage: "It  depends on how much fear they (the anti-  The President of the  United States and influential  Members of Congress in  \ both parties are advocating  legislation to ban all  •'"•j^SS****  S^rfev \ abortions and to outlaw  some methods of birth  control including the IUD and the Pitt.  Before Congress acts some critical  questions must be answered  The anti-abortion, anti-birth control Amendment is now before  Congress. There is a very real chance it will be enacted.  Most Members of Congress acknowledge that the majority of Americans  oppose such measures. And most Members are, privately, fearful of such  legislation.  You can help call your Representative's and Senators' urgent attention t  these questions by using the attached coupon. And you can do even more!  The National Abortion Rights Action League (NARAL) actively opposes  passage of any anti-abortion, anti-birth control legislation. We. the 100.000  members of NARAL, dedicate ourselves to freedom to make the most  - A message from NARAL which also appeared in the New York Times, May 10,1981-  representatives. That's all we've done.  That's all we can do," says Knight.  Another threat is the change in federal  funding to Planned Parenthood. Since  specific monies are earmarked for such  agencies in the Title 10 grants, and Reagan wants to replace them with lump sums.,  there is no guarantee that the state  legislature will have to provide them with  funds. Currently, 50 per cent of Planned  Parenthood funds come from the federal  government.  "It (the system of title 10 grants) has  worked in the past but now Reagan wants to  eliminate title 10 and give the states  lump sums. A lot of the states would be  in very bad shape if that happened."  However, there is still hope that even if  title 10 grants were replaced by lump sums,  Planned Parenthood would receive enough  funding to continue operating.  "If we get  the monies in block grants it could be  that later on in the year there'd be some  adjustments in the figures."  But oven if the statute passes, Sherman-  Peterson says, NARAL and others will continue to push for choice on abortion.  "Even if we lose, then we're going to keep  on fighting. We're looking at the long  Ijaul.  "We've tried to point out to people that  they're not going to get a chance to vote  directly on this issue. The time for procrastination has passed."  There are reasons to be pessimistic that  the pro-choice groups will win this fight.  Recently the U.S. senate labour and human  resources committee approved a bill designed to encourage teenagers to practice  "self-discipline" in their sexuality.  According to Sherman-Peterson, this bill  was proposed to divert funds from groups  like Planned Parenthood.  The measure,  introduced by arch-conservative Senator  Jeramiah Denton (R-Ala.), is intended also  to promote giving children up for adoption  as an alternative to adolescent parenthood .  Bill would "encourage self-discipline"  among teenagers  Denton described it to the senate as a  continuing adolescent pregnancy project  which would provide services to other  adolescents to encourage "self-discipline  and responsibility in matters of human  sexuality," encourage family participation  in cases of teenage pregnancy, promote  adoption as an alternative in such cases  and provide research and data"collection  on family planning programs.  The bill authorizes $30 million for each  fiscal year through 1984 and has the endorsement of liberals such as Senators  Edward Kennedy (D-Mass), Thomas Eagleton  (D-Mo. ).  The issue of abortion as an alternative  to teenage pregnancy is never mentioned  although the bill states, "prevention of  adolescent sexual activity and adolescent  pregnancy depends primarily upon developing strong family values and close family  ties."  Recently anti-choice groups were also out  in force to show their displeasure at  Reagan's appointment of Sandra O'Connor  to the Supreme Court in early July. The  Moral Majority and the National Right-to-  Life Committee members threatened that they  would try and block O'Connor's appointment  because of her stand on abortion.  "Sandra O'Connor has a consistent and  strong pro-abortion voting record while a  senator in Arir.ona," said Dr. J.C. Wilkie,  the National Right-to-Life committee's  president.  Cross at Reagan's failure to appoint  judges who favour "Traditional values"  Cal Thomas, Moral Majority vice-president,  joined Wilkie in his condemnation of  O'Connor. Richard Viguerie, Conservative  Digest publisher, charged that Reagan's  choice for the Supreme Court violate! his  election promise to appoint judges who  "respect traditional family values and the  sanctity of innocent human life."  While the anti-choice groups may be unhappy with Reagan's appointment of  O'Connor, they have won a small victory in  the senate. A U.S. senate sub-committee  has been holding hearings on the HLS  since May and in early June they votec/ 3  to 2 to approve it. This is the f'rst  step towards validation of the bill.  Critics charge that they hearings were  one-sided. Knight says the sub-committee's  chair, John East (R-North Carolina) refused  to let anyone who was not 'invited' to  speak at the meeting testify.  "They really stacked that committee. They  a1so said it had nothing to do with the  issue of abortion."  She cites the example of the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists  president who was not allowed to testify  in his official capacity but only as an  individual.  Fifty national organizations charged that  the hearings were biased and deliberately  limited in scope. Six women who protested at the hearings were arrested. Finally the hearings were extended to let all  interested parties voice their opinions  on the issue.  But even if the bill does pass through  both houses of congress (it only needs  a simplo majority) groups such as NARAL  say it will be challenged at the Supreme  Court level.  The statute would overturn  the 1973 Supreme Court decision in the  Roe vs. Wade case which ruled that wory n  have a constitutional right to an abortion for at least the first six months  of pregnancy. According to Knight, 95  per cent of abortions done in Washington  are done in the first trimester.  The statute would allow states to pass  laws making abortion illegal once again.  Congress would no longer stand in the way  of such legislation and the punishment  for the 'crime' would vary from state to  state.  Once one state makes abortion illegal  again and a woman is prosecuted she could  fight that decision'on the grounds that  the law is unconstitutional because it does  not provide all women equal protection  under the law. Why should women in  Nevada be denied abortions when they are  legal in' Washington state?  Ultimately the decision will return to  the Supreme Court. That Sandra 0'Connor[> 14       Kinesis       July    August 81  NEW RIGHT OFFENSIVE  has been appointed is perhaps a good sign  for the pro-choice groups.  According to right-wing representatives  such as Senator East, the statute has  nothing to do with the issue of abortion  but it is an administrative matter which  should be left up to the individual  states, although he has publicly stated  his opposition to choice on the matter.  East said recently on a television report  on the HLS, "in the past we've stuck to a  Jeffersonian principle, leaving It to the  state level."  East also stated that the issue is merely  one of definition: "Many reputable,  highly qualified scientists" agreed that  life began from the point of conception,  he said, but failed to mention the 50  outraged national groups who demanded the  hearings be opened and the six jailed  protestors freed.  "I'm troubled with abortion as a form of  birth control.  I suppose ideally one  would want to have a healthy sexuality  where abortion wouldn't be a problem," he  continued.  His opponents on the program included  Dr. Halett, the white-haired head of the  800-inember California Obstetricians  Association who recently endorsed a letter  sent to Reagan expressing their opposition  to the HLS.  "We're concerned with the quality of life,"  said Halett.  "That prospect (of the HLS)  is very frightening to me." He added  that he too had been through the days  where his patients would die from septic  abortions.  NARAL's Robin Chandler Duke also charged  that making abortions illegal will not  end them.  "Making abortion illegal won't  make it go away.  It will only increase  misery. It seems to me a crime to make a  baby have a baby."  Real majority favours right to choose  (Since abortion became legal in 1973,  more than one million teenagers became  pregnant and 38  per cent had abortions).  Chandler Duke also raised the issue of  public opinion. Knight charges that it  is really only a 'small core of people*  who really oppose the right to abortion  for women.  "All the polls in this country show that  most people in this country are pro-  choice." She adds that a recent survey  by her Republican congress representative  found that out of 17,000 people polled,  82  per cent opposed banning abortion.  Opponents to the HLS say it is a case of  the will of the minority attempting to  impose its morality on the majority.  Sherman-Peterson charges that because  almost half the nation refused to vote in  the last election, many politicians are  governing without a clear mandate on this  issue.  How will it affect Canadian women?  What effect will the statute have on  Canadian women if it passes? Will American women travel north for safe abortions?  According to most health-care representatives in Vancouver, the effects will be  minimal.  Meg Hickling, a Planned Parenthood education spokesperson says that American women  could not come to Canada to have abortions  done here because most hospitals have  residency requirements.  She adds however that women who have money  will always be able to have abortions even  if it means travelling hundreds of miles.  Many Canadian women currently travel to  Washington state for abortions because it  is difficult to have one in the north and  interior of B.C.  "Many middle and upper class parents whip  their children across the border for an  abortion. What might happen (if the HLS  "mm?*  mm^  passes) is that local pro-life groups  might feel happier."  She adds that the statute seems "mind-  boggling, insane to me."  Faye Cooper, a member of the North Shore  Women's Centre, agrees.  "I think psychologically it would give them (anti-  choice groups) a hell of a big stick. But  I think it would have virtually no impact  on Canada."  One reason why Cooper says she doubts that  it would be important to Canadians is that  our abortion laws are by no means liberal.  There is no easy access to abortions in  Canada, she adds.  "It depends on the hospital, it depends on  the doctor, and it depends on the circumstances. No hospital is obligated to  have an abortion committee. There are  anti-choice boards in places in Victoria,  Powell River and Prince George and many  other places in the province."  She adds that the hospital in Powell River  performed only three abortions last year.  But according to Cooper it would be  possible for a Seattle woman to have an  abortion in Canada, although it would be  expensive and difficult.  "It's not going  to be a snap for her." According to Laura  Lynn Brown of the VGH surgical day care  unit, it would cost an American woman  between $250 and $400 for an abortion.  Says Cooper: "What the U.S. is proposing  is just a stricter form of Canadian law."  According to Statistics Canada, there were  12,4-83 therapeutic abortions performed in  B.C. in 1978 and 62,290 nationally that '  year. And although there were only figures  available for the three states, 1,372  abortions of Canadian women were performed  in the United States in 1978. So that  door, open to women who cannot get abortions in their own town or city or why are  trying to avoid scandal, will once again  be closed.  But the fear that Canadian politicians  would jump on the bandwagon seems remote.  At the moment Canada does not have the  Moral Majority's equal who have access to  wealth and the government's ear. Much of  the work being done on the HLS is being  carried out by lobbyists for both sides  and the fight in Canada is fought at the  level of hospital boards rather than in  Parliament.  The abortion issue is just part of a right-  wing campaign to 'put women back in their  place', raging in America. Moral Majority  members not only oppose choice on abortion  but the Equal Rights Amendment and gay  rights.  Rights that women's groups and others have  fought so hard for are in danger of disappearing. The unthinkable is being  contemplated and Canadians can do little  but sit back and watch. Q  RALLY SEPTEMBER 12  CHILD  UNDER r\   \    a  Hllflffi  SjSSSPSB* *»wk m to ontK  (^  CONCERNED CITIZENS FOR  CHOICE ON ABORTION  Come and show your support for a woman's right to choose  Rally to Repeal the Anti-abortion laws  Queen Elizabeth Plaza  Noon, September 12 Kinesis       July    August 81        15  BOOKS  In Her Own Right does not shy away from class issues  in our f oremothers' lives  By Laura Cardriver  IN HER OWN RIGHT: Selected Essays on Women's  History in B.C. Edited by Barbara Latham and Cathy  Kess. Published by Camosun College, Victoria, B.C.  Most British Columbians know little about  their own history, and even less about the  contributions that women have made to this  province. In Her Own Right, a collection  of selected essays, edited by Barbara  Latham and Cathy Kess breaks new ground  in this long neglected area.  The essays address a variety of subjects  ranging from the arrival of B.C.'s first  immigrant women on the ship, the Tynemouth,  in 1862, to feminist reformers at the  turn of the century, to those women who  became absorbed in the relief effort  of the 1930s.  A picture gradually emerges of prominent,  very active middle-class women from Vancouver and Victoria and the organizations  they were involved in. The same names  appear over and over again; names of women who could be active in the reform movements because they enjoyed the privileges  and freedoms of the leisured class.  While women like Maria Grant, Helen Gregory MacGill and Evlyn Farris made genuine  strikes for the advancement of women and  pushed for much-needed reforms, they were  able to do so because of their social  status acquired through fathers and husbands .  Early women's groups were the preserve  of privileged women  The essays do not shy away from problems  which can be traced to the middle-class  backgrounds of reformers and women's groups.  Tami Adilman, in her essay on Evlyn Farris  and the University Women's Club, points  out that "it is obvious that the Women's  Liberal Association did not want their  membership to include working women." In  other parts of the book reference is made  to women's organizations which preferred  to remain middle and upper-class in character.  Nora Lupton, in her essay, says that participation in the B.C. Protestant Orphans'  Home Ladies' Committee was an indication  of status though she adds that the home  provided excellent care for5 children for  a century.  Given society's stratified character, it  was hardly surprising that the reform movements tended to be the preserve of privileged women. Opportunities for women  of other classes were very limited; they  concentrated on surviving. For example,  Deborah Nilson's essay exposes the fact .  that the prevalence of prostitution particularly during times of economic depression, was related to the scarcity of employment for women in other areas.  It is unfortunate that the women who would  benefit most from social reforms were not  those with the power to address their problems. Conversely, those women who were  respected in the community didn't have  the working women's perspective.  In her essay on sexism in B.C.'s trade  unions, Marie Campbell examines how men  involved in unions turned to middle-class  rather than working women for advice on  women's wages. What resulted was that women were forced to accept wages that even  trade union leader James Wilton condemned  as less than one-third of a reasonable  wage for working women.  Briefs from middle-class women expressed  a desire to "be fair to employers as well  as the employee," which was natural enough  since their husbands were more likely to  be employers than employees. Even Helen  Gregory MacGill, a prominent reformer,  refused to support women's need for decent  wages.  Reformers were not immune to racism  Mention is made throughout the book of  these women's racist bias, or at least the  tendency of important B.C. women's groups  to use the general anti-Oriental bias of  the time in their rhetoric to further their  own political ends.  IN  HER  OWN  RIGHT  rj  liiifflii  Selected Essays on Women's History in B.C.  Only two of the women portrayed in the  collection of essays, Agnes Deans Cameron  and Helena Gutterdige, are shown to have  had a lifelong commitment to genuine  egalitarian principles of equal rights for  women and men. Both seem to have been unusual women in other ways as well; less  committed than the others to maintaining  the middle-class lifestyle with traditional marriage roles, and more interested in  their own personal fulfillment.  For many of the others, as Gillian Weiss  concludes, "the suffrage campaign was a  minor battle in the war to retain and extend middle-class values throughout society."  All of this becomes more understandable  when we view the prominent women and provincial women's organizations in the early  part of the century as belonging to the  large North American reform movement.  The fears of social degeneration held by  white Anglo Saxon Protestants, and the  belief in the superiority of their own  social mores were the driving forces behind the reform movements.  Suffrage not a goal, but a tool  Women were welcome in reform groups for  their nurturing abilities. The idea was  that women's special role as mother gives  .them the right and duty to participate in  the public sphere. In B.C., as elsewhere,  most early feminists were 'maternal feminists' of this kind.  Families tended to be involved in reform  causes together, and we can see many  wife-husband teams who were very active  in B.C. And as Linda Hale points out in  her profiles of prominent B.C. suffragists,  many of the women were active in a number  of groups.  Suffrage was not a primary goal for these  women.  Their feminism had little to do  with a belief in natural equal rights.  Suffrage was a tool which they hoped would  give them the power to make reforms in  legislation which affected women and  children, particularly in laws relating  to family, property and labour areas.  Viewed from the larger historical perspective, the middle and upper-class elitist,  religious and sometimes racist nature of  many of the prominent B.C. women and women's groups becomes not only understandable but predictable.  As Gillian Marie points out in her opening  essay, "Historians have written about the  suffrage movement, but in isolation and  not within the context of a wider social  reform movement. This narrow focus gives  the reader the false impression that suffrage is the sole story of women in the  late nineteenth and early twenthieth centuries, that their only goal was the franchise and that feminism died with the grant'  ing of the suffrage."  Many different B.C. women's organizations  were interested in suffrage, and for many  different reasons.  But common to most of them was the fact  that the franchise was considered a necessary tool rather than a major goal. In  her essay Diane Crossley examines how  many of these women continued to press  for reform and were subsequently involved  in the Liberal government's new social  policies after B.C. women finally won  the vote in 1917.  They used the vote to accomplish reform  goals they had set for themselves decades  earlier. Whatever their motives and  class interests, the B.C. women whose  lives are illuminated in In Her Own Right  carried out many necessary reforms and  helped get us all our primary political  tool: the vote. They may not have been  truly interested in equal rights for women, but their efforts have made it possible for us to work today to influence  government policy toward that end.   Q_  Stepping out of line is coming  Stepping Out of Line:  A Workshop Manual  and Resource Guide on Lesbianism/Feminism  is almost out. Contact the workshop collective c/o Press Gang Publishers, 603  Powell, Vancouver.  Lesbian Conference outfoxed ?  The 1981 Lesbian Conference applied for  funding from the secretary of state women's  program last February. Although the grant  application met all the relevant criteria,  so far Secretary of State Francis Fox, has  refused final approval.  The conference of 500 women, held in May,  still needs money to reimburse travel expenses .  Write to Francis Fox, House of Commons,  Ottawa. Ask him when he is going to approve  the funding for the conference.  For more information write to the Lesbian  Conference Organizing Committee, Box 65663,  Station F, Vancouver B.C. Kinesis       July August 81  CULTURAL WORK  Looking at Radical Reviewer's herstory: the first issues  THE RADICAL REVIEWER was invited to write  a narrative of its birth for the literary  journal  13th Moon, which is producing a  special issue on the history of women's  literary magazines,  as a celebration of  women's cultural renaissance.    We thought  that KINESIS readers might like to read  our story as well.  Cy-thea Sand  The RADICAL REVIEWER was born one 1980  January evening in a Vancouver Lesbian  Literary Collective (LLC) meeting. When  the rest of the group had dispersed, three  of us stayed to talk about our love of  writing.  Between us we had written songs, poems  and feminist literary critiques. We  moved from one Idea to another, warmed  by each other's enthusiasm, until one  woman said that she'd like to start a  literary'journal. Our minds spun with  the possibilities. Of course no one had  any extra finances for the endeavour, but  we were undaunted. And very excited.  We decided to approach the editor of  KINESIS, Vancouver's feminist newspaper,  with the idea of producing literary  supplements to KINESIS. Kinesis agreed  to help us produce two issues under their  auspices — then we were on our own.  So, with the guidance, supplies and financial support of KINESIS, we produced  issue number one in June 1980 and Issue  number two in December 1980. Our twelve-  page supplements featured book reviews,  poetry, interviews, critical analyses and  photography from a lesbian/feminist perspective. They were received with eagerness and encouragement by KINESIS readers  and subscribers.  Barbara and I were the Radical Reviewer  The three of us wrote all the reviews,  articles and poetry for our first issue,  but then one woman had to withdraw due  to the increasing demands of her full-  time job. Barbara and I were  the RADICAL  REVIEWER." (The LLC still exists, meeting  regularly to discuss women's literature  and feminist theory.)  After our second and last issue with  KINESIS, we scrambled around creating  an office and lay-out room in my basement, collecting supplies, mailing out  sample copies and distributing in local  bookstores.  We managed to attract fifty-odd subscriptions and a few submissions for our third  issue published in May 1981.  Most of the copy was penned by myself and  Barbara. We are presently researching,  writing and soliciting for our fourth  issue, set for September 1981.  We plan to publish three times a year —  Spring, Fall and Winter. We are applying  for Secretary of State funding which will  be used for advertising and promotion.  We need to do outreach work in order to  create a substantial subscription list and  to increase bookstore sales.  We have mailed out 300 sample copies of  the RADICAL REVIEWER number three to  libraries, women's centres and feminist  bookstores throughout British Columbia,  the rest of Canada and the United States.  We have also mailed approximately 100  sample copies to other literary publications in hopes of being accepted for their  exchange list.  We now have a distribution manager, Sarah  Shamai and a typist, Darlene Trewern.  Barbara has divised a production schedule  for our next issue, including deadline  dates and typing times, in order to ease  the confusion and anxiety associated with  layout week. We are on the move.  Since Barbara and I have done most of the  writing for the first three issues, we  Cy-thea Sand (L) and  Herringer (R), the prime movers of the Radical Reviewer  are just beginning to develop a formal  editorial policy. As we attract more  writers from our community, and realize  our own time limitations, the need for an  editorial policy becomes clearer.  We know that we want well-written book  reviews and articles which are inspired  by a love of, and concern with, women's  literary culture and heritage. We also  want the RADICAL REVIEWER to be accessible  to as many women as possible. Therefore  we encourage and practice non-academic  language and styles.  We have also spun off from the traditional  book review format into a subjective/emotive reading of given works. This has  allowed us the liberty to transform the  traditional book review into a catalyst  for our own perceptions and ideas. We  believe that this way of reading and  writing is actively feminist and creative.  We want to encourage ourselves and other  women to deeply explore a book, to integrate its sensibility into a new consciousness. So, I suppose part of our  editorial policy could read as follows:  Savour another woman's work; grace  it with your mind and skin's intuitive/  cerebral knowledge; create a review/  critique which honestly reflects the  work's value and significance ... for  you.  We're dedicated to developing  feminist criticism  In short, the RADICAL REVIEWER is dedicated to feminist criticism of literature  and the arts which is fertile, inventive  and rich.  We are also interested in poetry, photography, journal excerpts and short fiction  pieces. We would like to feature interviews with artists, activists, and writers  every third issue or so.  Moreover, we are keenly interested in  submissions from young women. We have  already published two reviews by the  twelve-year-old daughter of an LLC  member. We want voices from all generations — as well as the 23 to 34 year old  articulations of the lesbian feminist  community.  The Women's Liberation Movement has made  women aware of the deep need for our  literary voice to be heard and appreciated. The feminist literary renaissance  of the 1970s must not be allowed to fade .  into an anomaly.  For this reason, the RADICAL REVIEWER  publishes original works by local women  as well as giving critical attention to  both established contemporary and traditional writers.  The RADICAL REVIEWER is not only interested in fostering feminist literary  criticism, but also to making it accessible with a inexpensive newsprint format  and non-academic approach.  We hope to attract more and more writers  from both within and outside of the  lesbian/feminist community in Vancouver.  An integral part of the women's movement  We understand our work to be an integral  part of our feminist community in particular, and the women's movement in  general. All revolutions are cultural.  Reading, and writing are important cultural tools which, when sharpened by a  feminist/lesbian wit and sensibility,  enhance the voices of all women, of all  classes, all races.  Our publication has been greeted with  great interest. Many ''.-omen have commented that the RADICAL REVIEWER has inspired  them to read again. Some women have  suggested that we have helped to alleviate  the isolation of reading.  Moreover, Barbara and I are beginning to  meet other writers interested in contributing to our tabloid. They have said  that the RADICAL REVIEWER eases their  sense of distance from the activist  element of the women's community.  We plan to continue using a newspring  format but we are investigating the cost  for a glossy cover arid back. This would  enhance our attractiveness and allow us  to use photographs and graphics to maximum benefit on the front and back covers.  We'll grow in size as submissions increase  and our vision sharpens. Finances, of  course, are always to be considered. We  may eventually aspire to become a bound  journal although we rather like the  accessibility appeal of newspring.  Meanwhile, I research, write and solicit  material, forever urged forward by Barbara  and my strong working friendship, my love  of reading, writing and women.  Our subscription rate is $5.00 per year  for three issues;  $10.00 for institutions.  We will send bulk orders with an invoice  for feminist bookstores interested in  selling the RADICAL REVIEWER. Our  address is:  P.O. Box 24953, Station C  Vancouver, B.C. Kinesis       July   August 81  CULTURAL WORK  Original Sins is part feminism, and a great read  By Julie Wheelwright  It can be described as a cross between an  important feminist work and a trashy  novel, but Lisa Alther's new work, Original Sins,  is entertaining, thoughtful and  hard to put down.  Following her first novel, Kinflicks, her  new book is more sophisticated, but the  humour and warmth are still there.  It is  also a novel which focuses on truths about  the 1960's and its various movements.  The novel traces the development and  growth of The Five, a group of childhood  friends living in Newland, Tennessee in  the 1950's. The Prince sisters, Sally  and Emily have plans to marry the Tatro  brothers, Jed and Raymond to make their  offspring double cousins. Donny, the  only black member of the group is relegated to visiting cousin stature.  Things change for The Five. The first  shock comes when they go to an afternoon  movie and Donny is forced to sit in the  balcony. When the others assure the  teller that Donny is with them, she  snarls, "Honey, I don't care if he was  with Jesus Christ, he ain't setting downstairs. "  In high school, Sally learns her pep squad  smile, spends her time working on floats,  going to Ingenue meetings and dreaming  about Jed. Emily dates Raymond who  sports Reindeer vests, rayon shirts and  thick glasses. He is not the popular  jock his brother is and Emily never learns  the pep squad smile.  After a rape attempt by a white man,  Donny's mother leaves PineWoods and  heads for New York, fearing for her life.  Donny goes to the black high school and no  longer associates with the other four  beyond his shuffling and grinning when  asked to caddy or do yard work for Mr.  Prince.  The first to leave town is Raymond, who'  heads to New York to work in a print shop  and immerse himself in the civil rights  movement. Here Alther uses first person  narrative and allows us to see the contradictions in the movement.  Women are 'chicks' for male movement  One of the most striking is the role that  women played. Raymond thinks of them as  'girls' and 'chicks' whose duties are  limited to cooking, licking stamps and  sleeping with the male leaders. The men  in Raymond's group who venture South to  register black voters view black women  as status symbols and they realize it.  One woman confronts Justin, a wealthy  white heir from New York and one of Raymond's idols, "Listen baby, white boys  don't want nothing but two things from  nigger women: housework and pussy. And  Justin honey, I know you ain't got no  house."  When Raymond's lover Maria leaves him  because she can't have an orgasm with him,  he rages, "orgasms for women! These  aggressive demanding Yankee bitches. She  should spread her legs and be grateful for  what she got."  Emily is another recruit for the civil  rights movement and she finds the same  thing. But it is only after she marries  Justin and is saddled with his child that  she realizes the movement's hypocrisy.  Says Emily's lover, Maria, Raymond's  former: "Well, during civil rights,  women found themselves cleaning the  Freedom House while the brothers were off  being interviewed for the evening news.  And then Stokley Carmichael came out with  that bit about the only position for  women in the struggle being prone. Then  Cleaver described how he raped white  women to get even with white men, practi  sing up on black women. And then during  Vietnam, the women were trying to find  ways to pay the phone bills, while the  men were out dumping blood on draft  records."  There are other moments for Emily and  her friends. At their weekly women's meeting when discussion begins to degenerate  into chaos, Lou, a wealthy black college  mate of Emily's who was once accused of  being 'Oreo' in her attitudes towards other  blacks, shouts, "You talk about being  fucked over, you try being black arid a  woman and a dyke and Southern and a  welfare mother all at once. I ain't got  no sympathy for none of you. But what I  think is this: You confront a carrot with  a potato, and it'll probably insist, 'Hell  Donny is another victim who in turn victimizes his wife and children when he  comes to understand his position in the  Southern way of life. He becomes involved  in the civil rights movement without understanding his wife's oppression.  The Five are a microcosm of social changes  When The Five meet again in Newland,  Tennessee, they are a microcosm of changes  wrought on Americans in four decades. But  there is a note of optimism in the picture  and Alther has not lost her sense of  humour.  It is a novel well worth reading if you're  looking for a trashy book for a bedside  table read or a look at changes in southern  no, I ain't no potato. Honey look at me.  Hell, I'm an orange, and long and thin.  And lookee here, I got me this lacy green  top.' Stops them seeing they're all in the  garden together and all gonna get dug up  come fall."  Lou urges the women that if they split up  into factions they will no longer be a  force to be reckoned with. It is a message  well taken and described in a context that  m^ny women in the movement could identify  with.  Emily also encounters white women who take  black men as lovers even though they continually return home with bruises from their  beatings. Her marriage with Justin fails  as she begins to realize that she no  longer wants to go through life as the  Great Ear, although she fears what will  happen once she is released from heterosexual monogamy.  "Monogamy: If her sex drive were released  from it, what would happen? It was possible  it would prove uncontainable. Maybe she'd  lust after everything in sight. Broomsticks  and doorknobs and gear shifts. No energy  for her work or her child. No time to eat  properly, or get enough sleep. Her health  would begin to fail..."  But Emily survives. The woman who is the  real victim is Sally, her pep-squad leader  sister who becomes pregnant. Sally rapidly  has two children and spends her days  worrying about pleasing her husband.  The portraits of the characters are painted  frankly and sympathetically. Even Raymond's vision which drives him to join his  hillbilly relatives in Tatro Cove, is not  without understanding. Jed, the reactionary mill foreman almost pathetically  hangs onto traditions of the South that  are dying as he clenches harder and harder  to them for support.  United States. One criticism of the novel  though is its failure to develop its  characters equally. Emily is a much more  powei-ful and real person whose transition  from frustrated Home Coming queen to  lesbian feminist is more understandable  than Donny's transition from Mr. Junior  Church Usher to Black Panther.  For Donny, reasons for the change are clear  but Alther's handling of the transition  is a little rough.  Jed simply never  changes and Sally comes into her own in a  surprisingly powerful way.  One just hopes that the novel will soon  appear in paperback. At $17.95, it is  a difficult expense to justify. 0  Sacrificial Burnings available  Sacrificial Burnings  is a feminist videotape about love, power and illusion, now  available from Women In Focus. Quotations  from a medieval manual, Malleus Malifi-  carum, referring to the evil of witches  are interwoven with two recent witch-  tales: Hollywood actress Frances Farmer,  and a woman who 'escapes' an oppressive  upbringing for an equally destructive  marriage. For rental details, call Women In Focus at (604) 872-2250.  Women and Art in Quebec  Women in Montreal have put together a slide  presentation on Women and Art in Quebec.  A first, the presentation consists of some  200 slides covering a variety of media as  well as styles.  The presentation, currently available in  and around Montreal, is -40 minutes long and  followed by a question period. Perhaps it  will be available to those of us farther  away? For info: 524-4036 Montreal. Kinesis       July    August 81  MOVEMENT MATTERS  The question is not should men  work against rape,  but how  they  should  By Dome Brannock  These comments were prompted by an article  by Ruth Meechan in the June   '81 Kinesis.  The question was not should men work  against rape, but how  they should.  The disagreement as to how they should  work to stop rape has lesbians on both  side of the argument. It also has heterosexual and bisexual women on both sides.  The whole issue about policy change at  Rape Relief was quite complex. For  example, it has been and still is a policy  at Rape Relief that one always believes  the woman. That is a good policy when  helping a woman through the male-dominated  court system.  It is also a good policy  when counselling a woman.  It is not a good policy if the Rape Relief  collective take the woman's word and then  act  on it against  the man  without having  heard his  side.  That is an injustice of a lesser but similar kind that women have been suffering  from for centuries.  I don't want that  kind of injustice for anyone, man or  woman.  In your article "Please Let us not resign  from the human race." You seem to equate  those who disagree with Rape Relief policy  with lesbians.    And then you equate lesbianism with people who are dictating  policy for 90% of the population.    You  also seem to equate lesbianism with man-  hating.  I am a lesbian and I want men to fight  against rape.  I want them to go out into  the big wide world and educate each other  about sexism.  I don't want to eliminate  men from the world, nor from my life.  Because T am a lesbian does not mean that  I don't have men in my life.  I have two  children whom I love very much. One of  them is a 6 foot 15 year old man. Any  day of the week you will find him and  his five male friends lounging around the  house. There are moments when I wish that  all six of them would disappear into thin  air. But I don't want to eliminate them  from my life.  There is a racist practice that goes like  this: An Indian person does something  that a white person does not like. The  white person says, "Indians are like that"  But if an Indian person does something  that a white person likes, then the Indian  is referred to as a person, no longer an  Indian.  Something similar happens to women of  colour. One woman does something that men  consider foolish or she fails at something,  She is then used as an example of how  foolish and incompetent women are.  Minorities get held responsible for every  member of their groups they are constantly  being judged by what the status quo  considers the failing, never by the  achievement. If they succeed the fact  that they are a minority is unimportant;  if they fail it is all important.  The opposite is true for those who set  the standards, i.e. if a white heterosexual make does something stupid it's  because he's stupid. If he rapes it's  because he's sick. If he does something  brilliant it's because he's a white  heterosexual male.  The way you talk about lesbian in your  article is similar to the way minority  groups get treated. You judge all  lesbians for something that lesbians as  a group did not do.  I understand from your letter that you  don't agree with lesbian separatist  politics. I don't agree with lesbian  separatist politics either. However, I  do agree with having women-only groups.  If an Indian or Black group did not allow  whites into their movement in order that  they may formulate their own thought and  ideas, I as a white women would not feel  discriminated against. Nor would I think  that they wanted to eliminate me.  I  would not consider them separatist.  I  would only consider them separatist if  they planned or wanted to build a culture  that excluded others on the basis of  nationality, race or sex.  Minority groups need time to figure out  who they are and what they want because  for too long they have been defined by  the other.  The last point I want to address. You  say that unless we co-operate with men we  can expect lots of rapes.  It seems to me  we get lots of rapes no matter what we do.  Cooperation means different things to  different people; it does not mean we  have to work in the same way or the same  place.  I will not discount what you say because  of who you choose to sleep with. It is  true some lesbians will. It is also true  that some heterosexual women will discount  what I say because of my sexual choice.  I hope you won't. •  lesbians that a gay men's organization  had. After that experience I tried to  get support from my collective to get a  space of our own. A space that would be  ours alone where we could put up our  posters, have a library, collect newspaper clippings and have a filing cabinet.  We were a small collective of ten women  too busy providing counselling and paying  our bills to raise enough money for the  rent.  Later, when I was attending a Human Rights  meeting, I thought the lack of feminist  lesbians at those meetings was astonishing. You would have thought Vancouver  lesbians did not exist.  The last Human Rights meeting had to do  with (among other things) the inclusion  of "sexual orientation" in the Human  Rights Code. Who was there to speak for  the feminist lesbians of Vancouver — me.  Now as much as I like to hear myself talk  I really think we should have had some  lesbians there who are better trained in  middle or upper class mannerisms and  speech.  Gay men from SEARCH and a mixed group  from Victoria both submitted position  papers but nothing from Vancouver lesbian  feminists.  At that time there were at least six  groups in Vancouver with lesbian in their  name. None of those groups were primarily  action groups. They were, and are, mostly  service oriented.  Feminist lesbians when we went into action  around political issues usually went under  Where's our lesbian movement?  By Dorrie Brannock  For a long time we have had a women's  movement and a gay movement in Vancouver  but no lesbian movement.  Over the last 10 years we have seen  lesbians emerging as political beings,  organizing within the women's and gay  movement around our own oppression. But  we did not even utter the words "lesbian  movement'' until recently. Now that it is  here I think it's real weird that nobody  to my knowledge even noticed that it was  missing.  We knew something was missing, at least I  did, but I could not have said what it  was. I remember when I was doing a paper  on lesbians in the work force for my  women's studies course. At that time I  was a member of the Lesbian Information  Line and like all lesbian groups in Vancouver, it was in a space that belonged to  another women's group. So we had no place  for posters, files, etc. I had to go to  a gay men's organization to do the research  for my paper.  I was embarassed that the Lesbian Information Line did not have the material on  the banner of the women's movement.  The 1981 Lesbian Conference with its  Lesbian Pride March was a turning point  in our politics. Since the conference,  the words I hear on most lesbian lips are  "lesbian visibility" and for the first  time the odd woman says "lesbian movement".  When you hear the phrase Lesbian Movement  you will probably remember a time when  you wondered, "What is wrong, where is  everyone, what is missing"  Lesbians against sentimental slop  This year I think and hope will be a  year when we will see emerging groups  like: Voice of Lesbians, Lesbians Against  Nulces, Lesbians for Peace, Lesbians  Against Imperialism, Lesbians for a better  Understanding of our Planet, Lesbians for  Political Action, Lesbians Against Bigotry  Lesbian Economic Systems and Theory,  Lesbians Against Sentimental Slop.  Maybe we might even rent a space where we  can put up our posters, hold meetings,  gather material relevant to the work we  will be doing. We could call our space  the Lesbian Centre.  It should not be so hard. After all, we  did it once before when we helped build 0  the Women's Movement. + Kinesis       July    August 61  MOVEMENT DEBATE  Autonomy = independence = separatism revisited  By Judith Quintan  This is written in response to a letter  that appeared in the June '81 issue of  Kinesis, entitled "Please let us not  resign from the human race".  I am aware that there has been a lot of  heated debate in Vancouver about the question of men working closely with feminist  groups. As an outsider to the heat, I  hope I can inject a little light on this  issue.  Over twelve years ago women in this country, along with our sisters around the  world, stated the need for an independent  women's movement. That meant independent  from men.  Out of this first principle a very large  body of feminist thought has grown, along  with a distinct women's culture, women's  services, a women's press, and a growing  feminist consciousness among women.  As women, living in a world that practices systematic misogyny, our battle for  freedom is far from over yet. And the  basic principles of autonomy and sisterhood are still sound.  We built an autonomous women's movement  for the following reasons:  • because experience had taught us that  even within the most liberal of male-led  freedom movements, the concerns of women  were always ignored, sometimes even  resisted;  • because we understood that the oppression of women was and is basic to the  maintenance of all power hierarchies in  the world, and that the best way to fight  this was as women;  • because 'including' men always meant  excluding some women (particularly lesbian  women, but many others, too). And our  first concern is always for our sisters;  • because we have seen that even allowing  a single well-meaning man into our groups  means that many others follow, and soon  they assert their birthright of telling  us what to do;  • because we understood that men had gone  far riding on the apron strings of women  but, like all good mothers we must push  them out of the nest to fend for themselves. Men had to 'grow up' politically  and the existence of an independent  women's movement gives them the opportunity to do just that.  Much was written then, as now, about this  question. Readers can look up such  classics as Sisterhood is Powerful  or  The Fourth World Manifesto,  to understand  the principle of women's autonomy. For a  much deeper analysis of the need for  separatism and the myth of man-hating, I  suggest the introduction to Gyn/Ecology,  a more recent feminist classic.  Why is autonomy being challenged again?  What I would like to discuss here is why  the principle of feminist autonomy is  being challenged again now.  It seemed to  many of us that the issue was settled  long ago, which proves that we can't  afford to become complacent about our  victories.  The women's movement has been very powerful. We have challenged to the core all  the assumptions of patriarchy. There is  no woman in the world who has not been  affected by the rising power of all women.  A challenge to the basic principle of  autonomy is a challenge to the core of  our movement and cannot be ignored.  There has been a recent rise in anti-  feminist literature emerging from such  groups as the male left, the peace movement, the ecology movement. There has  been strong anti-feminist organizing on  the part of the church in all its brand  names. There has been a world-wide rise  in fascism, from Britain's National Front  to our own Ku Klux Klan. This has been  parallelled by a sharp 'swing' to the  right in all First World state governments. These events are not isolated.  Nor are they isolated from the women's  movement.  It is my firm conviction that the move  towards the worst extremes of patriarchal  politics is precisely in response  to the  rising power of women.  It is reaction  to our own autonomous women's movement.  Every time women have risen in power there  has always been a strong patriarchal reaction. From the Greek massacres of  Amazon tribes, to the inquisition in  o£AC£-  ^pmiOH  A cartoon from our herstory  Europe, which was directed specifically at  women, solidifying the power of the christian church against the rising power of  women in village economies. To the rise  of fascism in the thirties which was a  direct response to the post-suffrage  freedom of women.  It isn't surprising that we are beginning  to feel the wrath of patriarchal response  to our present bid for freedom. The tactics within our movement are classic  D & C (divide and conquer). In this case  it takes the form of eroding our autonomy  under the middle-class banner of 'humanism. ' Let me answer Ms. Meechan specifically.  We are not doing any favours to men by  'rehabilitating' them. As long as we  accept our role as taking care of men,  then they will continue to insist on their  right to be 'taken care of, including  forcibly as in rape. We don't need the  cooperation of men in our fight for freedom — we are quite strong enough to  manage it ourselves.  If men want to co-operate with us, they  can figure out their own battles, and  stop trying to join ours; they can refuse  their complicity in our oppression and  leave us to continue organizing ourselves  as women, independently.  It isn't the 'mistakes' of individual men  that are responsible for our oppression.  When we talk about patriarchy we aren't  discussing personal relationships between  men and women only.  The patriarchy is a system of power. Power  of some people over other people. Power,  in the first case, of men over women. By  fighting independently, we aren't 'resigning' from the humanirace. We've been  excluded from the 'human' race for six  thousand years — our lives and struggles  and contributions .as women have been made  invisible.  Now we are fighting for inclusion in the' human race, and when we  win, and define 'human' the way we want,  then men can choose for themselves whether  they  wish to join the human race.  I would like to add an important footnote.  I have used the words independence, autonomy and separatism interchangeably in  this article.  This is because one of the  problems in our movement is the increase  in lesbian-baiting — another D & C tactic.  Any  woman who believes in and works towards an autonomous women's movement is  a separatist.  That doesn't preclude any  woman also working with men elsewhere.  It  certainly doesn't preclude any woman  sleeping with men.  Our movement has always been pro-choice for women.  The label separatist is becoming increasingly associated with lesbian women, and  disassociated from straight women. A  lesbian is a woman who chooses to sleep  with women, but that doesn't make her a  feminist. A feminist is a woman who  chooses to organize politically with women,  but that doesn't make her a lesbian.  The women's movement is by definition  separatist. So I would like to know what  exactly a lesbian separatist is.  I suspect it means a lesbian who works in the  movement. So where's the threat?  The only other definition of a lesbian  separatist I can think of is a lesbian who  believes in separating from straight  women as well as men.  I have been involved  in the women's movement for twelve years,  and a lesbian for ten years, and I have yet  to meet a lesbian who believes we should  separate from straight women politically.  Of course there is a lesbian movement, and  it is a very strong movement. But it  isn't now and never was a movement in  opposition to straight women. I am talking  here about who we organize with, not who  we sleep with.  Lesbian separatist: a lavender herring  So I am suggesting that the term lesbian  separatist is another lavender herring,  used to hide the real issue of women's  autonomy. The question at stake, when  women suggest accepting men into our  feminist organizations, is the question of  whether we want to continue organizing  separately as a women's movement.  If we hadn't answered that question twelve  years ago with a resounding yes, we  wouldn't have any rape crisis centres to  argue about, or women's newspapers to  print our arguments in. And as long as  women are still being beaten and raped, as  long as women are still forced into  marriages and veiled on the streets, as  long as women are still losing our children  because we are lesbians, or jailed for  prostitution, or underpaid and overworked,  or submitted to the horrors of modern gynaecology, or denied control over our lives  and our bodies, then we must continue to  have an independent women's movement. And  that means, simply, no men. O 20       Kinesis       July   August 81  CULTURAL WORK  Life is full of flux, and vice versa  By Victoria Freeman  Between thick slices of advertising,  spread twelve minutes of dialogue,  add predicament, villainy and female  suffering in equal measure,     "^hrow  in a dash of nobility,  sprinkle with  tears,  season with organ music, cover  with a rich announcer sauce, and serve  five times a week.  — James Thurber's recipe for soap opera.  Ever since the days of radio serials, soap  operas have been ridiculed and dismissed  as "women's" entertainment. Intellectuals  disdain it and feminists disown it — along  with Harlequin Romances and True Confessions.  But, like country music, it won't  go away.  In fact, countless Canadians and  40 million Americans watch it daily.  There must be something  in it.  A while ago, at the Women in Focus Art Gallery on Broadway, an unlikely event took  place. More than 100 feminists and lesbians sat around listening to a new soap  opera called Flux, a radio play.  The first episode dealt with a communal  house of five women and two children. One  woman tried to tell her mother that she  was a lesbian. Her daughter complained  that she didn't want to have a puberty  party. Another woman accused her female  lover of slam-bam^thank-you-ma'am sex.  A male community organizer discovered that  an informer was sabotaging the tenant meetings .  This was feminist soap opera. And the  audience loved it.  "It's really important for me to make people laugh," said author Mary Schendlinger.  "We need to see our lives that way, especially political people who work very hard."  But Schendlinger, whose stories have appeared in Press Gang's anthology, Common  Ground, and in the newspaper, The Body  Politic, is not just spoofing traditional  soap operas. She is genuinely interested  in the form and wants to explore her political ideas within in.  For soap, perhaps more than any other medium, is an examination of personal lives,  feelings, characters, relationships and  interrelationships within a community.  "Some of the issues in Flux are overtly  :political, like the tenant issue, for instance. But I believe the personal is the  political; it's one of the reasons I like  soap."  And because soap operas are serials which  continue indefinitely (Search for Tomorrow, for example, is 30 years old), there  are greater opportunities to look at  issues and situations from all sides and  in depth.  Everybody cries for weeks  "When someone's friend dies, everybody  cries for weeks; that's what I.'ve always  liked about soaps. They're more like  real life; everything doesn't get wrapped  up in an hour."  What does it mean to live with children  ,and share responsibility for them? What  is it like to live in a communal house?  What do you do in a collective where one  person is more powerful? What happens  when lesbian and straight women live together?  These are some questions Schendlinger  hopes to explore in future episodes.  "It's a story about women-centered women  for a change. The women on TV soaps are  much more male-centered. Male-female  relationships aren't going to play a major  part, though they'll certainly be there  — they get all the attention everywhere  else. It's a whole different set of problems and concerns."  At least for the moment, she expects her  audience to be mainly female. "Women are  interested in emotional process, much more  so than men. I would like men to be interested, but I know I'm speaking mainly to  women."  Schendlinger is a soap opera addict. "I  started watching the soaps about 16 years  ago when I was in high school and I used  long before they are acceptable on  prime-time.  And while homosexuality is still taboo,  feminism has influenced the shows, at  least to some degree. "The women are  stronger. You see women doctors on General Hospital; they aren't all nurses any  more. The woman who isn't married isn't  always the bad woman; sometimes she's just  Schendlinger (above) on the soaps of her youth: "I do care what happens to the people. After alt, I've known them  longer than either of my children and most of my friends."  to stay home for the day. My mother watched General Hospital, and that was how I  got into it.  We began to talk about it. We would wait  for everybody else to get home for dinner  and we would drive them crazy saying> 'I  don't know about Jessie; she seems really  worried about something. And Steve is in  terrible shape and won't talk to her', and  so on. We just had fun with that; gradually I started caring about the people.  "When my second kid came along, I was  really under it. I was very isolated and  barely keeping it together and the soaps  were nice company. At my freaked-out  worst, I could sit and be catatonic and  watch all the ABC soap operas right  through for a couple of weeks at a time.  "Now I really love checking in on them  once in a while. I do care what happens  ,to the people; after all, I've know them  longer than either of my children and most  of my friends."  According to Schendlinger, TV soaps aren't  just an escape. They often explore sensitive or controversial topics, such as teenage drug use and artificial insemination,  made that choice."  Schendlinger agrees that soap operas are  too "grabby." Although the scenes in Flux  leave the audience hanging in the traditional soap opera style, they are not as  drenched in melodrama. "That kind of  emotional stimulation can be a strong pull  or draw for people who lead boring, repetitive lives. I don't want to suck people  Flux avoids soapy lies, secrets  Flux also dispenses with some other time-  worn conventions of soap opera. Traditionally, secrets and lies provide the emotional suspense that keeps an audience  interested..  "One of the things about soaps that always  drove me crazy was how unwilling people  were to be honest with each other. That's  not how I live or how my friends live.  Can you sustain drama and interest if people really talk to each other? Well sure,  our lives are full of drama?"  Schendlinger produced the first episode  with the help of other people. Further  episodes will be produced this summer." Q  The authors of SQCfflKlOra @fS©©ra©  read from other works  Octopus Books East welcomes  Helen Potrebenko Cynthia Flood  Mary Schendlinger Frances Duncan  Anne Cameron LL Field  Kathryn Woodward  and all their friends and fans and other Interested types  to a reading on  Thursday, September 17  7:30 p.m.  Octopus East—1146 Commercial Drive, Vancouver MOVEMENT DEBATE  A diverse movement demands eclectic newspaper, open debate  By Gayla Reid  Kinesis is, and always has been, a project  of Vancouver Status of Women. VSW publishes Kinesis; VSW edits it. In any discussion about what Kinesis is, this is the  place to start from.  At VSW we understand that Kinesis is a  feminist newspaper. The paper believes in  certain things and promotes them with all  the objectivity of a mother bear.  We believe in a woman's right to control  her own body, to have access to quality  childcare, to be paid equally with men, to  enjoy complete freedom of sexual orientation, to live free from the fear of domestic violence. And so on.  Believing in these rights and existing to  promote them, VSW would never, in Kinesis,  publish articles which, for example, condemned reproductive freedom, or claimed  that lesbians violated God's plans for the  human race, or said that children are deranged by childcare. Or any comparable  garbage.  Response to our support for fundamental  feminist principles is not always warm.  Last week we received a letter from a woman which began, "Please accept my resignation from the Status of Women as I cannot subscribe to its rejection of God,  the Church, and the Family..."  We publish such comments, from time to  time, on our letters page. When we do so,  it should be clear that we are not promoting the beliefs expressed by the writer.  We are letting our readers know that Kinesis meets with hostility as well as with  affection. We see no necessity to keep  such adverse criticism under wraps.  The two areas which meet with the most resistance are our advocacy of choice on  abortion and freedom of sexual orientation.  In 1980 Vancouver alderperson Bernice Gerard made repeated public attacks on VSW  for these two stands. She accused us of  always 'harping' on them in Kinesis, thus  ruining 'what otherwise could be a very  sweet tune'.  Just before our funding from city hall came  up for council discussion this June, Rafe  Mair was busy on his hot-line lambasting  ! Kinesis for advocating 'self-induced abortions '.  And on one of our annual funding pilgrimages to Victoria, a civil servant told us  his ministry had received complaints about  VSW. One woman, he told us, had written  to them because she had found a copy of  Kinesis hidden beneath her daughter's mattress.  Kinesis is a  controversial newspaper. No  doubt about that.  How do we get there from here?  VSW shares with other feminist groups a  commitment to ending sexism. Many feminists  agree about goals. We can all agree, for  example, that we want to see a world where  misogynist violence does not exist.  But how do we get there from here?  That's where we can begin to disagree. That  is what the debate is all about.  From coast to coast, the debate rages. In  condos and co-ops, at benefits and barbe-  ques, we are all putting in our two cents  worth. And sometimes, just sometimes, when  a feminist feels especially intense about  a certain topic, the debate reaches the  pages of the Kinesis.  When it does, we're glad to have it.  It takes courage to enter into controversy  in a public way, in a newspaper. It takes  far more courage to write an article than  it does to publish it.  Vancouver Status of Women believes that by  opening Kinesis up as much as possible to  all our readers, we can work towards find  ing answers to that important question:  how do we get there from here?  57 different varieties  Well, how do  we get there from here? How,  for example, do we combat misogynist violence? One woman believes that the most  effective way to start is to eliminate .  men, as much as possible, from her life.  She looks to her sisters for support, and  finds it. Another woman staggers on home  from a hard day at the transition house to  snuggle in beside the man of her choice.  Both women are, equally, feminists.  One woman thinks that the principal contradiction is class; another says that it's  sex. Yet another finds the phrase, principal contradiction,  alienating lefty gabble. All these three are feminists.  One woman thinks that the best way to go  is to have feminists sitting in the House  it (December 80). When Rape Relief sends  in articles we publish them too.  In past few months we have received two  separate requests about how we treat movement debates.  First, Isobel Kiborn wrote us a letter. It  appeared on the letters page of the February Kinesis. Said Isobel: when you print  an article which is critical of a group  doing anti-sexist work, please get a response from that group for publication in  the same issue.  Requests seemed reasonable  Isobel's request looked perfectly reasonable. Here we are, publishing a paper  which is intensely, almost extravagantly,  interested in different points of view.  What could possibly be wrong with printing  a criticism, and alongside it, a response?  Simultaneous debate. Sounds terrific.  of Commons. Another condemns working with  institutions of the state as a co-opting  waste of time. Both are women's movement  activists.  And the list goes on.  Debates about strategies and tactics are  by no means confined to the question of  how best to combat violence against women.  Which is the best way to work for our reproductive freedom in 1981? For some, repeal of the abortion laws from Canada's  criminal code is the sine que non  of the  pro-choice battle. For others, repeal at  the federal level at this time would only  give right-wing provincial governments a  chance to get their grubby little paws on  our abortion laws.  Precisely because there is no agreement  within the women's movement about strategies and tactics, debate is essential. In  this sense, our movement is light years  away from even remotely resembling a political party; in this sense a feminist newspaper which plugs one line only is a bald  contradiction in terms.  VSW could chose to take up the entire paper  with stories about our organization's mighty leaps forward. We could spew out heroic  press releases, page after page. We don't.  Instead, we pour our skills and labour  into presenting, not only VSW's views, but  the views of all the other feminist groups  who wish to use our pages.  When VSW developed a critique of the proposed federal changes in legislation around  rape, we ran it in Kinesis (February 81).  When the North Shore Women's Centre organized a petition to protest Supreme Court  comments in the Pappajohn decision, we ran  Okay, we said to Isobel. We'll go for it.  We had some lurking doubts, however. What  if a group tried to hold 'up publication of  a criticism by saying it couldn't quite  pull its response together in time for the  deadline? And, we wondered, would this  act to undermine individual women who had  criticisms of a grouo? Wouldn't it be a  bit like a;child complaining, having daddy  respond, and saying that that closed the  matter?  Ironically, we said yes  to Isobel because  we wanted a quick response in time for simultaneous publication,     i  A mistake. We dealt with Isobel's letter  when it arrived, right on deadline. You  may know about the late-night romance of  deadlines. Sometimes decisions get made in  haste. Upon publication, you get to repent  at leisure. We did.  It was Dorrie Brannock who drew attention  to the less-than-terrific amplications of  Isobel Kiborn's request. Isobel, note, did  not asked for simultaneous-response protection for individuals.,Only for groups.  Trouble is, Dorrie said, this will intimidate individual women just learning to  speak out.  Looking at Dorrie's comments, we began to  chew Isobel's requests over at length. We  got out back issues of Kinesis and went  through them, Abating all the way.  In the February 1981 Kinesis, for example,  Jen Moses and Esther Shannon have some remarks, headlined, "NDP accused of co-opting  March 8." Following Isobel's proposals,  we should have gone immediately to the  NDP Women's Committee for a response, which  we should have then printed alongside the  criticism written by Esther and Jen.> 22       Kinesis       July   August 81  MOVEMENT DEBATE  Or should we? We tried this one out on  some friends. "Women won't like you uoing  the NDP Women's Committee as an example."  "Why not?", we asked. "Surely the NDP women have as much right to simultaneous-  response protection as Men Against Rape?"  Isobel's letter was prompted by some remarks made by Margo Dunn about Men Against  Rape, remarks that Isobel judged "mostly  attack by innuendo."  In the month following Margo's criticism,  Men Against Rape were given space to run  their own statement in Kinesis.  But the time between publication, Isobel  stressed, is vital.  In those weeks the  rhetoric festers, the opinions form and the  positions harden, she maintained.  We wondered if Kinesis readers were as  deeply vulnerable to that four-week gulf  between criticism and response as Isobel  suggested.  Questions arose of groups vs. individuals  Never an idle moment down at the VSW offices.  Just after we've been chewing away  on Isobel's proposals and our hasty agreement thereunto, in walks Cherbeau. Clutching an article.  Cherbeau had written an article in response  to one by Rape Relief's Joni Miller in the  February Kinesis. In that article, Joni  had addressed three topics: the need for  the Rape Relief House, Rape Relief's decision to work with men on their funding  committee, and their opinion that separatism is not an option for most women.  Cherbeau wanted to point out to readers  that there was considerable opposition to  these three developments at Rape Relief  from 'the wimmin's community'.  Here was an individual responding to a  group., Should we now contact the group and  get their response ready for simultaneous  publication? But the group had already  just had their page in Kinesis the month  before.  What you'd end up with, we decided, was a  power imbalance.  First you have Rape Relief's article. Then a response to Rape Re- '  lief's article. But that response would not  be allowed to stand by itself. It would  be flanked by the group's response.  Time for a little lousy VSW house wine and  on to the topic of the individual versus  the group.  Groups have more power than individuals.  This is, after all, the basic premise of  collective action. Big groups have more  power than little groups: Exxon vs. VSW;  Regina vs. the Women's Movement.  Kinesis can do nothing to alter the greater  power of the big groups, the lesser power  of the little groups, the least power of  individuals. Like the rain that falls upon  our city, these facts prevail.  We want women to speak their minds  But Kinesis can permit, even encourage,  individuals to speak out. The kind of women's movement we know we want to build is  one in which dissenting voices can be heard,  where individual women have access to the  media, where each of us can speak her mind.  It didn't seem fair to have a group, any  group, respond simultaneously to an individual ' s response to something that the  group had just published.  As we said, never an idle moment down at  Kinesis. No sooner had Cherbeau's article  hit the streets, than in comes a letter.  Who is it from?  It's signed by Lee MacKay, "speaking for  the women who attended the May 19, 1981  British Columbia Federation of Women  Lower Mainland Region on Accountability."  Gulp.  Five women, the grapevine reveals, were  at that meeting.  The letter, signed by Lee, is astutely and  carefully written.  It makes several requests. First: please  do what you'd said you'd do in response to  'ñ†Isobel Kiborn's letter: let the group criticised respond the same issue.  Okay. Point taken. We've changed our minds  about Isobel's requests. We painted ourselves into a corner by hastening to make  a simultaneous response to Isobel's request  that groups be given a right to a simultaneous response.  Second, Lee wants Kinesis to make sure that  "anyone who decides to use Kinesis to comment on the policies or actions of a feminist group or individual..."  Stop right there. Here's a significant difference from Isobel's requests. Lee, and  the women who endorsed her letter, want to  widen to terms of reference. Isobel wanted  protection only for groups; Lee wants it  for individuals, too.  We were pleased to see that.  Then the letter from Lee and the four other  women goes on like this: the group or individual who is criticising a group or individual should contact that group or individual 'well before the deadline' so that the  group or individual has time to prepare 'an  immediate response'.  To us, this showed an understanding of the  deadlines we face. We appreciated that  immensely.  But the writing and responding, mind you,  must all be done in time for 'simultaneous  publication'.  Again, as with Isobel's letter, the central  request is for simultaneity of response.  And if, for whatever reason, the writer  does not get around to doing this contacting for response, we, at Kinesis, must take  responsibility for so doing.  Jesus, Murphy. Gonna need the feminist equivalent of a fleet of fast pink ladies!  But there's more.  If the group or individual criticised can  successfully 'convince' Kinesis that publication could be 'substantially damaging' to  the group or individual targeted, Lee and  the others want to see Kinesis delay publication by one month.  There was no mention made of any indefinite  delays. One month was offered as the maximum hold-back period.  Okay.  Let's go back and see how that letter about  "NDP co-opts March 8" would look according  to Lee's procedures.  Following Lee's suggestions, Esther and  Jen should have contacted the NDP Women's  Committee 'well before deadline' and invited their 'immediate response'.  When Esther and Jen showed up at VSW with  their letter, our first question to them  should have been, "Have you contacted the  NDP Women's Committee?"  If they hadn't (for whatever reason), then  it would have been our responsibility at  Kinesis to get on the phone to the NDP women, get the letter in the mail to them,  discuss deadlines and so on.  They would have been offered two choices.  First, write an immediate reply. Burn the  midnight oil, sisters, and be quick about  it. For at our backs we always hear that  dreaded deadlire scurrying near.  Second, they could have tried to 'convince'  us at VSW that publication of Esther and  Jen's letter could be 'substantially dam-  agining' to the pro-choice cause. They  could have sent in their most persuasive,  experienced speakers to argue that such  criticism, published in Kinesis just before  the rally, would sabotage the entire pro-  choice cause in town, setting it back ten  months if not ten years.  Had they chosen the first route, and written an immediate response, would we then  have checked with Esther and Jen before  publication? No. Not according to Lee's  propsals.  If the NDP Women's Committee had chosen to  go the second route, and had tried to 'convince* Kinesis not to publish the criticism  before the rally, they might have succeeded  or they might not.  If they had been successful, the criticism  from Jen and Esther would have been held  until the April issue of Kinesis. By the  time you read it, the March 8 rally wouli  have been long gone.  Given that the March 8 pro-choice rally  was cancelled in support of the civic workers' strike, this has been a hypothetical  example.  But the procedures are exactly what Lee's  letter proposes. Do not forget that this  could apply not just to one article a month  but to three or four.  Imagine the phone calls. The phone calls  back. The delegations arriving at VSW 'to  convince' us not to publish that article  for a month. The time it takes to run  accountability searches on every single  controversial comment.  We're rejecting Lee's proposals because  they demand super-human strength. Which we  don't have.  Already, the charge towards deadline demands an almost demented burst of stamina.  What about those who aren't swift, skilled?  Dorrie Brannock*s comments, in the June  Kinesis, on Lee MacKay's proposals, were  acute and clear-sighted. Dorrie herself is  willing to burn to the midnight oil; so is  Lee.  But, Dorrie askes, what about those of us  who aren't skilled at churning the stuff  out? We do not all command the journalistic breeze of a Joey Thompson or the political savvy of a Lee MacKay. What is to become of those feminists who aren't swift,  insomniac writers? They would be effectively silenced.  We don't want to see that silencing happen.  And we don't want to see over-hasty responses happening, either.  Policies, you know, are all very well and,  good, nut the proof of the policy is in  its'practice. Having drafted these careful editorial requests, Lee found she had  a practical decision to make. Dorrie Brannock is mentioned in her letter. Should  Dorrie be placed in the category of those  people who are to be contacted for a simultaneous response?  No, decides Lee.  Yes, decides Dorrie.  Two of the women who were party to Lee's  letter came down to VSW /luring May to take  a look at Miriam Azrael's article about  women in prisons, scheduled for June publication. >> Kinesis       July    Augusts  MOVEMENT DEBATE  Did it need a simultaneous response from  the group, Women Against Prisons?  No, decide the two women.  Yes, decides a member of Women Against Prisons.  Opinions vary.  The point is this: when you embark on this  path of hurry-scurry simultaneous-response  editing, you tremendously accelerate the  role of editor-as-god, deciding who shall  qualify for notification for simultaneous  reponses and who shall not.  In the June 81 Kinesis we ran an open letter to the Quadra management from three  bookstores. Should we have asked the women  from the Quadra for a simultaneous response?  Why? Why not? Who decides?  The traditional practice at Kinesis, and  one to which we intend to revert forthwith,  is this: let the person or group involved  decide if a response is needed. Let them  respond without haste, in the following  issue of Kinesis.  Never has any group or individual been denied that right. No one ever will be.  Does publication jeopardize funding?  The request from Lee MacKay and the four  other women was quite specific. It dealt  with Rape Relief. An article critical of  Rape Relief was published in Kinesis in the  very week that Rape Relief was negotiating  its funding.  When we published an article by Ellen Bara-  gon, back in October 1979, that was also  critical of Rape Relief, we were told that  the Baragon article could jeopardize funding.  Criticism in October can damage funding;  criticism in May can damage funding.  Lee suggests that we might have possibly  held off publication of that criticism until June. But June is Walkathon month.  Would that have made June a bad month, too?  Actually, we think Rape Relief is right  about the fact that governments which fund  community groups keep an eye on what those  groups are doing, all year round.  But we are confident that one, two or three  criticisms in Kinesis about any organization;  {any  organization) would not constitute  sufficient grounds for a government agency  to suspend funding.  If government funders took every critical  comment to heart, VSW would have been down  at Georgia and Granville with our begging  bowls by 1976 at the latest.  Civil servants, we believe .from experience,  look most carefully at what organizations  such as VSW, Rape Relief and the Health  Collective, consistently say about ourselves  They also look most carefully at what women  who have used our services say about us.  It is on these groups, we believe, that  governments reach funding decision.  Your enemies are reading this  Finally, we want to address what we see as  being the most important part of Lee Mac  Kay's letter. It shows up in paragraph one:  We believe that debate on controversial issues within the movement is essential, but  insofar as'possible we need to find ways to  enable this debate to take place in ways  that do not give anti-feminists ammunition  that they can use to damage the movement.  Your enemies may be reading this.  Yep, they sure are?  Against the need for protection against the  enemy, as Lee points out, you need to balance the need for self-expression within  the movement. And if you can't air controversial matters in the pages of Kinesis,  where the hell can you air them?  We believe that feminists who read and support Kinesis know about life on the tightrope. It's a delicate balance.  So far, Kinesis hasn't done anything unconscionable. We don't intend to, either.  If the women's movement as a whole decided  that Kinesis was 'too public' and therefore  too risky, we believe that the movement  would find some other way of airing debate.  We could, for example, turn to the BCFW  newsletter.  It exists; it doesn't cost  too much to produce. We could drive around  town and drop it off at women's centres. We  could keep it under the counter at Ariel,  at the Women's Bookstore, at Octopus...  But the local movement has not, in any  significant numbers, yet expressed discomfort with VSW's receptivity to printing  debates. We have not, as a movement, developed an alternative way of conducting  print media debates. When and if the movement decides that's necessary, it will  have all the support of VSW.  And when and if that heavy-duty day dawns  when all  feminist debate must go underground, -we believe that women won't use  Kinesis.  You won't need a rejection slip  from us to tell you which way the wind  blows.  In any discussion of external vs. internal communications for the women's movement, VSW places Kinesis firmly and unequivocally in the area of external communications. Outreach has always been  and always will be our number-one priority at VSW.  The vast majority of our readers are not  involved within the inner circles of the  Vancouver women's movement. They are not  priwy to that grapevine which circulates  local news with juicy gusto.  To sum up:  Kinesis is not prepared to agree to Lee's  requests. We are, with the wisdom of hindsight, no longer prepared to agree to Isobel 's requests.  What we intend to do is this:  Kinesis will send a copy of an article  critical of any individual or group to  that individual or group along with details of the deadline for the next issue  of Kinesis.  That's all, folks. 0.  Send groups, individuals, a copy  We want to urge you to adhere to a policy  of sending a group or an individual a copy  of material that involves them prior to  its being printed. This request comes  with particular reference to the article  in May '81 issue written by Cherbeau in  criticism of Rape Relief.  We think that it is important that Kinesis  continue to be a respected forum for  criticism and information within the  women's movement and that consistency in  editorial policy will maintain this.  The Women's Caucus of the Learning Collective: Adonna Rudolph, Sharon Matsui, Dorrie  Nagler, Trisha Joel, Sue Scott, Carol Evans  and Eileen O'Brien.  and in addition: Henry Nagler, Rob Hornsey,  Gwilgym Smith.  Print criticisms simultaneously  To Kinesis:  We are in full agreement with the proposals from the May 19 BCFW regional meeting  to request that Kinesis print criticisms  simultaneously with responses and hold  back for one month criticism that would  appear at a time that was critical to a  group's well being.  'ine right-wing is becoming more powerful  and better organized. We must deal with  criticism of each other in a way that  does not prove useful to their cause.  When only one position of an issue is  printed there is potential to cause bad  feelings and unnecessary splits in the  Vancouver Women's movement which demoralizes and cripples us in our fight  against our oppressors. It can also  provide them with ammunition to be used  against us.  We need to learn new ways of dealing  constructively with our differences, and  we think the suggested changes are an  essential step in that direction.  Sally Batt, Isobel Kiborn, Lorraine Krakow  for the Radical Therapy Collective,  Women's Caucus  Make debate easier, not more difficult  Dear Editors:  I would like to respond to the articles in  the June Kinesis: "BCFW women request changes In Kinesis editorial policy," by Lee  MacKay, and "Proposals are convoluted..."  by Dorrie Brannock.  In my opinion Dorrie is correct in that we  must facilitate open communication between  various groups and various points of view.  We must make it easier  for women to present  their analysis of controversial issues, rather than building cumbersome obstacles to  hind the effective exchange of ideas.  Remember that for non-Lower Mainland women:  Kinesis is often the only source of information on current feminist issues.  I feel that the procedures suggested by the  BCFW regional meeting reps would simply  slow doen this debate and stall progress  towards resolving controversy.  However, my main point in writing is a comment in the BCFW article, "We need a forum  wider than BCFW in which to share our  ideas..."  Sad to say, this appears to be true.  BCFW, the only provincially-organized, umbrella network of feminists, has become so  narrow in perspective and analysis that it  excludes many feminists and is no longer  able to provide a forum for feminist debate.  I think it is time that those of us — the  temptation is to say 'those few of us' —  who still belong to BCFW to address ourselves to this issue.  The federation should be open to all feminist women's groups who wish to join. We  must leave the ideology of the correct —  feminist or political — 'line' to individual member groups as there is no place  for partisan exclusion of groups in an umbrella organization.  If we succeed in broadening the base of  BCFW, a wider range of viewpoints could  more effectively be presented for debate  at annual general meetings as well as in  articles in Kinesis throughout the year.  In sisterhood,  Susan Tickson  Prince Rupert 24       Kinesis       July   August 81  BULLETIN BOARD  ON THE AIR  THE LESBIAN SHOW  August 20: No theme re-run show. A wide  variety of pieces from past shows.  August 27: Music show: New Wave, A  look at the women's music of the New  Wave scene.  September 3'  Back to school show  September 10: Lesbian mothers  September 17: Poetry  September 24: Music: Ferron  THE LESBIAN SHOW on Co-op Radio, 102.7  FM, 7:.30 — 8:30 p.m. each Thursday.  W0MANVISI0N SHOWS  August 24: Country and western music;  women performers of the 1940s.  August 31: News show.  September topics TBA.  W0MANVISI0N on Co-op Radio, 102.7 FM,  Monday, 7:00 — 8:00 p.m.  GROUPS  PRESS GANG Printers and Publishers are now  open on Saturdays 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. at  603 Powell, 253-1224-  THE WOMEN'S SELF-HELP COUNSELLING collective can be contact at 872-3122, Vancouver Status of Women, Tuesday 7 to 9 p.m.  and Saturday, 1 to 4 p.m. One-to-one  counselling is now available. We plan  to form several self-help groups in September .  AS ABORTIONS BECOME MORE DIFFICULT to obtain, especially in areas outside Vancouver, more women are forced to come  to Vancouver for abortions. Many of  these women have little money and no  place to stay. Anyone who can provide  comfortable accommodation, for anywhere  from 1 night to 2 weeks, to women coming to town for this reason, please  contact the Vancouver Women's Health  Collective at 736-6696.  LESBIAN INFORMATION LINE is open for calls  two nights a week, Thursday and Sunday  from 7:00 to 10:00 p.m. at 734-1016.  Drop-in every second Sunday.  VANCOUVER LESBIAN MOTHERS DEFENCE FUND has  a potluck dinner the last Sunday of  every month. For information call  Mary at 251-5034.  ALCOHOLICS ANONYMOUS meetings for lesbians  Sunday at 8:00 p.m. Call Susan, 734-  1776 or Mary, 874-5142 or Theresea at  986-9484.  DROP-IN FOR LESBIANS OVER 40, Mondays at  8:00 p.m. at 322 West Hastings. Make  friends and socialize in a non-threatening atmosphere.  SUPPORT GROUP FOR LESBIANS using a problem-  solving format and self-help model is  open to new members. Facilitator. Payment is on a sliding scale. We meet  Mondays, 7:30 ~ 10:00 at the CRS warehouse. If you're interested, call 251-  2534.  GRANNY Y's, EMERGENCY CHILD CARE centre,  operated by the YWCA opened July 6 at  St Andrew's-Wesley United Church, 1012  Nelson at Burrard. Hours are 7:00 a.m.  to 7:00 p.m. This centre offers childcare for children six months to six  years in event of personal emergency.  MEDIA WATCH. Women interested in maintaining strong pressure against sexism in  the media — radio, tv and print —  please call Jillian or Sylvia at 738-  0395 or 539-5473.  The Kinesis workers bid farewell to Gayla.  Her dedication, hard work, and cheerful  disposition will be missed. We wish her  good luck in her future adventures.  VANCOUVER STATUS OF WOMEN offices are now located at 400A West 5th  Ave., Vancouver V5Y 1J8. Office hours  are Monday through Wednesday 9 to  5:30, Thursday 9 to 9.  Our new phone number is  873-1427  KINESIS  KINESIS is published ten times a year by  Vancouver Status of Women. Its objectives  are to enhance understanding about the  changing position of women in society  and work actively towards achieving social  change.  VIEWS EXPRESSED IN KINESIS are those  of the writer and do not necessarily reflect  VSW policy. All unsigned material is the  responsibility of the Kinesis editorial  group.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver  Status of Women, 400A West 5th Avenue,  Vancouver, B.C. V5Y1J8.  MEMBERSHIP in Vancouver Status of  Women is by donation. Kinesis is mailed  monthly to all members. Individual subs to  Kinesis are $10.00 per year. We ask members to base their donations on this, and  their own financial situations.  SUBMISSIONS are welcome. We reserve  the right to edit, and submission does not  guarantee publication. Include a SASE if  you want your work returned.  WORKERS ON THIS ISSUE: Ani Arnott, Janet Beebe,  Mary Beil, Janet Berry, Sylvie Couture, Cole Dudley, Jan  de Grass, Penny Goldsmith, Rosanne Moran, Gayla  Reid, Julie Wheelwright and Cat Wickstrom.  DEADLINE FOR NEXT ISSUE: August 31 for September  15 publication. Normal publication resumes thereafter,  with deadline 15 of each month.  WOMEN, ART AND POLITICS. We are putting  together a slide show of women artists  in Vancouver who consider their artwork political. It will be shown at  Women In Focus in October. We are asking for five slides per person and a  statement about themselves, their art  and politics. We need all of these  slides by Thursday, September 10. To  make arrangements or to get further  information, call Claire at 253-0743  or Persimmon at 253-7809.  EVENTS  W0MENW0RDS at Women in Focus, 456 Broadway,  August 23 at 7:30 p.m. Readings of  poetry by Ani Arnott, Cyndia Cole,  Laura Foster, Angie Zenk and others.  Admission is $2 at the door and $1.50  advance. Tickets are available from  Ariel Bookstore, Octopus East and Octopus West, and the Women's Bookstore.  WOMEN TAKE BACK THE NIGHT events are being  organized in Vancouver and Nanaimo for  September 18. Childcare will be available. For details, call the Vancouver  Rape Relief centre at 872-8212 or  Nanrvmo Rape Relief at 753-1021.  MARCH FOR CHOICE SEPTEMBER 12. Together we  can defeat the anti-choicers and make  abortion legal and accessible to all!  Assemble 12 noon at Queen Elizabeth  Plaza for a rally organized by the Concerned Citizens for Choice on Abortion.  For details phone 73102974 or 684-7696:  A MULTI MEDIA SHOW by Sue Schnee and Sandra Preshara, Helen Pitt Gallery, 163  West Pender, August 17-29.  THE SECOND ANNUAL WEST COAST Women's Music  and Cultural Festival at Camp Mather  near Yosemtie, CA (three and a half  hours from San Francisco), September  10 - 13, 1981, Thursday through Sunday.  Music, politics, culture and spirituality, sports. $65 per person, camping.  Advance tickets only from WCWMF, 1195  Valencia, San Francisco, CA 94110, 415  - 641 - 4892. Apparently 200 tickets  are being held at the gate for Canadians. Phone ahead to check.  WINTER BREAK IN NICARAGUA is being planned  for December 19 to January 3. We can  learn a lot from Nicaraguan women, discuss their experience and compare it  with ours and show them sisterly support. To join this group, phone Jeanne  at 525-8136.  WOMEN'S CENTRE TRANSFORMATION meditation  workshop. Learn to use psychic survival tools which transform negative  energy into positive changes. Increase  personal and collective womenpower.  Sunday August 30 from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m.  at East Side Family Place. Fee is A%  of your net monthly income. Wheelchair  accessible. Childcare needs 10 days advance notice. For registration and  information call Cyndia at 251-2534.  WOMEN AGAINST NUCLEAR TECHNOLOGY benefit  dance, Friday September 25, Legion Hall  at 6th and Commerieal. Women's Bands;  women only. Childcare available. Call  734-0565.  THE GAY AND LESBIAN EXPERIENCE, Contemporary issues and options. This course  will focus on social and legal issues  and the particular way they affect lesbians and gay men.  This is an 8 week course running from  7:30 tp 10 p.m., starting Monday October 19 at the Carnegie Centre. It is  offered through Continuing Education at  Capilano College in conjunction with  local lesbians and gay men. For details  call Marc at 733-0616.  WOMEN'S HEALTH: a date of up-to-date information on women's health. Saturday, September 26. 9:00 a.m. to 3-30 p.m., Theatre Rooms A130 and A122 at VCC Langara  Campus, 100 West 49th. Fee is $6:00.  For details 324-5323 or 324-5324.  FEMINIST THEORIES IN CANADIAN CONTEXTS is  the focus of a fall course offered by  the Feminist Studies Association. Dialogue between the academic women's community and women's groups is the goal.  Academic background not necessary. To  register, call 874-2564 or 734-7756 for  details. Or contact the Women's Bookstore, Octopus East or UBC Women's Centre, Room 130 in SUB.  VANCOUVER COMMUNITY COLLEGE WOMEN'S STUDIES  offers transfer credit courses in the  fall and spring. Theme of fall 1981 is  Women and Work, focusing on anthropology, history and literature. Call 324-  5221 or 461-1024 for details.