 &iiM».m\x&*&  HMJiDM  2 Vancouver Status of  Women celebrates 11  years of work in the  feminist community this  month. Two former staff  members cast a fond look  back  4 Joe Borowski has  taken on the Canadian  abortion law, saying he  represents the interests of  the unborn. This is fight  back time  9 Is Telidon out to  make dinosaurs out of  workers and activists?  Emma Flyer takes a hard  look at technology  10 Jill Bend has a  thought-provoking  response to Kristin Penn's  views on non-violence  13 TOWARD A NON-  NUCLEAR WORLD: a  packed-with-information  pull-out feature by  members of Women  Against Nuclear  Technology  25 Is public appreciation  something we activists  need — or get? Lou  Nelson suggests we think  about it  26 In the first of a series  of feature articles on B.C.  women artists, Michele  Wollstonecroft introduces  Robin Campbell of Victoria  27 Lesbian Fiction has  brought together some  ground-breaking short  stories. Whet your appetite on this book review  by Cy-Thea Sand  COVER: People worldwide are protesting the nuclear arms  race. Join the wave of the future. Drawing by Jeanne Taylor  FEBRUARY '82  KiMESIJ  news about women that's not in the dailies  SUBSCRIBE TO KiMMJiJ\  Published 10 times a year  by Vancouver Status of Women  400A West 5th Ave., Vancouver, B.C. V5Y 1J7  Subscriber  Member/Subscriber  Institution  Sustainer  $10  By donation  $20  $50  _ Payment Enclosed  Please   remember  that   VSW   operates   on   inadequate  funding — we need member support! 2   Kinesis    February 1982  ORGANIZING  Vancouver Status of Women: a look back on our work  by Diana Ellis and Debra Lewis  Those of us who work in the women's movement often have little time to reflect on  the past. There are always new issues to  face, and old ones at which to keep plugging away.  Nevertheless, our past is important. Understanding our successes and failures —  and why — is a crucial part of continuing  our work today.  Has the organizing work of the Vancouver  Status of Women (VSW) changed over the  years? If so, how? What have some of the  external impacts on VSW been and how have  they affected the way our work was done?  What about internal factors — staff  changes, physical space — what effect have  these had on the way VSW does things?  Finally, how is VSW responsive to.the  needs of women, and have those responses  changed over the past 11 years?  Work shaped by funding changes  With VSW's 11th anniversary upon us,  former staff members Debra Lewis and Diana  Ellis and ongoing staffer Nadine Allen  got together one evening to discuss our  own experience in relation to these  questions.  KINESIS  KINESIS is published ten times a  year by Vancouver Status of Women.  Its objectives are to enhance  understanding about the changing  position of women in society and  work actively towards achieving  social change.  VIEWS EXPRESSED IN KINESIS are  those of the writer and do not  necessarily reflect VSW policy. All  unsigned material is the responsibility of the Kinesis editorial group.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status of Women, 400A West  5th Avenue, Vancouver, B.C. V5Y 1J8.  MEMBERSHIP in Vancouver Status  of Women is by donation. Kinesis is  mailed monthly to all members. Individual subs to Kinesis are $10.00  per year. We ask members to base  their donations on this, and their own  financial situations.  SUBMISSIONS are welcome. We  reserve the right to edit, and submission does not guarantee publication.  Include a SASE if you want your work  - returned.  WORKERS ON THIS ISSUE: Jan Alexander,  Janet Beebe, Janet Berry, Johanna Clark,  Jan DeGrass, Cole Dudley, Dorothy Elias, Pat  Feindel, Penny Goldsmith, Nicky Hood, Judy  Hopkins, Sandy Kalmakoff, Alleson Kase,  Kristin Penn, Jeanne Taylor, LezlieWagman,  Michele Wollstonecroft.  DEADLINE FOR NEXT ISSUE: February 15  for February 28 publication. Late copy  printed as space permits.  Vancouver Status of Women offices  are located at 400A W. 5th Avenue,  Vancouver V5Y 1J7. Office hours are  Monday to Thursday, 9-5:30 (some  evenings by appointment).  Our phone number is 873-1427.  Diana Ellis and Nadine Allen, VSW staffers, June 1975.  Some of the external forces shaping VSW  were identified easily — funding, government and other women's groups among  them.  Consistent core funding, despite the fact  it has to be fought for each year, has  certainly been c  stabilizing influence,  enabling VSW to claim itself one of the  oldest status of women groups in the  country. We have had an office and staff  since 1972, developed projects that build  on previous experience, and flexed with  the changing needs of members, staff and  women in general.  At-the same time, inadequate core funding  has also shaped our work. From 1975 to 1980  the amount received each year stayed the  same. Meanwhile, the cost of living and of  working rose. Hence decisions were made to  redesign some of our services and decrease  the number of staff. .  In 1978, for example, the staff was reduced from 8 to 5 members. The ombudservice was eliminated and office priorities rearranged to reflect an emphasis on  work with groups and on issues, rather  than responding to individual problems.  We also developed a legal referral service  at this time.  Strategies reflect changes in government  The shift vas partly successful, but it  did leave a gap in advocacy work with  women, "/e approached City Hall for additional funding in 1980 and were turned  down because of our position on abortion  and lesbian and gay rights.  In 1981,  a change in city council combined with  our support in the community led to our  winning funds for an advocacy worker.  With the increase in staff from 5 to 6, we  reclaimed a bit of lost ground.  However, while the number of staff was on  the decrease, the workload was going up —  a trend caused in part by the change in  government in 1976. Many social services  have been cut back, eliminated, or made  less effective for women since that time.  As a result, VSW sees more women, takes  more phone calls, and involves itself  more in organizing efforts around these  cutbacks.  Because there is always so much  to do, priorizing has always proved  difficult; staff burnout has sometimes  been the result.  Looking even further back, the NDP years  in Victoria also shaped part of VSW's work  at the time. There was definitely a sense  that our briefs, our demonstrations, our  letters and bur press releases might be  heard and have some,, effect. Despite the  difficulty in dealing'with any government,  VSW knew at the time that the constituency  of women was one that some NDP MLA's took  seriously.  Certainly we worked hard on many issues  during those years. For example, VSW staff  and members sat on the Berger Commission  on Family and Children's Law and the  Provincial Advisory Committee on Sex  Discrimination in Public Education —  shaping the way later policy, matrimonial  law and non-sexist education were developed. Limited successes perhaps, but  successes nonetheless. Staff and members  also became involved with the newly formed  Human Rights Branch and Commission.  Above all else perhaps, there was far more  interaction between VSW and all parts of  government — both bureaucracy and legislators. Many of us learned much about  the way the system works and were able to  apply that knowledge to ongoing organizing  and issue development.  More recently, we have put less emphasis  on approaching the government. One  reason, of course, is that there are fewer  forums where we can be heard. There is  no committee on sex discrimination in education, no provincial co-ordinator on the  status of women, few other places soliciting our input. We have less manoeuvring  room, and we have learned not to beat our  collective head against the wall.  In the mid 1970's, the formation and  existence of other women's groups also  influenced VSW work. The proliferation .  of women's centres that began in 1974-75  certainly affected the shape of VSW's  work in the lower mainland area. Early  VSW members went on to organize women's  groups -\n  North Vancouver, Richmond,  Delta and Port Coquitlam.  As a result, in 1976 VSW was able to begin  to organize more strategically in the  neighbourhoods of the city of Vancouver.  And although VSW still receives many  requests to provide speakers, there was a  time when the bulk of our speaking engagements were outside of the city. Now, that  work can often be done by local women's  groups in the area.  Members play a strong role  Internal forces on VSW, such as membership, staff and actual physical space have  also played a part in shaping our work.  Obviously, each new staff person brings  her own special interests and skills to  the work. As well, with a small staff,  each staff person is key. So staff turnover, difficulties and burnout also play  Continued on page 30 February 1982    Kinesis    3  ORGANIZING  New programs, old battles — the work goes on at VSW  A  7%  Suzanne Gerard of Women in Trades with VSW  staffer Patty Moore.  Vancouver Status of Women will soon enter  its twelfth year of providing services,  facilities and support to women in B.C.  To mark our eleventh anniversary,   Jan  DeGrass spoke with two VSW staff members,  Patty Moore and Nadine Allen,  about their  work and thoughts about future directions  for  VSW.  Jan:  What programs are you currently involved in?  Patty: I'm working with a consciousness-  raising group at present, and also planning assertiveness training programs to be  held at family place drop-ins in February  and Marcy, and at VSW.  Another program we're working on right now,  Women About Women, will be an evening discussion series on specific topics (see  page 32 for details). Our programs are all  free, and we provide childcare.  Nadine: Besides the regular programs we're  all involved in, we do a lot of general  work that I would call 'reactive'. We  respond to telephone calls, gather information, answer questions from the media  and from women who visit us.  Since we have acquired our new office space  and there's so much room for programs to  take place, we've been able to share it  with many other groups. The Women's Building Committee uses it; so do the Welfare  Rights Coalition, the Women's Self-Help  Counselling Collective, and Women in Trades.  Jan:   Who is  VSW aimed at - single parents,  working women,  career women?  Patty: I feel we're really broad-based.  It's true we don't do much for the few  high-profile career women - we're not necessarily working on getting women into  high places. A large part of our mandate  is poorer women, women on welfare and  women in low-paying jobs. We believe women  have a right to choices about where they  work and how they live; a right to better  working conditions and decent pay.  Nadine: Broad-based doesn't mean middle-of-  the-road. It doesn't mean we don't have a  stand on which groups we support; remember  we're starting from a politically left perspective. But we support anyone who wants  to operate a valid program within the  broad scope of the women's movement.  Patty: I'd like to see us develop more ties  with women in unions. They have been working on some really pertinent issues, like  equal pay for work of equal value, paid  maternity leave, health' and safety, and  the effects of micro-chip technology on  the jobs of women.  Kinesis volunteer Cole Dudley at work on the  paper.  Jan: Do you get a lot of support from the  Nadine: We do, but we could use more help.  That's been a bit of a low point with us.  It's often more work finding the people  than doing it yourself. We'd like to have  everyone who is interested doing something  useful.  Some women phone us to say "I'm available"  but it's hard to tell them what to do. The  best way they could help is to focus on  something - one issue - and keep us informed about it.  A woman phoned the other day and offered to  attend the daycare coalition meetings and  report to us, and generally act as a liaison  so we could see how best to help. That was  good. I know that the housing coalition  could use a VSW rep too, and our library  could really use some volunteer help.  Patty: The consciousness-raising group I'm  involved in is a good way for some women who  are new to the women's movement to become  involved. They can try out new ideas, and  find areas they're interested in working in.  Jan: How does  all this':  : paper like  Kinesis fit into  Patty: Oh, it's vital. It helps women become  involved and keeps everyone informed. By  reading Kinesis, you can get a pretty good  idea of VSW's priorities.  Information from an anti-feminist perspective is presented only too frequently in  the regular media. The major papers are all  biased against women. Kinesis is a chance  to present our own views and lives in print.  Nadine: That letter to the editor printed  in the Sun a while ago was a good example.  He said, "Why isn't the women's movement  lobbying for rights in the constitution?  I'll support them if they'd only do something ..." It makes me mad. The only reason  someone like that thinks we aren't doing  anything is because it isn't reported in  the regular media. The fact is we're work-'  ing very hard. You'd never know it to read  the daily papers though.  Jan:  Is the work satisfying?  Patty: Yes. Working in a collective has  been good. I can say what I think and explore new ideas. A lot of the work we do in  outside programs is difficult; it's satisfying to plan it together and come back  here and know there are women who will be  there to support you. We offer each other  respect for the work we do. It's also  satisfying when something like the welfare  rights activities turn out so many people.  Jeanne Taylor, Kinesis volunteer and  ''resident artist".  Nadine: The only problem is that it's never  quite manageable. Every week you think,  "I'm going to get control of the work this  week", but there's so much to do. We keep  having to re-do things we've already struggled with before, like the pro-choice fight.  But we're not going to give up the fight.  Patty: It seems like there are more women  than ever before working on different issues in this city. We've really branched  out, opened up. The work load has increased  so you can tell that the women's movement  is having an impact.  Nadine: One thing I would say has changed  in the last few years is that we're placing  more emphasis on strengthening ourselves,  widening our knowledge, learning skills  and supporting each other. We're not forced  into an adversary position all the time.  Jan:  What issues do you think will become  very important for women in the near future':  Patty: Welfare rights is crucial right now.  Organizing among immigrant women and domestic workers is also on the increase, and  we will be offering whatever support we  can to these women.  Nadine: Our legal work is still important,  and continues to involve a lot of lawyer  referrals. We also manage to produce a  steady flow of briefs and articles on legal  rights issues, like family law and pensions.  One thing that's always a concern is our  funding. It's never secure. Once again  we'll have to ask for support letters from  our members and friends. I'm sure people  get tired of it, but that's the reality of  working here.  We ask readers to write letters in  support of VSW's current funding  applications to the provincial  Attorney General,  and to the City  of Vancouver.  Tell them how our  services are important to you,  and  how imperative it is to the women  of B.C.   that a service  like ours  continues to exist.  Write  to:  Alan Williams  Attorney General  Legislative Buildings  Victoria,  B.C.  and   Mayor and City Council  City Hall  453 West 12th Avenue  Vancouver,  B.C.  Please send us a copy of your  letter(s).   Thanks. Kinesis    February 1982  HEALTH  Borowski suit presents a grave threat to abortion rights  by Ann Thompson  A showdown is approaching between the  Canadian ruling class and the organized  anti-abortion movement on the one hand,  and on the other, women fighting for the  right to control our own bodies and lives.  On December 1. 1981, the Supreme Court of  Canada agreed to hear a suit brought by  Joseph Borowski of Manitoba against the  1969 amendments to the Criminal Code.  Those amendments make it legal to perform  abortions as long as they are done in  major hospitals and follow very restrictive guidelines. Borowski wants the law  declared invalid on the grounds that the  Bill of Rights protects fetuses.  hundreds of thousands of Canadians. Yet  these demands are not acknowledged in the  Supreme Court's December 1, 1981 ruling.  This is the same court that twice held  hearings and handed down decisions in the  case of Dr. Morgenthaler in 1975 and 1976.  Morgenthaler has been uncompromising in  his thorough defense of abortion as a woman's right, and in his denunciation of  the abortion laws. Yet despite the familiarity they have with th^se arguments, the  judges are ignoring the demands of women.  Their approach is to emphasize that they  consider abortion to be primarily illegal.  The Majority Opinion of December 1, written by Justice Martland, states: "The  Help Organize an Abortion Rights  Action for Mother's Day "  Attend the Lower Mainland Planning Meeting  Trout Lake Community Centre  3350 Victoria Drive  Saturday, February 13, 1982  1 - 4 p.m.  Borowski's challenge to the validity of  the abortion laws is the Canadian equivalent of the U.S. Human Life Amendment.  Both aim to supplant women's rights with  the supposed rights of the fetus at a  constitutional — ie inalterable — level.  We face a grave threat.  But we can beat  it if we waste no time and get busy  organizing the majority of Canadians who  are on our side.  Borowski will likely bring in doctors and  scientists to testify that human life begins at conception. Similar testimony  was offered last spring at hearings in  Washington, D.C. on the proposed Helms-  Hyde Human Life Bill, the text of which  is identical to the Human Life Amendment.  Should the Borowski suit succeed, the  door would be opened to prosecuting women  who have abortions, and doctors who perform them, for murder.  Use of birth  control such as the IUD, which prevents  the implantation of the fertilized egg,  might also violate the law.  And of course  there would be no more abortions performed  in hospitals.  It would be back to the  days of the wire coathangcr.  Abortion considered primarily illegal  There are alarming features to the thinking of the judges who will deliberate  and rule on Borowski's challenge, as  revealed in the documents handed down  December 1.  Nowhere in the ruling are women spoken of  as independent beings with basic rights.  Feminists have challenged the validity of  the abortion laws since the 1969 amendments were adopted.  This challenge has  been repeatedly made in Parliament,  beginning with NDP MP Grace Maclnnis'  private member's bill calling for repeal  in the early 1970's, and continuing with  similar bills put forward by such MP's  as NDPer Svend Robinson in 1979.  More importantly, repeal has been demanded  by innumerable large rallies, demonstrations, conferences, tribunals, and public  meetings across the country, involving  legislation under attack here...provides  that in certain specified circumstances  conduct which otherwise would be criminal  is permissible."  They then ruled that this permission should  be questioned, and they empowered Borowski,  a notorious anti-abortionist, to do so.  Borowski granted 'standing' despite lack  of qualification  The crux of the December 1 decision is to  confer legal "standing" on Borowski, thus  entitling him to present his case to Court.  The rule on standing excludes a person  from bringing an issue to court unless "he"  has the "most direct interest" in it.  Borowski, who can neither get pregnant nor  perform abortions, has no such relationship  to the law.  The judges have this to say about fetuses:  "The legislation proposed to be attacked  has a direct impact upon the unborn human  fetuses whose existence may be terminated  by legalized abortions. They obviously  cannot be parties to proceedings in court  and yet the issue as to the scope of the  Canadian Bill of Rights in the protection  of the human right to life is a matter of  considerable importance.  "There is no reasonable way in which that  issue can be brought into Court unless  proceedings are launched by some interested  citizen."  And thus the door was opened for Borowski  and the anti-abortion movement to go before  the Supreme Court.  Only twice before has a member of the public been allowed to challenge the validity  of adopted legislation which did not directly affect him. Most of the 25-page text of  the December 1 ruling is an examination of  these two precedents, and of how various  groups of Canadians 'stand' in relation to  the abortion laws.  The groups given consideration are doctors  who perform therapeutic abortions and  doctors who do not; similarly, hospitals  that appoint therapeutic abortion committees and those that do not. None of these,  in the judges' opinion, have reason to  attack the abortion laws.  A symphathetic view is taken toward "the  husband of a pregnant wife who desires to  prevent an abortion which she desires."  But the judges conclude that the pregnancy  would run its course long before such a  husband could bring his challenge to the  courts.  All women are affected by restrictions  The judges exclude the possibility that  women might challenge the validity of the  law by choosing to ignore all but the woman who is pregnant and who manages to surmount the bureaucratic obstacles to obtaining a legal abortion. "There is no  reason why a pregnant woman desirous of  obtaining an abortion should challenge the  legislation which is to her benefit."  Thus the judges close their eyes to the  fact that women of all ages, pregnant or  not, are directly affected by the restrictive legislation on abortion. They make no  apology for the admitted inequities in the  application of the law and concede nothing  to the demand for the fundamental right to  choose.  The nearly thirteen-year campaign by women  against the inadequacy of the 1969 reform  on abortion now faces its most serious  challenge. Indeed, the Borowski suit is a  threat to the climate of support for feminism that our efforts have created, and to  the progress made so far against women's  oppression. In this emergency, we call on  'all feminists to join in defeating Borowski  One option is to apply to the Supreme Court  for intervener status in the hearings;  that is, for the right to make pro-choics  presentations to the Court. The Canadian  Abortion Rights Action League (CARAL) in  Toronto is looking into this, and other  groups may be as well. While it is rare for  the Court to permit interveners, it may do  so in this case.  It is important for us to remember that  while the Supreme Court may aim for lofty  objectivity, it is in fact susceptible to  strongly-voiced public opinion. The decision to waive the rule on standing for  Borowski is a clear-cut example of this:  the Court has been affected by the high-  pressure campaign being conducted by the  anti-abortion movement.  His objections to the law differ from  ours  For feminists, the strongest and best defense against the Borowski suit is to  mobilize supporters in a massive, continuing expression of the demand for a woman's  right to choose on abortion.  Coupled with this is the demand for repeal  of the existing anti-abortion laws. It is  important that the women's movement not  allow Borowski to trick us into defending  the existing laws. He wants these laws  declared invalid for wholly anti-woman  reasons. Women want the laws repealed for  feminist reasons, so that choice will not  be hampered by legal and bureaucratic  restrictions.  We should not support these horrendous  laws just because Borowski is attacking  them. We must press our demands for repeal  and for the fully-legal right to choose  forward all the more vigorously.  We do not know when the case may come to  Court, although Bo-rowski's lawyer is claiming it may be as early as this spring. It  Continued on page 12 February 1982    Kin  ACROSS B.C.  Aboriginal women still waiting  for the real decision  Concerned Aboriginal Women won a partial  victory January 12 when the remainder of  53 mischief charges laid against the native  people who occupied Department of Indian  Affairs offices last July were dismissed.  Because separate charges were laid against  every individual arrested after the occupation, the occupiers faced 53 separate  trials. However, when the first case came  up for trial December 18, arresting officers were unable to identify Mary Louise  Williams, the woman they had arrested. The  charge was dismissed as a result.  At the second trial January 6, of Lillian  Basil, the judge again dismissed the charge.  The defense has based its case on the fact  that Basil had a right to be in the DIA  offices during the occupation because  (1) she felt negotiations were underway  between Concerned Aboriginal Women and  Indian Affairs Minister John Munro, and  (2) Senator Ray Perreault (acting on behalf of Munro) had telephone Munro at the  time of the occupation, and Munro had not  returned the call.  At the third trial January 12, charges  against Karen and Leonard Anderson were  dismissed for the same reasons. With three  trials thus completed, the Crown decided  to withdraw the remaining 49 charges. The  same defense would have applied in all  cases.  Concerned Aboriginal Women think the criminal charges and trials were a diversionary  tactic - they are still  waiting for Munro  to contact them. Their demands remain the  Sunshine Coast Transition  House opens  The Sunshine Coast Transition House officially opened December 23, 1981.  The  house will be run by one full-time coordinator, two part-time staff and 15  volunteer staff. The house office can be  reached by calling 885-2944-  The house opening is the result of five  months work by a committee of local women.  The funding for the Transition House came  as a result of an educational questionnaire done two years ago on the Sunshine  Coast.  The top four needs listed by  women on the questionnaire all dealt with  crisis intervention and emergency shelter  for women.  The results of the questionnaire were  given to local MHR supervisor Harvey Bist,  who then budgeted money for a Transition  House.  Affirmative action in Vancouver shipyards pending  Late last year, th- Canadian Employment &  Immigration Commission reached an affirmative action agreement with Vancouver's  major shipyards. The shipyards, after talking it over with union, provincial and  federal government representatives, have  agreed to increase the number of women  working in the shipyards.  But B.C.'s CEIC affirmative action promoter, Bill Rapanos, is hesitating about  whether to run a full-page ad in the Vancouver Sun to bring potential women out of  the woodwork. He's afraid it would be a  waste of money, that very few women would  respond to such an ad.  Women in Trades disagrees, and is lobbying  to change Rapanos' mind. They cite the  example of World War II, when women res  ponded to similar ads by the thousands.  Extensive advertising, well-financed  training programs and good quality childcare will do the trick, says Women in  Trades. They add that trades opportunities  for women should be advertised where women  will see them - in offices, in union halls,  and on city buses, for starters.  It is a fact that serious obstacles remain  for women entering the trades - management  resistance, inadequate training programs,  and lack of support services for women are  just three.  To illustrate the state of federal commitment to trades training for women, the  government in 1980 allocated just $2 million out of a total training budget of  $834 million to wage subsidies for women  apprenticing in non-traditional trades.  As for affirmative action agreements with  industry (a voluntary affair), only 26  such agreements have been signed across  the country so far. Considering the rate  at which traditional jobs for women are  becoming obsolete, this kind of affirmative  action is clearly inadequate, (from Linda  Eossie/Vancouver Sun)  City of Vancouver's EEO back  in action  The City of Vancouver's Equal Employment  Opportunities Program has been revived as  of December 1, 1981 under new co-ordinator  Reva Dexter.  Parts of the program had continued on a  low key basis ever since Shelagh Day''s  thwarted efforts over three years ago.  Day received little support from.the mostly  NPA-dominated City Council and was hounded by columnist Doug Collins and others of  his ilk.  A push from Mayor Harcourt has led to the  reinstitution of the program which will  probably follow the guidelines set down in  1977.  Dexter anticipates "a lot more support from City Council this time around."  "I've also been on the Vancouver Show and  Webster lately and I've found the response  from the media to be quite positive."  The program includes recruiting the city's  women workers into non-traditional jobs by  providing training programs for them and  offering help with advancement, promotions  and transfers.  Training courses will also  be provided for disabled employees and  an assertiveness training class will be  underway soon.  The program is also sponsoring a drive to recruit nurses for the  health departments.  First task on the agenda is to collect  data relevant to men's and women's comparative positions and salaries. Analysis is  taking place now and results are expected  by February.  "I'm trying to delegate a lot of the data  collection," said Reva. "It's important  that the various departments get involved  and pass information on. Only then can  they be aware and committed to working on  the results."  The program encompasses three sectors:  -the disabled, minorities and women.  "But their needs are all different", wailed  Reva, only two months into the job. "People  assume their needs are the same, but how  can you count minority workers when they're  not even supposed to write that they are in  a minority on the application form? And  who's to say who is disabled?"  "Personally, I would prefer to work with  just women."  Reva Dexter is a former VSW staff member.  Forum forces reversal of training cutbacks  The Manpower Cutbacks Forum story of last  November has a surprise ending. It worked!  It would seem when the feds are directly  affected, they take action.  Don Henslowe, manager of Institutional  Training at CEIC (Canadian Employment  Immigration Commission), has confirmed  that all previously funded pre-employment  courses have had their funding re-instated.  Cliff Worthy, training consultant for CEIC  pre-apprenticeship programs, also confirmed that all but four pre-apprenticeship  courses have been re-funded. The four  courses have been either been dropped by  the schools or re-classified as pre-employment programs.  Eight seats are now sponsored by CEIC in  the Women's Exploratory Apprenticeship  Training (.WEAT) program, and funding has  been restored to Basic Training for Skills  Development (upgrading) courses.  As before, two spaces in all pre-apprenticeship and pre-employment courses are  reserved for women until two weeks prior  to the start of the course. However, it  appears that CEIC is still not taking  seriously its obligation to fill them with  women.  CEIC apparently does not always bother to  consult its waiting lists for women, nor  does it always ensure that a woman dropping  out of a course at the last minute is  replaced by a woman. This situation is  currently being documented.  Here is where CEIC living allowances stand:  Single person living alone...$70/week  Woman with one child, living alone or with  non-working spouse...$90/week  Woman with two children, living alone oh  with non-working spouse...$105/week  Woman with three children, living alone or  with non-working spouse...$120/week  Woman with four children, living alone or  with non-working spouse...$135/week  Dependent care allowance for children under  school age is an extra $20/week for the  first child, !315/week for each additional  child. A living-away-from-home allowance  of $40/week is available for courses under  two months long, if you are maintaining  yourself and the residence you left.  There is a commuting allowance of 7i^/mile  if you must travel more than 15 miles away  from home each day. And a relocation grant  of 7i^/mile is paid if you must move out  of town to take a course.  Finally, if you qualify, you can collect  unemployment (UIC) benefits while you take  your course. In this case, you would not  receive the living allowance described  above. 6   Kinesis    February 19!  ACROSS CANADA  Associations demand ban on  Depo-Provera for retarded  women  TORONTO (CP) - The Canadian and Ontario  Associations for the Mentally Retarded  have demanded an immediate ban on the use  of the drug Depo-Provera, a synthetic  form of the hormone progesterone.  The associations called for the ban after  a study tabled in early November in the  Ontario legislature showed that three  severely retarded women died of breast  cancer while taking the drug. (Depo-  Provera is given to mentally retarded  women in many cases to stop menstruation  for hygienic reasons.)  During its annual meeting in Quebec City,  the Canadian association unanimously  passed a resolution saying "no citizen  who is mentally retarded should be subjected to the potential hazards of this  drug."  The association also asked the health protection branch of the federal Health and  Welfare Department to extend the moratorium throughout Canada.  Depo-Provera is used in more than 70 countries in Europe and the Third World as a  contraceptive.  It is not approved for  such use in North America because studies  have found high doses in beagles produced  breast cancer.  But can he type?  According to Crown Zellerbach News,   on Ontario chemical manufacturer recently told  the annual conference of the University of  Western Ontario Business School that the  time is approaching when typing skills  will be stressed in executive recruitment  ads.  George Hagen of Reichold Ltd. told the  conference that an executive who can type  and use a small portable computer will soon  have a competitive advantage in the job  market.  Need we say more?  Edmonton women fight  pornography  Three screaming women recently disrupted a  one-night only showing of the sadomasochistic film Story of 0  at Edmonton's  Princess Theatre.  The women, members of a group called Women  Fight Back, distributed literature protesting the film outside the theatre and  asked patrons their reasons for attending.  (Vancouver Sun)  Non-violent rape still rape  A non-violent rape is still rape and warrants a four-year jail term, the B.C._ Court  of Appeal ruled in November.  Three appeal court judges upheld a four-  year jail sentence for a man convicted of  raping a 31-year-old woman after he spent  an evening drinking with her in a North  Vancouver bar.  Justices P.D. Seaton, E.E. Hinkson and W.A.  Craig rejected defence lawyer Howard Brad-  brooke's argument that the accused deserved lighter sentence because he did not  physically "abuse" the woman.  "I would suggest the abuse was rape, the  worst kind of physical abuse," said Justice  Seaton.  Bradbrooke added that the accused, a 200-  pound truck driver was "sobbing and crying  afterwards" and was not "callous, vicious  or depraved" in his behaviour towards the  woman.  "Sexually assaulting a woman is a callous,  vicious thing to do, so you're telling that  to the wrong judge...perhaps she wasn't  hurt physically but emotionally she was  (obviously) pretty seriously injured," replied Justice Craig, (from Victoria Times-  Colonist/Flagrant)  Carpenters' paper adopts non-  sexist usage  On the Level,   the newspaper of the B.C.  Provincial Council of Carpenters, has  launched a new editorial policy designed  to eliminate sexist language from their  pages.  The move follows a decision by the annual  convention of the B.C. Provincial Council  of Carpenters to attempt to remove all  sexist language from Carpenters' collective  agreements in British Columbia.  The new policy will include words such as  chairman which will become chairperson,  tradesman which will become trades worker,  and journeyman which will become journey-  person.  Although these changes are only small steps  in the campaign to achieve equal rights ,  for women they are nevertheless important,  primarily because they symbolize a willingness to recognize the need for change and  improvements.  The changes have also been promoted by the  B.C. Federation of Labour, the Canadian  Labour Congress and the B.C. Human Rights  Branch and have already been adopted by  several unions. (On the Level)  . EVER NOTICE  WHEN  THE ECONOMY  TIGHTENS... SO DO   THE DRESSES !  Manitoba unionists plan  occupational health clinic  The Manitoba Federation of Labour, at its  last annual convention, decided to launch  a major fundraising drive in order to set  up an occupational health clinic - to be  controlled by workers and run for the benefit of workers.  Currently, the only physicians specializing  in occupational medicine in Manitoba are  employed by companies.  The clinic would provide treatment to workers who believe they have an occupationally  induced illness or accident. In addition,  the clinic would offer educational programs  about the hazards of substances, occupations  and workplaces; computerized access to relevant international data banks; and consultations for other interested health care  workers. (Healthsharing)  Women CAs are tops  In a recent issue of the CAmagazine (a  chartered accountants' publication) it was  noted that in the December 1979 Uniform  Final Examinations for CA status, the four  highest scorers nationally were women -  Penelope Smiley, Elaine Stewart, Joan Davison and Eleanor Hirvey. Not only that, but  women have taken top scores in three of  the last four annual exams. (Homemaker's)  Quebec bankworkers back on  the job  Employees of the Canadian Imperial Bank of  Commerce at East Angus, Quebec, members of  the United Food and Commerical Workers,  won their first contract last month after  16 months on the picket line.  In support of their campaign, the CLC had  urged all affiliates to withdraw union  funds from CIBC branches across Canada.  This likely persuaded CIBC management to  offer the East Angus branch benefits equal  to those in other branches.  The UFCW  members in East Angus, near Sherbrooke,  were locked out in April, 1980. (Peer C/  Canadian Labour)  Pioneer woman doctor dies  Dr. Elizabeth Bagshaw, a pioneering Canadian woman doctor who started her medical  practice in 1906, died,last month in  Hamilton, Ontario at age 100.  In 1924, Dr. Bagshaw helped to found the  Federation of Medical Women of Canada. In  1932 she became a founding members of  Canada's first birth control clinic, and  served as its medical director for thirty  years.  In 1973, Dr. Bagshaw was named a member of  the Order of Canada, and in 1979 was  awarded the Governor General's Persons  Award in recognition of her efforts to  advance the status of women, (info from  Vancouver Sun)  Kingston Pen relocates women  prisoners  Three provinces have agreed to accept women  prisoners being relocated from the federal  penitentiary in Kingston, Ontario. B.C.,  Alberta and Quebec will house 155 to 165  of the 205 women prisoners at Kingston in  new or existing facilities.  The federal government has been pressured  for years to close down Kingston penitentiary because of the poor conditions there,  Added weight was given by a Canadian Human  Rights Commission ruling that women prisoners are victims of discrimination in the  federal pentitentiary system.  Because Kingston is the only federal prison for women in the country, and because  the numbers of women in federal prison are  so few relative to the male prison population, they have had less access than men  to rehabilitiation programs, and because  they are housed only in Kingston, they are  more likely to.be far from home.  For the up to 45 women remaining in Kingston, Solicitor General Robert Kaplan says  he hopes to announce plans soon which will  upgrade rehabilitiation programs for the  women there, (info from Vancouver Sun) February 1982    Kinesis   7  INTERNATIONAL  Breast cancer treatment may not make significant difference  A doctor writing in a recent issue of  Mother Jones  magazine has asserted that  despite the many new techniques for treating breast cancer, "there is no compelling  evidence that one is better than any other  or that any is significantly better than  none at all."  Dr. Hugh Drummond contends that in order  to make a difference, local treatment  would have to be done on the narrow group  of cancers that are going to spread to  other parts of the body but have not yet  done, so at the time of diagnosis. "The  subgroup of treated women for whom the  surgery might have been 'in time' is  apparently so small that it does not  create a significant difference between  the treatment and non-treatment groups,"  he says.  Drummond's conclusions are based largely  on a summary of more than 300 research  papers which was published in The New  England Journal of Medicine. "There is a  dramatic diagram in the article," he writes,  "which compares survival rates for two  groups of patients charted against years  after the appearance of the first symptom.  One group was treated with radical mastectomy; the other had no treatment at- all.  The two curves are extremely close, and for  the first two years (which is the median  survival rate) there is no difference."  What about the figures touted by the cancer research establishment? First of all,  women who live five or ten years after the  initial diagnosis are generally considered  cures, even if they eventually die of the  disease. The increased emphasis on early  detection is also a factor: "Early diagnosis results, by definition, in greater  survival rates without a change in actual  longevity."  Finally, in the comparison study referred  to above, some of the untreated patients  lived for nearly 20 years, and five percent  died of causes other than breast cancer.  Drs. Craig Henderson and George Canellos,  the authors of the New England Journal  study, discovered that positive responses  to hormone therapies occur primarily in  women more than five years beyond menopause - that group of women with the best  overall prognosis.  The majority of patients undergoing chemotherapy will show some tumor regression for  an average duration of eight to ten months  and an average survival after treatment of  14 to 18 months. "However," writes Drummond, "for many of these months patients  are plauged with nausea, vomiting, anemia,  poor resistance to infection, bleeding  tendencies, hair loss and fatigue that  are toxic effects of the drugs themselves.'  Drummond also rejects the widespread conviction that breast cancer is hereditary,  pointing to a study by Ido de Groot of the  University of Cincinnati. De Groot's data  suggests "a stronger relationship in breast  cancer between neighbours than between  daughter and mother."  Drummond points the finger at environmental  and dietary factors. His advice to women:  "stay away from hair dye; take a break  from birth control pills; get rid of the  fat in your diet; don't take tranquilizers;  get angry about pollution; and avoid unnecessary X-rays."  For women who already have breast cancer,  Drummond asserts that it is as important  to "consult, join with or organize other  women with the illness as it is to see a  physician."  He argues that women should not passively  accept whatever the doctor recommends.  "Ask him or her to justify - in terms that  take your individuality into consideration  - whatever is done. Ask about and complain  about side effects. If the doctor acts as  if you are some kind of lunatic for challenging a medical judgment, then maybe you  have got the wrong doctor."  Silkwood award overturned  Last December 12, a 3-judge appeals panel  in Oklahoma City overturned a lower court  order which had awarded a record $10.5  million to the heirs of Karen Silkwood.  Silkwood was murdered in 1974. Her car was  rammed and run off the road as she was on  her way to meet a New York Times  reporter  with evidence of nuclear safety violations  at a plutonium processing plant of the huge  Kerr-McGee Corporation. Her death became  the focus of national attention in the  anti-nuclear movement and more broadly.  A civil suit was filed, and in May 1979 -  in the wake of events at Three Mile Island  - a federal court jury quickly awarded the  Silkwood estate $500,000 in personal damages and $10 million in punitive damages  against Kerr-McGee. This was an unusually  large award which was allowed to stand at  the time by the trial judge.  In overturning the award, the Appeals Court  first threw out the $10 million punitive  damages against Kerr-McGee, alleging that  the 1954 Atomic Energy Act pre-empts any  civil actions for punitive damages. If  this ruling stands, it means that no nuclear industry company could be sued for  punitive damages, no matter how flagrant,  deliberate or avoidable their "accidents"  might be.  The justices then tossed out the $500,000  award for personal damage, ruling that  Silkwood's heirs should have instead filed  for workers' compensation: {Revolutionary  Worker)  Tubal sterilization does not  eliminate risk  A recent finding suggests that as many as  six women in every 1,000 who undergo tubal  sterilization will subsequently become  pregnant. Dr.'David Grimes, reporting for  the American College of Obstetricians and  Gynecologists, says however that tubal  sterilization is still a safer bet than  birth control pills or other methods.  Grimes says tubal sterilization increases  by "severalfold" the risk of ectopic pregnancy, in which the fertilized egg remains  in the Fallopian tube instead of moving to  the uterus. However, there seems to be no  adverse effect on babies born to women who  have undergone tubal sterilization, (from  Vancouver Sun)  Killing "in defense of honour"  Protests- by feminists in Rio De Janeiro,  Brazil, have caused the reversal of the  acquittal of a man charged with killing his  lover "in legitimate defense of his honour".  He now faces a 15-year jail sentence.  Raul "Doca" Street, a playboy who had married and left three Brazilian heiresses,  killed wealthy Angela Diniz when she ended  their two-month-old relationship, during  which she had spent considerable money on  him. She wanted to have the freedom to have  relationships with other men and women.  In October 1979,,Street was acquitted. His  lawyer had described Diniz as "a luscious  Babylonian prostitute" and "a scarlet woman  of the kind we have been warned about in  the Apocalypse".  Brazilian feminists pressed for a new trial  which began in November 1981. During that  trial, a feminist study was presented which  maintained that 772 women in Sao Paulo  alone were killed by male lovers as a  "legitimate defense of honour" in the two  years since Street's acquittal.  In the last ten years, the number of Brazilian women attending universities has  increased fivefold, and the proportion of  women defined as workers has risen from  19%  to 30%. However, most women work in  low-paying jobs.  Brazil's only woman senator, Eunice Michilis)  from Amazonas, is sponsoring a bill that  would revoke a law permitting automatic  annulment of a marriage if the husband discovers that the bride was not a virgin.  (off our backs)  Labyris makes women's safety  its business  London now has a fleet of feminist cabbies.  The company, called Labyris, has a fleet of  20 mini-cars, all driven by women, and  carrying only women (men may ride only if  accompanied by women).  According to Margaret Anderson, founder of  the company, Labyris provides safe, comfortable and slightly less expensive travel  for women, who in the past have had to risk  propositions and harassment from male cab  drivers.  The existence of Labyris has aroused the  ire of many men (the address of Labyris'  dispatch office is unlisted), and some male  cab drivers have complained of discrimination, saying they stand accused of being  rapists.  London's public transportation is reportedly so unsafe for women that feminist organizations such as Women Against Violence  Against Women are lobbying for segregated  cars in the subway and on passenger trains,  (from Linda Yiossle/Vancouver Sun) Kinesis    February 1982  WORK  Domestic workers organize, demand equal status  by Susan Hoeppner  A domestic workers' union became a reality  recently when more than 40 domestics,  from all parts of the world, met December  20 at the Vancouver Status of Women to  create the Domestic Workers Union of B.C.  (DWU).  Domestic workers at the founding meeting of the  Domestic Workers Unions of B.C.  Newly elected president of the union is  Daphne Williams, a Jamaican domestic who  has been working in Canada for eight  years.  Last year Ms. Williams was the  focus of a public campaign organized by  INCAR (International Committee Against  Racism) in which she won a battle over a  deportation order.  At the founding meeting of the union,  Daphne pointed out that decision to  unionize "did not happen overnight.  It  came after a lot of hard work and individual battles."  According to the union, domestic workers  represent one of the most abused segments  of Canada's work force.  The domestic  work permit system sets up immigration  conditions different from those of landed  immigrants. Domestic work permits must  be renewed periodically, and this allows  government and employers to (overtly or  surreptitiously) blackmail workers because  of their fear of deportation.  Our silent acceptance permits  exploitation  Secondly, domestic work is not recognized  as real work. Women who do domestic labour  are treated by society and by individual  employers as second-class workers.  This  is manifested in long hours of work, with  little or no time off, low pay, and an  appalling lack of privacy.  The stories  that domestic workers have to tell are  horrifying. Yet there is silent acceptance  by Canadian of this exploitation.  The constitution of the Domestic Workers  Union, passed unanimously, advocates the  following objectives:  To unite all domestic workers in British  Columbia in a single democratic organization.  To achieve for all domestic workers the  best standards of compensation and other  conditions of employment and to protect  the rights and interests of all domestic  workers; and in particular to organize to  achieve:  • better wages  • fewer hours of work without lessening  compensation  • overtime pay  • medical and dental benefits  • sick leave and benefits  ■ maternity protection and maternity  leave  • workers compensation for accident and  injury  ■ other leaves  To negotiate contracts of employment with  employers to ensure fair employment standards and a right to grievance and appeal  procedures.  To represent and promote at all levels of  government such changes in laws and regulations which improve the conditions of  domestic workers and to enforce the promotion of existing laws and regulations  which affect domestic workers.  To obtain and ensure the right of all  domestic workers to change their employer  regardless of their status in Canada.  Ms. Williams acknowledges that achieving  objectives is a formidable task.  "Fear is  the biggest obstacle for domestic workers.  Many domestics are afraid of being fired  or deported. We have been treated like  dirt for so long, we don't believe we  have any rights. Only by getting together  will this situation change."  One of the biggest problems the union faces  right now is lack of funds. Because  domestics' wages are so low, they cannot  afford the budget that effective organizing requires.  Yet in order to have a  strong beginning, money is crucial.  The Domestic Workers Union asks unions,  groups and individuals to contribute what  they can.  Donations can be directed to:  The Domestic Workers Union of B.C.  c/o 1992 West 1st Avenue  Vancouver, B.C. V6J 1G6  Telephone: 733-8764 Q  The Domestic Workers Union will be holding  a benefit sometime in March, which will be  a good opportunity for friends and supporters to show that support. See next month's  Kineses for further details.  The past year was one of militancy for union women  by Marion Pollack  In 1919 the B.C. Federation of Labour convention passed a resolution calling for a  six-hour work day, to be achieved by a  general strike.  If this resolution had  been placed on the floor of the 1981  convention, the leadership would probably  have pulled out all stops to defeat it.  1981 was a year of growing militancy for  women workers.  In the early part of the  year, CAIMAW members at Canadian Kenworth  won an equal pay for work of equal value  - settlement breakthrough.  In February,  telephone workers occupied the premises of  B.C. Tel and subsequently held out for a  long and bitter strike.  The spring and summer saw civic workers  strike to attain equal pay for work of  equal value, and a very successful strike  •by immigrant workers at Windermere Lodge.  And in August 1981, postal workers won  paid maternity leave. Yet the 26th annual  convention of the B.C. Federation of  Labour neither reflected nor attempted to  channel this militancy.  Technological changes such as office computers will radically alter women's work  in the near future.  It is estimated that  the word processor will reduce secretarial  jobs in Canada by l|-2 million.  The Women's Right Committee of the B.C.  Fed drafted an excellent paper on this  issue.  But while it provided a clear  analysis of the situation, the report did  not begin to outline the labour movement's  response to microchip technology. The .  nearest thing to response was promise of an  upcoming conference on technological  change and unemployment.  Equal pay issue could spark widespread  militant action  With the exception of a number of topical  comments, the 1981 Women's Rights Committee  report could have passed for an earlier  version. There was virtually no analysis  of the gains and defeats of the past year,  nor was there any direction as to how to  build on the momentum..  If the Women's Rights Committee would take  more active leadership, the women's movement inside and outside trade unions could  dramatically increase in strength. For a  start, the Committee could mount support  picket lines for striking workers, could  hold meetings throughout the province for  women to share ideas and experiences, and  could work with community groups to fight  for daycare and abortion rights.  The B.C. Federation of Labour is committed  (on paper at least) to support all unions  fighting for equal pay for work of equal  value.  Furthermore, the B.C. Fed has  undertaken to hold a conference in the  near future to discuss all aspects of equal  pay.  The equal pay issue has the potential to  attract many women to unions and militant  action. The winning of equal pay on a  province-wide basis will mean that the  position of all women, inside and outside  the paid labour force, will be drastically  improved.  Other resolutions dealth with by the convention included support for the FDR and  FMNL of El Salvador, a call for free 24-  hour quality childcare, endorsement of the  B.C. Organization to Fight Racism (BCOFR),  development of an anti-racist program,  opposition to the Coal Deal, condemnation  of franchise! childcare centres, a call to  re-hire the Pratt 3, and affirmation of  support for the Canadian Farmworkers  Union.  This convention showed that women's concerns are becoming more and more rooted  in the trade union movement. It is clear  that for women's issues to be taken  seriously within the Federation, we need  to continue to mobilize both within and  without the labour movement. 0 February 1982    Kinesis   9  TECHNOLOGY  Telidon promises obsolescence for workers, social movements  by Emma Flyer  Telidon. It sounds like some prehistoric  animal. In fact, it's technology that gives  government and business the means to make  dinosaurs out of the labour force.  Telidon is the ultimate in computer programming. It makes Information flashed on  the screen of a video display terminal  (VDT) look like a cartoon, rather than a  boring set of letters and numbers.  And if B.C. Tel and the Canadian government  have their way, within 10 or 20 years every  home will have a Telidon keyboard attached  to its television. It's going to change  our lives.  It's becoming rapidly apparent that advancing technology has real potential to entirely alter our way of life - thousands  of workers may well become redundant, a  liability to "society". What's perhaps less  immediately apparent is the isolation  people will experience in a "Telidonized"  society.  Don't worry about getting there  For instance, there will be no need to shop.  By punching in the co-ordinates of your  favourite store, your TV screen will flash  the pages of its catalogue. You make your  choice, punch in the co-ordinates and your  bank account number, and the money is automatically transferred to the store's account. Wipe out needless hours of browsing.  Wipe out retail and banking jobs at the  same time.  Want to get a book from the library, or  read a newspaper? Punch"in the co-ordinates  for the library and your favourite reading  subject. The screen will display book covers or newspapers, until you stop at the  one you're interested in. Page by page, you  can read it from the screen. No need to go  to the library, or buy a paper. No need to  leave home. Books, newspapers and magazines  will become obsolete. There will be drastic  reductions in the need for library workers,  and workers in the pulp and paper and printing industries.  Want to write a letter to a friend? With a  Telidon terminal, it'll be cheaper and  faster to punch it in your keyboard and  have it appear on her screen. No delay.  No letters cluttering up your hall. No  need for postal workers. No need to leave  home.  Want to work for pay? Some banks are already experimenting with computer cottage  industry. You have the VDT installed in  your home, so you can do your house/mother  work as well as your bank work. The bank  doesn't have to pay you sick leave when  your kids are sick. If you don't get all  your work done during the day, you can  finish it after the kids are in bed. And  if you refuse, another woman down the  street will take the work. After all, jobs  are going to be hard to find.  Prepare for life in the dinosaur patch.  Don't worry about getting there; government  and big business will pay for the ride, on  Telidon. Don't worry about taking the handout; for them, it's a cost-saver.  Telidon would replace woman-to-woman  contact  The federal Department of Communications  (DoC) is very interested in acceptance of  Telidon as a way of life. Along with B.C.  Tel, it has approached a number of community  groups suggesting that we participate in a  Telidon experiment.  They want each women's group to have a Telidon computer terminal for two years. To  begin with, a description of each organization, the work it does, its address, phone  number, and perhaps the name of a contact  person would be fed into the data bank.  Then, for example, a worker at the women's  health collective, instead of phoning Vancouver Status of Women to find out if they  have access to information on sexual harassment, would simply punch in "VSW" or "sexual  harassment" on the Telidon keyboard, and  wait for the information to appear on the  screen.  Some groups see the project as a community-  based autonomous information network, a  grass-roots alternative developed by women  for women. And although that sounds awfully  like what we already have, they are enthusiastic about the possibilities for freedom  of information that they see in the project.  <&>'  <-^~  .&      - ^  &  *ti&  ¬•  ^  ,v>>  <**>?>*  For at no cost to us (DoC would be footing  the bill), we would be provided with training and practice in using computer systems.  DoC would also pay for the terminals ($300-  $400 each) installed in our offices and in  selected libraries and recreation centres.  However, as I see it, there are a number of  ways that our participation in this project  could do serious irreparable damage to the  women's movement.  There would be a loss of woman-to-woman  connection in our daily organizing. Yet it  is the frequent contact in our work and  the resulting trust among us, that is the  basis of our information network. An accidental personal remark can start a discussion, an update of information, a new idea.  But if we could get the information we  need from a computer terminal, we might  not bother to make contact personally. We'd  lose that contact and the concomitant  sense of being part of a mutually supportive, informal network.  In fact, after two years on the computer,  chances are we'd have lost a good deal of  the network that keeps us connected. Those  of us with networking skills now would  probably not lose them, but new women  wouldn't have the same experience, might  not find their way into the network without woman contact.  Consider our rate of burnout and turnover.  It's quite possible that two years down  the road, many of our organizations will  be staffed almost entirely by new women.  What if their experience in connecting  with other feminist organizations consisted mainly of automatic updates on a video  screen?  When funding for the project reached its  cutoff date, those dependent on the computer would have to switch fundraising  priorities. They'd have to find money for  terminals, computer time, training new  members. New members would have to be  women who didn't object to computer technology, and who weren't intimidated by it.  Would we even recognize our own organizations in five years?  Hazard to health, control of  communication  It seems ludicrous that we're being offered the chance to learn computer skills in  our own offices on machines that we've  been protesting, that we don't trust, that  are wiping out jobs where we earn money to  subsidize our political work, that we're  certain do damage to our eyes and central  nervous systems.  There are a number of issues that probably  haven't been examined by groups being approached about Telidon. One of these is,  do we want to experiment with a new toy  built under incredibly exploitive conditions? An article in the magazine "Second  Class, Working Class" describes how the  eyesight of Asian and Indonesian women who  manufacture microchips severely deteriorates after two years on the assembly line,  effectively ending their work-life, and  how employers are able to refuse responsibility and compensation for this loss.  Another issue is government access to centralized information about the women's  movement. Is this the first wave of an  avalanche of information about us that will  be fed into government computers? And who  will control what information goes in and  what doesn't? If one group refuses to provide information, will another inform on  them? How much will they tell? If your name  comes up as a contact for more than one  group, what will that mean if the government suddenly becomes more repressive? The  RCMP are still building files on lesbians  and gays, even though they've been advised  by the Solicitor General that it's no longer illegal to be gay. Feminists are often  accused of being lesbians. Are you getting  nervous?  Do we want government computers to have the  ability to monitor how often information is  requested by one group from another, ie.  who has strong links? What does it mean  when we submit proposals for other kinds of  funding? Will only those "on the computer"  be considered "legitimate"? Why has the  Department of Communications approached us?  We've been offered access to people who can  use computer terminals in libraries and  recreation centres, and jobs and skills  for a handful of women - small advantages  when weighed against the damage which might  be done- to the women's movement.  We must be solid in our resistance to this  project. Groups who are considering participating must realize they are putting  other organizations and individuals at  risk, without our consent, and for short-  term advantage to themselves. If some are  co-opted by the project, while others resist, there will be deep splits in the  women's movement, in Vancouver and nationally. Our communications network as it  stands is in fact one of the strengths of  our movement.  Let's keep it that way.  Q 10   Kinesis    February 1982  ARMED STRUGGLE  Revolution a complex mix of hope, justice, violence  by Jill Bend  The two articles on non-violence in the  last issue have spurred me to write.  I  hope to be able to open some minds to the  dangers of pacifist ideology, and to  divert any trend towards the equating of  feminism with pacifism.  I don't agree that feminism is intrinsically a non-violent movement.  If people  want to talk about violence/non-violence,  they should outline exactly what they mean  by those terms.  I have encountered people  too often who believe that chanting slogans is violent (in which case most of us  are violent immoralists! ) or that destroying property is violent.  It is a real knee-jerk liberal reaction to  rave on about how abhorrent violence is.  That is far too simplistic a way of dealing  with a complex issue.  It shows how fearful people are of the question.  Regarding the B.C. Organization to Fight  Racism (BCOFR) rally, feminists can support  or not support what goes on at rallies from  other positions than whether violence was  used.  I don't support what went on because I don't need to be involved in  rivalry between two hierarchical, Marxist,  male-dominated groups.  Those characteristics are the source  of the problem;  violence is just the result.  Reality necessitates the means  Women can work against racism, or other  oppressions using other methods, in other  groups and at other rallies. So it  doesn't concern me whether there was  violence at that rally. My heart and  support isn't behind either of those  groups, whose motives I believe are  questionable.  People should stop freaking out at the  fact that violence happened at the rally,  and consider that maybe they were freaked  out at being caught in the middle of a  violent situation, perhaps being used.  We should be saying that this is not  acceptable.  Obviously, violence between two anti-  racist groups is not okay, it's absurd.  Political violence between left and right,  progressives and reactionaries, and the  need to defend ourselves as a movement,  is what the issue should be. For example,  what would we do if the KKK attacked our  rally?  Historically, the progressive community  has gained a certain amount of strength  by organizing peacefully.  Then at a  certain point, right-wing elements and the  state attack them violently.  This does  not happen because the common people have  used violence or guerilla warfare, it is  just how the right responds to the legitimate and democratic development of radical  ideas.  We should note here that recent arrests  of members of the Black Liberation Army  and Weather Underground after the Brinks  robbery in New York have given the FBI and  state police the go-ahead to harass, invade  and terrorize radical, Third World, and  feminist organizations and communities  throughout the area.  It is a clear  example of how we must stand together  against police tyranny; otherwise our  apprehensions about violence and armed  resistance are used against us to implicate and convict other members of progressive movements.  So when we talk about violence, let's talk  instead about the millions of indigenous  people of North America who have been  systematically wiped out through disease,  military attack and cultural annihilation.  And that attack still continues.  It's  not a trivial matter.  Let's talk about how the majority of people  in North America who are not white are  forced to live. In this "land of opportunity", there are people who starve to  death, who freeze to death, who are brutalized by hysterectomy and lobotomy.  Phenomenal numbers are totally abused,  destroyed and killed each year.  This is violence!  Let's talk about it.  This is the ultimate, sickening evil.  But are pacifists talking about that, or  is it all just an abstraction?  I believe you can't be a true pacifist and  live off the fruits of a violent society.  If you consume any of the goods that come  from the violence of this obviously  violent society, then you are participating in violence and cannot be a pacifist.  Pacifists are generally dogmatic types.  They say that means (strategy or tactics)  determine the end, but in so believing  they are only looking at the physical act,  rather than seeing also the spiritual  aspects of resistance and development.  The act of hope, the beliefs we want to  teach our children, are all part of any  revolutionary's means.  But pacifists reduce means to the merest  factor of whether or not violence is  involved. For example, Amnesty International refuses to support political prisoners if they have used violence. No  matter how much they believed in their  struggle or loved their people, Amnesty  remains aloof from their life and pain.  And that is because, though conscientious,  A.I. remains a middle-class liberal  organization.  I believe you have to look at the total  being of a person or movement.  It is  true that the means create the end, but  the means can only be an amalgamation of  all the elements of your work and personal life.  Inner strength, compassion,  a sense of justice — all these factors  work to create the end.  It cannot be  reduced to one nefarious moral thorn of  righteousness.  Believing in peace does not automatically  make someone especially good.  Look at  what bastions of patriarchal, hypocritical, war-like attitudes most religions  are.  Pacifists make a religion out of  their .pacifism and, as I see it, religion  usually foments fascism.  What does it really mean to say that you  are for peace? Rockefellers and Reagans  all say they are for peace.  Better to  say that you are for freedom of people  from the chains that bind them.  It is often said that people who believe  in the use of violence also believe that  "the end justifies the means", but this  shows misunderstanding. Their position  is rather, that "the reality necessitates  the means".  It is important to understand this difference because it says we must look with  naked minds at the reality of the enemy  and the power for and against us, assess  the situation and act in whatever manner  necessary to ensure victory and survival.  When you see that freedom from oppression  is what people are working for, you realize that any talk about "ends" is only  artificial and static.  What we are fighting for is not a goal, but a process and  way of living, and it is clear to me that  any "means" of moving forward must be  honourable.  Progressive people who use violence are  talking about the need for freedom, the  need to defend ourselves and overcome  obstacles in our path to freedom.  The  real violence comes daily from those who  would do anything to stop us from reaching  freedom.  Revolutionary violence (armed resistance  is used to keep, or regain any rights  we've had.  It gets ridiculous when people  put down the use of revolutionary violence.  The amount of fighting that goes on to  defend ourselves is quite minimal compared  to the enormity of the attack that goes on  continually-against the earth and its  people.  Does the very use of violence warp a person? This is quite a theoretical criticism. After all, we could claim that  your unwillingness to stand up and put  your life on the line shows that you are  warped — sort of like a robot; with the  lack of commitment to risk your life or  take a life, for the sake of larger  humanity.  No-one wants to build a new society through  violence alone, as critics of violence  accuse. Rather we have to build it  through people, changing the way we want to  live, becoming strong and spiritual individuals.  To admit to anything less is to reduce  our  desires and actions to one facet only. To  take violent action in defence of your  human rights may even offer you more  morally and spiritually than being passive,  and not acting.  For oppressed people especially, resistance is the most important thing. And it  comes in different forms. For some  people, it is nonviolent; for others, it  is violent.  There is nothing to be lost,  and everything to be gained, by taking  action to resist and stand up for your  rights.  Kristin's article, about experiences in  her own life, is valid for her but it has  been experienced only by her. A personal  view is crucial but there is more than  that. I didn't see much reflection about  the question of non-violence from a world  view.  Continued on page 11 February 1982    Kinesis    11  ARMED STRUGGLE  REVOLUTION continued from page 10  It's strange to see how some people will  stand behind individuals and groups (so  often women) who are "victims".  Yet  when these victims stand up and fight to  take some power back, they suddenly become  reluctant to show support.  I don't agree that women have always been  nonviolent. Many political prisoners are  women. In the U.S. and Europe there are  many women who have been part of guerilla  groups who are dead or in prison now.  There is also a history of strong actions  taken by feminists.  Women have acted  against pornography and sexism in advertising, and some people would call their  actions violent since it involves force,  property destruction, and/or other  illegal elements.  What is violence? Is property destruction  violent?  If we don't believe we must inevitably arm ourselves, then what do we  believe is inevitable? Mass slaughter?  Apathy? Acquiesenee?  Kristin mentions with respect to the film  about Nicaragua, "Women in Arms", that she  "wasn't heartened to hear women discuss  what kinds of guns they prefer" and that  she didn't think it "liberating for women  to kill next to their male comrades."  Women already participate in "war"  The point is not that the women were  killing, but that they were defending  themselves and their people! They were  fighting for freedom, not because they  liked to kill. And why shouldn't women  discuss gun preferences, if they are  welcome to discuss food, and movie, and  car preferences?  For the Nicaraguan people to free themselves from the rule of a dictator,  somebody has to fight.  There's no reason  why women shouldn't have been participating, and there is nothing immoral or  degrading about it.  It was necessary for  the women to participate along with all  the people at that time, in order to  change the quality of their lives, and  to ensure that they and their children  had a future.  It's important not to be afraid to learn  what a gun is. As long as women refuse,  because of principles or fear, to learn  what a gun is, and while men learn as  children what guns are about, we are  always going to be victims!  The society we live in is already a warlike one.  Women already parti.cpate in  "war" and unfortunately we usually lose.  Through my work in the anti-prison'movement, I have seen that the state has  categories for crimes committed by women.  They claim more women are committing  violent crimes these days.  Yet most of these "crimes" are in fact  self-defence. Women are fighting back  against abusive relationships, and are  being locked up and classified as violent  for it.  When feminists support Inez  Garcia, Joan Little, Yvonne Wanrow, and  the many more women who've been through  the same, we should realize that those  women have been made to serve time for  killing a man who brought terror into  their lives.  Our support of these women has been concrete and we have known exactly what we  have supported. I don't see any difference between what Inez Garcia did (she  killed one of the men who raped her) and  what a group working against rape might  decide to do in terms of carrying weapons.  As women, we should acquaint ourselves  with the use of weapons like knives and  guns — learn how to use our own bodies  for self-defence.  It is empowering to  to learn these things. To not do it, to  be unwilling to deal with the violence  in our world, is to leave ourselves sitting ducks, more vulnerable than we ever  should be.  Pacifists, by taking a strict position on  the issue of violence, ignore the reality  of changing modes of organization. As  the world around us changes, and as political situations change, so do our ways  of responding to it.  It's not an either-  or situation.  Instead, we have to judge  the situation for what is most needed,  most appropriate.  My major criticism of pacifists is that  they are more concerned about their position on nonviolence than they are about  other things going on in the world.  It is  more upsetting to them that people are  standing up for their rights in a "violent"  manner, than that the Earth is being  totally decimated.  I believe that all energy must be put towards ending the inhumanities that are  the most  crippling and destructive.  When  you are about to be devoured by a behemoth  monster, you try to eliminate it, you don't  contemplate subtleties and abstractions in  the heat of the moment.  Around the anti-nuclear movement there are  a lot of peace oriented people, but I find  many are more concerned about whether or  not you are violent than whether or not  we can stop the nuclear menace. They are  only willing to go so far in any struggle,  before they stop short ... right at the  point where they might compromise their  pacifism.  If you saw a woman being brutalized by  someone, and you knew you could only save  her by using violence, would you hesitate?  Would you be so selfishly moralistic in  refusing to use violence that you would,  in fact, commit violence by allowing the  attack against her to continue?  If you would do whatever necessary, then  you can't be a pacifist, because you  acknowledge the need for violence as a  response to some situations, and that  realization has far-reaching implications.  People fight back against what they perceive is violence to them.  Surely femin-.  ists must know that there are many different kinds of violence.  Women are victimized in many ways, within a lot of  "approved" institutions.  But society would  never say that marriage is a tradition of  violence for women.  Feminists have challenged a lot of society's preconceptions and values. Why do  we still accept the propaganda that armed  resistance is a degenerate, uncivilized  tactic?  People in North America look to the  changes in the Third World in their political work, but they aren't willing for the  same changes to happen here, and will  usually oppose local guerilla activity.  They oppose it because it means a change  in what they've always had.  It means  insecurity, instability, and that threat  of losing what privileges they ave.  Their Third World-ism also shows they think  it isn't bad here, only in the Third  World, as if our society is bad only because of what it does in the Third World.  They don't see the total connection.  A country isn't democratic at home, and  fascistic in the Third World. A corrupt  system is corrupt and repressive every  way and everywhere.  It must be c  and fought at its heart.  Violence, a male tradition  I think most feminists would agree with  Kristin's concerns about what is going  on in Iran, Afghanistan, Bulgaria, China  and Vietnam, and agree it is not progressive. Communist violence is no better  than capitalist violence.  In fact it further supports my position  that most violence comes from men trying  to impose their rule over others.  The  women's movement has always known the  institution of patriarchy as a death-  dealing one.  How can Kristin say she has "no illusion  that if we confront authority non-  violently, they will fight us peacefully.  Far from it, the revolution will be  violent ", and at the same time believe  we must only respond with "moral force,  overwhelming numbers and non-violence"?  She then goes on to say that many nonviolent methods have been used successfully.  There is a contradiction here —  perhaps between what she knows is necessary and what she hopes will work!  If, as Kristin says, it is not easy to  plan alternatives to the use of violence,  then she must be responsible for her advocacy of non-violence. If non-violence  is not a viable alternative to the use of  violence, and I don't believe it is, then  it should not be advocated.  It is important to question where the  belief and desperate hope that nonviolence  will work comes from.  Is it from within,  or is it a value perpetrated through  society to keep us down?  Future is not in the ozone  The last thing the rulers want is for us  to believe we have the right to defend  ourselves with arms. Many people are  under threat and attack right now, yet  pacifists continue to proffer hypocritical  Christian tenets like "thou shalt not  kill" and "love thy enemy".  Pacifists  want to place faith in people who have  never proven themselves to be anything  other than dishonourable.  Nonviolence has become a privileged  bourgeois position for those who don't  want to dirty their hands.  They want  peace, I'm sure we all do, but just  peace? Life is a struggle.  It's not  pretty or peaceful but it is the reality  for now and the foreseeable future. For  those who find it too real and seedy,  they'd better look somewhere else.  Out  in the ozone.  Continued on page 30 12   Kinesis    February 1982  HEALTH  Midwifery Task Force asserts integrity of midwifery  by Louise Mangan  Unlike European countries, Canada has no  provision for comprehensive midwifery education or care. We are one of only nine  countries within the World Health Organization which do not educate and license  midwives.  Canada's birth figures do reflect a high  standard of living, early termination of  many unwanted pregnancies, and medicine's  attempt to provide "total care". Yet few  doctors or nurses can offer the respectful  philosophy, diagnostic and support skills,  or time for preventive care that midwives  can.  Crisis intervention dominates childbirth  Instead, our obstetric system substitutes  emergency treatment for preventive caring,  often achieving results by artificial means.  In B.C., doctors now "rescue" half our  babies artificially, using forceps or  Caesarian.  Midwifery expertise is "crisis prevention',  pregnancy, birth and the early weeks of  parenting, the midwife combines human  vision and technical expertise to watch  for problems, using conversative skills  where necessary   /^TTT^T^^f  to prevent them./' '/ ' \   \   \V^  %!   ii  ially harmful drugs and procedures substitute for continuous personal monitoring.  Inadequately trained professionals offer  fragmentary care, and anxious women labour  with only brief attendance by strangers,  often battling the physical effects of  fear.  Thus it is not surprising that doctors and  nurses rarely see a spontaneous birth, or  a woman whose perineum has not been cut,  or the unfolding feelings of a family with  their newborn in the hours after birth.  Other countries achieve better results with  a fraction of the damage to body and soul.  Experience in the Netherlands and in Scan-  danavian countries validates the traditional midwifery premise that all woman and  their babies benefit from thorough antenatal education, sensitive assessment,  continuous encouragement, and respectful  protection for the natural process.  Midwifery expertise is "crisis prevention".  Through pregnancy, birth and the early  Through  The medical system gleans what it can from  midwives educated in other countries by  hiring them to work as obstetric nurses.  But nowadays, few midwives are willing to  work as obstetric nurses, because the job  nacks appropriate responsibility and recognition. Midwives on hospital staff have  no contact with mothers before or after  labour, and may not assist the birth unless  no doctor arrives. Only in northern nursing  stations (where doctors don't go) can  midwives practise in Canada.  Without midwives to affirm the birthing  abilities of women and to provide early  detection of problems, "crisis intervention" dominates childbirth.  Disruptions to the natural process aggravate maternal and fetal distress. Potent-  BOROWSKI SUIT continued from page 4   is vital to use the time ahead to good  advantage to show that the majority of  Canadians support our demands.  In this emergency, it is timely that the  B.C. Federation of Women convention last  November voted to sponsor province-wide  actions for abortion rights to be held  the weekend of Mother's Day, May 8-9,  1982. A BCFW Action Committee, together  with Concerned Citizens for Choice on  Abortion (CCCA) in Vancouver, have begun  organizing for these events.  We want to inform all our supporters about  these plans and urge them to take part in  making the Mother's Day actions for abortion rights hugely successful.  In the Lower Mainland, a planning meeting  has been called for Saturday, February 13  at Trout Lake Community Centre in Vancouver, from l-4pm. Nearly 200 organizations  have received letters inviting them to  send participants. The meeting is also  weeks of parenting, the midwife combines  human vision and technical expertise to  watch for problems, using skills where  necessary to prevent them.  In this way, couples safely enjoy the least  possible intrusion, an enriched ability to  give birth and be parents, and an awareness  of their own role in childbirth.  Participants in conference found  common ground  In February 1980, the Maternal Health Society of B.C. sponsored a conference called  "Midwifery is a Labour of Love" in Vancou-  Organizers believed that a critical analysis of Canadian obstetrics would lead to  recognition of the need for midwifery, and  that respect for diverse contributions  would alleviate fear and balance different  visions of midwifery. Conference speakers  were drawn from Europe, the United Kingdom,  the United States and Canada.  The three hundred midwives, nurses, parents  and doctors who attended the conference  found unexpected common ground.  They agreed to work together to make quail  fied midwives available to families through  the health care system, and to provide for  the education and licensing of midwives.  A petition for provincial circulation was  developed to document public support. An  Interdisciplinary Midwifery Task Force  was created to plan optimal education and  services, and a provincial association of  midwives formed to consolidate the vision  and momentum of midwives.  The Interdisciplinary Midwifery Task Force  has become a model health planning organization, with a representative board of parents, obstetricians, general practitioners,  and midwives (with and without formal  training).  Nursing background not necessary  The strength of agreement among these diverse perspectives, even in areas of potential controversy, has been inspiring.  First, the integrity of midwifery was established as a common goal. "Nurse" and  "lay" midwives (the Task Force does not  accept the distinction) agreed that formal  education of midwives, by midwives, will  maximize the safety and well-being of  childbearing families.  Medicalization of midwifery in other parts  of the world has only jeopardized the status, role and skill of the midwife. European experience has shown that nursing  background is not necessary to quality  care, and that the status of the "nurse-  midwife" is in fact threatened by the  traditional doctor-nurse relationship.  Similarly, Task Force members reached consensus on out-of-hospital midwifery practice. Those members committed to a range of  birth options believe that midwifery expertise will make birth safer in hospital and  out, and that out-of-hospital options, with  medical backup, can be shown to be safe.  Those who fear birth outside hospital are  reassured that midwifery practice will begin in existing institutions and expand as  safety,is demonstrated. Q  open to individuals who support abortion  rights. It will decide on the type and  format of the Vancouver area action and  will - strike committees to begin organizing  the program, publicity, fundraising, and  soliciting of endorsements.  At the same time, contacts are being made  with women's and other organizations  around the province that might organize  local actions on Saturday, May 8 or L'cther  Day, May 9. The date and choice of action  may vary and should be decided locally.  But public actions are strongly suggested,  as these have the most impact.  Possible actions might be:  * a public meeting with speakers from  the women's movement and from important  organizations in your area  * a larger-scale conference, at which  workshops as well as speakers could be  featured  * a demonstration in the streets, culminating in a rally with speakers.  BCFW and CCCA seek to involve as many organizations and individuals as possible in  these province-wide actions. Contacts are  currently being made with the labour movement, community organizations, and other  groups. Support has been pledged by the  NDP Women's Rights Committee.  Interested readers are invited to contact  us through: Concerned Citizens for Choice  on Abortion, P.O. Box 24617, Station C,  Vancouver, B.C. V5T 4E1 (phone (604) 876-  9920.  Remember that poll after poll over the  past decade has shown the majority of  Canadians support women's right to abortion. Our task is to mobilize this support  and make it vocal and visible.  Together, we can win. Q This we know.     The earth does not belong  to humanity  — humanity belongs to the  earth.     This we know.    All things are  connected like the blood which unites one  family.    All things are connected.     Whatever befalls the earth befalls the sons  and daughters of the earth.     We did not  weave the web of life,  we are merely a  strand in it.     Whatever we do to the web,  we do to ourselves. "  — Chief Seattle - 1854  We are now in a state of profound disharmony and imbalance with earth and with  each other. Our air, land and water are  dangerously polluted.  Many species of  animal and plant life are disappearing  forever from the earth. We live under the  increasing threat of nuclear war which  could destroy all life as we know it.  This situation is the inevitable result of  a value system that promotes domination  and exploitation of the earth and of  people rather than co-operation and mutual  respect.  Just as there are fundamental connections  that bind all life, so are there close  inter--connections among the causes of the  crisis that we now face.  In the same way  that humans have manipulated and controlled the environment, so men have subjugated women, whites have dominated  people of colour, technologically developed nations have exploited third world  nations, and corporate interests have  used workers to produce profits.  Patriarchal mentality promotes  domination  Nuclear technology is the latest and  potentially most destructive manifestation  of domination. The same mentality which  has supported a "power-over" ownership  attitude on the part of men towards  women over the ages now allows the rape  of the earth through uranium mining, the  dumping and unsafe storage of nuclear and  chemical wastes, nuclear weapons testing  and nuclear power plants which leak  radiation.  The same mentality that is behind the  nuclear industry and the nuclear arms  race operates in our government, our  economic system, in our legal and educational systems, in industry, in the mili  tary and in our social and cultural  value system. This set of values promotes  domination and exploitation and is known  as "the patriarchal mentality."  The patriarchal mentality perpetuates inequalities of all kinds.  It shapes our  educational system, preparing some  children to be assembly line workers and  others to be executives.  It allows  viable, profit-making companies to lay  off hundreds of employees without concern  for their welfare.  It maintains a prison system that hides  and restrains the worst victims of these  inequalities.  It allows more to be spent  on weapons of mass destruction than on  any other single endeavour. And it  promotes the destructive attitude that  men have a "natural right" to dominate  women, that whites are superior to  people of colour, that it is in the best  interests of the third world to have  their land, resources and people exploited  by industrially developed nations.  People, environment considered  expendable  It is not that all peoples in all times  have incorporated this attitude of domination into their way of living. Native  people on this continent, for example,  did live in close harmony with the  environment before the white people came  (and are the only ones today who must  deal with uranium mining on their land  and the resulting destruction of their  health and environment).  There is a native saying: "As the earth  is treated, so is the woman." It is no  accident with the patriarchal mentality  as the dominant cultural value in the  world today, that women, aboriginal  peoples and the environment are all considered expendable in the pursuit of  power and technological "progress".  Our  system values the production and consumption of commodities over the quality of  human life.  The health and welfare of the earth, of  women, native peoples, workers, people  of colour and third world peoples are  increasingly threatened by the many expressions of the patriarchal mentality —  sexism, racism, capitalism, imperialism  and the inhumane uses of technology. None  of these are in the best interests of a  healthy and satisfying life for any of us.  The issue is quality of life  The problem of nuclear technology is one  part of the same issue. The issue is the  quality of life, not mere survival in a  violent world where women live under the  threat of sexual assault, where the already  low life expectancy of native peoples is  being further decreased by uranium mining  and wastes on their lands, and where there  is a continual increase in cancer and  birth defects from low-level radiation  and environmental pollution.  The -patriarchal mentality is not confined,  to the powerful men who control the  economic, political and military systems  of the world today.  Because of its pervasive influence in every aspect of society, everyone to a greater or lesser  extent has absorbed some of these values.  For this reason, it is necessary that we  support each other's individual work to  unlearn these values and rid ourselves of  sexist, racist and exploitive behaviour  as well as working together to change  societal values.  As feminists, we do not accept the right  of men to have power over women, of any  race or nationality to consider itself  superior to another, of any group of  people to use the labour of others and  the natural resources of the earth for its  own profit.  It is not enough, however, to merely  change who  dominates.  We must challenge  the very notion of domination itself.  Contrary to much popular belief in our  society, the "drive to dominate" is not  an innate characteristic of human beings.  Human society is basically a co-operative  endeavour — and must be  to survive.  Transforming the prevailing values of our  culture means rejecting the idea that anyone can have "power over" anyone or  anything else; it means reclaiming our own  non-exploitive power, acquiring control of  our own lives and working together within  the context of a co-operative and respectful community. Q 14   Kinesis    February 1982  NUCLEAR POWER  'A' is for atom — a primer on atomic energy  What is nuclear power? For most of us, the  answer to this question is riddled with  scientific terminology to the point that  we would need a code book to decipher it  all. "Electron", "isotope", "half-life" and  "chain reaction" are all terms relevant to  the nuclear industry. An understanding of  the nature of nuclear power is necessary if  we are to consider how it affects all of  our lives.  Let's start at the beginning ...  Atoms are the basic building blocks of  matter. A cluster of atoms is known as a  molecule.  Water, wood, glass, oxygen and  all other matter is composed of molecules.  An atom consists of an extreme1/ dense  nucleus surrounded by an orbiting swarm of  electrons.  The nucleus consists of a certain number of positively charged protons  and neutral neutrons.  The protons and  weight of an element is the total of its  protons and neutrons.  Nuclei (plural of nucleus) which have the  same number of protons (same atomic  numbers) but different numbers of neutrons  (di fferent atomic weights) are called  isotopes.  Uranium, which is the fuel for nuclear  reactors, is a common element which has  Figure 2: Fission  produce an unstable Up,,. u",, then flies  apart into two large pieces called fission  products.  During the fission process, several neutrons and gamma rays (radioactive waves)  Figure 3:  Chain  Reaction  © fRoTON  r=5>  f\IUO-£U5  CaNsIS^   HAS   * CBN^fM-   ^i£^-  ,St'^  of p^s ANP #^  o  ^'O </  9,0 jx. °H  y^ -i     u,u  | • 7  .235  Figure 1  neutrons are held together by a very  powerful nuclear force.  For each positively charged proton, there is a corresponding negatively charged electron. This  makes the atom neutral in terms of charge.  Currently, there are 104 different kinds  of atoms, called elements.  The first 92  element-s occur naturally and the rest are  man-made.  The number of protons in the  nucleus of the element gives us its  atomic number.  While the nucleus of an element has a  fixed number of protons, it can have a  different number of neutrons.  The atomic  several different isotopes.  The two  uranium isotopes Up,, and Up,,, are the  most abundant in nature.  Up,, is the most  valuable for its use in atomic and nuclear  fuel but it makes up only 7%  of natural  uranium.  Any element which has an atomic number of  83 or more is unstable or radioactive.  This means that these atoms can spontaneously eject or radiate neutrons from  their nuclei.  The basis of nuclear energy is the capturing of energy released when the nucleus of  an atom is split apart. This splitting is  called fission.  Nuclear power plants derive their energy  from the splitting or fissioning of Up.  When Up,, is bombarded by neutrons,  this element will capture a neutron to  235*  are also released. Fission products form  part of the waste of the nuclear power and  weapons industry.  Each time a U?,, nucleus fissions, 2 or 3  neutrons are set free.  These neutrons may  be captured by other Up,, nuclei causing  them to fission.  If each fissioning U?  nucleus causes on the average more than'"'  one additional Up,, to fission, an uncontrollable reaction occurs.  This is known  as a chain reaction which can result in an  atomic explosion.  However, if some of the neutrons are removed by a neutron absorbing material (e.g.  graphite) so that each U",, causes only  one Up,, to fission, then the chain reaction is controlled. Nuclear power plants  use controlled chain reactions to produce  power.  The smallest mass or amount of fissionable  material that will sustain a nuclear chain  reaction is called critical mass.  The  critical mass of U0,, is 10 pounds, which  would be approximately the size of a  grapefruit.  The information in this section is from  No Nukes — Everyone's Guide to Nuclear  Power by Anna Gyorgy.  Women Against Nuclear Technology (WANT) is  a feminist anti-nuclear organization that  started in Vancouver in the fall of 1979.  We came into existence because we saw an  absence in the anti-nuclear movement of  an analysis which clearly defined the  connection between sexism, racism, capitalism, imperialism and the development  of nuclear technology.  Our role has been primarily educational  and has included organization of a feminist  anti-nuclear conference and Holly Near  concert, presentations at environmental,  anti-nuclear and women's conferences,  public speaking, preparation of original  material for distribution, and a film  showing.  In addition, we have actively  .participated in the April 26 International  Day of Nuclear Protest Coalition for the  past three years.  We try to raise anti-nuclear awareness in  the women's movement, and to demonstrate  that militarism and the abuse of technology  are feminist issues. We also try to  raise feminist awareness in the anti-  nuclear movement by pointing out the  relationship between the exploitation of  the earth and the oppression of women,  people of colour, workers, third world  and aboriginal peoples.  We are available to speak to groups and  are currently open to new members.  If  there are enough interested women, we  hope to have a street theatre group soon.  For more information, call 255-0523 or  734-5393, or write 1774 Grant-Street, £7,  Vancouver, V5L 2Y7.  The following W.A.N.T. members wrote the  articles which appear in this feature:  Annette Clough, Sandra Kalmakoff, Miriam  Moses, Kristin Penn, Lezlie Wagman, and  Maggie Zeigler.  Copies of this feature are available from  Women Against Nuclear Technology, #7-1774  Grant Street, Vancouver, B.C.  Cost is 50^ per copy or 30jzf per copy for  orders of 10 or more. February 1982    Kinesis    15  NUCLEAR POWER  Nuclear technology at home in B.C., despite moratorium  We live in a country that is deeply committed to nuclear production. - Saskatchewan and Ontario are major centres of  uranium mining and exploration continues  constantly.  Some of this uranium goes to power nuclear  power plants and projects in Canada but  the vast majority of it, about 90%, is  exported. The Canadian government is  committed to the export of uranium and  nuclear technology, as evidenced by the  overseas sales of Canadian designed CANDU  reactors.  This stance of the Canadian government  results in environmental destruction,  massive nuclear waste disposal problems,  disruption of world peace, and the encouragement of nuclear weapon production.  The export of nuclear reactors and uranium  provides nuclear technology to countries  that do not possess it.  Plutonium, a byproduct of reactors, and raw material for  nuclear weapons, is then available.  Sometimes these issues seem far away, but  they affect all of us and we have a responsibility to act.  Here in British  Columbia, we have no nuclear reactors,  there is a moratorium on uranium mining  and there seems to be a plentiful supply  of hydro electricity.  This situation lends itself to a feeling  of security.  But there are local issues  that are cause for serious alarm and we  need to educate ourselves as to what they  are. We need to lend individual and  organized support to the protection of our  environment, our province's resources and  our health.  Nuclear power, nuclear  weapons and nuclear waste are  British  Columbia issues.  Looking first at the military connection,  the Canadian government itself owns or  produces no nuclear weapons.  But this  does not stop us from playing host to the  American military on the strategic  Pacific coast.  This presence has an  environmental as well as a military impact.  Nuclear weapons do not need to be exploded  to be hazardous.  Accidents happen,  leakages occur, radiation is released,  and, unbelievable as it may seem, weapons  are lost.  In the 1950's, a U.S. military  plane in trouble jettisoned its nuclear  cargo into the Pacific Ocean off the B.C.  coast and went on to crash on land. The  cargo has never been located.  Prior to the B.C. moratorium on  uranium mining, three people were arrested in Genelle B.C., the site of a proposed uranium mine, for blocking  uranium exploration work in the China  Creek watershed, the town s water supply. All three were Cominco workers in  Trail, one of whom had personal experience with cancer. The judge handed  down an absolute discharge, commending the three for their integrity and  motivation to protest.  There are several areas for concern:  Nanoose Bay on Vancouver Island is the  largest underwater weapons testing facility  in the world.  American nuclear submarines  are regularly tested there for radiation  leaks and instrument performance. The  base is staffed jointly by American and  Canadian personnel.  The Canadian Forces Base at Comox on  Vancouver Island is a storage facility for -  BRITISH COLUMBIA  (0)    URANIUM EXPLORATION  >j>W   PROPO  Qj}'"e;wT*s<  SEO URANIUM MINES  and.lClearwaler)  ?    X Bugaboc  Monash  Lassie L  ake (Beavetdell)  S\         PROPOSED NUCLEAR REACTORS  I'W I Ccmox  \R WEAPONS BASES  br>Nanoos  Bay  L^ J HANDLING  Nuclear hot spots in British Columbia and Washington  American nuclear warheads.  In case of  radiation leakage or accident, there is no  comprehensive emergency evacuation plan.  The United States government is negotiating with Canada for access to three  miles of water north of the Queen Charlotte  Islands. They want to build a Trident  submarine base on the U.S.-owned Prince  of Wales Island, but American waters are  too shallow to allow passage.  Because the missiles Trident carries  have the capacity and accuracy to destroy  a distant missile base before retaliation  can be launched, the Trident is a key  component of ''first strike limited nuclear  war" in'which, theoretically, only one  "shot" will be fired and one side will  "win".  The first Trident nuclear submarine is  due to arrive at Bangor, Washington early  in the summer of 1982. Besides posing a  direct missile threat to our safety, the  Tridents will utilize sea lanes along the  Canadian-American border and will pass  through Canadian waters in the Juan de  Fuca strait.  Radioactive contaminated  coolant is likely to be released into the  ocean on a regular basis.  There are also non-military projects in  British Columbia which produce radioactive  waste.  In Vancouver, radioactive wastes  from the University of British Columbia's  TRIUMF cyclotron, as well as from hospitals, must be transported through city  streets and stored at some disposal site.  At Simon Fraser University in Burnaby,  plans are being considered for the construction of a SLOWPOKE nuclear research  reactor (SLOWPOKE stands for safe, low  power, critical experiment).  SFU is located on an earthquake fault line, which  makes it a particularly dangerous place  for a nuclear facility.  SLOWPOKE will  require uranium for fuel, which necessitates all steps in the nuclear fuel cycle  from mining, milling and enrichment of  uranium to the transportation and storage  of radioactive materials and waste.  Health  and safety hazards will be posed at every  stage.  What makes SLOWPOKE especially ominous is  that it is a prototype for the small scale  nuclear reactor envisioned to provide heat  to small buildings or neighbourhoods. The  Canadian nuclear power industry may bail  itself out of financially unviable large-  scale reactor production by promoting  SLOWPOKE as "your friendly neighbourhood  reactor."  One of British Columbia's major industries  is mining, and there are several existing  and planned mines that are hazardous. The  AMAX mine at Kitrault is one of these.  The molybdenum mining and milling operation  there has proceeded over widespread opposition from the public, as well as from the  Nishga Indians who live in the area.  Continued on page 21 16   Kinesis    February 191  NUCLEAR POWER  Nuclear fuel cycle adds up to a deadly legacy  The nuclear fuel cycle involves six major  steps: mining, milling, enrichment, fuel  fabrication, nuclear power plants, and  nuclear reactor wastes.  The purpose of the nuclear fuel cycle is  two-fold:  1. To produce bomb-grade materials for  developing nuclear warheads.  2. To produce steam which generates electricity in commercial nuclear power plants  Mining  Uranium deposits are found in U.S.A.,  Canada, South Africa, Namibia, Australia,  France and the U.S.S.R.  In North America,  major sites of uranium ore have been  discovered on aboriginal lands, particularly in Saskatchewan, the Dakotas, and  the American southwest.  These lands have been exploited by the  nuclear power industry thus laying to  waste large areas of arable land, and  polluting rivers and streams. Ultimately,  there is the destruction of the natural  ecosystems which the aboriginal people rely  on to live.  Uranium ore is mined from both underground  and surface mines.  It is found mineralized in sandstone deposits and other rock  formations. High grade ore is rapidly  being exhausted so that ore with minimal  amounts of uranium is now being mined.  During the mining of uranium, two carcinogenic radioactive substances are released;  radium and radon gas.  Radium affects the  bone marrow and radon gas is a danger to  the lungs and the body as a whole.  Milling  Once the ore is extracted, it is ground to  a sandy consistency at mills. Sulfuric  acid is them mixed with the ground ore to  produce a substance called yellowcake.  Four pounds of yellowcake are extracted  from an average ton of ore.  Yellowcake contains 85$ uranium oxide,  the raw material of reactor fuel.  This  process creates vast amounts of wastes  known as tailings. These tailings contain  radium and radon gas and consequently  emit radiation.  These wastes have been indiscriminately  used as fill material in communities near  mines and mills, leaving homes and buildings with radioactive foundations: Piles  of- discarded tailings blow around and  pollute run-off water and air with radioactive particles.  Enrichment  A high concentration of uranium is needed  for reactor fuel. ^ The process used to  increase concentration is known as enrichment. Yellowcake is turned into a highly  corrosive gas and must be stored in  special containers.  Uranium enrichment plants have been built  in Britain, France, the U.S.S.R. and  China. They are the largest industrial  plants in the world, each taking up hundreds of acres.  These plants circulate millions of gallons  of cooling water daily and consume vast  amounts of electricity.  It has been  estimated that the three U.S. enrichment  plants consume about 3%  of all electricity  produced in the U.S. Since nuclear energy  provides only 8%  of the electricity needs  of the U.S., over a third of the electricity produced by nuclear power goes into  the enrichment process!  Fuel Fabrication  This process involves solidifying the  uranium gas into small ceramic pellets the  size of pencil erasers. These pelletes  are then loaded into metal fuel rods  approximately twelve to fourteen inches  long and one inch in diameter.  The core of a common reactor would contain about one hundred and sixty fuel  assemblies with each assembly holding  around two hundred rods. The total weight  of the fuel is approximately one hundred  tons. Fuel fabrication is highly radioactive needing remote control machinery  for the process.  Nuclear Power Plants  The reaction inside the fuel rods creates  vast amounts of heat which turns water  into steam.  This steam turns turbines to  generate electricity which is sent along  transmission iines.  Nuclear power is a very expensive, complex  and dangerous way to boil water. As one  nuclear critic said, "Using nuclear power  to produce electricity is like using a  chain saw to cut butter!"  Continued on page 22  Health hazards of radiation are well-documented, wide-ranging  Radioactivity is a problem at every stage  of the entire nuclear fuel cycle. The  waste products of nuclear power and weapons  production find their way into rivers,  lakes and oceans and contaminate the food  chain.  Even in their usual course of operation,  nuclear power plants emit some radiation.  Most plants are not trouble-free; leaks  and other malfunctions significantly increase the amount of radiation emitted.  The mining and milling of uranium produces  mountains of tailings — unshielded piles  that are continuously releasing radioactive radon. Nuclear wastes and other  radioactive materials are transported by  truck, rail, etc., fallible vehicles that  can and do leak. Another significant  source of radiation is fallout from  nuclear weapons testing.  This kind of radiation is known as ionizing  radiation.  Ionizing radiation harms us  by altering the electrical charge of the  atoms and molecules comprising our body  cells.  A very high dose of ionizing radiation  causes brain cells to swell and enlarge,  leading to confusion, delirium, loss of  control of muscles, fever, and sudden  death.  A less high dose causes radiation illness,  in which all actively dividing cells in  the body are killed, hair falls out, skin  is sloughed off in big ulcers, vomiting  and diarrhea occur, and white blood cells  die.  Lower doses of ionizing radiation can cause  leukemia five years after exposure: cancer,  twelve to forty years later; and genetic  diseases and abnormalities in future generations.  Research suggests that the most widespread  effect of chronic low-level radiation in  terms of numbers affected, is the lowering  of the body's capacity to fight infection,  leading to pneumonia, bronchial infections  and influenza. Long-term low-level radiation has also been linked with premature  agmg.  Manmade radiation comes from a wide range  of sources.  X-rays, radiation therapy,  the burning of certain types of coal,  colour tv sets, microwave ovens and towers  smoke detectors, and luminous watch and  clock dials are other soureer of ionizing  radiation.  Continued on page 22 February 1982    Kinesis    17  NUCLEAR POWER  Nuclear power and the arms race are intimately linked  The 'peaceful' use of nuclear power as a  source of electricity cannot be considered  separately from the development and spread  of nuclear weapons.  These two uses of  nuclear technology are now and always  have been closely connected.  In fact, nuclear weapons came first. The  original nuclear reactors were built during World War II to create enough pluto-  nium for the atomic bombs that were  dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 19-45.  Plutonium is an artificial element produced in the processing of uranium fuel  by any nuclear reactor.  It is also the  raw material of any atomic bomb.  The average commercial nuclear reactor  produces around 500 lbs. of plutonium  each year. The bomb that destroyed  Nagasaki was made with -10 lbs. of plutonium, an amount the size of a tennis  ball. Normal operation of power reactors  worldwide currently produces some 30 tons  of plutonium a year, enough for about  10,000 bombs.  'Peaceful' technology a cover-up for  nuclear arms race  After the war, the atomic establishment  that had built the bomb (American military and industrial interests) tried to  allay its guilt and justify its continued  existence with the promise of unlimited  electrical power.  'Atoms for Peace' became an element of American foreign  policy, offering technical and financial  assistance to other countries in setting  up civilian nuclear programs — at the  same time  that the nuclear arms race was  beginning.  Thus, the non-military uses of nuclear  power originated as a by-product of the  military uses. 'Peaceful' nuclear technology was promoted both to cover up the  on-going production of nuclear arms and  to justify the huge military expenses  involved in developing the technology in  the first place.  Today, 4/5 of the nuclear industry in the  world is devoted to weapons production.  The technology for producing both nuclear  arms and nuclear power is controlled and  operated by the same multinational companies. One reason these companies can  afford to lose money on power plants  (and they do) is that they are assured of  government subsidies to keep them in the  weapons business.  Weapons production is getting easier  Nuclear power and nuclear weapons production are technically as well as financially related. Most of the knowledge,  much of the equipment, and the general  nature of the systems used in making  bombs are inherent in civilian nuclear  activities. Almost all instruments and  theories used in nuclear pov,rer production  have some military application.  Not only is it theoretically possible to  make nuclear weapons using the technology  of a civilian nuclear reactor — it has  been done.  In 1974, India exploded a  nuclear -,'arhead using materials from a  CANDU research reactor purchased from  Canada.  Reprocessing plutonium from any reactor  for use in weapons is technically possible  for national governments and other groups  with similar resources. And it's getting  easier. At the sixth international  exhibition of the nuclear industry  (NUCLEX 81) held in Basle, Switzerland,  Americans announced the development of a  method to isolate explosive material for  nuclear weapons from used fuel rods, with  the help of laser beams.  Little control over plutonium extraction  Another new development exhibited was a  micro explosion unit which makes it  possible to carry out tests for atomic  bombs in laboratories instead of underground. Such research programs are not  subject to international control.  What control there is leaves much to be  desired.  In 1956, the International  Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) was set up.  Part of its purpose was to keep the  plutonium produced by commercial reactors  ^^^^  under control and prevent it from being  used to make bombs.  But the IAEA has  been worse than ineffective for several  reasons.  For one thing, plutonium that has been  extracted from spent reactor fuel (reprocessed) is hard to measure precisely  and is therefore easy to steal or divert  to military uses, even if reactors'  plutonium inventories are inspected. In  1976, the IAEA was nnable to verify spent  fuel inventories in 13 out of 45 reactors.  The IAEA's regulatory activities are  poorly funded and understaffed, so the  checking of plutonium inventories has been  infrequent in any acse. When discrepancies in inventories show up, the IAEA has  no way to enforce its regulations or  punish violators. There is evidence that  a black market in bomb materials already  exists. The main obstacle, however, is  that part of the IAEA's mandate is actually to promote nuclear power; it has  consistently done so, in spite of the  obvious conflict of interest with its  regulatory role.  Electrical energy is inappropriate to our  real needs  Because of the amount of plutonium produced, and the relative ease of diverting  part or all of it to weapons production,  power reactors can be considered large-  scale military production reactors with an  electricity by-product, rather than benign  electricity producers with an unattractive  plutonium by-product.  Many governments that have bought commercial reactors are strong regional powers  with local rivalries and imperial ambitions, e.g. Brazil, South Africa, Pakistan  and the Philippines. Since commercial  reactors (as distinct from arms production  reactors) can thus be operated so as to  produce significant amounts of weapons-  grade plutonium without increasing costs,  decreasing efficiency or risking detection, there is every reason to believe  that these countries are developing  nuclear weapons using their spent reactor  fuel.  The assumption that, whatever the risks,  nuclear power is essential for meeting  energy needs is false — for any country.  Electrical energy (the only kind that  nuclear power provides) is inappropriate  to the real needs of Third World and  'developed' countries alike.  The high cost of going nuclear and building an electrical infrastructure will  increase Third World dependence on foreign  capital and technology, and close the  doors on development rather than open them.  Danger of nuclear accidents is extreme  Selling reactors to non-industrialized  countries on terms of credit that will  leave them in debt for decades only helps  the wealthy supplier nations strengthen  their hold on the resources of the Third  World. Nuclear energy is proving too  costly even for rich nations. The  alternatives are numerous, feasible and  safe.  The dangers of manufacturing, handling and  storing nuclear weapons and non-military  nuclear technologies are the same. Radiation leaks from weapons installations,  including nuclear submarines and strategic  bombers, pose the same threats to the  people working with them, the general  public and the environment as do leaks  from power reactors. (Less than one  millionth of a gram of plutonium, if  inhaled, can cause lung cancer).  Testing of nuclear weapons spreads  radioactive material over large areas,  and the danger of accidents with nuclear  weapons is extreme. Since 1950, there  have been at least 32 accidents involving  American nuclear weapons; in many of these  nuclear bombs were lost and a few came  close to causing major nuclear explosions.  There is a strong possibility that such  an accidental detonation would be misinterpreted as the first strike of a  nuclear war.  Present known nuclear arsenals (in the  U.S., U.S.S.R., U.K., France and China)  contain over 15,000 'strategic' weapons;  total nuclear firepower is well over a  million Hiroshimas. For several years,  the U.S. has been manufacturing components for the neutron bomb (a weapon that  kills people but leaves buildings and  property relatively undamaged), and is  now openly begininning to produce the  bombs themselves.  In Europe in recent months there have  been massive demonstrations against the  build-up there of nuclear weapons, and  the growing likelihood that Europe will  be used as a nuclear battlefield by the  U.S. and the U.S.S.R.  "Popular disarmament movements are growing  everywhere. The intimate links between  nuclear power and nuclear arms must be  recognized and exposed if these efforts  are to succeed. 0_ 18    Kinesis    February 1982  February 1982    Kinesis    19  NUCLEAR POWER  Resistance to nuclear technology and the arms race is an international phenomenon  Since Hiroshima, people from all over the  world have been protesting the proliferation of nuclear weapons. Since the mid-  1950 's people have also opposed the  domestic, 'peaceful' use of nuclear  technology.  The world-wide anti-nuclear movement has  taken different forms and developed in  varying ways according to local circumstances, but anti-nuclear activities  around the world seem to have at least  three things in common.  One is that, throughout the movement,  women as individuals and in groups, have  played major roles of initiative, leadership and continuity. Another is that the  most successful actions have been firmly  by each other's successes and begin to  foster our own international network.  Britain led large-scale resistance  The world's first large-scale anti-nuclear  weapons movement was born in Britain.  In  that country, the Campaign for Nuclear  Disarmament (CND) mobilized hundreds of  thousands of people in the fifties and  early sixties in 'Ban the Bomb' demonstrations.  No mass anti-nuclear power  movement grew directly out of that mobilization, partly because the CND campaign  of that time was based on the idea of  'Atoms for Peace' — conversion of military technology to peaceful 'progressive'  civilian use.  Today, Britain has three major disarmament  RftDiO-  RCTiFS  grounded in grassroots resistance to a  nuclear presence in local communities.  The third is that these local and regional  struggles are all being waged against the  same international forces: the multinational corporations and military interests that control nuclear technology.  These forces (representing a few world  powers, particularly the U.S.) influence  and maintain strong links with each other  even as they compete.  By contrast, anti-nuclear movements around  the world have only had tenuous links  with one another.  Communication on the  grass roots level between people of  different countries is difficult, partly  for reasons of language and culture.  Our similar struggles go unreported  More importantly, the established media  of all countries are always influenced  and largely controlled by the same powerful groups that have financial and political interests in the development of  nuclear technology. So it is no accident  that we in North America have heard little  or nothing in the daily news of the major  anti-nuclear/ecological movements in-  Western Europe, of the growing Japanese  resistance to nuclear development, or  of the opposition to uranium mining in  Australia.  Though frequently unrecognized, the similarities and connections between these  struggles are as real as the transnational  links in the nuclear industry itself.  In  order to succeed against this global  oppression, it is crucial for us to understand the ways in which we and our counterparts around the world are fighting the  same fight. Only in that <rray can we learn  from each other's experiences, be inspired  groups.. The CND is still active, campaigning for Britain to get rid of nuclear  weapons and get out of NATO.  The World  Disarmament Campaign (WDC) wants all  nations to give up nuclear weapons and  disarm.  European Nuclear Disarmament  (END) is a new movement focussed on grass  roots activity both in Western and Eastern  Europe. Although these three groups take  somewhat different approaches, there  appears to be some co-ordination of activity —END and CND worked together on an  Easter anti-war march in 1981.  Since about 1975, conservationists and  environmentalists in Britain, led by the  U.K. section of Friends of the Earth, have  been actively opposing all forms of nuclear  technology, first by involvement with  government inquiries into nuclear reactor  safety and subsequently with demonstrations  The Republic of Ireland is the only  European country in which the trade  union movement is strongly anti-nuclear.  Workers' opposition is instrumental in  keeping Ireland nuclear free in the face  of tremendous pressure from the  European Common Market to develop  nuclear power.  and a parliamentary lobby by a coalition  of environmentalists and trade unionists.  The British Campaign Against Sea Dumping  and Greenpeace have been active for  several years in the fight against the  dumping of radio-active waste in the  Atlantic.  Several radical groups are  working with trade union members on nuclear  issues.  One such group is the Socialist Environment  and Resources Association, whose slogan is,  'Create jobs not plutonium'.  Recently  Britain's powerful Trades Union Congress  issued a declaration calling for the  closing of all nuclear bases in Britain  and for unilateral nuclear disarmament.  Women's groups are increasingly evident in  British anti-nuclear activities: Feminists  Against Nuclear Power, Mothers Against the  Bomb, Women Oppose the Nuclear Threat  (WONT). WONT is a country-wide network  of groups working in various ways, from  staging 'events' at military shows to  participating in national demonstrations.  The Women's International League for Peace  and Freedom (founded in 1915) and Women  for Life on Earth are groups that are  active on both sides of the Atlantic.  In June 1980, more than 25,000 people  marched in London to protest the government's plans to increase military spending  and station U.S. cruise missiles in  England.  This was the first major demonstration on nuclear weapons since the  1960's, marking a new upsurge in the  British peace movement.  In October 1981  an estimated quarter of a million people  marched in London in one of many massive  demonstrations against the deployment of  nuclear weapons by NATO.  European movement led by ecologists,.  environmentalists  Continental Europe has been the scene of  continual anti-nuclear organizing and  ' actions since April 1971, when 1300  people participated in the first European demonstration against the construction of a nuclear power plant at Fessen-  heim in France.  The chronology of the European movement  makes it evident that the recent massive  demonstrations (while primarily a response  to U.S. plans to place cruise and Pershing  II missiles in NATO territories) have  many precedents and years of organizing  An active anti-nuke movement in  Denmark has had enough influence to  cancel six planned reactors in 1975, and  Denmark still remains nuclear free,  largely due to adverse public opinion.  Danish feminists were the first to protest  against the Swedish nuclear reactor  located 20 kilometers from Copenhagen.  behind them.  In the past ten years there  have been hundreds of marches, co-ordinated demonstrations, occupations of plant  sites, sit-down strikes, utility rate  witholding actions, information fairs,  referenda, tractor blockades, peace tax  campaigns, petition campaigns and more,  involving hundreds of thousands of people  in struggles against nuclear facilities in  every country.  Much of the European anti-nuclear movement, particularly in France, has been led  by ecologists and environmentalists, who  usually.favour decentralization of political power as well as of energy production.  In France, ecologists and members  of various Amis de la Terre groups have  put forward their own candidates for  presidential elections since 197-4. These  candidates have received small but growing  percentages of the vote.  The German  'Green Party' has also run ecology/anti-  nuclear, candidates in national elections.  In Sweden, the nuclear issue has been a  focus of elections for several years.  The  country has six reactors, and with half  the uranium in Europe, it is definitely  part of the international nuclear system.  Changing governments have variously  slowed and promoted a strong nuclear  program.  The 1980 referendum won majority support  for another 25 years of nuclear energy  perhaps because it was worded in such a  way as to make an essentially pro-nuclear  position seem anti-nuke.  Anti-nuclear  forces in Sweden view this referendum  defeat simply as a milestone in a long  fight.  The referendum result has not stopped  citizen efforts to shut down one of the  most dangerous nuclear plants in Europe,  at Barsebaeck in Sweden. This reactor is  just 20 kilometers from Copenhagen,  Denmark, and has long been opposed by  Danish and Swedish activists, led by  Danish feminist groups. Denmark remains  nuclear-free, largely due to public  opinion.  In her book "Nuclear Madness", Dr.  Helen Caldicott, an Australian pediatri-  tion, describes how a letter to the local  newspaper was the starting point for a  national protest against the French  atomic tests in the South Seas.  Thousands of people demonstrated,  wrote letters to politicians, boycotted  French products, and petitioned the  U.N. until eventually the French  suspended their atmospheric atomic  tests.  A Women's Petition for Peace originated in  Denmark in February, 1980.  It was presented to the United Nations Conference on  Women in July 1980, with the signatures of  500,000 Nordic women.  Since then, it  has been taken up by many countries.  The  new goal is to present 500 million signatures to the Second UN Special Session on  Disarmament in 1982.  West German debate has been open,  sometimes violent  West Germany has seen militant local and  national action against nuclear power.  At the same time, the anti-nuclear movement there has seen an escalation of police  power and suppression of civil liberties  unequalled in any Western country.  West Germany is very industrialized, with  little open space, so nuclear plants  cannot be hidden from view in unpopulated  areas.  The nuclear debate has been open  and sometimes violent for several years.  The basic model of citizen organizing is  the 'Burgerinitiativen', the citizen  initiative or citizen action group.  These  groups oppose nuclear power and are also  active on other ecology issues affecting  them locally.  There are at least 400,000  people in hundreds of.such groups all over  the country.  The first international occupation of a  nuclear power plant site took place in  Wyhl, West Germany, on February 23, 1975.  Local activists were supported in the  first week of their blockade of construction by 28,000 people from all over Germany and from France.  For more than a  year people occupied the construction site.  Eventually an inquiry was held, and construction of the reactor was cancelled.  The Wyhl occupation became a model for  citizen direct action, and inspired occupation-type demonstrations from Malville,  France, to Seabrook, U.S.A.  In 1977 a similar site occupation took  place in Gorleben, where the country's  first reprocessing plant and waste disposal dump was planned.  Activists set up  an 'Anti-Atom Village' which, for mere  than a year, served as a local information/education centre while keeping  attention focussed on the issues surrounding construction of the plant.  When police finally dragged off 2500 people  and destroyed the village, the response  was immediate: demonstrations happened in  every major city of the Federal Republic.  The facility was finally cancelled in  1980, as a result of scientific critiques  and the strong public protest.  The anti-nuclear movement in West Germany  continues to grow. Cn October 10, 1981,  in West Germany's largest post-war" demonstration, 300,000 people gathered in Bonn  in another European protest against NATO's  nuclear weapons program.  Women have been active in anti-nuclear  groups for years  Anti-nuclear groups are also active in  Spain, Switzerland, Holland, Greece, Italy  and Austria. Since 1975, the European  anti-nuclear movement's International Coordination Conference (ICC) has encouraged  and co-ordinated activities all over the  continent around the 'Common International Demands' of stopping the production  and export of nuclear^ plants and weapons  and the stationing of nuclear weapons in  Europe,   a ban on uranium mining, full  employment and safe working conditions.  The ICC secretariat continues to function  as an information exchange.  Western European phenomenon. So far there  is no popular grassroots anti-nuclear  movement in the USSR or other Eastern  European communist countries. The blackout of news about Western anti-nuclear  In September of 1981, Boston Edison  was forced to cancel plans for its second  nuclear reactor because of astronomical  construction costs. A company official  said, "We cannot expose the company  and our customers to the financial risks  and uncertainties now associated with  continuing this unit." (Van. Sun,Sept.  25, 1981)  movements and a complete lack of public  discussion within these countries of  technological and safety problems are at  least partly to blame.  The first major  indications we have had of popular reaction to nuclear technology in Eastern  Europe were the recent large demonstrations in Rumania and East Germany against  NATO's nuclear .plans for Europe.  Japan and the Pacific focal points of  nuclear activity  Beginning with the bombing of Hiroshima  and Nagasaki and post-war American,  British and French testing of nuclear  weapons in Micronesia and Polynesia, Japan  and the Pacific have been focal points of  nuclear activity and the site of numberless nuclear tragedies.  Women's peace and disarmament groups have  been active all over Europe for years.  Recently, their struggle has been joined  by many women with a specifically feminist  perspective.  Women for Peace in Oslo organized last  year's Peace March '81, which started in  Copenhagen in June and covered 700 miles  in 45 days, through Germany, the Netherlands, and Belgium, arriving in Paris on  August 6th.  On International Women's Day  1981, 2000 women demonstrated at the  Ramstein Atomic Military Base, the largest  U.S. Military installation in Europe.  Last fall about 10,000 women held a silent  torch-light procession through the Hague  to protest the deployment of new nuclear  weapons in Europe. Female MPs received a  petition from the women calling on the  Dutch government to refuse to station  cruise missies in the Netherlands.  The European anti-nuclear movement is a  The blasts from more than a hundred  nuclear tests have shaken the Pacific,  showering radioactive fallout on the  islands, destroying fishing grounds and  rendering uninhabitable the homelands of  thousands of people.  The plight of the  Pacific Islanders has largely gone unheeded, in part because they lack both  the numbers and international influence  to make heard their case.  In Japan, the story has been different.  Trying to forget the horrors of atomic  war, the Japanese people apparently welcomed the 'peaceful atom'. But in 1971  when radioactive emissions from the first  plant at Tsuruga were found in sea water  and marine life in the area was seen to  be affected, people began to be alarmed.  Cause for concern has continued to grow  as Japanese nuclear plants carry on operations in spite of on-going technical  Continued on page 20 20   Kinesis    February 1982  NUCLEAR POWER  RESISTANCE continued from page 19  problems and continual leakages and accidents. In the heavily-industrialized  country, which has suffered a depressing  array of ecological catastrophes (including mercury poisoning and extreme air  pollution) nuclear power is rrobably now  the primary environmental issue.  Japan's history of resistance to nuclear  power has seen many dramatic and partially  successful actions.  In 1974, a reactor  ship called MUTSU, built by the Japan  Nuclear Ship Development Agency, was to  be launched after a two-year delay caused  by local opposition.  Before the ship could leave the harbour,  it was surrounded by 300 small fishing  boats. While 20,000 onlookers cheered  from the shore, the fishing people lashed  their boats together in a giant blockade.  After some hours, rising winds forced the  blockade to disperse and the ship left.  No sooner was it fired than the reactor  began to leak and had to be shut down.  mination.  An expanding network of these  locally-based struggles against individual  power plants is making it increasingly  difficult for the industry to find reactor  sites, while at the same time spreading  awareness of the dangers of atomic energy.  Following the latest series of accidents  and cover-ups at the Tsuruga plant, the  Japanese Socialist Party, a significant  force in Japanese politics, joined one of  the country's largest unions in calling  for the shutdown of all nuclear plants in  the country and a ban on new construction  until the technology could be made safe.  Opposition also continues to the Japanese  government's plans to dump radioactive  waste in the Pacific Ocean.  Japanese  groups have joined with representatives  from the Pacific Islands of Guam, Belau,  Tonga, Vanuaatu, Fiji, the Marshall Islands  and the Marianas to petition the Japanese  government to reconsider its dumping plans.  The dumping was recently postponed until  late 1982.  Greenpeace volunteers (in inflatable rafts) protest the arrival of the aircraft carrier USS Ranger in  Vancouver's English Bay October 30,1981 during United Nations Disarmament Week. The Ranger  has nuclear weapons capability.  Meanwhile the people had blocked the  harbour with sandbags and they refused to  let the ship return. Eventually an agreement was reached and the ship was allowed  to dock on condition that a new home port  be found within six months and the old  facilities be dismantled.    As a new port  In June of 1978, a west coast group  called the Crabshell Alliance tried to occupy the site of the Satsop Nuclear  Plant in Washington state. 148 of the  demonstrators were arrested.  Coincidentally, they were scheduled to  stand trial in April 1979, two weeks  after the Three Mile Island accident.  The prosecutor dropped the charges  deciding that a "fair trial" would be impossible because he would "be asking  people [the jury! to put aside fears at a  time when they are being inundated with  negative news about nuclear reactors".  Had the trials gone ahead, the jury  would have been chosen from residents  of Grays Harbour County, 95¬∞7o of  whom had indicated concern about the  Satsop plant.  was sought, the MUTSU incident raised  public opinion against nuclear power all  over Japan.  Numerous struggles against land reactor  sitings have been waged with equal deter-  A growing'Nuclear Free Pacific (NFP) movement is now giving a stronger voice through  co-ordinated action to the numerous  resistance fronts in the Pacific and  Pacific Rim countries. The first Nuclear  Free Pacific Conference, held in 1975,  formed an international movement based  on two principles of unity: all nuclear  development is harmful and must be stopped; and foreign domination, or imperialism, ' is at the root of the nuclear  disease.  These unifying principles allow the NFP  movement to unite separate struggles and  avoid the trap of single issue politics.  Indigenous peoples' land rights struggles  (such as those of Australian Aborigines,  New Zealand Moaris and Native Indians  from Canada and the U.S. ), national  liberation movements and independence  efforts (such as those in Belau and New  Caledonia) all fall under the movement's  rubric.  All fuel-cycle and military  developments are part of the movement's  concern.  The Pacific Concerns Resource Centre,  established in Honolulu in 1980, acts as  the movement's nerve centre (Hawaii is the  home base for the U.S. Pacific Command,  and the hub of American military activity  over half the globe).  On March 1, 1981, the third internationally co-ordinated Nuclear Free Pacific  Day saw actions and meetings in Hawaii,  Japan, Australia and the American west  coast.  In Tokyo, a coalition of citizen  and labour groups rallied to protest  nuclear power and reprocessing plants and  show solidarity with Pacific peoples'  struggles.  In Honolulu, women from the island of  Belau gave a slide presentation and panel  discussion on the new Belauan constitution, which bans nuclear testing and waste  In Whyl, West Germany in 1975,  several hundred people occupied the  proposed site of a nuclear power plant.  Police evicted the occupiers, but they  kept returning and soon their numbers  grew to 28,000people, blocking  bulldozers and halting construction. The  occupation lasted for 2 years.  Occupiers finally agreed to leave if a  judges' panel would hear testimony on  the dangers of the plant. The judges'  panel heard the testimony and agreed  that the plant should not be built. And  it wasn't.  storage on the island. This position is  now threatened by U.S. efforts to supercede it with a new status of 'free association1 , which would permanently protect  U.S. military interests in Micronesia.  As a Pacific Rim country, Australia has  been affected by radioactive fallout from  Pacific testing and by the increasing  militarization of the region. But Australia's main connection with the nuclear  issue is the fact that the country has 27$  of the world's 'reasonably assured'  reserves of uranium.  The vast bulk of these reserves is found  in an area of the Northern territory  which is also the traditional home of  several Aboriginal tribes. And so, as in  so many other places where uranium is  mined, opposition to nuclear activity is  part of the struggle for a people's  self-determination and cultural identity.  Uranium mining and waste disposal have  been disputed in Australia over the past  20 years by Aboriginals who oppose destruction of their native lands, by  labour unions alarmed at the hazards of  handling dangerous materials, and by anti-  nuclear and peace coalitions, including  active Women Against Nuclear Energy  groups. Many groups opposed to uranium  mining are affiliated with the Movement  Against Uranium Mining (MAUM), started in  1974.  Trade unions have taken stronger stands  against nuclear power in Australia than  in any other country faced with nuclear  related development. Opposition to uranium mining has been expressed by the  Australian Railways Union, the Builders  Federation, the Metal Trades Union, the  Trade and Labour Councils and the Watersides Workers.  In 1977, following police violence against  demonstrators who went to the Melbourne  docks to protest the presence of a ship  carrying uranium oxide to West Germany,  the Victoria branch of the Waterside  Workers refused to handle any more ships  carrying yellowcake.  In August, 1980, Darwin Waterside Workers  voted to ban yellowcake traffic through  the port of Darwin and asked the Darwin  City Council to declare the city a nuclear  free zone.  At present an anti-Trident project, initiated by an Australian group, is dramatizing the interconnection of all Pacific  anti-nuclear struggles. A ship called  the Pacific Peacemaker has begun a voyage  that will take it from Australia to New  Zealand, 'French' Polynesia, Hawaii, and  the west coast of the U.S. arriving there  around May 1982.  Continued on page 21 February 1982    Kinesis    21  NUCLEAR POWER  RESISTANCE continued from page 20  The purpose of the voyage is to educate  people about the nuclear missiles that  Trident carries, and to participate in  non-violent actions at the Trident base in  Seattle.  The Pacific Concerns Resource  Centre and American peace groups are  organizing a four-month speaking tour  along the west coast for the ship's crew.  News from U.S. still the most accessible  Even though the links between anti-nuclear  groups in Canada and the U.S. are not as  strong as they should be, news of anti-  nuclear activities in the United.States is  still more accessible to Canadians than  that from anywhere else.  It is beyond the  scope of this article to describe the  long, involved history of anti-nuke  activities in North America. A few significant points are worth noting, however.  As everywhere else, women have often led  and always been active in the struggle.  In the 1960's and early 1970's, most of  the anti-nuclear work in the States took  the form of intervention in Atomic Fnergy  Commission regulatory hearings. These  interventions, which led to the imposition  of stricter safety standards on the nuclear  industry, were largely organized and  carried on, often for years, by groups of  women.  Helen Caldicott, the Australian  doctor and anti-nuclear activist who  founded Physicians for'Social Responsibility, has recently started a Women's  Party for Survival in the States.  Women's Pentagon Action raising  awareness of militarism  Among the most inspiring actions of recent  years were the November 1980 and 1981  gatherings of women at the Pentagon.  Women's Pentagon Action (WPA) includes  many feminists from many backgrounds, with  many concerns, in all a network of more  than 50 groups that make a connection  between feminism and peace, as well as  other issues such as racism, poverty,  and destruction of the environment.  In 1980 more than 2000 women marched  through the streets of Washington to the  Pentagon, and, in an act of empowerment,  encircled the building.  Awareness of  militarism was raised by the action, and  networks were formed. A parallel soli-  In December of 1973 NU, a private  utility company, announced plans to  build a reactor at Montague,  Massachusetts. Sam Love joy, a nearby  organic farmer tired of the lengthy and  often unproductive procedure of intervening in hearings, single handedly  topped a weather tower NU had erected  on the Montague site, then hitchiked to  the police station and turned himself in.  During his court case on malicious  damage charges, he presented expert  witnesses on the dangers of nuclear  power, making the courtroom an anti-  nuclear showcase.  Charges were dropped on a technicality, but not before he had influenced  local public opinion. In the November  1974 election, a majority voted against  construction at Montague, and the project was postponed for 5 years, and  perhaps indefinitely.  darity demonstration was held at the same  time in San Fransisco.  Again in 1981 3000 women participated in  a 2-day non-violent demonstration that  encircled the Pentagon. The WPA statements drew clear links between militarism  and the oppression of women and people of  colour, as well as denouncing U.S. military involvement in El Salvador.  In the U.S., as in Australia and in Canada, an important focus of anti-nulcear  work is uranium mining. Those most  directly affected, the indigenous peoples  on whose land most mines 'happen' to be,  are taking the lead on this front.  American Indian movement 'forced to  understand' link between repression and  resource exploitation  Land-based struggles are being v/aged in  several American states of the west and  southwest, as well as in Saskatchewan.  The Black Hills International Survival  Gathering in South Dakota in the summer of  1980 brought a wide range of activists  together at a site sacred to many North  American Indians, in an area which is  threatened by uranium mining activities.  Here was launched a decentralized international campaign against the multinational uranium miners, Rio Tinto Zinc  and Union Carbide.  Women are evident, in these struggles, too.  In 1978, a group called Women of .All Red  Nations (WARN) was founded, as part of the  American Indian Movement, to restore the  position of Indian women as leaders in  Indian culture.  According to one of its  founders, Winona La Duke, one of WARN's  main concerns is how the exploitation of  uranium affects the well-being of their  people.  'We are forced to understand  the link between repression of the people  and theft of the resources.'  All over the world, anti-nuclear activists  are making similar connections, recognizing the similarity of their struggles,  and joining forces in a steadily strengthening international network. 0_  TECHNOLOGY AT HOME from page 15  (AMAX, an American multinational, is also  being opposed by native people in various  parts of the U.S. and Australia.)-  The Kitsault mine releases radioactive  radium, uranium and thorium, since molybdenum is always found with uranium and cannot be mined without bringing the uranium  to the surface.  AMAX has government  permission to dump 12,000 tonnes (a  tonne = 2200 lbs. ) of toxic waste daily  into the waters of Alice Arm.  Besides the Kitsault mine, there is a  proposed molybdenum mine for Atlin in  northern B.C. and a molybdenum"and copper  project proposed for Gambier Island in  Howe Sound.  The Atlin mine is a Placer  Development project which over 20 years  would produce 200,000 tonnes of waste  tailings. Eight thousand tonnes of this  would be uranium and thorium. Despite  strong public opposition, the government  has allowed Placer to show preliminary  mining data before heeding community  requests for an environmental impact  assessment.  Uranium mining in B.C. is under a seven  year moratorium, announced by the Social  Credit government in February 1980. Not  many people realize, however,that there  is no real legal base to this moratorium.  A Mines Act passed in August of that year  states that an order-in-council could  limit or prohibit developments when uranium ore exceeds threshold limits.  In  September such a regulation was passed,  establishing threshold limits for mining  minerals containing uranium ore.  However,  the Mines Inspector has the sole authority  to re-open and initiate mining operations.  There is no democratic process.  If uranium were mined here, it would be  transported elsewhere, as there are no  nuclear reactors in British Columbia.  There is, however, no policy against  building them and B.C. Hydro has done  preliminary research in this area.  It is impossible to separate the issue of  nuclear power from the issue of energy,  and B.C. Hydro's energy policy is clearly  one of expansion. As a way of justifying  their policy, their projected increases  are consistently higher than actual usage  increases.  Part of B.C. Hydro expansion is the  Cheekye-Dunsmuir transmission line, which  will supply power to Vancouver Island and  which is part of a massive power grid  being developed throughout the province.  This line to the island would make possible nuclear power plants.  Feasibility  studies have been done and three sites  named — Crofton, Port McNeill and False  Head.  The coal generating project being planned  for Hat Creek is also part of this energy  expansion.  In addition to causing acid  rain and other environmental damage, it  will release radioactive emissions of  thorium and uranium.  Hydro's expansion projects also include  massive hydroelectric developments whichare unacceptable either as alternatives to  or complements of nuclear power plants.  There are projects planned for the Fraser  River and estuary, and dams proposed for  the Stikine, Iskut and Laird rivers in  northern B.C., and for the Peace River.  The Site C dam on the Peace River would  flood thirty percent of B.C.'s best  quality farmland..  All these river projects cause loss of  farmland, forest, wildlife habitat,  fishing and recreational resources. Most  of these projects as well, like the mine  projects, encroach on native lands and  are extremely damaging and disruptive to  the native way of life and self-sufficiency.  There are energy alternatives to nuclear  power and the damming of British Colum-'  bia's rivers. We need realistic assessments of our energy needs and reduction  of energy requirements through conservation and through economic pressure on  large industrial and business users. We  need modes of energy production that are  . ecologically and economically sound and  we need limitations on energy exports to  the United States. 0_ 22   Kinesis    February 1982  NUCLEAR POWER  FUEL^CYCLE continued from page 16  The Core - Cooling water is used to keep  the fuel rods from overheating. The heat  is excessive and if there is an interruption of the cooling water, the core containing the fuel rods and the fuel assembles can melt, causing a disaster.  The fuel would melt into the ground  releasing deadly radiation.  This situation is known as a "melt down".  The  nuclear industry has named it the "China  Syndrome" because theoretically, the  molten fuel could burn its way through the  earth towards China.  PLUTONIUM LIFE SPAN  -500,000 YEARS   Plutonium - Plutonium is one of the major  by-products of the nuclear fuel cycle and  did not exist on earth until it was produced in nuclear reactors. It is a highly  toxic, radioactive, carcinogenic element  that will continue to exist in its radioactive state for half a million years  after it is produced.  If it gets into our lungs, one-millionth  of a gram will cause cancer. Plutonium  was originally developed for use in the  construction of atomic bombs and nuclear  warheads. It takes only one kilogram to  create a bomb. It is estimated that by  the year 2020 there will be 20-30,000  tons of plutonium in existence.  Breeder Reactors - Another use for plutonium is as fuel for the breeder reactor.  The reactor's outstanding quality is that  it produces more fuel than it consumes.  However, it takes approximately ten years  for a breeder to produce a quantity of  plutonium and the lifespan of a breeder  reactor is often not much longer than  that.  Breeders are the most dangerous  kinds of reactors for two reasons.  First,  they require a large amount of highly  radioactive fuel, a mix of both uranium  and plutonium oxides.  Secondly, the core which is immensely hot  is cooled not by water, but by liquid  sodium which can explode on contact with  air or water. Breeder reactors are expensive, pose additional safety hazards and  require and produce plutonium, the deadliest of all elements.  Radioactive wastes are a dangerous end to  the nuclear fuel cycle.  They are toxic  and once released into the environment  they contaminate land and water virtually  forever. There is no safe disposal and  storage of nuclear wastes.  There are three categories of nuclear  wastes, as well as the mining wastes  (tailings) mentioned earlier.  Low-level wastes include anything that  has picked up radiation during any part of  the fuel cycle. Also included are medical wastes contaminated by hospital use of  radiation, as well as tools used in  mining and gloves and uniforms of workers  in enrichment and reprocessing plants.  Another low-level waste is the radioactive  plant cooling water. Between 1946 and  1962, 47,500 55-gallon drums of low-level  radioactive waste from atomic weapons and  research were dumped into the ocean.  So-called intermediate wastes are liquids  and materials contaminated with fission  products, including uranium and plutonium.  These are not necessarily less dangerous  than high-level wastes, but are less concentrated.  High level wastes contain uranium-235 and  plutonium-239.- They are highly radioactive and dangerous in .any form.  They  can be used to make explosive weapons.  About 75% of U.S. nuclear waste is stored  at the Hanford Reserve in Washington  State.  Leakages have occurred there which  have contaminated the Columbia River and  eventually the entire food chain in the  surrounding area.  DecommissIoning - One of the most overlooked and ignored aspects of nuclear  power has befen the decommissioning of a  nuclear power plant. The lifespan of a  plant is only thirty to forty years.  After that it becomes thousands of tons  of radioactive waste.  Since many plants  have not been decommissioned, we have not  yet experienced the full impact of the  problem.  There are two methods proposed for decommissioning a nuclear power plant:  mothballing and entombment.  If mothballed  a used-up reactor would be closed, welded  shut and guarded for an indefinite period  of time.  Theoretically, however, the concrete of  the containment vessel would be long  since turned to dust before the reactor  contents would be safe.  Entombment is  the covering of a reactor with concrete.  This entails the same problem as moth-  balling.  Decomissioning nuclear power  plants can be as expensive as the original  construction.  The issue of radioactive waste is an overwhelming problem we must now face. The  effects on our health and the balance of  the entire ecosystem is incalculable. It  is a deadly legacy we leave for our children and future generations.  Q  The information in this section is from  No Nukes — Everyone's Guide to Nuclear  Power by Anna Gyorgy.  HEALTH HAZARDS continued from page 16  Video display terminals and radar equipment emit non-ionizing radiation, which  does not change the molecular structure of  body cells in the same way as ionizing  radiation, but which still appears to  cause a variety of biological disorders.  About the degree of our exposure to most  of these sources of radiation, we have  some choice; nuclear power, however, does  not offer a voluntary choice — the  radiation released by nuclear technology  is imposed upon people.  No level of radiation is safe. All levels  of radiation adversely affect the body.  It takes only one radioactive atom to  damage a cell and cause cancer or genetic  mutation.  Even natural background radiation affects the aging process of cells  and probably accounts for some cancers.  A certain amount of natural or background  radiation comes in ultra-violet rays from  the sun and cosmic rays from outer space  which have filtered through the ozone layer. Background radiation also comes from  radioactive elements found naturally in  rocks, soil and air.  Man-made radiation adds to the level of  radiation to which we are exposed. The  cumulative effects of many small doses of  radiation are as serious as those of one  large exposure; the more exposure, the  greater the chance of cancer and genetic  defects.  The establishment by the nuclear -industry  and government regulatory agencies of  "safe" levels of radiation exposure for  workers and the general public is therefore misleading. The fact these standards  keep changing (the amount of radiation  deemed safe is being reduced) demonstrates  how arbitrarily they are determined.  Studies on nuclear workers, on uranium  miners, on soldiers exposed to atomic tests  in the fifties, and on patients who have .  received diagnostic x-rays have all found  significantly higher cancer death rates  among people who received legally allowed  radiation dosrs than in the general population.  Despite the claim of the President's Commission on the accident at Three Mile  Island nuclear plant in March 1979 that  the radioactivity released was not enough  to cause cancer, developmental abnormalities or genetic ill-health, there is  evidence to the contrary.  There was a  significant rise in infant deaths in  Pennsylvania shortly after the accident,  as well as an increase in miscarriages  and other health problems in people and  animals.  We can expect the incidence of cancer in  North America to keep increasing as the  cumulative effect of exposure to radioactivity takes its toll.  0_ February 1982    Kinesis    23  NUCLEAR POWER  Feasible alternatives to nuclear power do exist  Nuclear power plants generate energy  only in the form of electricity.  However  since electricity represents only about  13-15% of cur energy needs, it is clear  that nuclear power cannot solve our  energy problems in any meaningful way.  There are and always have been alternatives to nuclear power.  The trouble is  that, while many of these alternatives  are most effective as small-scale decentralized operations, the multinational  corporations and government agencies  which control the nuclear power industry  depend for their profits on centralized  energy sources — a few large power plants  producing huge quantities of energy distributed to much of the mass media and  hence have the power to influence public  -opinion.  Thus, many people accept at face value  the claim that nuclear power is our only  alternative to freezing in the dark.  Furthermore, multinational corporations  control much of the funding and expertise  available for research and development of  the alternatives.  Needless to say, when  corporations profit from centralized  energy, they do not use their profits  to research cheaper, safer and less  centralized sources.  Nuclear power plants are capital intensive; to make them work, they require a  huge initial investment in buildings,  land, and equipment. The alternatives  described below are labour- intensive;  that is, they require human input in  manufacturing, installation and maintenance.  Nuclear power plants actually destroy jobs because they tie up huge  amounts of capital which, if invested in  any other energy form, would result in  major creation of employment.  Some of the alternatives suggested are  already in use in varying degress in  different parts of the world. For  instance, most of the hot water in Tel  Aviv has been heated by solar collectors.  A 40-foot wind tower on Cortez Island has  the capacity to supply electricity for 9  neighbouring cabins.  And there are many  solar collectors on houses and buildings  in Vancouver.  Alternatives would produce clean, safe  power  Other alternatives are new, with problems  inherent in implementation. But none are  nearly so dangerous as the threat of meltdown or the presence of radioactive waste.  Conservation  Better design of existing heating and  lighting systems and some appliances can  save a large percentage of total energy  requirements without reducing output.  Many buildings and appliances, designed  in the days of cheap energy, were not made  with an eye to conservation.  Passive Solar  New buildings can be built with large  glass panels on the south side.  By  keeping the windows uncovered in daylight  and covered when there is no sun, the  building can derive much of its heat from  the sun as opposed to an internal heating  system.  Covering windows during the  hottest hours during the summer can keep  a building cool without artificial air-  conditioning.  The Solar Co-op at Vine and  Broadway in Vancouver was built to maximize passive solar energy.  Active Solar  Solar collector roof panels attract the  sun's heat and use it to raise water  temperature.  The water is then stored in  insulated containers and is pumped through  conventional heating systems to provide  heat.  In other active solar systems, the  solar collector is used instead of a hot  water tank.  Solar collectors are inexpensive and easy to build.  Both the  Solar Co-op and the Vancouver Energy  Information Centre (SPEC) heat most of  their water with a solar collector.  a two-chambered heat exchanger. A liquid  with a low boiling point, such as ammonia,  is enclosed in a 2-chambered heat exchanger. One chamber is warmed close to the  surface, causing the liquid to vapourize.  The vapour escapes with enough force to  turn a turbine, is forced into the cold  chamber where It liquifies, then is pumped back into the warm chamber where escaping vapour again turns the turbine.  The electrical current produced by the  turning turbines is delivered to consumers  through power lines.  Windpower  Windtowers can be an excellent source of  power in B.C.'s coastal climate.  They  are easy and inexpensive to build and  require no fuel.  During periods of high  wind, turbines spin to generate power,  which is then stored in batteries hooked  up in series for use in periods of calm.  Oil companies know the value of windpower  — Alberta Gas and Oil has commissioned  the building of windtowers to-supply  power along the northern pipeline route.  Biomass  Biomass refers to the conversion of biological waste matter (i.e. weeds, manure,  crop residue and surplus) into fuel.  Organic matter is 'digested' by bacteria  to produce methane gas which is similar  to natural gas. High quality fertilizer  or cattle feed is the byproduct, so this  method of energy production is especially  suitable to agricultural areas.  Photovoltaic Cells  These are cells made of silicon or cadmium through which sunlight passes and  is converted directly to electricity.  Photovoltaic cells can be used much like  solar roof collectors; however, there is  no efficient way to store this energy for  use outside of daylight hours.  This  technology was originally designed by  NASA for use in the space programme.  Ocean Thermal Energy  It is possible to utilize the wide temperature variance between the surface level  and the lower levels of the ocean by using  Geothermal Energy  There are vast quantities of energy  stored in the earth's hot core.  In  areas where the molten core has pushed  close to the surface (i.e. volcano areas  and sites of natural geysers and hot  springs) it is possible to tap underground steam so it turns turbines to  produce electricity.  A geothermal plant  in California generates electricity at  half the cost of a nuclear reactor.  There  is, however, danger of environmental  damage due to removal of water from  beneath the surface. More research is  necessary before we can use geothermal  power to its fullest safe potential.  Small Scale Hydro Electricity  Given conducive geographic location (i.e.  proximity to a small natural waterfall)  and a moderate investment in labour and  equipment, it is possible to build one's  own hydro-electric generator and never  have to pay a utility company for power.  Small scale hydro generators preclude  the necessity for the huge dams and  diversions with which large power companies such as B.C. Hydro do irreparable  damage to the environment.  There are at  least 50 and probably many more small  scale generators in remote parts of B.C.  'Alternative energy', 'appropriate technology' and 'soft energy' all refer to  methods of producing clean, safe power.  Research, development and implementation  of .alternatives to nuclear power will  create many safe, long term jobs for  people who don't necessarily possess  highly technical skills, and will lead to  a cleaner, healthier environment.  Q 24   Kinesis    February 19i  NUCLEAR POWER  Our hope for the future lies in working together for change  For some of us the possibility of nuclear  war is so frightening that it can lead to  a feeling of hopelessness, a feeling that  we can't change the world fast enough, so  why even try.  The thought of nuclear war is  overwhelming  but it is crucial that we continue the  struggle with a firm conviction that we  can change the future.  Our hope for the  future lies in all of us working together  to build a safe world for ourselves and  our children.  Many of us who are concerned about the  escalating arms race and the hazards of  nuclear power plants cannot make a major  time commitment to anti-nuclear work.  Despite this, there are many things we can  do without joining a group that can have  an impact.  Here are some ways that you can help:  LEARN - The government and the nuclear  power industry try to intimidate and invalidate us by saying that we cannot  possibly understand nuclear power or that  we do not have the information to judge  the "national security" issues around  nuclear weapons.  But we do not have to be nuclear physicists to understand the basic principles  and hazards involved in nuclear power.  Nor do we have to be politicians to understand the consequences of nuclear war.  • Read - refer to the bibliography for  books and magazines on the nuclear issue  • Join or organize an anti-nuclear study  group.  SHARE INFORMATION - We are barraged by  so much false pro-nuclear propaganda  (that nuclear power is harmless, that we  will freeze in the dark without it, that  we must continue the arms race) that most  of us simply do not know the facts.  • Share what you have learned with  friends, relatives, co-workers and  neighbours.  • Circulate a petition for one of the  anti-nuclear groups — it's a good  opportunity to talk with people about  the issues.  • Ask librarians to order anti-nuclear  books.  • Wear an anti-nuclear button or t-shirt  • Bring a-film or speaker to a group or  class you are already involved in.  SUPPORT existing anti-nuclear groups by  • giving a financial contribution  • taking out a membership in one of the  organizations  • subscribing to a newsletter  • going to a demonstration, event or  workshop.  WRITE - Writing letters will not change  the world, but sometimes we forget that  it can have a significant effect.  • Write a letter to your MLA and/or the  premier about B.C. issues such as the  Cheekeye-Dunsmuir Line, the AMAX Corporation, and the Comox military base.  • Write to your MP and/or the Prime  Minister to have Canada declared a nuclear free zone.  • Send a letter from your group, class  or union as well as individual letters.  AGITATE - -You can help to raise public  awareness of nuclear issues.  • If you are in a union, propose an  anti-nuclear resolution (AUCE has passed  on.e in opposition to the nuclear  research reactor proposed for SFU)  • If you are in a political party, work  to get an anti-nuclear resolution  through (the NDP has passed one on the  federal level).  • Work within your women's organization,  class or any other group you are in to  draw up an anti-nuclear resolution and  send copies to government officials  and anti-nuclear groups.  JOIN - If you want to become an active  member of an anti-nuclear group, here are  some you can contact:  • Women Against Nuclear Technology  (WANT).  1774 Grant St., #7, Vancouver.  Phone 255-0523 or 734-5393- A feminist  anti-capitalist women's group opposed  to nuclear power and nuclear weapons.  • Canadian Coalition for Nuclear Responsibility (CCNR), 2148 Cornwall,  Vancouver.  Phone 734-8915.  Primarily  educational group opposed to nuclear  power and weapons.  General meetings  the first Tuesday of the month.  Newsletter available for $5 a year.  • Coalition for World Disarmament,  210A-1811 W. 16th Ave., Vancouver.  Phone 731-5626.  Currently working  toward the United Nations Special Session on Disarmament in the spring of  1982.  ■ Ploughshares, 1955 W. 4th Ave., Vancouver.  Phone 733-0141. Working on a  national campaign to make Canada a  Nuclear Weapons Free Zone. Newspaper,  "Monitor", buttons and posters.  • United Nations Association, 2524  Cypress, #204.  Phone 733-3912.  They  have bulletins and pamphlets on disarmament.  Some work in secondary schools.  ■ Voice of Women'.  Phone 687-6510 or  253-3625. A women's group working for  world peace and disarmament.  Active  petitioning drives.  • B.C. Peace Council. Phone 873-6697.  Works on issues of disarmament and world  peace.  • Hat Creek Action Group. Phone  874-0994. A direct action group  against B.C. Hydro mega-projects.  • Greenpeace, 2623 W. 4th Ave., Vancouver.  Phone 736-0321.  Environmental  group that does some education and  direct action around banning nuclear  testing.  • SPEC, 2150 W. 6th, Vancouver.  Phone  736-7732.  Environmental protection  group. Resource centre is open to the  public.  • Canadian Catholic Organization for  Development and Peace (CC0DP), 150  Robson, Vancouver.  Phone 683-0281. Some  educational work through Catholic organizations on militarism and Canada's  nuclear role in the world.  • Haney Alliance for Nuclear Discouragement, 13210 232d St., Maple Ridge.  Phone 467-9089 or 467-9064.  • Fraser Valley Peace Council, 16124  9th Ave., White Rock.  Phone 531-4178.  • Unitarian Church Social Responsibility  Committee.  Phone 224-1698.  All phone numbers are in Vancouver,  unless  otherwise indicated.       Q  RESOURCES  Books  Ain 't Nowhere We Can Run — A Handbook  for Women on the Nuclear Mentality. S.  Koen and N. Swaim, WAND, Norwich, Vt.  The Anti-Nuolec  and Karianders  •> Handbook.     Stephen Croall  Pantheon Books, NYC., 1978.  Nuclear Madness  — What You Can Do.     Helen  Caldicott, Autumn Press, Random House of  Canada, 1978.  Energy/War:  Freaking    the Nuclear Link.  Amory Lovins, Harper & Row, NYC, 1980.  No Nukes - Everyone's Guide to Nuclear  Power.     Anna Gyorgy, South End Press,  Boston, 1979.  Soft Energy Paths:  Towards a Durable Peace.  Amory Lovins, Pelican, 1979.  Magazines  Win Magazine.     326 Livingston St.,  Brooklyn, NY 11217.  Non-violent activist  magazine with news of the anti-nuclear  movement.  Published every other week.  $15 per year.  Peace News.     8 Elm Ave., Nottingham 3,  England.  5-issue trial sub for 2 pounds.  Published every other week.  The World Information Service on Energy  (WISE)   'Bulletin'.     1536 16th St. N.W.,  Washington, D.C. 20036, USA.  Provides  international information and resources on  safe energy, uranium and nuclear power and  weappns from the news service of the grass  roots movement world-wide.  $10/yr.  Films  We Are The Guinea Pigs.     IDERA, 2524  Cypress St., Vancouver.  Phone 738-8815.  The Last Slide Show  (slides and cassette)  and Making a Killing:  the Arms Industry in  Canada.     Coalition for World Disarmament.  733-9018.  No Act of God  (on nuclear power).  National  Film Board, 1155 West Georgia, Vancouver.  No Nuke Women.   (video) Metro-Media Association,  1037 Commercial Drive, Vancouver.  Phone 255-1833-  Anti-nuclear videos are also available  through Video Inn, 261 Powell Street,  Vancouver, or phone 688-4336. February 1982    Kinesis    25  MOVEMENT MATTERS  Recognizing our labour or the dinner party that never was  by Lou Nelson  Once upon a time, four women were sitting  in a kitchen, drinking tea, exchanging  stories and talking about movement  politics.  It's difficult to reconstruct exactly how  we got onto the topic that is the subject  of this article, but there we were, right  into it — appreciations, celebrations,  toasts, tables and dinner.  It seems we  went from controversies in the movement  to current gossip, to group process to  burnout.  Then one of us trundled out an idea she  said she'd been thinking about for a while  — wouldn't it be great to have a dinner  of appreciations. That is, a dinner AND  appreciations.  Sort of like this: ask collectives to pick  one or more people from their collective  they want to say some good things about,  find people to get up and say appreciations, rent a hall and microphone, have  food, wine (and juice), perhaps a mistress  of ceremonies, and do it up. Charge  $5.00 at the door and give the net proceeds  to Press Gang.  The initial response to this idea was  positive so we played it out as if it were  a real project. That's when we started  running into problems. Too many collectives, too many women, too little time.  Given a large number of collectives, how  do you structure the evening so the celebration does not become overwhelming? One  a minute was not the effect we were looking  for.  So why not change the structure? What if  we simply honoured some individuals?  Certainly there are more than enough  women who deserve our recognition and  appreciation.  Moving right along (and now sitting at  the Waldorf with a round of beer), we came  up with a list of seven women, and set  about thinking of women who could do the  appreciations.  It was shaping up to be a  celebration with a focus. Another round  of beer later, we set a date for a supper  meeting to pull together the initial  publicity.  Star making or public appreciation?  Well, before we met again, we talked with  a few friends, and found resistance to  the idea. Some women objected that the  celebration would create stars, would set  up leaders, had aspects of giving power  away. At our supper meeting, we talked  about these objections and our responses.  We decided that without support there was  no point in going ahead, but we still  liked the idea.  We need to talk about ways and means of  doing public appreciations.  We are not  wedded to the specifics of our idea, but  one element is key: group or community  recognition of individual women, women we  have all worked with, who are our own  friends, sisters, lovers, co-workers.  I would like to outline some of my reasons  for wanting such a celebration.  The women we chose for the first dinner  were Dorrie Brannock, Sarah Davidson,  Pat Smith, Prabha Khosla, Muggs  Sigurgeirson, Gloria Greenfield, Ces  Rosales.  It is important for me to  acknowledge these women because  a) they have served as an inspiration to  me;  b) they are continuing to do political  work and they have been fighting for a  long time (some longer than others, but  all more than five years);  c) having experienced burnout myself,  and having seen women stop doing political  work, I know what forces are against them  continuing, and  d) I want to give these women public  credit for the work they have done, and  the roles they have played in the movement  — maintaining continuity, each one in a  different way, continuing to fight for  her vision of the future.  These are not the only women I would so  toast. But we have to begin somewhere.  One seemed too few, ten too many, seven  a compromise.  I mean, there are only so  many ways to slice up an evening.  Validating ordinary struggle  We need to recognize that we in Vancouver  have a distinct history, and our own  story to tell. We have a place in history,  and we are making it.  We are delighted to see films such as  Wilmar 8 or Union Maids or Women in  Arms. Other women's stories of their  lives somehow become larger than life  through being filmed and told as a story.  We look at them and say, "Ah now, how  wonderful that was, how great those women  are!"  And then I am reminded that we are wonderful too, but so few stories get told.  How do we validate our own Canadian, B.C.  lower mainland struggle?  It all seems so  ordinary and humdrum.  It seems to me we can begin by appreciating the work that women are currently  doing and encouraging them to continue.  To do this in a public way has an impact  and a significance that personal appreciations do not.  I could go to each of these women and say  how I appreciate the work she is doing,  but somehow that is not enough for me.  It is also that they add to and extend our  history of struggle as a movement.  I want other activists to join me in  toasting their dedication, their courage  in the face of discouragement, their day-  to-day plugging along and coping with  life's hassles.  We honour other women, those who are easy  to honour — famous writers, political  theorists, revolutionaries. Who doesn't  have a poster on her wall, or a quote on  her fridge?  Celebration a way of taking ourselves  seriously  But there are many more women who will  not receive any recognition. Women like  us. Women who are not writers, not politicians, not famous, not noticeable. Women  who work at organizing, continuing to make  links with other women; women who work to  maintain the few structures the women's  movement has; women who work across and in  different cultures, striving to make new  connections.  Do we let these women  remain anonymous?  To me that is to rob ourselves of our  history in process. Always looking to  the future goal — working, struggling,  organizing — never accomplishing enough,  always seeing what needs to be done...  when do we stop and say "Good work."?  Women spend years of their lives organizing  for women, and are expected to continue  on the strength of personal satisfaction,  knowing they are working for a good cause  Well, perhaps that's not enough.  We don't want to create stars, or leaders,  or to be elitist, but to honour the work  that is being done. Celebration is a  way of taking ourselves seriously.  So, guess who's coming to dinner? 0  \   H  vt  //        t  Shari Street  February 19-27,1962 26    Kinesis    February 1982  CULTURE  Female imagery in wood: a profile of Robin Campbell  by Michele Wollstonecroft  Robin (Heather) Campbell originally  trained in Montreal as a printmaker (she  moved to Victoria 3s years ago). Robin  chose to make wood sculpture, primarily  because wood is reasonably safe and convenient to work with, and does not require  dangerous chemicals or elaborate, expensive equipment. Robin uses hand tools  and collects most of her materials from  the beaches around Victoria.  Robin is a member of Xchanges, an artist-  run co-operative gallery and studio.  There, in August 1980, she held an exhibition called Sanctuaries.  Robin's sculpture is profoundly female in  form, style and imagery. Much of her  work reflects pre-historic (i.e. non-  patriarchal) images and shapes.  This show  transformed the Xchanges gallery space  into an environment somewhat reminiscent  of matriarchal religion, ritual, and  earth-oriented pantheism.  One creates oneself through one's  sculptings  Sanctuaries  included five female figures.  Mama is a stylized voluminous female  figure, with a bird-like head and a small  bird nesting in a hollow on her chest.  X'm is a horned.goddess with a delicate  face, and an elongated flattened body  that contains the head of an axe embedded  on its side in her lower abdomen.  Spring is a stylized muscular female figure, with a beak-like head. In Sanctuaries,  she sat upon, as if emerging from, 800  pounds of earth. The earth was carefully  placed in a circle, and surrounded by an  outer circle of earth.  Mermaid, accompanied by a suspended fish,  is a folk-art styled musical figure.  Her  belly is hollowed out and engraved with a  spiral, and she is strung and tuned for  playing.  Alpha, the fifth piece, is a  stylized tall, slim female form surrounded by a circle of stones and mimicked by  similar cut-out figures on the wall behind.  Of this work Robin says, "This show of  fine female figures in wood offers to its  perceivers self-expansive sanctuaries of  being.  The source of the images and to an  extent the forms is the pre-historic  female figure/goddess.  I was originally  drawn to the steatophagous figure 5  and then recently have been exci- *  ted by the more joyful Egyptian and Mino-  an y)   I? 'dancers' .  "The forms' other source is my self in  process.  Important here is my belief,  somehow reinforced by the Tibetan Book of  the Dead, that one creates oneself through  one's breathings, noisings, postures, and  shape makings (sculptings).  "The dominant shape of my art has been an  embryonic Q comma, a shape readily perceivable    in the steatophagous goddess  I have been struggling throughout the  past five years to work through that  shape.  I am now in the process of standing up into a new form Yl    inspired by  the breathing/noising  V of 'Alpha'.  The polysyllable-polymorph now replaces  the monosyllable-(Om-like ) monomorph  comma." (Robin Campbell, Sanctuaries  Artists, August 1980)  The made becomes the maker  Robin is very sensitive to the innate  qualities of wood.     Because  "found" wood  (predominantly fir) often has an eccentric  character,  Robin has at times com-  "Spring" from Sanctuaries (left), "Headstone" (top right) and "Bier" (bottom right) from  Graveposts and Headstones. Wood sculpture by Robin Campbell.  promised her purity of expression in order  to retain certain features of the wood.  In the Sanctuaries  pieces, this eccentric  character of the wood served to reinforce  the pantheistic implications of the show.  X'm and the Mermaid displayed some painted  surfaces, as well as bright stones for  eyes. The Mermaid's fish (also wood)  displayed a glittering scaley surface of  ornaments, tacks and beads, and this ornamentation added a sense of folk art.  Recently Robin has been working on a body  of work entitled Graveposts and Headstones.  These pieces are more concerned with pure  form than her previous work. Robin states:  "Each person has, as they develop, a  peculiar shape or. form which they find  comfortable.  This form is a substratum  which emerges as composition in painting  or drawing, as one's characteristic physical posture, as a recurring form in an  artist's sculpture.  It informs one's  handwriting style. Spiritually it shapes  a person's chant or mantra.  "This form can not only express or describe  a spiritual state or mode of being; it can  evoke or prescribe, in its manifestation  as sculpture, one particular mode. Cause  and effect can reverse roles and the made  becomes the maker. The viewer identifying  with the form is remade." (Robin Campbell  Graveposts and Headstones,   Statement 1981)  The Graveposts and Headstones  pieces are  intended to be seen as positive spiritual  feminine forms for people to contemplate  and internalize.  It is important to Robin  that these sculptures "are objects that  exist in space without becoming phallic —  they are receptive — ... giving/receiving,  "feminine", listening/hearing, opening/  closing, erotic and spiritual forms." (R.  Campbell)  Recent work a graveyard encounter  The Graveposts and Headstones  literally  represents a graveyard scene.  It is  Robin's intention that these pieces, upon  installation, shall be placed in the order  that one would really encounter them in a  graveyard.  The first piece the viewer will see is the  Guardian, a large horizontally-lined block  that is U or V-shaped and painted in the  centre.  The fifteen Graveposts are next. They are  like the "dancers" Robin mentioned previously, and symbolize the mourners.  The Graveposts are relatively stylized in  their form; however, individually they  differ. Their heads are a U (receptive)  form, and they are painted within the U  and on the abdomen.  The Headstones are fashioned after the U-  shaped heads of the Graveposts. At present there are two Headstones — hollowed  out half ovals that retain their woodiness  on the exterior but are painted bright  pink and bright orange in the U-shaped  centre. They have names like "Raspberry  Sherbet" and are reminiscent, of a ripe  piece of canteloupe.  The four Tombs are long blocks of wood. In  the centre of each is an egg-shaped hollow  that is painted a cool light pink.  Both  the Headstones and the Tombs retain their  mass and appearance of strength, yet are  also extremely delicate.  The Bier is a boat-like shape.  It is  hollowed across the top and unlike the  Tombs, the hollowed surface is textured.  The surface is painted a more flesh-like  pink than the other pieces. The Bier is  not as massive and block-like as the  Guardian, Headstones or Tomb.  Robin has had numerous solo and group  exhibitions including at Powerhouse Gallery (Montreal), Galerie des Artistes  Independents (Montreal), the Musee de  Quebec (Quebec City), and Circle Craft  (Robson Square, Vancouver).  She also  won fifth prize for wood sculpture in the  1980 International Wood Carving Competition, held at the Canadian National Agricultural Exhibition in Toronto.  She has  received two grants, one from the Community Arts Council of Victoria in 1980,  the other from the Quebec Government's  AID to Artists' programme in 1978.  At present Robin is collaborating with  artist Nina Welles to produce an installation of game boards and drawings  entitled Absurd Endeavours. The games  are meant to be played, but in order to  play and even win the players must cooperate with each other.  The Show opens  April 1st at the Xchange Gallery in  Victoria. 0_  This article is the first in a series  featuring B.C.   women artists,   by Michele  Wollstonecroft. February 1982   Kinesis   27  REVIEWS  Lesbian Fiction moves beautifully into new territory  by Cy-Thea Sand  One of the most challenging aspects of  living outside the dominant culture is  what I call simultaneous seeing: being  sensitive to the truth and beauty of my  life while knowing that the powerful few,  with the complicity of the many, would  destroy that life.  Lesbian Fiction,  an anthology.    Edited by  Elly Bulkin.  Watertown, Massachusetts:  Persephone Press, 1981.  295 pp.  $8.95  paper.  So it is with lesbian literature. While I  celebrate the diverse intelligence of lesbian literary culture, I am aware that our  lives reflect only sexual perversity in  the minds of most people. The word  "lesbian" is still unspeakable outside of  women's communities. When it is uttered,  charges of sexual obsessions and abnormal  desires are generated.  I hope that the publication of Lesbian  Fiction  will help to change this perspective. Meanwhile, I am impressed with the  depth of concern and talent that exists  in the American lesbian writing community.  Lesbian Fiction  includes twenty-eight  short stories as well as an historical  review of lesbian fiction and an essay on  teaching lesbian short fiction in the  classroom, both by editor Elly Bulkin.  Established writers such as Audre Lorde,  Jane Rule and Jan Clausen are presented,  as well as lesser known authors (at least  to me), such as Aleida Rodriguez and  Sauda Jamal.  Irene Klepfisz' experimental work, "The  Journal of Rachel Robotinik", is an  interesting example of genre blending.  This .piece begins with a letter to the  reader, explaining that the journal  entries to follow are the work of short  story writer Rachel Robotnik. Her editor,  and author of this letter, is Mary M.  Arnold.  She explains that Ms. Robotnik's collection of short stories has been well  received by literary critics.  However,  Rachel Robotnik has failed in her attempts  to get her journal published.  (It was  written while she worked on the short  stories).  Arnold tells the reader that Ms. Robotnik  believes "that most reviewers as well as  readers could not understand (her work) if  they did not understand how it came to be",  and that "lovers of great art are pure  poison.  They live for the single moments,  for epiphanies, for great revelations.  They want to forget what happens in  between; they don't want to see the  process, the conditions, the dead flies  stuck to the half dry canvas." Mary  Arnold has retained the unpolished  quality of the journals, editing for  clarity only.  The journal excerpts themselves are interspersed with newspaper headlines and  stories as well as with excerpts from  Rachel's works in progress. The journal  details the practical aspects of the  writing process for most women: the  squeezing in of solitude between a job  and domestic life, the anxiety about  economic security gnawing at one's aspirations to greatness, the frustrations  of creative individuals bound by the  economic/emotional fragmentation of  post-industrial society.  Klepfisz is an  astute and angry writer — her words sting  as well as inform.  Dorothy Allison     Julie Dlockwomon      Sandy  Doucher     Maureen Dtody     Jo Corrillo     Jon  Clousen    Flying Clouds    Jewelle Gomez    Jud  Lesbian  FICTION  Grohn     Saudo Jomol     Froncine Krosno    Irene  Klepfisz     Audre Lorde     Elizabeth A.Lynn    Ju  dith McDaniel     Lynn Michaels     Oarboro Nodo  an anthology  edited by:    Elly Dulkin  1 Diana Rivers     Aleida Rodriguez    Jane Rule  1 Darbora Sheen     Ann Allen Shockley     Koth  jerine Sturtevant     Pat Suncircle     Kitty Tsui  "Lovers of great art are pure poison.  They live for the single moments, for  epiphanies, for great revelations. They  want to forget what happens in between;  they don't want to see the process, the  conditions, the dead flies stuck to the  half-dry canvas."  One of the most appealing features of  Lesbian Fiction  is its complexity. Lesbianism, women-identification, are taken  for granted by the artists; they are  intellectually free to explore the multi-  faceted nature of living. They are without the debilitating self-consciousness of  the fifties and sixties writers of popular  lesbian literature, and without the political zealousness which marred much of the  lesbian fiction (and poetry) of the  seventies.  Loving women is a fact that is basic to  these writers' lives and work.  It is  the vital force of their creativity but  not its raison d'etre.    Their woman-love  inspires their concern with violence  against women (Judith McDaniel - "Present  Danger"), the nature of illusion (Barbara  Sheen - "Twins") and the triple horror of  racism, poverty and drugs (Sauda Jamal -  "A Mother That Loves You").  Domestic  violence is dramatized in Dorothy Allison's  excellent work, "A River of Names". And  in Allison's story, "I'm Working on my  Charm", the idlosyncracies and perils  (respectively) of Southern culture and  waitressing are presented in a humorous  way.  It is in its representation of different  racial and class experiences that Lesbian  Fiction  excels.  The majority of North  American literature is of the white, male  middle class reality. My literary educa  tion as a white woman has been saturated  by these monolithic images. (A school of  radical working class literature exists,  but is male-identified).  One of the joys of reading autobiographies  for me is learning the intellectual influence on people's lives. But most of these  influences have been ethnocentric —  devoid of knowledge or concern with  working class women, black children, Mexican culture or Japanese tradition.  When I read stories like Jo Camillo's  "Maria Littlebear" my mind moves into new  territory: it does not lie stagnant in  comfortable familiarity. When Barbara  Noda's poetic prose honours her grandparents, I am enriched by its beauty and  simplicity.  Lesbian Fiction  is a fine collection of  contemporary short fiction.  Its concern  with the grit of life, what Mary Meigs  calls the "dark truth", is indicative of  the universal ism of women's, of lesbians'  thought and visions.  Cy-Thea Sand is an editor of THE RADICAL  REVIEWER.    She encourages women to submit  articles and reviews for the upcoming  issue concerning the art and literature of  Canadian women.    Submissions are due by  March 15,   1982.     Send to THE RADICAL  REVIEWER,  P.O.   Box 24953,  Stn.   C,   Vancouver  B.C.    o.  r  Canadian  Advisory Council  on the Status  of Women  f^^^       Conseil consultatif  ^B         canadien  k^^J      de la situation  _  _      de la femme  Publications  PENSION REFORM  WITH WOMEN IN MIND  Describes the Canadian pension  system and emphasizes women's  needs with suggestions for concrete  and realistic reforms that will provide  fair and adequate pensions to all  women.  By Louise Dulude,  111 pages  Write for your free copy to:  LES FEMMES ET LA REFORME DES  REGIMES DE PENSIONS  Une analyse de la situation des  femmes face au systeme canadien de  pensions et des reformes concretes et  realistes qui s'imposent pour accorder  aux femmes les pensions qui leur  reviennent.  Par Louise Dulude,  128 pages  Obtenez-en gratuitement un exemplaire  en ecrivant a:  CACSW PUBLICATIONS  Room 1005  151 Sparks Street  Ottawa, Ontario  K1P5R5  y -^m                      PUBLICATIONS CCCSF  r^'                     Piece 1005  ij^mk                     151, rue Sparks  ^  ^                     Ottawa (Ontario)  ■ ■                     K1P5R5 Kinesis    February 1982  REVIEWS  Holly Near returns to Vancouver in aid of anti-nuclear work  On March 19, Women Against Nuclear  Technology (WANT) brings Holly Near and her  accompanist Adrienne Torf to Vancouver. Proceeds of the concert, to be held at the  Orpheum, will be distributed between WANT  and AMNLAE (the Nicaraguan Women's  Association). See Bulletin Board for details.  by Marcia Meyer  Throughout the ages, artists and musicians  have reflected the ideas, philosophies  and advancements of the eras in which they  lived.  In our time, Holly Near, songwriter, performer and recording artist,  has gone one stop beyond .  Her lyrics and music not only portray what  is happening around us but reveal an  attitude and awareness affective of progressive change. Holly's melodies and  harmonies are as beautiful as the philosophies her lyrics represent. And her  inventiveness is well matched by the  ingenious adeptness of her piano arranger  and accompanist Adrienne Torf.  In the early 70's, Holly toured the U.S.  and parts of Asia singing anti-war songs  for the Free The Army Show. Before this,  she performed in prisons; she has long  recognized the problems of classism and  racism.  In the past decade, Holly has evolved a  songwriting style that combines brilliant  musical composition with lyrics representing commitment to women's rights, world  peace and an environment free of oppression and nuclear technology. Her songs  do not play into the stereotypes that  see women as dependent possessions, nor  do they condone alcohol and drug abuse,  hopelessness, sexism or racism.  What Holly sings about is real. With  respect to nuclear power, radioactive  wastes are being emanated, transported  and stored within our very cities and  nuclear power projects are being built  while officials falsely assure us that  nothing can go wrong. Holly sees nuclear  technology as "similar to all oppressions  that have ever existed. This is just a  highly technological version."  Yet, in the face of this, Holly reminds  us that we do have the power to organize  and affect change. She sings,  Learn the lessons of the past  We're not the first  And we're not the last  To sing about freedom  To live our lives for freedom  This feminist health book is recommended reading  by Ani Arnott  How to Stay Out of the Gynecologist 's  Office  by the Federation of Feminist Women's  Health Centres (Women's Health in  Women's Hands Series)  Women to Women Publications, Los Angele;  paperback, 1981.  This book is the result of years of self  help and lay health research by women at  the Los Angeles Feminist Women's Health  Center, (these women also printed the  book themselves. )  In language that most English-speaking  women will find understandable, they  present positive and quite radical views  of gynecological anatomy.  They tell us  how our systems work, suggesting a whole  range of normal ways for our bodies to be,  rather than presenting one stereotypic  "perfect" model that leaves the rest of  us wondering whether we're really working  right.  The illustrations are wonderful, showing  all kinds of women taking care of their  own and each others' health. The big,  old women in the pictures are from many  races, and take all the natural rambling  shapes that women do really, again an  exciting reflection of the woman-loving  view that shapes this book.  It's a fine contrast to the illustrations  from a 1971 UBC medical text where women  are posed and dressed (nude in high heels)  as if for a 1940s girlie calendar.  The sections on odours and secretions are  recommended reading for all. For probably  the first time, a medical book has printed  information on why we smell and secrete  the way we do, giving us a solid respect  and understanding of what is natural and  functional about these taboo aspects of our  female bodies — ammunitition against the  barrage of attitudes that we are sexually  somehow 'dirty' because of them.  A large part of the book is taken up with  describing and explaining what can go  HOW TO STAY  OUT of the  GYNECOLOGISTS OFFICE  v* By the Federation of  Feminist Women's Health Centers  wrong in our healthy systems, common  disturbances, how to notice them early  and what we can do for ourselves.  For each problem they first say what is  going on in the body that's causing irritation and what may be the reasons behind  the disfunction so we can take preventative measures in future.  Then they present alternative treatments  they have used or heard of.  They tell  us how widely, and with what varying  degrees of success these home remedies  have been used, to their knowledge.  They say how they think the remedy works.  Finally the standard medical treatments  are outlined and critiqued — including  additional effects of drugs commonly  prescribed, and risks of surgical or  diagnostic procedures.  The second part of the book, "Taking the  Mystery Out of a Medical Visit", could  actually subtitle the whole thing. It is  written primarily for an American audience, so much of the information is  not directly applicable to Canadian  women.  But it addresses a lot of the non-medical  issues that confront a woman who must see  a medical specialist. They supply a lot  of information about common diagnostic  tools and tests, from the taking of blood  pressure to urine tests to pelvic examinations, so we are more informed about  what is happening to us and can ask relevant questions.  And they make a lot of concrete suggestions about how we can maintain equality  and be assertive in a usually very unequal situation.  The third part of the book is a glossary  of medical terms, containing full, plain  language explanations of what physicians  are talking about.  The income from How to Stay Out of The  Gynecologist's Office will go to support  the ongoing operation of the Los Angeles  Clinic whose funding is under attack by  "right to life" lobbies and professional  interests. These same "professional  interests" one time sued a woman in the  clinic for practicing medicine without a  licence when she put yogurt in a woman's  vagina to counteract a yeast infection.  The book is available at the Vancouver  Women's Health Collective and at the  women's bookstores.  Q February 1982    Kinesis    29  CONFERENCES  Highlights from the BCFW convention  The British Columbia Federation of Women  (BCFW) convention held November 6-8 in  Vancouver was a contentious one in many  ways.  Perhaps not surprisingly, given that this  convention aimed to re-structure the federation based on a task committee model  (eliminating the old standing committee),  and stronger representation from regions.  One of the first issues to arise at this  convention was that of voting majority,  an important issue since convention deci- 'Ģ  sions are often close ones.  The motion proposed raising majority from  50%+l to 1%. Those in favour thought that  75% more closely approached consensus (our  ideal, but difficult to achieve in such a  large group) than did 50#+l. However, many  others were convinced that such a large  majority would make it truly difficult to  conduct business in convention. That view  defeated the motion - later on in the  convention, a compromise motion using 66%  as majority did pass.  Individual membership was another issue  which sparked much discussion. It arose  because some women who have been committed  to BCFW work do not belong to a member  group, or their group disbanded during the  course of the year, leaving them without  official status.  Women who supported the concept of individual membership thought it was a positive  move to enable women who are not in groups  to join BCFW. They pointed out that women  who belong to member groups typically devote almost all their energy to that member group. Consequently, there is very  little energy to carry out the task of the  federation.  Those opposing the motion thought it attacked a fundamental principle of BCFW -  that which encourages member groups to  work together as groups to fight the system. Individual membership was seen to  water down collective organizing.  As well, feminist groups do ascribe to a  basic unity which requires they be accountable to one another. Some feared that  individual membership would have much less  accountability built in.  The motion supporting individual membership  eventually passed, but a directive was appended dealing with the accountability  issue. What this says is that a sponsorship  letter from a member group must accompany  an individual's application for membership  within a region. Individual members must  re-apply annually, and fulfill duties as  do member groups. The directive recognized  that individual membership is a distinct  advantage for isolated and/or rural women.  Another structural change concerned childcare. The Lesbian and Feminist Mothers'  Political Action Group (LAFMPAG) proposed  additions to the constitution which, for  instance, would require member groups to  "address the needs of chidren and women  with children, provide childcare for each  meeting, share expenses as necessary and  evaluate the childcare provided for the  previous meeting using information from  those directly involved, including the  children."  Those in favour of this stressed that collective responsibility for childcare is a  fundamental principle of feminism. Specifically, one woman stated that as a minimum requirement, each member should contribute money to cover childcare expenses  in order that mothers could attend meeting's; that it is completely incompatible  with feminist principles not to address  this issue.  Some were concerned that the wording of  the motion contradicted the BCFW preamble  which reads in part, "we are committed to  the autonomy of member groups", and that  "requiring" groups to do this would set an  unwanted precedent in the constitution.  This was the only opposition, however, and  the motion carried.  Other amendments to the constitution concerned regional responsibilities. Regions  are now responsible for ensuring member  groups fulfill their responsibilities to  BCFW, and for supporting women responsible  for children to become involved in, or form  member groups.  In addition, regions will ratify new individual members and groups in the region,  ratify regional action committees, decide  how to be represented on the coordinating  collective, and coordinate and implement  regional work. The new childcare policy  noted above also applies to regions.  A motion in favour of creating an outreach  liaison committee for regional organization  was also defeated. However, a motion requiring that the next convention planning  committee include at least two women to  plan childcare passed unanimously.  The issue of whether BCFW conventions  should be "open" or "closed" was resolved  for the time being by deciding that convention may be designated open to all women  who wish to attend by the coordinating  collective before convention, with workshop  facilitators having the right to close  their workshops.  The Sunday session began with the report of  the incorporation committee, which recommended rejection of the idea of incorporating BCFW. Some expressed hesitation,  fearing it could jeopardize our hopes for  funding in the future,  Most delegates, however, were willing to  accept the committee's recommendation,  agreeing with the speaker who suggested we  tell Secretary of State to change their  policy if it seems bent on denying BCFW  funding. In the end; the committee's recommendation carried.  Following that decision came new policy  proposals. Childcare policy was first on  the agenda. Aside from revision of existing  policy, three new policies were proposed.  One states: "We encourage member groups  organizing feminist events to take responsibility to make the ideas and actions  that are the focus of that event accessible  and useful to children."  Another proposed, as set out previously,  that all member groups and BCFW meetings  provide childcare. The third recommended  that as "we are in the process of learning  to be responsible for childcare as a group  we encourage  member groups to set aside  time at every meeting to evaluate childcare  provided for the previous meeting, using  information from those directly involved,  including the children." All these proposals were passed by delegates.  The policy on anti-racism which followed  engendered much discussion. All but one  section of this resolution was passed by  delegates.  In part, the resolution asked individual  members and member groups of BCFW to be  responsible for acknowledging, defining and  acting upon their privilege, racism and  classism; that member groups actively work  to educate themselves and others about  class and white privilege, strive to involve more third world women in member  groups, and encourage third world women's  groups to join BCFW; and, that member  groups form working alliances with anti-  racist groups and take direction from third  world people/women in fighting societal and  institutional racism.  The section defeated by delegates asked  that every BCFW member share their knowledge and skills with and learn from third  world women, regionally, provincially and  across the country. Objections to it centred around the fear of tokenism, with  member groups asking third world women to  do the work of educating them.  Some speakers referred to the anti-racism  workshop held the previous day. They stressed the need to see the connection between  sexism and racism, and said that third  world women would not encourage women of  colour to join BCFW until member groups  had taken some initiative to work on  racism.  The anti-imperialist policy passed by delegates asks, in part, that BCFW support  efforts by third world women to rid themselves of imperialism and repressive political systems in whatever way they see fit;  that members become more aware of the problems third world women face both in Canada  and abroad; that BCFW recognize the oppression of aboriginal women in Canada and encourage member groups to actively support  them in their efforts to gain both equal  and aboriginal rights; and, that BCFW encourage members to work with native and  third world women's support groups organized by solidarity groups whose goals and  practices are mutually compatible with  BCFW policy.  The issue of autonomy of member groups came  up frequently during the convention. The  structure committee especially, was concerned about passing policy which contained  intent to force member groups to comply.  They think we must look seriously at the  role we want BCFW to play before departing  in such a way from past practice.  At times this objection was made during  emotion-laden discussion such as that surrounding the anti-racism resolution, so  that those who brought it up ran the risk  of appearing to be against incorporating  anti-racist policy.  The minutes of the convention provide a  complete record of decisions made at the  convention. This report is only a summary  of some of the issues.  If member groups have not received minutes,  copies are available from Press Gang. A  revised constitution and policy handbook  is not being printed this year, so handbooks will have to be revised on the basis  of the minutes.  FEB 22-26      ,  U.B.C. WOMENS   WEEK  ?,  SCIENCE  & TECHNOLOGY  23: Abortion Technology & Ethics  : Suzuki - Impact of Science  24: Beer & Women's Bluegrass  : W.A.N.T.  25: Margaret Benston  : Women in Science Panel  : Wine & Cheese & Women Profs  26: VDT Technology  : Judy Smith - Empowering Women,  feminist analysis of science  For info: 228-2163  Presented by  U.B.C. Women's Centre 30   Kinesis    February 1982  ORGANIZING  VSW: A LOOK BACK continued from page 2  a part in determining how the work gets  done.  Members of VSW have always played a strong  role in the work of the organization. Many  members have joined VSW and immediately  become active in some aspect of our work  — KINESIS, answering phones, serving on  the executive, volunteering time, developing issues — or in bringing their own  concerns and skills to the forefront.  On the other hand, the decision made by  many members to simply join VSW and receive  KINESIS prohibits VSW from being a purely  membership-based organization.  Rather, it  allows us to move out into the community  of women in neighbourhoods and communities  throughout Vancouver, and sometimes in  other parts of B.C.  A forum and a meeting place  No social change organization can do effective work without a base.  VSW's  base has always been politically varied,  and this has shaped our representation  of women.  We have always tried to begin  our work with any woman "where she is at"  and move with her in a certain direction.  At the same time, we have struggled hard  to develop a realistic and consistent  political "line" that would work not  only for reform, but for real change for  women.  This has not been an easy road to travel.  We seldom please everybody with our  statements and issue development.  However,  we do present an analysis that is thoughtful, challenging, meaningful and possible.  Certainly not all of our members agree  with all parts of our analysis.  After all,  women are not a monolithic body.  But  it is important that there be opportunities  for those wanting to agree and disagree,  to speak. VSW has always provided such a  forum, and that has been a major strength.  The actual physical space from which we  work has also had an impact on how VSW  has developed.  Obviously it affects the  ability of the staff to get things done  efficiently, but there is more to it than  that. This was especially evident when  we moved from West 4th to West 7th.  The 4th Avenue offices were cramped but  open, with a meeting room downstairs. We  were able to respond to changing numbers  of staff (each summer brought at least 3  or 4 students working on projects) and,  most importantly, we were able to offer  meeting space to members and other women's  groups.  Much of this changed after we moved to  West 7th.  The closed offices and lack of  meeting room prohibited drop-in activity  and the sharing of meeting space with  REVOLUTION continued from page 11   Do any of us living in this comparatively  rarified, privileged world have any right  to comment upon the means anybody else  takes towards freedom? Living here in  Vancouver, many of us white and middle  class, do any of us have the right to  comment upon what the blacks in the ghettoes of New York act upon? Do we have  any right to comment on the directions  the indigenous peoples of Nortn America  have taken to try and preserve a future  for their people? This is perhaps the  most crucial message I want to convey.  I suggest that pacifism is an ideology  that can only be held, these days, by  people who have race and class privilege.  It is not a luxury that poor people and  people of colour can have anymore.  The  severity and finality of the attack upon  many of us leaves no room for choice in  deciding what to do.  Current VSW staff members Janet Beebe, Patty Moore, Susan Hoeppner and Hilarie McMurray.  Missing are Nadine Allen and Cat Wickstrom.  other women. Now that we have moved to  much larger premises, evening activities  have once again stepped up. VSW space is  being used by other groups nearly every  night of the week and three other women's  organizations who can't afford space of  their own have had phone lines installed  in various corners of our new premises.  VSW a training ground for feminists  VSW's ability to be responsive to women's  needs is one of the great strengths of the  organization.  Perhaps the telephone information and advocacy work has been one of  the most constant services VSW offers to  women.  And it's a two-way street.  This  ongoing work has given VSW a way to monitor women's needs and concerns, and to act  on them.  Because we remain involved in  the day-to-day problems of women, we keep  in perspective what is important.  To our work with women, we add the monitoring of government and private sector  statements about women, and of pending  legislation. To this work, we bring  the actual experience and knowledge VSW  has gained over the years.  For example, when the recent throne speech  mentioned the need for a women's office in  the Ministry of Labour, we knew that  nothing new was being proposed. We knew  what efforts the provincial government  had made on behalf of women, and with what  results (or lack thereof!).  This kind of information exists not only  in the heads of the staff and other workers at VSW, but in the library as well.  The library, developed since the early  years, is constantly used by a whole  range of people who need easily accessible  information on issues of concern to women.  VSW is also responsive to women in that it  exists for people to use as they see fit.  Many women have come to VSW because of a  strong personal or political need.  They  have been able to have that need met at  VSW.  Finally, VSW has helped other groups form  and grow, and offers itself as a training  ground for feminists. Many women active  with VSW have gone on to work with other  groups, or have sought employment dealing  specifically with women's needs. Others  have simply found themselves better able  to speak up about women's Issues.  When we three first sat down with the tape  recorder to talk about being staff and  members of VSW, we fell into an all too  familiar pattern of remembering our  failures.  But as the evening progressed,  we reminded ourselves of the successes.  Eleven years later, we are still here.  Many, many women have passed through VSW  — some for a solution to a problem, some  to volunteer their time, others as staff  members, and some for all three! .  We are confident that all of us have  gained as well as contributed to VSW's  life and growth.  There is still much  work to be done, but we have a solid  history on which to build.  0.  If you're poor or non-white, prison is  pretty much your guaranteed future, so  what amount of choice or decision-making  is there? What do morals or ideologies  mean in the face of that future? Might  as well act while you can.  Get some  justice done before you're killed or  imprisoned.  This is the real-life  attitude of many people, though it probably seems alien to those living fairly  sequestered lives in the mainstream.  You won't find people who have nothing  being moralistic about how to fight for a  better life.  Only people who have property believe that property destruction  is violent.  It means nothing to people  who possess nothing.  People who believe in resisting in whatever ways are available are also involved  in co-operation, mutuality, powersharing,  collectivity and non-hierarchy. These  aren't values and st7,ategies reserved  for pacifists only.  I think there is something called hatred,  and it is a destructive emotion. Anger,  on the other hand, is avery real and  necessary response to the conditions  people live in.  Angry people will bring  about change.  Revolutionary violence  that comes from angry people is very  different than violence that comes from  hateful people.  I have deep respect for all sisters and  brothers who have acted upon their  beliefs, done what they feel is right,  and been imprisoned or killed in the  process. It is important that all people  throughout time who have risked and died  so that we may live and fight, be remembered. Q February 1982   Kinesis   31  HEALTH  Women's Health Collective updates health practitioner directory  by Vancouver Women's Health Collective  The health practioner directory rt Vancouver Women's Health Collective is in need  of expansion and updating.  In search of  new input, we've enclosed with this  month's Kinesis  our revised practitioner  evaluation form.  We want to increase the information we  have on doctors currently listed, and open  more files on practitioners other than  MDs, such as chiropractors, naturopaths,  and physiotherapists.  We also want more  files on health practitioners in outlying  areas, the suburbs, and a wider range of  locations in Vancouver.  Practitioner directory now an index file  The directory originally grew out of discussions by a group of about ten women  who met in the early 70's to express their  dissatisfaction with the medical profession.  Through their discussions and further investigation, these women gained a  heightened awareness and anger at the  treatment of women under the present  system.  They found that women were not informed  of risks of various treatments, drugs and  methods of birth control.  Nor were we  treated as equals in decision-making  around our health. So the group went  door-to-door in one area of Vancouver to  get other women's experiences for a doctor  directory.  At first the directory was supposed to  provide assistance to women looking for a  good doctor, by making available other  women's experiences with doctors. The  Health Collective originally gave out  doctor's numbers over the phone; however,  BULLETIN BOARD continued from page 36 —  CONFERENCES  B.C. HEALTH COALITION SEMINAR on the future of medicare in Canada, Saturday,  March 6 at Hotel Vancouver, 8:30-4pm.  Fee $15, includes lunch. Registration  and fee must be in by Feb. 19 to: CU&C  Health Services Society, c/o D. Schreck,  22 E. 8th Avenue, Vancouver V5T 1R4  ABUSE, AWARENESS, ACTION: A women's conference on Violence.  Friday March 12,  7-11 p.m. and Sat. March 13, 9am-12  midnight, in Kamloops. Education/action  oriented workshops.  Billeting for out  of town participants.  Fee: $20 (subsidies available). Childcare provided on  Saturday.  For further information:  Women's Access Centre, Box 3010, Kamloops, V2C 5N3 (374-0123)  WOMAN'S WORK CONFERENCE at Cariboo College  in Kamloops, March 12-14. Sponsored by  the Women's Access Centre.  For more  info, contact Lynn Thompson, Cariboo  College, P0 Box 3010, Kamloops, B.C.  V2C 5N3 (374-0123)  PENSIONS: FOCUS ON WOMEN, March 6 at Hycroft, 1489 McRae Ave., Vancouver, 9am  to 5 pm. reception follows. This is a  delegate-only conference, but if there  are places left after Feb. 15, they may  accept individual registration.  Fee:  $15. Childcare provided for a fee  (subsidies are available).  For more  information call Joan Wallace 736-6368  or Jillian Ridington 738-0395.  two things influenced us to change our  policy.  First, we found only a handful of women  whose experience with their doctors was  positive enough that they wanted to recommend them to other women. Second, the  few "good doctors" whose numbers we gave  out were soon flooded with patients, and  we began to get complaints like: "I thought  you said she was a good doctor,  I had to  wait forever and then she spent hardly any  time with me."  Not only that, sickness is big business.  The epidemic proportions of unnecessary  surgery, drugs with "side effects" of  dependency, cancer, or other disease,  and ioatrogenic (physician-caused) illness  all point to the abuse of power by a  profession operating under conditions of  monopoly for private profit.  So do the long waits that inconvenience the  ill person so doctors won't run the risk  of seeing less than a full load of fee-  paying patients. Medical technology it-  We found that women were not informed of risks of varous treatments,  drugs and methods of birth control.  Nor were we treated as equals in  decision-making around our health.  What we have now, instead of direct  referrals, is a health practitioner directory, a reference file where women's  evaluations of their practitioners are  made public, indexed by speciality (i.e.  urologist, obstetrician, GP) and again by  geographic location.  As our analysis of the health industry  grew, we began to revise our belief in the  existence of the "good doctor".  In Canada,  as in most western countries, health care  is provided by highly paid professionals  who treat sickness rather than trying to  maintain health.  Doctors share an  allopathic theory and training that  stresses treatment of illness or symptoms  rather than the whole person, and resorts  to drugs, radiation and surgery that  frequently do more harm than good.  self is developed and promoted by profit-  making corporations whose interest is  selling more products.  As a result, women have had to take  responsibility for our own better health.  We all have medical emergencies we don't  have the expertise to meet.  In seeking  the help of professionals, we need to  work from an informed position, knowing  the most respectful, capable professionals  to approach.  We would appreciate your taking the time  to send us your comments and experience  with professionals you have consulted.  Please use copies of the enclosed form,  and mail them to us at 1501 West Broadway,  Vancouver.  0_  DIALOGUE FOR ACTION, a conference on the  status of immigrant women, sponsored by  the B.C. Task Force on Immigrant Women.  Friday March 19, 8:30-4pm and Saturday  March 20, 9-2:30pm. At Hycroft University  Women's Club, 1489 McRae, Vancouver. Pre-  register by February 25 to Sat Devi,  622 Seymour, Vancouver V5B 3K4. Registration is $15 (includes lunches). Subsidies may be available to those from  outside Lower Mainland. For childcare,  call Sharon Wilms, 688-2531. For more  details, call Jenny Pride 688-4157.  JUST OUT  PORNOGRAPHY & PROSTITUTION by Jillian  Ridington and Barbara Findlay.  Published  by Vancouver Status of Women. 28pp.  $1.00 ($1.50 by mail) Available from VSW  400A W. 5th Ave, Van., B.C. V5Y 1J8  (873-1427)  KNOW, INC. CATALOGUE of pamphlets, published by this feminist organization  from 1969 through the present. For a  copy, write KNOW, INC., Box 86031,  Pittsburgh, PA 15221-0031.  COURSES  DOUGLAS COLLEGE is offering the following  programs for women. Bursaries are available. Call Margaretha Hoek, 521-4851 for  details and registration:  Effectiveness Training for Women, Jan.  26 - Mar. 30  Wen-Do for Teenage Girls, Jan. 27-  Mar. 3  Assertiveness Training for Teenage Girls  Feb. 6 & 13  Making Your Own Job, Feb. 27 & Mar. 20  Assertiveness Training for Single Mothers  Feb. 27 & Mar. 27  The Changing Job Market, Apr. 26.  VIDEO & FILM, Women in Focus' 1982 catalogue.  24pp.  $2. from Women in Focus,  #204-456 W. Broadway, Vancouver, B.C.  (872-2250)  FLAGRANT, VOL. 1 #1, by the Vancouver  Island Lesbian Newsletter Collective.  Soon to be monthly.  Subs, are $8.50 a  yr. individual, $12/yr organizations.  Write P.O. Box 1604, Stn. E, Victoria,BC  WHITE ROCK WOMEN'S PLACE, 821 Kent St.,  White Rock is offering the following  courses for women. For details and to  register, call 536-9611.  Massage for Relaxation, Feb. 6  A Place in the Garden: a sexuality workshop for women, Feb. 12-14  Meditation workshop, Feb. 20  Introduction to Reflexology, Mar. 20  GLOBAL LESBIANISM, third issue of Connexions, an international women's quarterly  $3 (or subscribe for $9).  Write:  Connexions, 4228 Telegraph Ave., Oakland  CA 94609.  PEOPLE'S LAW SCHOOL offers free law classes  in Cantonese, Japanese, Punjabi, Italian,  Vietnamese, and possibly French and  Russian. Contact Nerissa Yue at 734-1126.  The Law School public support in the form  of tax-deductible donations to maintain  their public legal education programs. 32    Kinesis    February 1982  MOVEMENT MATTERS  In February and March, Vancouver Status of  Women will host*a Tuesday night discussion  series. The evenings are intended to be  both informative and stimulating, and ideas  for future topics are welcomed. The series  is open to all women,  and is free of charge.  Images of Women  Tuesday, February 23  bach day we see images of women in media,  entertainment and advertisements that  portray popular myths about women, and  shape our thinking about ourselves, our  mothers and our sisters.  Images of Women  will be a slide presentation and discussion celebrating the images that women  have created for ourselves.  Included in  the slides are sculptures, paintings,  graphics, banners and other visual symbols  of the women's movement. The slides were  assembled by Michelle Wollstonecroft who  will show them and begin the discussion.  WOMEN  ABOUT  WOMEN  A FEMINIST  DISCUSSION SERIES  Lang, Arms, Kitzinger) as well as the  voices of millions of birthing women are  ignored?  Birthing should be organized around the  needs and experiences of the woman giving  birth.  We must reclaim birthing. Maureen Minden will discuss women, birthing  and the status of midwifery in B.C. today.  A short film, Midv.'ives, will be shown.  Domestic Workers  Women and Music  Tuesday, March 2  Music is a part of our everyday lives.  However, much of the music that surrounds  us does not reflect our unique experience  as women. Women and Music brings together women who have been tapping, strumming  and humming alone to talk about and experience music that is our own and to third:  about using our music for change.  Other topics could be: why women find it  hard to get involved, what compromises  women have had to make to play their music,  feminist musicians and production companies and Festival '82: A Celebration of  Women in the Arts  Rose;  ; Moran, singer  and songwriter, will organize the evening  and facilitate the discussion.  Women in Trades  Tuesday, March 9  An evening for women who are interested in  learning more about non-traditional jobs.  Two women from the Women in Trades Association of B.C., Suzanne Gerard, a welder,  and Colleen Penrowley, a construction  labourer, will be speaking on their own  experiences in the trades.  There will be information on the different  trades, training courses, wages you can  expect, financial assistance, physical  ability required, pre-employment and pre-  apprenticeship programs, unions, health  hazards, and sexual harassment.  Midwifery - A Women's Issue  Tuesday, March 16  Isn't it incredible that those who do not  give birth have come to control it! How  is it that all the famous birthing experts  are men (Dick-Read, Lamaze, Leboyer), and ,  how is it that our women authorities (Mead  Tuesday, March 23  Domestic workers suffer incredible abuse  in Canada due to discriminatory immigration laws and the lack of recognition of  domestic labour. The work permit system  is an effective way to use domestic workers, many of whom are third world women,  as cheap and portable labour.  Recently, domestic workers in Vancouver  have formed a union.  During this evening  the issues that the new union will be  grappling with will be discussed. Some  of them are:  the right to landed status,  decent wages and hours of work, and the  right to privacy.  We will also talk about  ways to support the union.  Daphne Williams, President of the Domestic  Workers Union, and Susan Hoeppner, of the  Vancouver Status of Women, will facilitate  the discussion.  Tuesday, 7:30-10:00 p.m.  Vancouver Status of Women  .400A West 5th Ave. (at Yukon),  Vancouver  Co-ordinated by VSW. For more information  call Patty Moore, 873-1427.  No charge, donation welcomed.  Childcare provided (please call ahead to  arrange).  Women only.  Q_  Support Rape Relief house with  pledges, goods  Vancouver Rape Relief is an organization  that provides for the needs of women and  children who have been violently assaulted.  In Canada, 54% of women who live with  male partners are battered, a woman is  raped every seventeen minutes and one  woman in four will be sexually assaulted  sometime in her life.  In one step in the fight against violence  against women, Vancouver Rape Relief has  decided to open a house that will serve  as a refuge for raped and battered women  and children.  Rape Relief, the Ad Hoc House Fund-  Raising Group, has raised $85,000 in two  years towards the purchase of such a  house.  This money was raised through  Walkathons, benefit dances, unions and  donations from groups and individuals. We  are continuing to approach people who we  believe are aware of the need for this  shelter.  At the moment we have the house and are  getting it ready for opening. We are asking for support to help us open the house  and ensure its continued survival. We  welcome contributions whether it be cash  (a donation or on-going monthly pledge ),  or a donation of furniture, bedding or  pantry supplies:  FURNITURE:  area rugs, straight back  chairs, coffee tables, table lamps, floor  lamps, freezer, industrial vacuum cleaner,  cribs, high chairs, play mats, children's  books  BEDDING:  sheets, towels, blankets, bed  spreads, pillow cases  PANTRY: canned goods, garden produce,  meat for freezing, bulk flour, rice.  If you wish to make a donation call  Nicole at 872-8212.  EMERGENCY: Women's Studies at VCC, Langara is eliminated in the new budget. We  need letters of support, to bring to the  College's Board of Directors underlining  the necessity for maintaining Women's  Studies in the College, or showing how  you were benefitted by this program.  Write now c/o Co-ordinator, Women's  Studies, VCC Langara, 100 W. 49th Ave.,  Vancouver, B.C. Without support, Women's  Studies will no longer exist at Langara.  B.C.-Nicaragua Women's  Support Group raffle results  Thank you! After expenses were paid, we  raised $2,564 from the BC-Nicaragua Women's  Support Group. The proceeds were given to  representatives of AMNLAE (the women's  organization in Nicaragua).  The money will go towards a daycare centre  for a lobster packing plant which employs  about 80 workers. The plant is located  in Corinto, the largest port on the Pacific Coast of Nicaragua. A solidarity group  in Germany is making monthly donations to  the same centre.  The results of the draw, held on Friday,  December 11th at the Vancouver Status of  Women, are as follows:  Sculpture by Persimmon Blackbridge won by  Karin Konstatynowiez, Vancouver.  Dinner for two '  Vancouver.  . by Rachel Epstein,  'Nicaragua' book of photographs won by  Norman Chastain, Cranbrook.  Boag Foundation calendar won by Ann  Thompson, Vancouver.  Record album by Yolacamba Ita won by  Joanna Coosemans, Terrace.  Guatemalan blouse won by Beth Abbott,  Vancouver.  To everyone who bought tickets, friends  and sympathizers around the province and  across Canada, we appreciate your support.  This money will help reinforce the links  being made with Nicaraguan women and men,  and show our concrete, as well as moral,  support for their ongoing battle for freedom and independence from U.S. imperialism.  In friendship and solidarity,  Diana Smith  RFR plans a lesbian issue  Resources for Feminist Research, a feminist  quarterly, is soliciting material for a  lesbian issue to be published in March  1983. The editors are interested in topics  ranging from politics to unions, culture,  work, lesbian history and health. The  issue will contain research articles,  discussion pieces, book reviews, bibliographies, and resources of all kinds.  Completed articles, proposals, outlines,  ideas and contacts would be welcomed.  The deadline for submissions is July 1,  1982.  For more information write:  RFR, c/o Department of Sociology, Ontario  Institute for Studies in Education, 252  Bloor St. W.,.Toronto, Ontario M5S 1V6,  or phone Kathy at (416) 533-3945.  ' 2 February 1982    Kinesis    33  MOVEMENT MATTERS  Video by Women: a 3-part  series  Women in Focus is presenting a video series  titled "Video by Women: Exploring Feminist  Video Styles & Aesthetics". In exploring  the ways- in which feminist have utilized  video, we have divided the series into  three areas:  - Documentary Video  - Do Feminists Have a Sense  of Humour?  - Video as an Organizing Tool  The series is open to the public, and at  the end of each evening will be a discussion for women only. A facilitator and.  several resource people will be on hand to  provide their perspectives as well.  DOCUMENTARY VIDEO, February 23, 7:30pm  By the Skin of Our Teeth,   1980, 28 min.  Examines the harsh life of single welfare  mothers who live below the poverty line.  T.W.U.   Tel,   1981, 9 min.  A look at the T.W.U. strike of February  1981, when workers took over B.C. Tel.  Alternatives to Hysteria,   1977, 60 min.  A contemporary and historical look at  mental illness in Canada, framed by one  woman's analysis of her own breakdown  and subsequent treatment.  DO FEMINISTS HAVE A SENSE OF HUMOUR?, March  2, 7:30pm  The East is Red,   the West is Bending,   1977',  20 min.  What do imperialism and the electric wok  have in <  women's movement; the gay movement and  lesbians; the record of oppression and  specific repression to which we have been  subjected, the fears we have about that  and what actions we can take.  "Amazons Then, Lesbians Now" is a video  for lesbians only. This collective decision is a political position, taken to enable us to discuss our situation, our problems, and our specific aspirations among  ourselves.  The video was conceived, shot, and edited  between March, 1979, and March, 1981. We  wanted to reflect the particular reality  of French-speaking lesbians in Montreal  who make up our immediate family circle.  This video is an attempt to make ourselves  visible and to reflect our subjective  experience.  It is available in black and white, in  French (i" tape) and English (i" or 3/4).  The English version consists of a voice-  over of the original French.  It is 1 hr.  and 45 minutes long.  For further information or rental requests  contact:  Video Amazono, c/o Ariane Brunet,  Boite 429, Succ. Station Victoria, Montreal,  Quebec, Canada H3Z 2V8. tel. (514)489-8392.  Dance/Videotapes,   1975-80,   13 min.  The Dying Swan; Deux Pieds; Minute Waltz;  Duet for Tap and Galoshes.  The Gloria Tapes,   1979-80, 53 min.  The adventures and misadventures of a  single mother on welfare.  VIDEO AS AN ORGANIZING TOOL, March 9, 7:30  Lesbians Against the Right, 1981, 60 min.  Lesbians discuss the attacks of the New  Right and ways to combat it.  A Respectable Lie,   1980, 30 min.  Pornography and its connection to violence against women.  Location: Women in Focus, #204-456 West  Broadway. Phone (604) 872-2250.  Tickets: $3/evening, available at Women  in Focus  Childcare: by pre-arrangement only; phone  872-2250.  General admission / Refreshments / Discussion for women only following screening.  Amazons Then, Lesbians Now  "Amazons Then, Lesbians Now" is a videotape describing the territory of the  Amazons of antiquity. It is also a cultural analysis of their impact on us and a  political consideration of present day  lesbian reality. With the participation  of more than fifteen lesbians, we have  addressed significant points in our evolution, from the beginning of our awareness,  to political affirmation of our identity  as lesbians. Included are: coming out;  the question of roles; the history of  lesbian bars in Montreal; the different  choices we make in our relationships - the  couple, monogamy, non-monogamy; the relation between feminism and our lesbianism  and the importance of our role in the  CARAL seeks new members  CARAL (Canadian Abortion Rights Action  League) is soliciting members right now.  The purpose of CARAL is to ensure that no  woman in Canada is denied access to safe,  legal abortion.  They state, "Our aim is the repeal of all  sections of the Criminal Code dealing with  abortion, and the establishment of contraceptive and abortion services, including  appropriate counselling, across the country. We regard the right to safe, legal  abortion as a fundamental human right."  Membership fees are as follows: $10 individual, $15 family, $3 limited income,  $25 affiliated group, $100+ sponsor, and  $25-100 sustainer. Monthly post-dated  cheques are welcome.  Send your cheque and membership information (including a signed statement saying  you agree with the objectives of CARAL) to  CARAL, Box 935, Station Q, Toronto, Ont.  M4T 2P1.  They also need volunteers for work such as  speaking, writing letters, and telephone  .and clerical work. Let's protect our right  to abortion.  Workshop to explore racism  This workshop is for white women who have  previous peer counselling experience and  want to work on their racism.  Who is giving this workshop?  We are four white women who have been  meeting bi-monthly for the last 6 months  to work on our racism.  We don't have the answers but we do have  some skills and we want to use them to  explore ways to help us and other women  to fight racism.  Starts Sunday, Feb. 21 and continues for  4 weeks. 2-5 p.m. Fee: $20. For more  information call Carol Evans at 254-3910  or Dorrie Brannock at 872-1940.  Festival '82 will go on in July  FESTIVALS  A C€L€BRAT!ON C¥ WOM-eN rN TH€ ARTS  FESTIVAL '82:  A CELEBRATION OF WOMEN IN  THE ARTS will take place in Vancouver this  summer. The artistic accomplishments and  creative talents of B.C. women artists  will be presented at Robson Square Multi  Media Centre July 5-18, 1982.  FESTIVAL '82 will include workshops in the  areas of music, literature, performing  and visual arts, a juried art exhibition,  lectures, plus evenings of entertainment  featuring B.C. women dancers, theatre performers, musicians, writers, video and  filmmakers.  Our goal is to make contact with all  women artists in Britich Columbia, and  already an active network of artists has  been formed provincially.  Concentration  on fundraising, publicity and generally  getting the word out are some of our  immediate priorities.  Committees have  been formed and are working to coordinate  presentations in each area of art to be  represented.  Pamphlets are now available in the women's  bookstores outlining the tentative schedule of FESTIVAL events, our objectives,  and information for artists who wish to  enter their work and become involved in  this provincial project.  For additional  information phone 681-8557 or write to  P.O. Box 1032, Stn. A, Vancouver.  Lesbian archives solicits  material  The West Coast Lesbian Collections, located in Oakland, California, is a community-based library and archives for women.  The Collections includes diaries, letters,  journals and other personal papers, the  records of lesbian organizations and projects, unpublished literary works and research papers, as well as books, tapes,  magazines, records and photographs.  Join with us in gathering and preserving  the materials of lesbian culture, and  visit the Collective when in the Bay area.  All donations strengthen the continuity  between generations of lesbians. To re-  cieve our newsletter or for more information, please write or call WCLC, Box  23753, Oakland, CA 94623-  (415)465-8080. 34   Kinesis    February 1982  LETTERS  CPC(M-L) replies  Kinesis:  The last issue carried two articles dealing with the violence at two anti-racist  rallies in October and with the question  of violence itself.  Democratic Women's  Union attended those rallies and must  reply to these articles to correct the  facts and give our view on the question of  violence, and self-defence.  Both of the authors, Dorrie Brannock and  Kristen Perm, have not investigated the  facts and give false information. At the  October 4 demonstration, the People's  Front Against Racist and Fascist Violence  did not attack the other demonstrators.  The spokesman of People's Front was himself brutally attacked while waiting his  turn to address the rally.  The entire  donnybrook resulted from the physical  attack upon the People's Front spokesman  by the BCOFR marshalls.  Neither author  reports that People's Front members were  also seriously injured in the BCOFR  attack, nor that BCOFR leaders and the  police are attempting to frame People's  Front supporters with criminal charges.  On October 17, by their own admissions,  the BCOFR leaders and marshalls organized  an intentional violent confrontation in  order to "dump People's Front in the park"  for its alleged crimes.  On the spurious  premise that People's Front and CPC(M-L)  are disrupters, the BCOFR formed a private  goon squad which attacked the People's  Front contingent which included some  20 women supporters of D.W.U., and many  East Indian working people. There were  many serious injuries to People's Front  supporters, including three women, two of  them East Indian working women.  nj>*j  i*^ sfcx-M^^  T^e- &u  <Lhc  z9s"  i«Ac^  Sa*jlLinjo 's >XkjA*lyJtr5 - ?■  tkc Wslu   &   Viirx^Jt  thrifts  - H.9C  What harm could have been done by the participation of People's Front in either  demonstration to the cause of opposing  racism? Had that question been put to the  hundreds of people assembled on Oct. 17,  the vast majority would never have agreed  to the exclusion of the People's Front  contingent nor to the vicious brawl instigated by the BCOFR marshalls.  To justify such vicious and divisive conduct the BCOFR supporters brand the anti-  racists in the People's Front as "the  enemy" and compare them to the fascist  forces of Pinochet and Marcos, according  to Penn. Yet in all the talk about violence, neither the authors nor BCOFR mention U.S. imperialism, Soviet or Chinese  social-imperialism as the greatest enemies  of the peoples of the world and as the  source of untold devastation and suffering  to the people's of the world.  Those who  are opposing violence as such are obscuring  the issue of the source of violence.  D.W.U. analyzes violence in this way: the  system of exploitation of man by man is  the source of violence and it is the  oppressors and exploiters who are the most  brutal organizers of systematic violence  against the people. This violence is  faced by women in their daily lives.  This  reactionary brand of violence has brought  the world to the brink of the most violent  event in human history — a third world  war. This enormous danger leads D.W.U.  to the conclusion that revolution is a  necessity to eliminate this system of  exploitation and with it the possibility  of war, and if war breaks out, as the way  to end war.  D.W.U. opposes as a matter of principle  the use of violence among the people. The  people should not be fighting amongst  themselves whether in domestic quarrels,  youth gangs, between national minorities  or amongst the various nationr.  No one  amongst the people benefits from the use  of force as a method to resolve the differences among the people.  It is the rich,  the fascists, the KKK who profit from  fights such as BCOFR organized.  Far from its goal of outlawing the KKK,  what the BCOFR has attempted is the banning  of the People's Front from public demonstrations.  This culmination of the abhorrent, communalist and sectarian  brawling which characterized the so-called  legitimate left in Vancouver, extended to  organizing an armed force to prevent  intermingling of the delegations on Oct.  17 and exchange of views, and has now  resulted in the Vancouver police imposing  a ban on People's Front participation in  other public demonstrations where they are  welcome by the organizers. This conduct  has emboldened the KKK which, on Jan. 4,  launched a physical attack on a lone member of the People's Front on Hastings  Street in broad daylight.  The anti-communist prejudice which these  self-appointed censors are enforcing with  arms is not foreign to the women's movement either. Last August two women supporters of CPC(M-L) who attended a women's  demonstration were physically assaulted  in an. attempt to expel them and prevent  the distribution of communist literature.  Democratic women do not support this kind  of thuggery.  In the face of such violence, self-defence  is the only response.  D.W.U. is proud  to have participated on October 17 in an  anti-racist demonstration and proud of  its supporters who defended themselves  when attacked.  D.W.U. calls upon all  serious women who want to fight against  the violent attacks upon women to find a  means to unite to fight the common enemies  and the culture which oppresses women. We  invite a polemic over how to solve the  problems amongst the people in a rational  and cool-headed fashion with democratic  spirit and largeness of heart in putting  aside our secondary differences of opinion.  The question now facing the women's  movement is: What are the norms of political behaviour amongst women and women organized in various groups? We all see the  absurdity of the efforts of one French  women's group to copyright the international women's symbol and the name- of the  women's movement to ensure their political  domination. We must both expose those who  would claim private property rights of the  cause of women and those who would split  women over minor differences or on an anti-  communist basis, and those who apologize  for the enemy or preach illusions.  We  must be prepared to fight to defend the  rights and liberties of the people and  to accomplish the task of emancipating  women.  We call upon women in British Columbia to  put aside sectarian squabbling and private  interests, and to participate as a united  force in the International Women's Day  demonstration on March 8th to show our  strength in numbers and our confidence  that we can overcome all hindrances to  our unity.  Raj Dhillon, Secretary  Democratic Women's Union of Canada,  Vancouver Branch.  Solidarity takes many forms  This letter is in response to the article  by Kristin Penn in the last issue of  Kinesis.  To start, I too wish for change in a nonviolent manner. However let's not be forever under the belief that we shall win  the struggle in such a manner.  To carry  on such a belief is escaping from reality  I am afraid.  In the past, there has been no ruling  class that has voluntarily given up its  power/authority without a fight. " Nor  should we expect the ruling class within  North America Jo do so!  It would mean  suicide for them.  So let's not function under such illusions.  Instead we must face the cold hard facts  of reality.  I hear people all the time saying that  armed struggle is okay for those people in  and of the third world but not for North  America. The only reason I find people  say that is because they are afraid of  losing their status and mythical standard  of living under capitalism.  To my train of thought, I believe that  most are state collaborators, but at the  same time perhaps do not realize that fact  and through their complacency they maintain capitalism.  In the long run, we are going to have to  address the question of armed struggle  in North America.  If we do not address  this crucial question, then we only perpetuate the exploitation within the third  world in the interests of the North  American ruling elite!  Comrades, do not think for a moment that  we will be able to throw off the chains  which bind us through non-violent measures.  No ruling class has ever voluntarily  given up their power/control nor should  we expect them to do so!  Solidarity must and will appear in many  forms and not necessarily one of nonviolence.  Raven Will'amson February 1982    Kinesis    35  LETTERS  Women's Building group needs  help — or else  Kinesis:  The first annual general meeting of the  Women's Building Society of Vancouver was  held on May 31, 1981. Attendance, while  consisting of a quorum as set forth in  the Constitution of the Society, was  quite low. Most of the women present had  been active on the Planning Committee for  the past two years and no longer felt  their participation could be sustained  at that level. So although all present  became members of the Society,#less than  half felt they could make a commitment for  ongoing active participation to work towards the goals set forth.  With some new input of energy, a small  working corps continued to meet and plan  towards a framework within which to build.  Early in October 1981, we learned that  the old Post Office (and former RCMP headquarters) at 16th and Main was up for  public tender and we decided to submit a  proposal. We contacted a number of  women's groups to hypothetically allocate  space and demonstrate the need for a  Women's Building, and submitted a proposal  we felt was well conceived and presented.  We learned in mid-December that our bid  was not successful. While disappointed,  we weren't greatly surprised or chagrined.  It had been a good and useful experience  for us.  Unfortunately, our core group has been  further reduced due to changes in some of  its members' working lives and necessity  to drop active participation. Our  attempts at recruiting haven't been very  successful so we feel we have no choice  but to call a meeting of members and  supporters to determine the future.  Unless some women come forward who can  make a serious commitment to working to- ■  wards the goal of acquiring a Women's  Building, we feel there will be no choice  but to dissolve the Society and to decide  which group or groups will benefit from  our assets.  If you still feel a Women's Building is  needed in the area, then please come forward — in any event, join us to share  in the decision of whether we can hope to  pursue that goal or whether reality  deems otherwise and our assets can be  better put to use by groups promoting  women's culture in the community.  Time: THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 18 at 7 p.m.  Place: VSW-400A W. 5th Ave., Vancouver  Women's Building Society of Vancouver  Planning Committee  Addendum to Incest Survivors  Speak  Kinesis:  I made some serious mistakes on last  month's feature on incest, which are  important to mention.  The cover, which I drafted in rough, was  left to Jeanne for improvements. I had  not described the idea to her and this  played a part in what was lost. Credit  for the cover idea never went to Sky, who  created the concept, and in my attempt to  interpret Sky's image, her image was lost.  The original idea was to have the box,  Pandora's box of secrets, reopened so that  the truth be known about what is really  taking place. According to male mythology,  Pandora's womanly curiousi ty unleashed  evil to the world as a punishment for man  stealing fire from other men. A  In fact we are held responsible for keeping  the secrets of incest, wife-beating, child  pornography, satan worship, torture — all  the brutalities of this system.  At the time I was drawing the cover, I had  not fully grasped Sky's description of the  world splitting open, so that the evils of  patriarchy would fall into the centre and  burn. I hadn't seen the ways in which I  was still trapped, but with anger at what  I was beginning to understand, I drew our  world split apart, leaving the worms (the  evils of the world) floating in the  atmosphere.  I didn't see that solution because I  hadn't seen my own way out of the seductive influence my own father and other men  had over me.  I had to see that their influence has twisted my thoughts, my understanding and my vision. I was fooling  myself to believe they had no effect.  The articles I wrote were about helping  others, not about what was happening to  me. I wrote about how incest is being  handled by the patriarchal system, not  about what women have done to heal themselves.  I didn't write about the hours of discussion with Sky that deepened my understanding, and made our meetings with the  survivors in California so worthwhile.  Being a counsellor effectively blocked me ►  from my own pain and understanding of what  happened to me.  It also put me in a position of power, and that took power  away from the other women. By being part  of the counselling system I was suggesting  that women need others to help them.  It  removed me from them, from myself and  from the women's movement.  I felt sucked  into the male system because they have  the money.  It made life easy for me, but  the effects I now see are devastating.  A misprint in my article reads that  Seattle suggests that two to three years  is enough for offender treatment. They  have never said that. They do say that  2-3 years is a good time-frame to work in.  For what has been done to us, no time  frame is enough.  What I want is a centre where we have  places to meet, to share our lives and  plan what we do — a centre where the  rules are ours, where there are no men,  wnere we can learn to neal ourselves.  We need a place here in this city and we  need one in the country too.  I am  tired of asking permission, explaining  politely, of being silent and waiting.  I want to demand what we have a right to.  Marg Verrall  P.S. Another important book on incest is  "Michele Remembers" by Michele Smith and  Lawrence Pazder.  Non-violence an active vision  Kinesis:  I am writing in support of the two articles in the last KINESIS about the Oct. 17  BCOFR rally.  I am excited to see the  beginning of a discussion of non-violence  as a way to live our visions.  I too had  been disturbed by reports of the rally,  both from friends who saw it as a success,  and some who were critical.  In choosing this action, BCOFR put  marchers in need of being defended, by in  effect creating a "territory" to occupy  against attack.  It is important to be  clear on the value of what is being defended. What role did pride or the need to  prove strength play in the decision to  hold a rally at that time?  I suggest that this course of action will  probably lead to an escalation of the  violence, until one side really does smash  the other.  With tempers hot and your  friend being hurt next to you, when you  have a weapon you are going to respond in  kind, not "defensively".  Non-violence is not passive acceptance of  violent attack, but involves finding  ways to defuse the violence and acting in  a way that does not escalate it.  BCOFR could have chosen another way to  continue to fight racism.  I know how  hard it is to even imagine other possibilities than fighting back with weapons  — those examples where people have  succeeded in non-violent resistance have  not hit the headlines. We need to educate  ourselves and begin to learn that it is  possible.  I agree with Kristen that visions are  vital to what we are creating. We can  help create those visions with inspiration from those who have gone before.  Yes it will be difficult, the backlash  will be violent, but we can be creative  and resourceful and f.enacious.  Following is a list of reading material on  non-violence.  Recommended:  Gene Sharp. The Politics of Non-violent  Action.     Porter Sargent Publisher,1973.  Worth getting library to stock.  Pragmatic approach to how non-viob.-nt action  works, with short descriptions of  examples, plus analysis.  Mulford Sibley. The Quiet Battle.   Writing  on the theory and practice of nonviolent resistance.  Chandi. Non-violent Resistance. A full  description of the theory and practice  of Satyagraha.  Old, but worthwhile if you can find them:  A.J. Muste. Non-violence in an aggressive  World.  Joan Bondurant. Conquest of violence.  Richard Gregg. The power of non-violence.  I regret that none of these is very recent,  nor do they make good feminist connections  — perhaps someone in a larger place could  research that.  There's also a lack of  Canadian materials, including the following  organization which I am recommending as a  resource. They do have contacts here,  though, and may be doing training workshops in western Canada this year. Write  for contacts and lists of publications.  They do have a feminist analysis.  Movement for a New Society  4722 Baltimore Ave  Philadelphia, PA 19143, USA  Beryl Clayton  A W9MQN'S  PAINTING  BUSINESS  REASONABLE RATES  FREE ESTIMATES  CYNTHIA  253-2212  876-9608 (messages) 36   Kinesis    February 19!  BULLETIN BOARD  GROUPS  VANCOUVER WOMEN'S HEALTH COLLECTIVE is  looking for women who share our feminist  anti-capitalist perspective to do volunteer shifts one afternoon a week in our  Resource Centre.  We will be offering  a 5-session weekly training group for  interested women, starting late Feb.  Call 736-6696.  THE RADICAL REVIEWER is soliciting copy  for its special Spring '82 issue on  Canadian Women Writing.  Book reviews,  articles, interviews and poetry are  welcome. Deadline is March 15, 1982.  Please send sase to The Radical Reviewer  P.O. Box 24953, Stn. C, Van. B.C.  INNER SOURCES of Healing & Creativity is  an on-going group practicing meditation,  visualization and energy circles.  Allow  yourself the gift of good feelings,  beautiful thoughts and positive change.  Guided by Cyndia Cole, Tuesdays 7:30-  9:30pm. You may attend on a drop-in  basis.  Fee is whatever you wish to  contribute.  Phone 251-2534 for location  DOWNTOWN EASTSIDE WOMEN'S CENTRE is having  its annual general meeting on Feb. 3, 2pm  at the Women's Centre, 412 E. Hastings.  Nominations for Board members, and ideas  accepted by Joy, 255-1614.  The Women's Centre is also setting up a  childcare collective at the Centre. They  need donations of: a crib, changing mat,  rug, and other children's/baby equipment.  Call Joy, 255-1614. She will arrange  pickup.  WOMEN'S SELF-HELP COUNSELLING COLLECTIVE  can be contacted at 872-3122 from 7-9pm  on Tuesdays. Some groups are beginning  this spring. The Counselling Collective's  aim is to provide an alternative to  traditional therapy. It is a free service.  BI-SEXUAL WOMEN'S GROUP is sponsoring an  evening of bi-sexual culture, Feb. 24th  at 8pm.  For details, phone Joyce at  251-3725 or Georgia at.224-5614.  EXHIBITION OF PACIFIC N.W. WOMEN'S ART is  scheduled to take place in Seattle this  fall. Stepping Stone, the women's organization sponsoring the show, is soliciting slides and resumes in a preliminary  review. The theme of the show will be  "In Our Own Image". Deadline for entries  is March 15, 1982. For information, call  Nancy (206)632-3506 or Tisha (206)523-  4041. Or write: Stepping Stone, c/o  Pacific Women's Resource Centre, 4253  Roosevelt Way N.E., Seattle WA 98105.  CLASSIFIED  BONNIE RAMSAY, Accounting Services. Income  tax, financial statements, bookeeping.  Call 738-5349.  FEMINIST CLASSICS: herstory, theory,  fiction, poetry, wanted by Ariel  Books, 2766 West 4th. Good prices  for books in prime condition.  Phone 733-3511  Ariel Books closed Friday nights  until Spring. Now open Monday  through Saturday, 10am -6pm.  LESBIAN PHOTOGRAPHER seeks S/M lesbians  to be photographed for positive, healthy  images of sex.  I will exchange photographs for your help. Anonymity  guaranteed if desired.  Call Jean at  (206)324-5976.  WOMAN WOULD LIKE TO cross-country ski with  same during weekends and weekdays except  Tuesdays and Thursdays. Call 299-6030,  ask for Heather.  f\l£XXrt£SS,  CToMMiTMCur  EVENTS  POT LUCK DINNER & PARTY by the Cut-Rate  Connection, a feminist social group  formed to help women meet and have fun  in an informal, inexpensive atmosphere.  Sat. Feb. 6 from 7:30 pm on, at 2496 W.  7th Ave., Vancouver.  All women and  children welcome.  MONEY IS INHERENTLY FEMALE, a workshop  for women.  Healing ourselves from  poverty, guilt, scarcity, and greed.  Allowing us to experience individual  and collective economic power. Presented by Cyndia Cole, tax consultant,  therapist, meditation guide, poet.  Sunday, Feb. 7, noon-6pm. East Side  Family Place, 926 Commercial Dr.  Fee is  whatever you wish to contribute. To  register, call 251-2534.  THE DINNER PARTY SPECIAL! Cheap trip to  Montreal March 10-14 to see Judy Chicago  exhibition. $308 return, must sign up  before Feb. 10. Contact Hardial Parhar  at Teletravel, 736-3364 (Vancouver) for  details. For billeting , call Sylvia  Spring, 539-5478.  DANCE BENEFIT for Women's Programming at  Co-op Radio, Saturday Feb. 13, 8pm -  midnight at the West End Community  Centre, 870 Denman. Live (all-women)  bands - The Moral Lepers and Mystery  Guest — and an art food auction.  To  pre-register for childcare, call 879-  7980. All women welcome. Tickets $4  unemployed, $6 employed.  For more info,  call the Women's Programming Caucus,  Co-op Radio, 684-8494.  BENEFIT FOR ISADORA'S Co-operative Restaurant, Friday, February 19, 8pm with  Ad Hoc playing. Legion Hall, 727A E. 49  Ave. (at Fraser). Tickets $4.75 at Octopus East, Isadora's office (681-3748).  RSVP childcare.  SYBIL ANDREWS: a retrospective exhibition  of linocut prints. "Andrews is an 82-  year-old Campbell River artist with an  international reputation in colour  printmaking.  Jan. 16-Feb. 28 at Vancouver Art Gallery, 1145 W. Georgia, Van.  Free admission.  EAST END STOREFRONT CO-OP BENEFIT Dinner  Dance Extravaganza, Feb. 27 at the Oddfellows Hall, Gravely and Commercial.  Two great bands, kids' entertainment.  Tickets at EEGF, 1806 Victoria and at  Octopus East. Call 254-5044 for more  information.  TWO DANCES by IWD Planning Committee.  Feb. 26: a mixed benefit featuring  AD HOC. 8:00 at the Legion at 49  and Fraser.  March 6: Women's dance with two bands,  Moral Lepers and Mystery Guest. 8:30,  West End Community Centre.  Ticket  prices for these dances to be announced.  Tickets to be available at the usual  outlets.  INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S DAY activities will  include: March and rally Saturday, March  6 downtown at mid-day; Information Day  Sunday, March 7 at Britannia Community  Centre Cafeteria, numerous workshops and  cultural events, plus childcare. Watch  for posters carrying more details. The  theme for IWD this year will be a look  at how women are continuing to create  collective solutions to our oppression  as women, ending the isolation we have  faced. Our movement is growing stronger  each year!  HOLLY NEAR WITH ADRIENNE TORF & CARRIE  BARTON will be performing at the Or-  pheum Theatre March 19th at 8 p.m.  For on-site childcare, phone 734-5393  or 255-0523.  Interpreted for the hearing impaired, wheelchair accessible.  $7.50 unemployed; $10.00 employed —  reserved seating. Children under 12  free (ask for reserved seat) Proceeds  go to Women Against Nuclear Technology  and AMNLAC (The Women's Organization  of Nicaragua) Tickets available at  Women's Bookstore, 322 W. Hastings,  Octopus Books East, 1146 Commercial Dr.  and Vancouver Ticket Centre Outlets.  ON THE AIR  W0MANVISI0N on Co-op Radio, 102.7 FM, from  7:00-8:00 p.m. each Monday:  Feb. 1- Mary Daly- Gynaecology.  Feb. 8 - Preview of Women's Music in  Vancouver. Review of the Benefit with  interviews with M0EV, Magic Dragon  and Moral Lepers.  Feb. 15 - Feature on Occupational Health  with the VDT Committee.  Feb. 22 - Minimal Music: Women instrumentalists in jazz with guest Carol  Rublack.  IWD Planning Committee meets every Tuesday  at the CRS warehouse, Oldam and Charles,  at 7:30. All women welcome.  THE LESBIAN SHOW on Co-op Radio, 102.7 FM,  from 7:30-8:30 p.m. each Thursday:  Feb. 4 - The Constant State of Coming  Out: Are you out? A look at women who  are out, women who aren't; how to, how  not to.  Feb. 11 - No Theme Show: Brief discussion of several topics and updates on the  local scene.  Feb. 18 - Humour Show: Beat the midwinter blahs with a chuckle at all the  funny stuff on this show and save yourself the price of a holiday in Mexico.  Feb. 25 - Music Show: This show will  feature the music of two local women's  bands, The Moral Lepers and Mystery  Guest.  RUBYMUSIC on Co-op Radio, 102.7 FM, from  7:00-7:30 p.m. each Friday:  Feb. 5 - Connie Francis: The True Story.  Feb. 12 - Ruby is warming up for  Valentine's Day with a selection of the  greatest love songs.  Feb. 19 - Tom Tom Club, Sara Dash, The  Belle Stars and more.  Feb. 26 - June Millington. Olivia's  newest recording artist.  For CONFERENCES, COURSES,  PUBLICATIONS see page 31