 ■  Vancouver Status of Women  2029 W 4th Avenue  Vancouver, B.C. V6J1N3  INSIDE  \  ET3 030  8Z6I  Optician charged with four counts of indecent assault   I  VSW reports on the dismal results of the Vancouver civic  elections   2  Makara.  Have they published their last issue?   7  Government ignores needs of immigrant women   8  Women wait for New Family Centre   10  Mother talks about her homebirth  II  Women want CALM births  12  BREAST CANCER. Carol tells her story   14,15  Put your money where your politics are - in CCEC   22  ROOM explores Quebec feminism     23  Cover graphic by Bev Coy,  a Winnipeg artist.   This graphic has  appeared in Celebrating Women,  produced by A Women 's Place  SUBSCRIBE TO KINESIS!  Published By Vancouver Status of Women  2029 West 4th Avenue, Vancouver, B.C.  Subscriber Only _  Member/Subscriber  AMOUNT ENCLOSED:  Subs are $8/year Individual (or what you can afford), $15/year Institutions.  VSW membership is by donation. Please remember that VSW operates on  inadequate funding — we need member support!  Vol7noll  50c)  Vancouver Status of Women \  ■ - I_Z=r ■    l J annual convention  BCFW support  CUPW  Support for the struggle of the Canadian Union of Postal Workers against  anti-labour legislation was expressed  at the fifth annual convention of the  B.C. Federation of Women.  Spokespersoi  Cindy Hale commented, "Just when women  are gaining a foothold in the  labour  movement,   long standing rights of workers are being arbitrarily revoked. "  By emergency resolution, the convention demonstrated opposition to Bill  C-28 and Bill C-8 as direct attacks  on the public sector employee's right  to strike and to free collective bargaining.  Over 200 women representing 50 B.C.  women's groups from points as distant  as Prince Rupert, Dawson Creek, and  Smithers came together for the 4-day  convention held at Capilano College,  North Vancouver, November 10-13.  Delegates at convention:  - called for the decriminalization of  midwifery;  - affirmed a woman's right to choose  the conditions under which she gives  birth;  - expressed grave concern at the undermining of human rights legislation  in B.C.;  - set up a provincial JIwatchdog"  committee to support women filing  complaints and to monitor human rights  in B.C.;  - endorsed the Vancouver-based COALITION AGAINST DISCRIMINATION (formed  to oppose Renaissance Canada, part of  the Anita Bryant Crusade, which is  opposed to women's rights and homosexual rights);  - condemned the Attorney-General of  B.C. for an act of political harassment in authorizing the indictment of  prison activists Betsy Wood and Gay  Hoon, after a lengthy Preliminary  Inquiry cleared them of all criminal  charges;  - endorsed the Quebec-based coalition  OPERATION LIBERTE, which is demanding  the repeal of the War Measures Act.  Hale said, "It was an exciting convention with women from all over B.C.  demanding equality more strongly than  ever.    Especially now,  when hard-won  democratic freedoms are being undermined and legislated away,  we have  taken a strong stand against politically repressive acts which limit our  right to self-determination as women  and workers. "  for more on BCFW,   see p.25  IWD Planning  The planning committee for International Women's Day is already  meeting weekly. Every Tuesday in  December, IWD meetings are held  at Britannia Community Centre, at  7.30 p.m. in Room L3. Contact Pat  Smith at 253 1224  Childcare can be arranged for the  meetings, by calling in advance.  Wood, Hoon trial  postponed  Trial of prison activists BETSY WOOD  and GAY HOON has been postponed until  mid -January.  The exact date has yet  to be announced.  Trial had originally been scheduled  for November 27 in New Westminster.  A week before that date, Wood and  Hoon met in-camera with the prosecuting attorney and the court judge.  Wood, who is conducting her own defence, requested a change of venue  on the grounds that the activists  have received negative coverage in  the New Westminster area. Change of  venue was granted, but the court date  delayed.  Optician eyed  on assault charges  Vancouver optician Aron Gutman has  been charged with four counts of indecent assault following a public  outcry from Rape Relief workers who  received a barrage of complaints  from Gutman's women clients.  The women reported incidents independently to Rape Relief, a  women's volunteer group which  counsels and assists rape victims.  The police held off laying charges  for several weeks saying they could  do little without a first-person  complaint even though they had  been made aware of the incidents  through Rape Relief.  So Rape Relief brought the matter  before the public - through the  media - and charges against  Gutman resulted.  One of the women describes what  happened in the optician's office:  It was  like a horror show.     He  was a very creepy,  sleazy man,  soft-spoken but pretty heavy with  me.     He told me  to put my head  down,   then started messaging my  shoulder.  I told him to get his hands off  me and he told me some women found  it relaxing.  She said she had found the optician's  name in the telephone book and  arranged a series of appointments  to be fitted for contact lenses.  The second time he put one  lens in  my eye,   then dropped the other down  my shirt,  stuck his hand in and  started looking for it.  I told him to  leave the room and  took, my shirt off.    But he came  back in before it was -buttoned up.  Other women reported similar groping  and fondling.  In one case the woman  says she screamed and fought back,  but was raped.  Agnew says the victims were afraid  of going to police because they  fear reprisal from the man or because the women believed they will  be blamed.  Unfortunately this sort of assault  on women happens all the time, says  Agnew.  Publicity on Gutman's alleged practices sparked complaints against  other professional men — including  a university professor and a  psychiatrist . These are  the next  cases we 're going after,   said Agnew.  Meanwhile, Gutman is continuing  his practice at the Willow Clinic  on Willow St. in Vancouver.  If  found guilty the maximum sentence  is five years for one count of indecent assault.  Gutman is said to have phoned Rape  Relief members and apologized for  his behavior.  He said he was  seeking psychiatric help.  Says Agnew: There are several  options for a judge.     If Gutman is  found guilty he could be sentenced,  fined,  given a suspended sentence  or let go providing he continues  seeing his  therapist.  The Dispensing Optician Association,  a volunteer organization representing opticians, has been very quiet.  Opticians are not licensed professionals .  Kinesis  Take out a gift sub.  just by filling out the subscription form enclosed  in this issue, you can treat a sister to a year of-  feminist news : all the facts, all the turkeys, all  the hope and despair of women 's movement living.'J! Vancouver elections  City  moves  right  Pappajohn loses  his appeal  The results of the November 15 elections in Vancouver were less than  heartening for those of us concerned  with the control of development,  civic democracy, neighbourhood improvement, and the interests of  women in the city.  Candidates running under the NPA  (Non-Partisan Association) banner  captured 5 of 10 council seats. When  added to the re-election of Mayor  Jack Volrich and Alderman Don Bellamy (both running as independents  with NPA endorsement), it is clear  that the pro-developer, anti-equal  opportunity, anti-ward system group  has a firm control on council.  The virtual sweep by NPA candidates  was caused by a certain shift to  the right by the electorate and by  the virtual collapse of TEAM (The  Electors Action Movement) as the  dominant force in civic politics.  Gains made by COPE (Committee of  Progressive Electors) were not sufficient for the election of additional COPE candidates to accompany  Alderman Harry Rankin, who once  again topped the polls.  First  runner-up in the campaign was COPE  candidate Bruce Eriksen who placed  11th, about 3000 votes from election.  Mayor Volrich lost no time in exploiting his new mandate.  One of his  first public statements virtually rejected the results of the referendum  on the ward system held simultaneously with the election.  Although the election of city council  by wards was approved by more than  half the electorate (51.2%)^ Volrich  has stated that the margin of approval  was too small to justify change. Apparently the wishes of a majority of  Vancouver voters are less important  than the mayor's own personal views.  In light of the fact that the majority  of council is also anti-ward system,  it is obvious that it will take a  great deal of pressure from the public to force council to implement the  wishes of the electorate.  In addition, Volrich has indicated  that he will press council to reconsider the Equal Employment Opportunities office.  Once again, a great  deal of public support will be necessary to hold on to one gain accomplished during the life of the prev-.  ious council.  A similar shift was seen in the election of both school board and parks  board members.  NPA candidates took  7 out of 9 school board seats, and  4 out of 7 parks board seats.  Few of the candidates elected are  likely to voluntarily respond to our  concerns.  Of those elected to council, school board, and parks board,  only COPE Alderman Harry Rankin and  Independent Darlene Marzari responded  to a VSW questionnaire distributed  before the election to gauge their  positions on a variety of issues of  concern to women.  We can look forward to a difficult two years in  getting our concerns heard and action  taken in those areas which are important to our communities.  On the picket line  Muckamuck strike enters sixth month  Threats of management harassment  and violence marked the six-month  anniversary Dec. 1 of the Muckamuck  Restaurant strike.  Picketers say there's been a lot of  harassment on the line at Muckamuck the last couple of weeks: Petty  stuff like doors slammed or flashbulbs flashed in people's faces.  And bigger stuff.    A bucket of water  thrown at one of the picketers.    A  guy with a crowbar just looking for  a fight.    A scab trying to strangle  a picketer with her own scarf, and  then  laying assault charges against her.  Management is doing this deliberately  to try and break the strike.     They  just love to see violence on the  line.     They know that no matter who  starts it,  no matter who gets the  worse of it,  violence on the  line  helps the boss.  On Saturday, Dec. 16, 1978 at 5:00  p.m. SORWUC is having a rally.  They  are requesting that people support  the strike and show management that  solidarity and strength exist on  the line.  There will be music,  refreshment, and the big draw of  raffle winners, outside the restaurant, 1724 Davie Street.  Vancouver businessman George Pappajohn 's three-year rape sentence was  upheld in a 2-to-l decision by the  B.C. Court of Appeal.  Chief Justice John L. Farris and  Justice W. A. Craig rejected the  appeal, which was requested on the  grounds that the victim, Malonie  Edwards, consented to being raped.  Pappajohn claimed the woman had consented to intercourse and in appealing the conviction argued that there  was misdirection by the trial judge  and that certain evidence should not  have been admitted.  Pappajohn, 39, was convicted and  sentenced in August 1977 for the rape  one year earlier of the 37-year-old  woman.  The jury was told that Pappajohn raped her at his Shaughnessy home.  During Edwards' testimony, she said  Pappajohn pushed her down a hallway  to the bedroom when they arrived at  his home and announced he was going  to rape her.  She also testified that  she was raped three times and her  hands were tied together in preparation for another forced sex act.  She said she had had lunch and drinks  with Pappajohn, then was driven to  his home to prepare the house for  selling.  She said she was forced into  a bedroom and later escaped by running  to a nearby home.  Pappajohn's lawyer Allan McEachern  said notice of appeal to the Supreme  Court was filed soon after the B.C.  Court of Appeal ruling.  Pappajohnj  who entered Oakalla following the  appeal rejection, is now walking the  streets again, released on bail.  Give LIL a little  This year, put LIL on your Christmas  gift list.  LIL, the Lesbian Information Line, needs to raise $200 to  buy the equipment needed for an answering service.  Their goal could easily be obtained  if each of us reading this article  could send them $1 to $5.  If you can  afford it, please do it.  LIL is in operation on Thursday  evenings, from 7 p.m. to 10 p.m.  Their number: 685-4519.  They aim  to provide information and counselling to lesbians and in particular,  to women just coming out.  LIL hopes to be able to expand  their phone-in hours and is  looking at the possibility of  a regular drop-in.  The LIL office  is operating out of one of the  rooms at the Women's Bookstore.  LIL does need your financial support  at this time.  Send your donation to  LIL c/o VSW, 2029 West 4th Ave.,  Vancouver.  We'll make sure LIL  gets it. KINESIS,  December   '78 - January   '79  CHILDCARE  Childcare organizing  Thousands of students and immigrant  families are ineligible for daycare  subsidies.  Human Resources Minister  Bill Vander Zalm says they can't,  use daycare facilities unless they  pay their way.  Thus, despite a growing need for daycare, immigrant women and students  are going without - they don't have  the $150 or more a month needed to  pay for daycare for one child.  The withdrawal of aid for immigrants  and students has created hardships  for daycare centres which count on  a full house in order to receive  enough government money, to operate  efficiently.  Because groups are forced to withdraw their children, vacancies at  daycare centres have increased. Income to centres has decreased, leaving daycare workers without salary  increases.  Did you know that full-  time daycare supervisors are paid  less than elevator operators?  These are just a few of the innumerable problems facing daycare parents and daycare workers today.  Last December, some of these parents and teachers met to discuss  these and other concerns.  One of  the primary recommendations to come  from that meeting was the formation  of an association of daycare parents.  A part-time coordinator, Janet Currie,  was hired by the city in June to help  organize the association.  And on  October 28, 1978 the founding meeting  was held at Langara.  The interest in  and pre-registration for the meeting  was enormous.  Childcare was provided  by the daycare union, the Social  Services Employees Union, and about  sixty children were registered for  the childcare alone.  It was quite  clear that interest and enthusiasm  were there.  The first part of the program consisted of three speakers.  Janet  Currie gave a brief history of daycare in Vancouver, and spoke of the  Child Care Federation, the previous  daycare action group (1973-76), and  some of the problems and splits  within that group.  She felt very  strongly that the new association  should be primarily a parents' organization (partly because parents  would make a more effective lobbying group); that it needed to be  imaginative, but to define common  areas of interest and have a narrow  enough focus to be effective.  Women, children,  are victims of   discrimination  She also stressed that everyone  must be aware of the obstacles ahead,  of discriminatory attitudes towards  children and women, and the attitude  that daycare is an inferior substitute for motherhood.  Bridie Mcllwraith, a supervisor at  St. John the Divine Daycare, spoke  of some of the myths and some ot  the critical issues in daycare.  Myths included misconceptions about  funding (ie. the misconception that  there is any), about the types and  class of people who need daycare,  and about the effect of daycare on  the parent-child relationship.  (Recent research indicates that  not only do daycare children not  lose touch with their parents, but  that the bonding between child and  parent is often strengthened because of  the improved quality of  the time they spend together.)  Mcllwraith spoke of the problem of  jurisdiction for daycare.  Daycare  is split among three different ministries: Health, Human Resources,  and Education.  Despite, or because  of this, nobody has the mandate to  look after what is happening with  the.children.  So while a daycare centre may be  meticulously inspected for fire  exits and lighting, no one inspects  the program, or the way the children  are being treated.  And when the  Minister of Education was approached  to upgrade the training program for  daycare workers, he replied that if  you upgraded the program, you'd have  to pay them more.  Bridie pointed out that better pay  and working conditions for staff  would decrease staff turnover and  provide a more stable environment  for the children.  (&0 0  The third speaker was a daycare parent, Sharon Yandle, who spoke of her  own experiences, and contrasted the  horror scene of trying to find daycare  a number of years ago with the relative ease of finding it today.  She  warned however, that the current  daycare situation is a result of  political pressure and if we don't  continue to fight for it, it can be  taken away.  Yandle pointed out that a lot of  people consider daycare completely  dispensible.  She suggested forming  lobbying groups to speak to all  levels of government, and also to  LNS Women 's Graphics  educate the public about daycare.  She  pointed out that a great many  women who stayed home with their  small children feel threatened by  daycare.  She also felt that improving the wages and working conditions  of the staff was an important issue.  Finally, she warned against in-fighting in the association, and felt that  a basis of unity had to be found.  The meeting then broke up into small  brainstorming groups to consider the  following questions:  1) What are the most urgent problems  in daycare at this time?  2) What should the goals of a daycare  association be?  3) What strategies should the association adopt to meet its goals?  4) What do you as a parent, teacher,  etc. want from a daycare association?  The groups generally came up with the  same problems, which centred around  education (of parents, staff, the  public, the business community,  unions, and government), funding,  staff training, and management of  daycare.  Suggested strategies included the formation of a lobbying  group, increased communication between parents and workers, and alignment with other groups such as students, industry and unions.  When the meeting re-convened, it was  formally moved "that the Greater  Vancouver Daycare Association be  formed".  People signed up for the  'steering committee, or for one of the  task groups: funding, research and  public education, and production of  a newsletter.  Meeting planned  for new year  Another general meeting will be held  early in the new year.  The steering  committee has come up with two proposals so far.  The first is that the  steering committee be made up of a  majority of parents, as parents have  no voice in daycare at this time.  The second is that the daycare association speak for all forms of daycare  including nursery school, after-school  care, over-three care, under-three  care, and family care.  The next task of the steering committee is to define the broad goals of  the association.  If you want more  information on the Greater Vancouver  Daycare Association, call Janet Currie  at 738-1863.# SINGLE MOMS AND KIDS  Single moms are  poverty group  Single mothers are becoming a growing proportion of the country's poor,  the Economic Council of Canada says  in its annual report.  The federal advisory council says  women not only lack other sources of  income but also earn substantially  less than men.  Lower incomes earned by women usually means insurance benefits are  lower than those paid to men, the  report says.  "In 1975 unattached males in the  labour force received about one-  third more total income than did  their female counterparts.  Among  the male-headed families who experienced unemployment, the average  family income was nearly $5,000  higher than the income of female-  headed families with no unemployment.  Among other findings in a section on  social programs:  - Unemployment alone is an unreliable indicator of financial hardship  and inequity.  - Middle and upper income persons  have benefited as much from social  programs such as unemployment insurance, pensions, family allowances  and medical care as have the poor.  They've come a long way  Children have come a long way from  their 18th-century existence as chattels and should have their rights  guaranteed by law, says Justice  Thomas Berger of the B.C. Supreme  Court.  Berg'er, speaking at IfcMaster University in Hamilton, said that  a federal statute should be enacted  to establish children's rights and  guarantee community services to  all children.  He said children should have the  right to food, clothing, affection,  .security, and education. He added  *that handicapped children should  have the same protection under the  law as normal children.  Merry Xmas, anyone?  Story 111:  After receiving her November cheque,  a woman with one child was called to  report to her welfare office.  She  was told that her December cheque  would not be forthcoming, as her  husband was owing in child support  payments.  This woman has been divorced for" 8  years.  After separating from her  husband, she accepted child support  payments in the amount of $75 a month.  However, after finding employment she  no longer wanted to accept the money.  In January, finding herself jobless,  she applied for social assistance.  employable.  Previously, women with  children who chose to stay at home  with them were not hassled about  going out into the job market. This  is a Catch-22, as women are not eligible for daycare subsidies for their  children unless they are working, and  cannot go out and look for a job unless they have daycare.  And then  there is the unemployment problem...  Story #4:  V.I.P. is being studied .and re-assessed.  It seems the Ministry of Human  Resources is no longer sure of the  value of the program.  V.I.P. is a  HOW COME YOU HAVENT COME FO OUF  HOUSE S/NCE MY FOLKS GOT LA/D OFF?  Child support payments were started  again immediately.  She was being  asked by Welfare to collect for back  payments that she had refused while  working.  When the welfare supervisor  was called by our staff member, she  informed us that the case had been  referred to another worker who would  return our call.  The new worker hedged, stating that  she wouldn't say that the woman hadn't  been told this, but that it was basically all right as she was entitled  to her December welfare cheque. There  was no acceptance of the fact that  if this woman had believed her original worker, she and her child would  have had no income at all for December and perhaps longer.  Story #2:  A handicapped woman had been receiving $268 per month plus $100 alimony  for some time.  This month she was  told by her worker that alimony would  no longer be allowed, as it was unearned income.  After pushing this  case to Victoria, the decision was  reversed, not however, without a lot  of worry for this woman who was  supposed to adjust to living on  $268 with a smile.  Story #3,:  It seems that in a lot of areas,  single parents are now being declared  program for women with children allowing them to earn $100 a month over and  above the welfare cheque.  Women were  previously allowed to use this program  for six months, at which time they had  to apply to renew.  For many women  whose six months were completed this  month, there was merely a deletion of  $100 on their cheque with no explanation.    Rawson healing  MAUD RAWSON, who was brutally beaten  in a marital dispute last August,  has recently been discharged from  rehabilitation hospital.  She has  returned to Prince Rupert to live  with her children at an undisclosed  address, due to further threats  from her husband.  Unconscious for weeks from the beating, Rawson suffered massive face  and head injuries, plus extensive  burns to her arms, face, chest and  abdomen.  When her sister and brother-in-law  reported the incident and tried to  lay charges against Rawson's husband, they were told that because  this was a marital dispute, the complaint would have to be laid by  Rawson herself, when she regained  consciousness.  She is now suing for divorce, and  may also take her husband to civil  court for damages. KINESIS,  December   '78 - January   '79  6  FEDERAL RIP OFFS  Unemployment and Immigration Minister  Bud Cullen has done it again to Canadian women.  He has announced a number of proposed  changes to the UIC program which will  have a devastating effect on women in  the labour force.  First, the government is proposing to  make it more difficult for repeaters  to claim benefits. For example, if a  person collects benefits for 20 weeks  and then finds work, that work must  last at least 20 weeks before the person can re-qualify for UIC benefits.  For many women, who are more prone to  lay-offs than men and more likely to  work at short-term contract jobs, it  will be almost impossible to meet  this requirement.  Secondly, the increased requirements  for entrants and re-entrants to the  labour force mean that claimants will  have to work 40 weeks in the last two  years, of which 10 to 14 weeks must  have been within the last year, before  qualifying for benefits.  While the government may have intended  this change to be a shotgun on young  people, it is women, particularly  older women, who will receive the  brunt of the blast.  Women who have  spent years in the home are most  likely to be unskilled and thus only  able to find work on a very temporary  basis.  Widowed or separated women  who desperately need to work will be  forced to resort to welfare in order  to survive.  Disincentive introduced  Finally, the government has introduced a disincentive to get training  at a time when women most need it to  combat high unemployment.  As of September 1, 1978 it has become  impossible for anyone collecting UIC  benefits to get a training allowance.  Without this allowance, a single  mother with several chiddren will  never be able to meet the additional  costs of transportation and day care  that a training course brings, if  she is living only on UIC benefits.  Women cannot win.  If they enter the  labour force, they are accused of  taking jobs away from men.  If they  give up looking for non-existent work,  they are accused of not wanting to  work.  These proposed changes are designed  to deny benefits to those who cannot  find long-term employment.  Women,  "the last hired and first fired", will  be hurt most.  The Liberal government  has in* fact developed policy blaming  women for abusing unemployment insurance without carrying out a single  objective study on women as UIC claimants.  Letters of protest can be sent to:  Bud Cullen, Minister of Employment and  Immigration, House of Commons, Ottawa.  (Reprinted from Women and the New  Democratic Party,  a report from the  federal women's organizer.)  frio>{  fly  ^  ,f&  Bud Cullen and  the boys, doing it  all to you  NAC attacks  Unemployment insurance benefits,  equal pay guidelines drawn up by  the federal Human Rights Commission,  and the refundable child tax credit  from Health & Welfare, are the main  items on the NAC agenda this winter.  At a recent executive meeting of the  National Action Committee on the  Status of Women, members discussed  the proposed UIC reductions which  they say are a serious attack on  working women.  The committee was  particularly upset with Employment  & Immigration Minister Bud Cullen's  statement that women abuse the UIC  program, and has requested documentation to support his charge.  The committee supports the policy  that requires government to establish job creation programs for women, but not limit these programs to  low-paid traditionally female jobs.  "We also maintain that the government should continue unemployment  benefits with training allowance to  permit women with dependents to take  advantage of teaching programs.  Eligibility requirements for unemployment benefits should not be  designed to exclude married women,"  said Pat Preston, Alberta representative.  Millions are not served  On September 8, the federal Treasury  Board announced that the money allocated for manpower training allowances  will be reduced by  $39.3 million.  The training allowance cutback will  have a devastating effect on students  enrolled in re-training programs at  colleges and technical institutions.  The cutbacks are being implemented in  the following ways:  1. Allowances given to trainees who  are married to, or living with, an  employed person will be cut back from  $45/week to $10/week.  2. Allowances given to single trainees  living alone, will be reduced from  $79/week to $60/week.  3. Allowances given to trainees with  one dependent will be reduced from  $90/week to $80/week.  4. Allowances given to trainees with  two dependents will be reduced from  $97/week to $95/week.  5. Allowances given to trainees with  three dependents will be increased  from $103/week to $110/week.  6. Allowances given to trainees with  four dependents will be increased  from $109/week to $125/week.  It is clear that these cutbacks are  not only designed to restrict general  accessibility to manpower re-training  programs, but also to impose a particular deterrent on women.  Women who  may wish to re-enter the labour force  after a period in the home, for example, will be unlikely to avail themselves of training with a stipend of  $10/week.  Similarly, many more women  than men are single parents with one  or two dependents.  Consequently, cutbacks in these categories will have  a far greater impact on women wishing  job training.  It would appear that these cutbacks  are only the beginning of a pattern  designed to restrict the availability  of manpower training services to women.  A policy discussion paper released by Canada Employment in late  1977, for example, states that English  language training courses should not,  in fact, be available to women.  The  paper states:  Recent studies,   however,  show that  in many cases it   (ie.   English language training)  is not being provided  to the right people.     A significant  proportion of trainees withdraw from  the  labour force after training,  many of them "to keep house".     The  great majority of persons in this  group are dependents.  The intention,   therefore,  is to provide  language courses with training  allowances primarily to immigrants  who made independent applications,  since these are the ones who have  been selected for their ability to  contribute skills to Canada's economy.  Obviously then, women who do not  "contribute to the economy" at any  given point in their lives must be  kept in that position.  Once again,  we have an example of how general  government cutbacks have a particular impact on women, and are designed  to make women the scapegoats for a  sagging economy. 6  Working women unite  Two representatives of Working Women  Unite met in late September with  the Women's Rights Committee of the  B.C. Federation of Labor at their  monthly meeting.  The-meeting was  set up to introduce ourselves to  other women in the trade union movement and to discuss ways of working  together.  Working Women Unite came into existence last fall.  No group existed  in the B.C. Federation of Women  that dealt specifically with women  and work, and women and unions. A  group of working women, primarily  SORWUC members, met and held a  workshop at the 1977 BCFW convention.  The workshop formulated  labor resolutions which were presented and passed at the convention.  After that initial accomplishment,  meetings of WWU lapsed for a few  months, but members of the group  realized that there was a need for  on-going work to be done on  creating a working relationship between women in the trade union  movement and members of the women's  movement.  In the spring the group  gained a new life, coming together  with a much broader base that included women from unions such as  BCGEU, CUPW, ATU, SORWUC, LClJC,  and IWU as well as non-unionized  women and women who worked in the  home.  Forging links between unions and  women's movement  A series of goals have been formulated as the basis of working together.  Along with attempting to  forge links between women in unions  and the women's movement, we want  to encourage the formation of  women's committees within locals of  unions, and discuss strategies on  how to organize in a non-union job.  Another major goal is the articulation of feminist demands for  working women to take to their  unions when negotiating new contracts. With the support of the  BCFW we can more effectively respond to government-proposed labor  legislation.  Since not all working  women belong to unions and in fact  much of the work women do is not  even considered work but acts of the  heart  we find it important to stress  and press for the recognition of all  work women do, no matter where it is  done.  To further these goals, WWU decided that a meeting with the WRC  was necessary to clarify the situation around International Women's  Day (the WRC did not formally endorse the action), and to inform  each about the other.  An initial  meeting was arranged with Astrid  Davidson, the director of the Women's  Rights Committee of the Federation  of Labor.  After we gave a brief  description of WWU and our goals,  Astrid was asked to describe what  the committee was and how it was  formed.  She told us that the WRC  was a body of 20 to 25 women who  were appointed by the executive  council of the federation or nominated to the committee by their own  unions.  As a committee of the B.C.  Fed., they cannot make policy, but  can act on the standing policy of  the parent body.  In order to effect  change within the B.C. Fed., the  WRC has to formulate resolutions  and present them at the annual convention of the Fed.  Astrid said  that to date the executive council  has been receptive to resolutions  proposed by the WRC.  The WRC's lack of involvement in  IWD was discussed and it seems to  be the opinion of the WRC that the  underlying cause of their absence  was a lack of communication rather  than a lack of interest on their  part.  The need to organize women  and the possibility of setting up  a drop-in centre for working women  in Vancouver was also talked about.  A further meeting with the whole  committee was then set for late  September.  Unfortunately only five of the committee members were in attendance  at the second meeting and as such  did not constitute the entire membership, as we had hoped.  Several of  the topics mentioned to Astrid in  the initial meeting were touched  upon.  IWD '78 was brought up again  and we discussed their possible involvement in '79.  Astrid expressed the concern that  women in the women's movement expected the WRC to be a feminist  and/or radical group and that the  women have varying politics and that  we shouldn't make any assumptions  about them.  We responded that the  women's movement is not made up of  people with a single ideology and  that they should remember this when  the discussion of feminism and/or  the women's movement arose.  We mentioned the "sticky" issue of  SORWUC and stressed that while we  wholeheartedly supported SORWUC because of its feminist policy, this  support did not negate or eliminate  the possibility of WWU working  with the WRC and other women active  in their unions: that while we consider ourselves feminists and members of the women's movement, we  are also actively involved in our  unions (if we belong to one).  In  many cases we learned to express our  concerns through the women's movement and then took this skill with  us into the union.  We think this meeting was important  as a preliminary to developing  ^jft.    |f¬ß¬ß  Martha Tabor    LNS  communication between Working Women  Unite and other women active in  trade unions, but we also know we  have a long way to go and a lot of  work to do before these ties are  realized in a concrete way.  The WRC provided us with written information supplied by the B.C. Fed.  of Labor which we were given permission to use in the workshops.  We think this kind of information  should be made available to many  women. We would like to see the  annual women's conference of the BC  Fed. an open conference, with interested women going as observers,  so that more of us can become familiar with the workings of trade  unions and take an active part in  deciding their direction.  Working Women Unite gave two workshops on women and unions at the  BCFW convention. There was a great  deal of interest in these workshops and many women attended.  Both times the workshops were divided  into two groups: an information  workshop which.defined and discussed  bargaining units, locals, labor  councils, the history of the trade  union movement, the B.C. Federation of Labor, the Canadian Labor  Congress, etc. and the other,  attended primarily by women familiar  with the labor movement, discussed,  specifically, women and trade unions  and strategies.  Out of these workshops came the desire to create a  labor sub-committee of the BCFW, entitled Women and Work, which was  ratified at convention.  Its goal  is to implement policy of the BCFW  on a provincial basis.  Our concern lies with all working  women no matter where that work is  done and we welcome ideas and  strategy on how to achieve our  goals of mobilizing and uniting  women from diverse occupations.  Our meetings are open to all interested women and are held on the first  Sunday of every month at Britannia  Community Centre in the music room  at 7:00 p.m.^ KINESIS,   December   '78 - January   '79  CCCA plans ahead  The Concerned Citizens for Choice  on Abortion is taking a new form -  the new direction is an offensive  to make choice on abortion available to all women.  In the past CCCA has focused on  responding to threats caused by  anti-abortionists (holding on to  existing rights).  CCCA was formed in February 1978  as an autonomous group ofindividuals  and adopted the following positions:  a) A woman's right to freedom  of choice on abortion must  be defeated.  b) The decision on abortion  should be made by a woman in  consultation with her doctor.  c The right to choose must be  defended against those who  attempt to prohibit access  to abortion as a hospital  procedure.  The focus was soliciting VGH and  Lions Gate Hospital membership  applications for the purpose of  electing pro-choice nominees to the  hospital boards of directors.  CCCA also sponsored a rally attended  by about 700 supporters and  received endorsement of its purposes from 40 Vancouver and B.C.  groups.  CCCA asks that people sincerely  concerned about guaranteeing the  availability of abortion to all women attend a public meeting and  join one of the committees:  Education  Law Repeal  Media  Provincial Organizing  Policy Development  Event Organizing for an International Day on Abortion Rights  CCCA is also advocating the removal  of abortion from the Criminal Code  of Canada.  If you want to get involved contact Jacqueline, 736-6232 (days) or  Jeanette 873-1188 (evenings).  Women Against Violence to meet  The women against violence subcommittee of the B.C. Federation of  Women is planning a day long forum  on pornography.  It is tentatively  scheduled for Feb. 17, so interested  women should keep that date open.  'Battered Wives'' not   entertaining  Feminists armed with placards and  pamphlets picketed the all-male  punk rock group called The Battered  Wives.  The four-man group, which performed  recently at the PNE, is said to  have changed its name to The Wives  in the wake of a storm of protest  from women's groups in Montreal and  Toronto.  But promotion posters and albums  still sport a gross logo depicting  a bleeding heart with a clenched  fist thrust through it. The  knuckles are smeared with red lipstick.  Debra Lewis, spokesperson for the  Vancouver Status of Women, said  women are demonstrating against the  Toronto band because it promotes  the idea that physical abuse of  women is acceptable.  Wife battering is not a joke to be  taken lightly or used as a cheap  publicity gimmick.     The threat is a  real one for any woman in a marriage  or common law relationship,   said  Lewis.  Promoter David Prier admitted that  the group, is a bit racey.  Some of the 5,000 people who flocked  to the concert wearing rolled-up  jeans and black vinyl jackets  agreed that the Battered Wives image  was sexist.  Makara suspended  Makara magazine has stopped publishing.  The most recent issue of the illustrative and beautifully designed .  magazine, Volume 3, Number 3 is the  last one to reach the bookstands.  The Makara Publishing and Design Cooperative has been forced to suspend  publication of the magazine because  of lack of funds.  Makara magazine was first produced  three years ago through a federal  LEAP grant.  When the grant money  ran out, the Makara collective continued publication using profits  from the still-flourishing Makara  Publishing and Design Co-operative.  But publication costs kept escalating and the collective, after much  thought and regret, decided to end  publication.  Says collective member Leslie Stan-  ick: "Each issue costs about $4,000  to publish. Members managed to keep  costs down by working for less than  minimum wage. Had we continued expenses would have pulled the entire  enterprise down by early next year."  Members are embarking on a promotion  and fund raising blitz which they  hope will offset the $15,000 deficit  incurred.  The collective has also appealed to  private organizations and is holding  a "We Love Makara" Valentine's benefit  dance February 10, 1979.  According to the collective, "We  have repeatedly applied to the Canada  Council for short-term aid but they  have refused to make up even a portion  of our operating deficit.  "Like most Canadian magazines, Makara  has never been self-supporting.     Its  sales didn 't pay salaries to the  workers.     They didn't quite cover  printing costs and contributors ' fees  - and that at a cover price of $1.50.  Our advertising revenues were also  limited.  "Long ago, Makara formulated an ad  policy which takes the reader's intellect and consciousness into consideration:  the amount of advertising space in the magazine was  limited to 10%.    Makara_ wouldn't take ads  that are graphically imcompatible  with the magazine,  or ads from anyone whose politics offended us or  our readers.  "If money permits, we will eventually  revive the magazine... or we will publish a semi-annual, or an annual, or  a bi-centenary...whatever is possible.  "Canadians need an alternative,  feminist forum for issues.    New writers  and artists, people with innovative  things to do and say,  need exposure  if we are to hear from them. "  Makara is appealing to readers to  help make this happen.  It is also  offering the Makara Magazine Collection - an entire set of back-issues  - postage paid for $15, a great  Christmas present.  Contact Makara Publishing and Design  Co-operative at 1011 Commercial  Drive, Vancouver, B.C. V5L 3X1. 8  KINESIS,  December   '78 - January   '79  WOMEN'S RESEARCH  Government  ignores  needs   of     immigrant  The needs of low-income or working  class immigrant women are largely  ignored by Canadian government policies and social service agencies.  They ar,' impeded by language barriers, racial discrimination, a lack  of job opportunities and a scarcity  of community services.  In a report completed recently by  the Women's Research Centre, it is  stated that Language and cultural  barriers,   lack of Canadian education,  and most importantly,   racial discrimination "lake it next to impossible  for immigrant women to participate  in 'community  life.  In order to learn more about the  plight of immigrant women, women at  the Centre organized and conducted  a series of four workshops for people  who work with immigrant women in the  community.  Workshop participants  examined four case studies.  They  found that poverty is a major problem.  Lack of money is most crucial  in putting the women in a dependent  situation and preventing them from  leaving it.  Another problem is language barrier,  which can effectively cut immigrant  women off from the larger society.  Due to her inability to communicate  in English, a woman is usually confined to her own ethnic community,  and is dependent upon others for  liaison outside of the community.  In addition to being isolated from  Canadian society, married women become progressively isolated even  within their own families as their  children gradually gain language and  other skills of the new culture.  These women then become dependent on  their children for translations and  other things, and as a result lose  prestige in their children's eyes.  Women whose children are born in  Canada have a unique problem in that  even if the children understand the  native tongue, they might not possess  the cultural concepts to translate  from English into their own native  language.  Older people suffer isolation  Many older people, such as widows  in particular, suffer the problem  of isolation as their children grow  up and leave.  Since they have been  in Canada for a long time they, in  fact, have become functionally illiterate in both languages and are unable to communicate even with people  of the same cultural background.  Because of her immigrant status and  isolation from her own relatives,  as one participant aptly said, an  immigrant woman who suffers a marital breakdown loses everything.  Since wives are usually sponsored  immigrants, they are completely  dependent upon the sponsor (usually  her husband or her husband's relatives) economically.  At times of family dispute or dissolution, the woman faces the problems of where to go, how to cope,  as well as the possibility of deportation.  Looking for a job is a  problem even if she can speak English and has the skills, because  her former job experience outside  of Canada is not recognized.  Therefore, women who suffer marital disputes are stuck in these situations  with very few resources available  to assist them.  The rules are unfamiliar  Most non-English speaking immigrants,  especially immigrant women, encounter difficulty dealing with authority  structures.  Immigrant women have to  cope with a set of rules which are  unfamiliar to them.  If they do not  speak English there is little chance  for them to find out what the rules  are.  For instance, since immigrant  parents do not have knowledge of the  school system, when their children  have problems at school they are  unable to deal with the school authorities effectively.  Often,  teachers and principals are not  sensitive to cultural differences  among students and misunderstandings  frequently occur among teachers,  students and parents.  Another example of the problems  created by lack of familiarity with  authority structures is the fact  that many immigrants are unaware of  the implications of psychiatric diagnosis to their immigrant status in  Canada.  Psychiatric records are  often made available by hospitals to  immigration authorities.  Such records , as well as other minor offenses, can be grounds for deportation.  On the other hand, police and  other professionals are often not  aware that immigrants can be deported even for minor reasons, and sometimes give wrong and dangerous advice.  More general problems are that immigrant women are afraid and do not  know where to go for information,  help or support.  In most instances,  they feel threatened to the point  that they are afraid to talk about  Credit: LNS Graphic:  their situations and will not trust  others to help deal with their problems.  Most participants also felt that  agencies are only capable of providing referral service because they do  not have the resources to give direct  aid to immigrant women.  Referral  is a circular process and agencies  are dependent upon each other for  survival.  There was some concern  that agencies can only provide band  aid type services.  None of the in-  depth problems of immigrant women  can be eliminated by the present  system of service delivery.  One of the most common problems  expressed by participants was that  it is difficult to reach immigrant  women, especially if they don't  speak English.  Some people felt  that it is because the situations  of immigrant women are not readily  visible to agencies which are most  easily accessible to middle class  women.  Immigrant women are not  aware of these resources, and even  if they are, mostly they are afraid  to go for help because they do not  know whether the information they  give will be used against them.  Resources are inadequate  A general complaint, from the agencies' point of view, is that, except  for government departments and large  organizations such as the United Way,  agencies do not have enough funding  to provide proper resources for immigrants.  Some participants felt that  the government should have definite  policies or guidelines concerning  the welfare of immigrants.  There is  a general lack of public money and  resources to sponsored immigrants  in particular.  As a result, immigrant women are forced to depend  upon someone, or some agency, continually, for help.  Another problem is the difficulty  women in jobs, community orientation  middle class agencies have in understanding the specific problems and  situations of immigrant women.  It  was pointed out that most workers  do not understand the relationship  between the various groups and individuals in different ethnic communities, and hence are unable to deal  effectively with the problems confronting immigrant women.  It is not  sufficient for an agency to simply  hire someone from the ethnic community it serves; it must go further  to identify individuals who will be  effective in providing resources.  The workshop groups discussed how  we could begin to help immigrant  women from our location in the community.  We felt that we must have  a more complete knowledge of the  quality and availability of present  services.  For example, many people  were unaware of what assistance legal  aid might provide for immigrant  people and felt it was necessary to  have such information.  We also felt  there was a need for us to share our  experiences, so that we could not  infer immigrant women into situations  where they would be badly treated or  where their problems could not be  adequately dealt with.  In working towards solutions, almost  everyone felt that there needs to be  some form of coordination for a particular woman who comes to an agency  with a set of problems.  An ideal set  up would be where a worker could get  to know the woman well, gain her confidence, assist and accompany her  through the maze of steps she needs  to go through, and then do follow-up  work.  Presently, if a woman is  referred to another agency, there is  no way to find out what happens after  her referral.  Orientation needed  It was suggested that there should  be more orientation for immigrants  both at their place of origin and in  Canada.  For example, if the Ugandan  woman in one of the case studies had  put down on her immigration application that she was 'an accountant rather  than a housewife, she might have qualified for a Manpower training program  in Canada.  There is a need for this  kind of information to be available  at places where there are Canadian immigration offices, so that people can  find out about things and avoid getting  locked into situations they cannot  get- out of.  In Canada, there should also be some  kind of program which provides immigrants with accurate and specific  information about their rights, how  the Canadian government and legal  system works etc.  The fact that they  can be deported for relatively minor  offenses should be stressed.  Some participants suggested that it  was important to deal with and try  and lessen the fear that immigrant  women feel.  One suggestion was to  establish an immigrant women's centre  where women could feel comfortable  going, and where they could act as a  support group for each other.  The workshop group felt there was a  continual need to minitor government  legislation and to lobby government  for change. We realized that long-  term solutions are only possible if  there are changes in government legis  lation, so that immigrants are constitutionally guaranteed their rights.  We also recognized the need for change  in current social and economic structures.  Until these changes are  achieved, our present efforts will  only be partial, and problems will  continue to recur. WOMEN'S RESEARCH  CENTRE has copies of the report.  Merry Xmas, war mongers  Merry Xmas warmongers — the federal  government has decided to spend $2.3  billion on fighter planes so that  the boys have something to play with  at Christmas.  This decision was made despite  Gallup Poll results which indicate  that more than two thirds of Canadians favor total disarmament.  The Coalition for Disarmament says  war is a women's issue: Proponents  of disarmament are going to have to  battle many of the same types of  issues that have been faced by  other liberationist groups,  and in  particular,  the women 's movement.  Like the women 's movement, proponents are reaching out to people of  all classes and all races to urge  them to fight against a power  structure that stifles basic human  rights and which is supported by  entrenched traditional value systems.  To end the domination of one group  by another using physical and  economic force is the common bond  of all liberation groups.     The  women 's movement and the peace movement are but two different fronts  fighting for freedom,  human dignity  and ultimately,  survival.  The overlapping interest of the  women 's movement and the peace  movement is reflected in the large  number of women 's organizations  that have sponsored the Coalition  for Disarmament.    Sponsoring organizations include,  among others,   the  Vancouver Council of Women,  The Voice  of Women,   the Women 's International League for Peace and Freedom,  the Vancouver Status of Women  and the Congress of Canadian Women.  It'll be a great day when our day care centres have  all the money they need and the Armed Forces  have to hold a bake sale to buy a plane. 10  by Joey Thompson  The federal department of health  and welfare has rejected a Vancouver  proposal for an out-of-hospital  birth centre.  But the six women who  spearheaded the project say they  have not given up hope; there's  still a good chance that Vancouver  women will have a New Family Centre  in a couple of years.  Ilene Gordon, from UBC's school of  nursing and a member of the committee, told Kinesis that the  proposal for a home-like birth  setting for pregnant women, is not  dead yet.  She said federal officials have  indicated that they are interested  in the proposal, the first of Its  kind in Canada, but that they rejected the application because it  needs more information and details.  She said the grant will be rewritten and re-submitted.  We have a lot of hope except there 's  a freeze on funding,   she said.  We'll have to wait now until the  liberal government loosens its  spending belt.  Gordon said the federal department  initially gave $7,000 to enable the  committee to hire a research assistant to prepare the grant. It means  the government wanted it submitted,  she said.  Federal acceptance of the proposal  will mean a lot to pregnant women  and women seeking an out-of-hospital  delivery, a concept which is gaining increasing popularity among  professionals, nurses and community  workers as well as women wanting an  alternative to the sterile, dehumanizing techniques often applied  in hospital-like Settings.  Here is part of the text of the  committee's grant proposal:  There is an increasing demand for  change in Canadian maternity service  by both consumers and health care  workers.    Although 80 per cent of  women have normal pregnancy and  birth these women are presently  cared for in expensive settings,  staffed and equipped to care for  high-risk women.  Although Canada spends vast amounts  of money on health care, many other  countries have lower infant mortality  rates.    Health care workers are  questioning the amount of obstetrical  intervention routinely applied to  all pregnant women.  Despite concerns that routine use of  'ñ†obstetrical intervention gives  rise to problems, intervention has  become the rule rather than the  exception.    Consumers are voicing  discontent with compartmentalized,  institutionally-focussed medically  managed care received during child  bearing.  It is not surprising  therefore that alternative approaches  to maternity care are being actively  new family  centre  The committee suggests that the New  Family Centre be a three or four  bedroom house located close to a  hospital (Grace, or Vancouver General), in case of emergencies.  The centre will serve low risk  women. Women who encounter any  difficulties during pregnancy or  labour will be transferred immediately to the hospital, Gordon  said.  The proposal, which took two years  to complete, asks the government  for $1.3 million to cover renovations for the house, capital costs,  salaries and research on the feasibility of such a service set up  across Canada. About half the money  would pay for running the centre for  three years.  The other half would  be poured into feasibility studies  and research.  Funding frozen  We have received a lot of positive  support from consumers, particularly  women giving birth in the home,  and support from physicians who  are worried about the non-existence  of support services for women' having  home deliveries,   Gordon said.  A lot of doctors said they weren 't  prepared to publically  lend support  to the project but added that if it  were funded they would love to work  there.  There has also been a tremendous  amount of resistance from doctors  to the concept of any births taking place outside the hospital.  Their attitude is that people having home births are foolish and this  foolishness should not be tolerated  or encouraged.  New Family Centre  plans goals  The purpose of the New Family Centre,  says Gordon, is to demonstrate  and evaluate a comprehensive program for healthy women provided by  a health care team in a home-like  setting. It will include child  birth education classes, pre-natal  care, care during labour and birth  and post natal follow-up of women,  infants and family for about one  year.  Gordon says that the goals of the  centre are:  - to provide safe maternal and  infant care in an out-of-hospital  setting  - to demonstrate that maternity  services can be offered less expensively  - to provide maternity services  that satisfy parents  - to provide maternity care that  will enhance the adjustments to  parenthood  - to demonstrate the viability  and desirability of the birth centre concept to health professionals  involved in maternity services.A KINESIS,  December   '78 - January   '79  ^  birthing at home  Peggi finds it easier and more comfortable to birth on her hands and  knees. Below: Friends and relatives offer Peggi support as her baby  son appears.     Then,  she says,  we took a good long look at each other.  by Peggi  It seems so short a time since I sat  in this room contemplating the birth  of my son.  I hoped and planned for  a natural birth and thought much  about a home birth.  I had read lots of birth literature,  went for pre-natal care, yoga and  birth classes, swam and walked daily.  I read books about mothering by women and for women, talked to other  pregnant women, women with children  and grandmothers.  Monthly I visited  the birth centre and met with my  midwife.  During this time I was still undecided about whether to have a home birth  or a hospital birth.  A hospital birth  had the security of medical expertise  - those life-saving skills necessary  in an emergency.  Having attended  to go to the hospital if advised.  If "something happened" we would  have to be willing to accept that  responsibility.  By accepting that  responsibility, we gained control of  our birth experience.  I remember feeling so in control of  the situation, collecting and sterilizing the equipment necessary and  preparing my home for the birth of  my child.  I chose to deliver in our living  room with a fire going and I invited  friends we wished to share the birth  with.  When labour began, on a drizzly November day about a year ago,  we were prepared, had a leisurely  breakfast and spent the morning relaxing.  As friends and midwife came during  the morning, my labour progressed  slowly.  There was conversation and  tea and I can still remember making  pickled beets!  At about one in the afternoon the  tempo and intensity increased. With  every contraction I moved closer to  birthing and more distant from the  people around me.  My husband Tim stayed close by, helping me with breathing and applying  counter pressure on my pelvis, where  the labour was centred.  After moving  through a transition I attempted to  lie down on my back.  But the slightest pressure made me flip over onto  my hands and knees.  It seems strange to have birthed on  hands and knees.  I remember seeing  photos of women birthing in that position and thinking - strange.  Strange it may be, but when labouring  on your back the last thing you want  is to sit on your bottom.  The last stage of labour moved very  fast.  All the time there was someone with me, helping with the breathing as I tried to slow down and not  push.  Then with a strong sensation  the head appeared.  When you can't  see, it seems an eternity for the  shoulders to come and to hear those  first sounds of life.  After nine months I was holding the  child I had come to know without  seeing or hearing.  As I held Joshua  he started to reach for my breast,  nuzzling and licking at first and  then with a strong suck.  We then both relaxed and had a good  long look at each other.0  nursing school I was aware of the importance of that.  It seems in retrospect that there was an emphasis on  birth as an emergency for which special skills and intervention were  necessary.  support received  Yet, given my health, and a past  birth experience, the chances of an  emergency were minimal.  Birthing in  a relaxed, comfortable environment  with the support of my husband and a  trusted midwife would be okay.  It was difficult, however, to resolve the question: "What if something happens?"  I was quite willing 12  Women  want   CALM   births  The Campaign Association for the Legalization of Midwifery (CALM) was  established a year ago to meet the  demands of a growing number of women  seeking alternatives to the conventional hospital birth.  The organization consists of a small  group of people who want women to  choose: who will give them care during  and after pregnancy, and where they  want to give birth.  CALM recognizes that some women feel  more at ease under hosuital care, but  it also believes that many women want  something different.  CALM committed to  personalized care  Karen May, one of the founding members of CALM, said laws permitting  the practise of midwifery and schools  which may train them must be controlled by people committed to offering  personalized care, support and counselling to pregnant women.  She said many doctors are imbued with  traditional attitudes about child-  bearing.  They don't view birth as a  normal physiological function.  If  doctors are leaders in the legalization of midwifery, CALM fears that  services to pregnant women won't be  substantially changed.  In a recent newsletter, CALM explains  the difference between the role of a  doctor and midwife:  The well-trained midwife is competent  to assist the family experiencing a  normal pregnancy and birth and does  not hesitate to call in medical  assistance as soon as it is indicated.    A  sensitive midwife is often able to  detect a problem before there is objective evidence and will seek medical  consultation.    Much of the midwives '  education has been directed toward a  profound understanding of what constitutes normal pregnancy,   labour,  birth  and postpartum period.    Along with  this is a thorough training in how to  recognize the subtle variations from  normal which may be signals that all  is not going as it should.  A medical student's orientation to  birth is somewhat different.     Obstetrics is a very small part of a very  extensive training program that doctors undertake.     The GP is taught the  basics of normal pregnancy and birth,  and is then thoroughly prepared to  deal with obstetrical problems.  But these two very different types  of training produce individuals with  very different expectations of the  birth process,  and with very different skills.    By virtue of their training and expertise doctors are well  prepared to deal with at-risk pregnancies,  complicated labours and deliveries,  or post partum problems.  Midwives are far better equipped to  give pregnant women and their families the day-to-day care and consistent emotional support that is required throughout the birth cycle.  Today 's parents want the services of  both these professionals.     If quality care is to be given to our new  families,   the midwife is a necessary  addition to the obstetrical team.  CALM is not suggesting that the midwife replace the doctor or nurse, but  that she work closely with professionals at all levels of pregnancy health  care.  The dissatisfaction with the stark,  severe and clinical atmosphere of the  hospital is increasing; health officials estimate that about 300 women  in the Vancouver area delivered their  babies at home last year.  Although the demand is rising, the  midwife's services are scarce. There  is no . way to find a midwife other  than by word of mouth.  The handful  of midwives who are practising in the  city are forced to work under cover  because their method of delivering a  caring support service for pregnant  women is illegal.  Families choosing a home delivery  over a hospital birth stem from diverse socio-economic backgrounds.  Women opting for a home experience  are not necessarily a part of the  counter-culture phenomenon as many  doctors and professionals claim. -  CALM member Jane Corcoran says:  "Families arguing for alternative  birthing make very strange bedfellows.  Some are seeking a spiritual experience not possible in a hospital,  others have had a child in a traditional hospital setting and vow never  to do it again,  other women want control over their own bodies and are  tired of turning to professionals,  usually men,  for all the answers."  Corcoran says midwife and home delivery do not go hand in hand.  Legalization of midwifery will also enable  midwives to set up birth centres similar to the birthing homes in many  U.S. states.  Some midwives want to  work with doctors and nurses in order  to make the hospital experience of  birthing a more humane one.  "T.'m fighting for midwives wherever  they want to practise.     The place of  birth is secondary,"  Corcoran said.  Doctors in most other countries work  together with midwives.  Yet the  Canadian medical profession is reluctant to recognize the need for change.  Hospitals and doctors depend heavily  on births to provide a basic income.  If an instititution lost half its  maternity patients a year, its annual  revenues would be reduced by millions.  Some of the more progressive hospitals  are attempting to meet the demand for  change and keep the customers by loosening rules and regulations concerning  care for the baby and visits for the  new mothers.  But the changes are slow in coming  and, say CALM members, are frequently  only band-aid solutions.  Doctors may fear a loss of income  if midwives are permitted to serve  as guiders and women are allowed to  stay home to avoid unnecessary drugs  and use of hospital equipment.  But  they are also concerned about safety.  Dr. Frederick Bryans, UBC professor  and head of Vancouver General Hospital's department of obstetrics and  gynecology, said home deliveries are  dangerous, "especially in rural areas".  Bryans said he would support legalization of midwifery, "if one is advocating the training of a group of  women who play an increasing role  in the medical care under hospital  supervision.  "An extension in nurses ' training is  a step in the right direction. However, if they are advocating that a  group of people practise outside the  hospital then I think it is a retrograde step. "  The College of Physicians and Surgeons of B.C. says it does not support  the midwife or doctor who attends a  home birth. But the College, along  with the Registered Nurses Association of B.C. (RNABC) has set up a KINESIS,  December   '78 - January   '79  13  joint committee to study the roles  of the nurse-midwife.  "They are running scared,"  said  May. "The demand for midwives is  escalating.    It 's safer for them  to set up their own system to control before someone else does it  for them. "  In some parts of the U.S. maternity  centres are blossoming.  For example, the Birth Home in Cottage  Gtove, Oregon where babies are delivered "in a comfortable home-like  setting.     The mother is attended by  nurse-midwives and immediate family.  The centre has a prenatal check-up  clinic.    Home visits follow the  birth."  New York's Maternity Centre Association has converted a townhouse into  a Childbearing Centre which has a  family room, garden, and kitchen.  The centre was established three  years ago by two nurse-midwives.  How much longer do women of B.C. wait  for a similar facility?  May is optimistic that the increasing  interest in and curiosity about alternative birthing methods will spark  action.  How soon is anybody's guess.  How to choose your midwife  CALM lists these guidelines for selecting a midwife:  - Do you like this person? Does she  seem genuinely concerned about your  family's welfare and does her manner  inspire confidence?  - What is her training and background  experience?  Self taught midwives can  be very good...but if she hasn't had  much experience she should be working  with a more experienced person (ask  how many births she has attended,  delivered on her own).  - Ask for references, talk to a few  of the women who have been helped by  this person.  - Ask about prenatal, labour and delivery and postnatal care provided  by this person.  She should see a  woman monthly in early pregnancy and  weekly in the last month.  She should  agree to attend early in labour and to  remain throughout.  After the birth  she will want to remain for a couple  of hours to ensure that all is going  well.  Postnatal visits are important  - a minimum of three visits in the  first few days.  - Prenatal classes are often provided  by the midwife and it is well to attend those of the midwife you have  asked to do the birth.  - Listen to what this person says to  you.  Does she emphasize parental  responsibility in deciding to.have a  home birth?  Does she talk about nutrition and taking care of yourself?  Does she indicate to you that a midwife must call in medical aid in the  event of complications?  Normal pregnancy and birth are her province and  she will delineate clearly for you  what will happen if your pregnancy  should develop problems.  - Can she establish a working relationship with your physician? Some  doctors recognize the value of midwifery and will agree to do medical  back-up. You may have to change  doctors.  If no doctor will back up  the person you have found - please be  suspicious.  - Ask what she expects you to supply  and what she considers important to  have in the physical environment at  the time of birth: a reliable car and  driver (other than the father), a  telephone, running water, warmth and  light, clean bedding, etc.  - What will she bring to the birth?  A good midwife needs very little in  the way of specialized equipment but  she does need to be very clean.  She  should have a fetascope (to hear the  baby's heart), a blood pressure apparatus, a watch with a second hand,  sterile gloves and antiseptic lotion  or cream.  She needs a bulb syringe  to clear the baby's airways, something  to tie and cut the cord.  As a safety  measure, she should carry small amounts  of Pitocin - a drug to stimulate contraction of the uterus.  - Ask what kinds of observations she  makes and ask to see the records she  keeps.  Basically these are a complete  and thorough history (family, personal:  medical, surgical, obstetrical and  social), records of findings of prenatal visits, records in labour, exam  of newborn and of new mother.  - Discuss with her exactly what you  and your family want with this pregnancy: the kind of care, birthing itself (who is to be present), treatment of the newborn, degree of involvement of mate.  Also, what does she  want, ie. type of lighting, assistant  to be present, observations and records  clean towels, food and a place to rest.  - Ask about her fee.  Many midwives  are working for the love of it and  charge next to nothing.  Parents have  a responsibility to realize that  these women are putting themselves  in jeopardy of the law, so please  make a donation that is appropriate  to the service rendered.  RNABC takes position  on    midwifery  RNABC has issued a position statement  supporting recognition of the nurse-  midwife as a health professional  authorized to care for mother and  baby throughout the maternity  cycle.  The statement was prompted by growing public interest in the practice  of midwifery in B.C. and in the  possibility of home births.  Elaine Carty, Molly Evans, Isabelle  Jenkins, Bernadet Ratsoy, all of  Vancouver, and Anne Wylie of Pr.  George were named to a special association committee to draft the  position statement.  They focused  on the nurse-midwife, or the nurse  with advanced preparation in  obstetrics — including the management of delivery in a normal situation — rather than concentrating  on midwifery as a separate profession.  RNABC's position follows a recent  statement from the Canadian Nurses'  Association which said that the  nurse-midwife is the health professional best equipped to meet the  growing need for counselling and  continuity of care for mother and  child during the maternity cycle.  The RNABC statement reads in part:  The Registered Nurses' Association  of British Columbia supports recognition of the nurse-midwife as a  health professional authorized to  provide comprehensive care to mother  and newborn infant during the maternity cycle.  This role is consistent with other ex tensions of  nursing practice.which have already  led to qualified registered nurses  exercising high levels of assessment and management skills.  The qualified nurse-midwife should  have expertise in general nursing,  as well as advanced education and  training in maternal and newborn  care.  Excerpted from the July-Auq 1978  issue of Maternal Health News,  volume 2,  number 8.  Cesarean childbirthing  Women who have had a cesarean and  after a trial of labor have had a  second baby vaginally will be  discussing their experiences Dec.  13 from 7:30 p.m. to 9:30 p.m. at  the Vancouver Public Library,  3rd floor auditorium, Robson and  Burrard.  The panel discussion and film is  sponsored by the Cesarean Birth  Group which provides information  and support to couples experiencing  cesarean birth.  Everyone welcome. For more information contact David Aleguire, 224-  2258 or Cathy Dempster, 271-8532. 14  KINESIS,  December   '78 - January   '79  15  Introduction  The British Columbia Medical Services  Act has come a long way and is fairly  decent in the coverage given women for  breast operations.  However, much is  left up to the Medical Services Commission, a body of not more than three  members appointed by the Lieutenant-  Governor in Council.  This Commission has final authority to  decide what medical bills will be paid  and what bills will not.  An appeal  can then be made to the Minister of  Health.  Please note that all of these  people are men.  Take the case of the man who had a cyst  removed from the back of his neck. The  doctor assured him he could have plastic surgery to remove any scar tissue  and it would all be covered by his B.C.  Medical Insurance.  Then take the case of the women who had  breast reduction surgery.  Her breasts  were not reduced because they were unattractive (as everyone in our society  is aware, breasts which are bigger can  only be better and make the woman so  blessed that much more attractive).  They were reduced because the added  poundage was aggravating a bad back  condition.  This B.C. Medical Insurance  would cover.  However, the plastic surgeon left one nipple very lop-sided and  there was some bad rope-like scar tissue from an infection on the other  breast.  The doctors in the case all  agreed that more surgery was required  to correct the errors made the first  time around.  But not so the Commissioners.  This was breast material,  therefore the surgery was deemed to be  cosmetic and not medically required.  The case was appealed to the Commission, but they were adamant.  It seems  the woman's only recourse was to pay  for the further surgery herself. Possibly she could have gotten a psychiatrist to indicate further surgery was  necessary for her mental health, but  who wants to be labelled crazy even  for a good reason?  It could be further noted that some  physicians seem to find more favour  with the Commission than others.  If  you are lucky and choose a doctor who  is liked by the Commissioners, you  are less likely to be hassled than if  you are unfortunate enough to find a  doctor not in their good graces.  So women be warned.  Breast augmentation operations are cosmetic except  for a reconstruction operation after a  mastectomy.  Breast reduction operations will be covered but expect fairly severe scarring and do not expect  any help or support from your medical  insurance for correcting this situation  Carol's story  by Kay Matusek  Carol was worried.  She thought  she had found a strange mass in her  breast.  She didn't usually do breast  self-examinations and she felt unsure about her ability to distinguish  an unwanted lump from the rest of the  pulpy-feeling stuff that made up her  breast.  She had always thought the  breast self-examination was looking  for trouble she would rather not face.  She also felt a vague embarrassment  when she thought about "feeling herself up".  But now she had found  something and she was very worried.  She decided she had better see the  doctor.  It took Carol a few days to build  up the courage to call her doctor.  In fact, she called only after she  decided the cough syrup wasn't stopping her persistent cough so now she  had a real reason to go for an examination.  She almost didn't tell the  doctor about the lump*.  She had finally convinced herself that it wasn't  anything serious.  She couldn't have  cancer, she couldn't lose a breast,  she couldn't be the next in her  family to die.  But just before the doctor left  the examining room Carol blurted out,  "Oh, Doctor, I'm not sure...it's probably nothing...I hate to waste your  time..."  She looked pleadingly at  the doctor.  She wanted the doctor to  guess what was wrong.  She wanted the  doctor to insist on checking her  breasts and to assure her there was  nothing wrong.  The doctor glanced at the clock  and back at Carol.  Carol said, "I  have a lump.  Uh, that is, I think I  found a lump in my breast." The doctor came back into the room, rustling  the papers in her file.  80% of lumps are benign  "I think I did an exam only 5  months ago and you were okay then."  The doctor smiled reassuringly and  began to discuss cancer.  "Did you  know," the doctor asked, "more than  80% of the lumps found in breasts are  not malignant?"  Carol had to admit she didn't.  "But it's good you're having this  lump checked out by me right away as  the sooner cancer is detected the  better the chances are it can be  stopped from spreading." Carol laid  back down on the examining table and  the doctor's nimble fingers soon came  to rest on the lump Carol had found.  "Yes, I feel a mass." The doctor  stood back and continued talking.  "If it is cancer it should be operated on immediately.  If it's removed  while it's still in the first stages  a woman has a very good chance of  never having a reoccurence of cancer  and living a very healthy, long life."  Carol's mind was racing.  They'll  cut me up.  I'll lose my breast. I'll  be disfigured and then I'll die.  Maybe it would be better just to die.  She wanted the verdict.  Did she or  with special thanks to Dr.Patricia  Rebbick,   surgeon,  and the volunteer  visitors of the Canadian Cancer  Society.  did she not have cancer?  She asked  the doctor.  "Oh, well, I can feel a mass of  tissue but I can't tell what it is.  I'll refer you to a specialist.  They'll have to operate to find out.  Referred to a specialist immediately  Carol was referred to a breast operation specialist immediately and she  was mildly surprised to find out how  quickly she was able to get an appointment.  In some ways she found this  But the day of her appointment with  the specialist arrived.  The specialist die a quick but  thorough examination and had Carol  get dressed to meet in the office  for a discussion about what would  happen.  The specialist said, "I want to  operate as soon as possible.  I could  probably get a bed in the hospital for  you this Monday coming." Carol could  not even try to hide the look of dread  which quickly spread over her face.  The doctor noticed.  "Carol, is there anyone you can  talk to about all your feelings and  fears?"  "Not really.  All my family is  back east.  When I've tried to tell  Carol nodded to the doctor but  she was hardly convinced.  No one  could ever help her now.  She just  wanted to walk out of the office and  let fate do with her as it would. If  she was supposed to die then she  would just go ahead and die.  Life  couldn't be worth living if it meant  walking about the streets maimed for  all to see, to shun, to abhor.  The doctor continued.  "The operation on Monday will be exploratory.  I'll make a small transverse incision  and the lump will be removed.  It will  be examined to see if it is malignant.  If it is I would like to remove your  breast at that time.  If it isn't you  will be sewn back up and there should  be  relatively little scar tissue and  virtually no pain."  Carol nodded again.  reassuring but in other ways she became more frightened. She had never  felt so alone in her life.  Cancer isn't something that's easy  to talk about.  It's walking death.  It's a reminder that you, too, are  mortal.  When Carol tried to discuss  what was happening to her with a  friend she discovered it was difficult for her friend to overcome her  own fears about death and mutilation  to be supportive of Carol.  "Why me?" The phrase was running  through Carol's mind like an endless  tape. Occasionally she still felt  like she was in the throes of a terrible nightmare and she would awake  soon to discover it was only a bad  dream, a story she was reading.  It  couldn't really be happening to her.  my friends they've recoiled from me.  I felt like something that crawled  out of a hole." Carol wiped a tear  from her eye.  "I'll do anything if  it can only please not be cancer."  Carol pleaded with the doctor.  Contact Canadian Cancer Society  "I can't tell you that now.  I  can only tell you what will happen  on Monday." The doctor paused.  "I  would also recommend you call the  Canadian Cancer Society.  There is a  special program of volunteers who  have all had mastectomies.  Someone  will be more than happy to come and  talk to you about all the problems  and feelings you are trying to deal  with by yourself.  I was going to  have someone see you in the hospital  but you could talk to someone sooner.  Do call them, do it for yourself."  "There are many reasons for removing the breast immediately if it is  cancer.  Some doctors think cancer  spreads more rapidly once it's disturbed.  It would be improbable that  removing the lump would remove all  the cancerous material and it's usual  to remove the whole breast.  Also it's  dangerous for a patient to be anesthetized too often." The doctor  paused.  "What will I look like?"  Carol.finally asked, "What will I  look like? What do you cut off?"  "We used to perform much more radical surgery.  Not only was the breast  removed but the lymph glands under  your arm and, in some cases, even muscle tissue was removed." Some doctors  still operate  this way.  But most research has shown it is not necessary  to remove everything.  If the cancer  has spread to the lymph system, and  again I will say I'm not yet sure you  do have cancer, it would be too late  to stop it even by removing all this  tissue.  And each individual case is  different.  In your case, Carol, this  lump has been quickly found.  If it's  cancer it probably hasn't had a chance  to spread and a simple mastectomy  would isolate the cancer and you will  be fine" for years to come."  Again Carol asked, "But what will  I look like? My body will be misshapen, all those scars.  How will  anyone ever desire me ever  again?"  And she thought of her lover's face  as it would be when his hand ran over  an indentation, rough and red, where  once her sensitive breast had been.  Again she started to cry.  "Carol, this won't alter your  ability to love, or make you less  a woman.  Our society puts a lot of  emphasis on breasts and appearance  for sexual desirability but this  isn't the most important thing for  most individuals.  Although I like  the shape of my lover's thigh it  isn't the reason I love that person  and there are people who love you and  won't be put off by the fact you've  had a breast removed."  The doctor offered Carol a box  of kleenex.  "The skin on the chest  and breast scar easily.  But I'll  be more than happy to refer you to  a plastic surgeon.  There are artificial breasts, called prosthesis,  tfhich are very good or you can have  a breast reconstruction operation.  But you'll have to get used to the  idea that once you remove your  clothing you won't look the same.  In either case there'll be a lot  of scar tissue."  Carol asked, "A breast reconstruction operation?  That sounds  like the best idea to me.  Wouldn't  it be better than an artificial  breast?"  "Each case is different," the  doctor continued.  "Not everyone  can have the operation.  If too  much skin or muscle is removed  then it means taking skin and flesh  from another part of your body so  you end up with two scarred areas.  If there has been radiation treatment it may not be possible to be  reconstructed because the skin is  too scarred and it loses its elasticity.  But only a plastic surgeon can tell you what can be done  in your own case.  Sometimes the  other breast needs to be reduced  to either match the reconstructed  breast or, for women who are very  large, to match the prosthesis  so the two breasts will be more  evenly matched in size."  At least that won't be a problem for me, Carol thought to herself.  "At any rate I wouldn't recommend having a reconstruction  operation for at least one year  after losing a breast.  Your body  needs time to heal from the first  operation and I would want to be  sure there's no chance of further  infection." The doctor studied  Carol's face for a minute.  continued on page  16 16  continued from p.15  "I would also add, a reconstructed breast is not sensitive,  and there wouldn't be a nipple.  But if I do have to remove your  breast you'll be fitted with a  temporary prosthesis before you  leave the hospital so I hope you'll  not worry a whole lot about how  you'll look.  No one on the street  will know you've had a mastectomy."  Carol got all the information  she needed from the receptionist  about where to be when and what to  bring with her to the hospital.  She also got the phone number of  the Canadian Cancer Society so she  could call and talk to a Volunteer  Visitor of the Mastectomy Rehabilitation Program.  Talking about the fears  She was beginning to realize in  fact she did have a lump in her  breast and it would be operated on  within a week.  She realized she  could wake up in the hospital without her breast.  She decided she  had better call someone and talk  about all her fears and expectations .  The woman returned her call later  that afternoon.  She introduced herself as Nancy and said she, too, had  lost a breast several years before.  She made arrangements to come and  visit Carol the next day.  When she arrived Carol was mildly  surprised to see she would never  have guessed Nancy was missing a  breast.  She looked fine in a pant  suit and sweater.  And Nancy wasn't  at all abashed with Carol's stares.  Carol thought she must have had a  reconstruction operation.  As though Nancy had read Carol's  mind she said, "We are lucky to have  available some very good prothesis.  Even when I go swimming no one's  aware I no longer have a breast."  "You mean you just wear an artificial breast?"  "Yes.  I had my mastectomy several  years ago.  At that time women rarely  were reconstructed.  I could go and  talk to a plastic surgeon now and it  might be possible for me to be reconstructed but I no longer worry  'Ģ*bout it."  Nancy went on to explain about  her operation, the care she gives  her body by exercising and cleansing  and she talked about looks.  As  Carol began to develop confidence  in her visitor she began to talk  about some of her fears.  Nancy was  a very good listener and seemed to  understand everything Carol was going  through.  First Carol had a chance to discuss her fear of being mutilated.  She was afraid no one would be able  to love her again.  How could she  ever let someone else see or share  her body? Who could love her when  there are so many whole women ready  to take her place in her lover's arms?  Nancy had felt this also but her husband and family were still there.  Nancy asked, "Would you like one of  the Volunteer's husbands to come and  discuss your operation with your boyfriend?  I can arrange it as some of  the husbands of the Volunteers have  offered to do this."  Carol was glad to hear this but  she decided to wait and see how it  went when she finally told Tom later  that evening.  She had put off saying  anything to him until she had seen  the specialist and realized she would  definitely have to be operated on.  She was now coming to realize this  had given her fears a chance to take  over.  Maybe she could still hope she  would be loved.  Ith Right  And as she talked Carol began to  realize her fear of dying was even  stronger than her feelings about being  deformed.  She had been trying to repress these feelings by concentrating  on her physical body, but what if she  were to die?  "I'm afraid of the operation.  I  don't like the idea of being put out.  And I'm afraid of having cancer.  I  always thought if you had cancer  nothing could be done for you.  All  the operation buys is a bit of time  but the cancer will come back and  eat you up alive."  Again Nancy was able to listen and  understand.  She was also living  proof it didn't have to be that way.  She was here, still alive and cancer  free after several years.  As she  said, "Yes, the operation does only  buy back a bit of time.  We are all  mortal, Carol, and we will die.  You  can only choose to have the operation  and then live the best and fullest  life for as long as you are able.  I  can say having cancer once does not  necessarily mean you'll have a short  life and painful death.  It doesn't  have to be that way."  Sharing the pain  After she left Carol had lots to  think about'.  But at last she felt  her pain and she felt it had been  shared.  She was still afraid but  the fears were no longer nameless.  And she still had to face the day of  the operation.  Now she was anxious  to see Tom and tell him all about  the things she was going through.  Carol was lucky.  Tom was very  supportive.  He was at the hospital  when she awoke to find some of her  fears had been justified.  She had  had cancer and she had had her breast  removed.  Later Carol had a reconstruction  operation.  It went quite well as  she was small breasted to begin with  and she had only had a simple mastectomy.  She thinks it's a bit nicer  than her old prosthesis, at least  it takes a bit less care, but she's  still scarred and she can understand  why some women don't worry about  going through another operation or  two for a reconstructed breast.  As the year has gone by she has  not developed any further cancer.  Tom did leave her but not out of  disgust for her body.  Her new man,  Paul, doesn't seem to mind the way  she is.  Definitely she feels she  grew into a better person, no longer  afraid of death and no longer tied  to the artificial idea her worth is  only skin deep.  NOTES  1. A monthly breast self-examination  could save your life.  Over the period of your life (roughly 70 years)  you have 1 chance in 13 of getting  breast cancer.  2. The chances are much greater for  women getting breast cancer than men.  Lung cancer is also on the rise  among women.  We've come a long way.  3. If you find a lump go and see your  doctor and tell her/him why you are  there.  Many women will find another  excuse for seeing the doctor and ex-  pect her/him to guess about the lump.  4. Find out about breast surgeons and  be referred to one you think you can  trust.  If you don't like the first  surgeon you see ask to be referred  to another.  Find one you can trust.  5. Listen to your doctor.  S/he is  the only person in a position to  know what could happen on the operating table.  Be sure you know what  the doctor is planning and be sure  the doctor knows what you want to  have happen.  You can change that form  6. You do not have to sign any hospital release form as it is.  You  may have clauses added or deleted  before you sign.  If you do not  want a mastectomy on the day you  have the biopsy you do not have to  agree to it.  Be sure this is understood on the hospital release form  and with your doctor.  7. If you think you'll want a breast  reconstruction operation be sure your  doctor knows as it may make a difference in the amount of skin s/he leaves  intact.  Find out more  Further Reading on Breast Cancer  Brody, Jane, You Can Fight Cancer  and Win  Crile, George Jr., The Breast Cancer  Controversy  Kushner, Rose, Breast Cancer  Kushner, Rose, Why Me?  Zalon, Jean, I Am Whole Again 0, KINESIS,  December   '78 - January   '79  17  BREAST*'  SELF-EXAMINATION  End prison construction  stand in front of your  breasts carefully for any c  m si/.- and shape. Look f<  ''''Xviii  4   ,.-.  ■: :/--^)  and siill using the fid!  ir fingers, feel under  Lie on your bed, put a pillov  a bath towel under your left  shoulder and youi left hand  under your head (From this  Step through Step 8, you should  feel for a lump or thickening.)  With the fingers of your right  hand held together flat, press  gently but firmly with small  circular motions to feel the inni  upper quarter of your left brea  starting at your breastbone an  going outward toward the nipple  line Also feel the area around  the nipple  you will feel a ridge of firm tissu  or flesh Don't he alarmed. Thi;  is perfectly normal  -—J        V.  I f o yKcfv  -, 5  nipple linen  And finally, feel the lower outer ,"  section of your breast, going /  from the outer part to the nipple  L-L^x^mA&T  ill  Repeat the entire procedure on  L__  the right breast  Your own doctor may want you  to use a slightly different method  of examination Ask him to teach  you that method. Examine your  breasts every month, just after  your period Be sure to continue  these checkups after your  change of life If you find a lump  1  or thickening leave it alone until  i              I  you see your doctor. Don't be  frightened. Most breast lumps or  changes are not cancer, but only  your doctor can tell.  MORATORIUM COMMITTEE ON  PRISON CONSTRUCTION  The Moratorium Committee on Prison  Construction is a national organization lobbying for an immediate stop  to prison construction in Canada.  The newly formed western Moratorium  Committee says that one of its priorities will be to draw attention to  the issue of solitary confinement.  Solitary, the committee points out,  is the most cruel and destructive  aspect of the prison system, being  responsible for suicides and self-  mutilations at ten times the rate  of general prison populations.  A spokesperson for the Moratorium  Committee commented: "Alternatives  to incarceration do exist.    They  are feasible.    The exploration and  development of these alternatives  would be a far better use of taxpayers ' money than" the unnecessary  and wasteful building of more prisons.    More than 80% of people are  imprisoned for non-violent crimes,  and they could have their cases  dealt with through restitution,  community service, and similar alternatives.    This would free ample  amounts of dollars and resources to  provide treatment for the very few  violent and dangerous offenders;  treatment which is currently almost  non-existent. "  The Moratorium Committee spokesperson also pointed out that the Solicitor General of Canada has plans  to open 29 new Federal prisons within the next five years. The program  will involve the construction of  5,000 new cells.  The capital expenditure for this will be more than  $5,000,000.  "Furthermore, "  she added, "there is  no evidence that an expansion in  prison capacity has any effect on  crime rates.    There has been a 250%  increase in the budget of the Canadian Penitentiary Service since  1970 (from $70 million to $256 million) .    But there 's been no decrease  in crime.    Crime is caused by social  policy issues but this government  chooses to ignore the connection  (unemployment,  economic disparities,  racial discrimination, etc.).  "There has been some discussion of  gradually phasing out three prisons:  Dorchester, Laval and the B.C.  Penitentiary,    For this reason,  there  is a general -impression going around  that old prisons are being replaced.  But there has been no firm commitment to close any prisons.    If the  history of the Kingston Penitentiary  is an example of 'phase-out', then  we can expect that the old prisons  will simply remain in use. "  You can join the Moratorium Committee  on Prison Construction by sending  a membership donation of $2.00 to  them at 245 Main Street, Vancouver,  B.C.  AUCE dispute  Majority favour strike action  AUCE local 2 workers are out at  SFU. When the mediator signed out  December 5, AUCE pulled its workers from the registrar's office,  from the cashier's and bursar's  offices.  Last November, AUCE Local 2 had  voted overwhelmingly in favour  of strike action.  Several months of negotiation with  university administrators has not  yet resulted in a new contract  for about 650 staff at SFU.  Members of AUCE (Association of  University and College Employees),  Local 2, are trying to negotiate  wage increase while university  brass have insisted on a two-year  contract with no increase in  salaries in the first year.  The  only money offered in the first  year is a one time $400 bonus,  really nothing more than a token  gift from the bosses.  Credit: Chip Berlet/LNS Vk  CONFERENCES  Women's Studies  by Gillian Marie  The theme of the Women's Studies  Association of B.C. fall conference  was Women's Health Care Issues.  The workshop conference, held from  October 27 - 28, began with a panel  discussion.  Representatives from  organizations providing health care  service or information to women  addressed the topic: What are the  political implications of the work  done - for the organization as an  entity, for the women who work  there, and for the women who receive the service?  Women from Vancouver Transition  House, the Birth Counselling Centre,  Rape Relief, and Concerned Citizens  for Choice on Abortion, agreed that  working in these organizations led  to a greater understanding of women's political oppression.  Women  from the Birth Counselling Centre  spoke of the politics of a woman  having a positive birthing experience, one in which she takes responsibility for the birthing process, whether in.a hospital or at  home.  A discussion followed over  the issue of the legalization of  midwifery.  Lee Lakeman, from Rape Relief,  discussed the initial hostility  the centre experienced from medical and legal professions.  The workers have been changing  the attitude of the professionals  who encounter rape victims, and  treat  the women as 'evidence'  rather than assaulted women.  Both Transition House and Rape  Relief discussed the politics of  being funded by the government.  In contrast, Ann Thompson from  CCCA stressed that this was a  political organization.  She  briefly outlined the extent of  regressive legislation that has  been passed recently, and the  counter-attack by pro-choice  organizations.  Saturday morning began with workshops on practical and theoretical issues in women's health care.  Workshops were held on Feminist  Research Methods, Emotional Self-  Defense, Women and Stress-Related  Illnesses, Women and Health Care  in the Third World, How Prescription Drug Advertisements Portray  Women to Doctors, Mothers of  Daughters and Daughters of Mothers,  and Women's Issues in Occupational  Health and Safety.  The consensus  seemed to be that there was so much  to discuss that the two hours allot-  ed was insufficient.  In the afternoon, workshops were  held on the Rights of the Working  Mother-to-be, Internal and External  Self-Examinations, Music Therapy  for Women, Sexual Styles, Physical  Self-Defense, Body Work for Women,  and Menopause - Myth and Realities.  Again, women appreciated the  sharing of personal herstories,  skills and experiences.^  Fight job harassment  B.C. Fed  The Women's Rights Committee of the  B.C. Federation of Labour deserves  a round of applause from women's  organizations for bringing forward  and getting passed three landmark  resolutions for women in the labour  movement: opposition to sexual  harassment on the job, opposition  to discrimination against gays and  support of a woman's right to choose  an abortion.  The committee, in its proposed policy statement on sexual harassment,  says:  Harassment at its extreme occurs  when a male in a position to control,  influence,  or affect a woman 's  job or career uses his authority  and power to coerce the woman into  sexual relations or to punish her  refusal.    It includes:  - Verbal harassment or abuse  - Subtle pressure for sexual  WHEREAS the B.C. Federation of Labour  Women's Rights Committee is preparing  a questionnaire on sexual harassment  on the job; now  THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED that the  B.C. Federation of Labour institute  a campaign to educate its affiliates  on the definition, nature and scope  of sexual harassment; and  BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the B.C.  Federation of Labour fully and actively support a union which is fighting against sexual harassment.  This policy means that the B.C. Federation of Labour will support any  grievance or arbitration concerning  sexual harassment.  Sexual orientation  WHEREAS lesbians and gay men form a  significant minority of the labour  force; and  activity  - Sexist remarks about a woman 's  clothing,  body or sexual activities  - Touching, patting or pinching  - Leering at a woman 's body  - Brushing against a woman 's body  - Demanding sexual favours accompanied by implied or overt threats  concerning one 's job  - Physical assault  Women have been silent on this subject. . . The source of sexual harassment is power:  the job is the carrot.  Either you bite or you starve.    Many  women,  who are all too familiar with  the threat of unemployment,  have no  choice but to succumb to the blackmail. . .  Whereas in rape cases,   the man overpowers a woman with a weapon or  threat of loss of life,  in sexual  harassment he overtly or implicitly  threatens her with loss of economic  livelihood.    A woman cannot freely  choose to say yes or no to such  sexual advances.     The fear of reprisal looms formidably for many  women when deciding how to react  to sexual harassment.     To refuse  sexual demands may mean jeopardizing her future or her career.    In  the case of working women,  the decision to simply quit a job is a  luxury she cannot afford.  Job harassment  Here are the resolutions:  WHEREAS sexual harassment on the job  has until recently been an ignored  problem of women workers; and  WHEREAS sexual harassment involves  coercion, threats and intimidation;  and  WHEREAS there is no protection in  either provincial or federal legislation to protect lesbians or gay  men; now  THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED that the  B.C. Federation of Labour actively  encourage its member organizations  to include a prohibition clause a-  gainst discrimination on the basis  of sexual orientation in their constitutions and collective agreements;  and  BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the B.C.  Federation of Labour actively campaign for the inclusion of "sexual  orientation" in provincial and federal human and civil rights legislation; and  BE IT FINALLY RESOLVED that the B.C.  Federation of Labour acquire and disseminate information on the oppression of lesbians and gay men.  Abortion  And the third resolution:  WHEREAS there has been a concerted  attempt by the anti-abortionists to  undo the present gains women have  made regarding abortion; and  WHEREAS the right to safe, legal  abortion directly concerns working  women as rich women have always had  access to it; now  THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED that the  B.C. Federation of Labour support  the principle that it is a woman's  right to choose whether or not she  wants an abortion; and  BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the B.C.  Federation of Labour endorse and actively support the fight to ensure  that women retain the right to choose^ KINESIS, December   '78 - January   '79  19  INTERNATIONAL  Lacking feminist analysis  Violence in Society was the theme of  the International Congress of Social  Democratic Women held October 31-Nov-  ember 1 at Vancouver's Hyatt Regency  Hotal, as a precursor to the 14th  Socialist International.  About 100 delegates from nations as  diverse as Japan, the Netherlands,  Spain, Guyana, Jamaica, Italy, Tanzania, and Belgium attended.  Canada's delegates were Muriel Smith,  former president of the Manitoba NDP,  Marianne Rose Holder, president of the  Ontario NDP Women's Committee, and our  NDP MLA for the soon-to-disappear  Burrard riding, Rosemary Brown. About  fifty other Vancouver women attended  as observers.  Many aspects of violence were examined.  Delegates from Guyana, Belgium  and Jamaica focussed on economic violence, noting the physical and mental  abuse of women and children only as  related factors.  Enrica Lucarelli of Italy noted:  "The structure of the labour market,  which from the very first manifestation of the   (international economic)  crisis had expelled women,  has become  more rigid lately on the question of  working women.    Many working women  have returned home and many of them  have,  for economic reasons,  had to  give up a form of independence which  certainly was not liberation,  but at  least represented a promise of new  awareness.    The nuclear family, which  was seriously affected in the industrialized western world,  has again  become in fact +he only possible issue for women,  even if that involves  frustration for everybody.-"  It remained for Canadian delegate  Rosemary Brown to define more dramatically the effects of such lack of  options on women, and to underline  the importance of feminist input into  an understanding of violence as it  affects women.  Brown's speech on  "Cultural Aspects of Violence" delineated the habits, beliefs and artifacts which permit all forms of violence against women - wife battering,  rape, incest, pornography - to exist  in our own society. Among the "artifacts" she listed "hospitals,  mental  institutions and prisons...social  institutions which intervene to interpret women 's behaviour in personal  terms...not saying to them you are  the victims of cultural violence but  saying to them you are sick,  you are  mad,  or you are bad... "  In her conclusion, Brown told the  delegates: "I recognize that your  goals must be long term,  that your  vision must encompass that future  of a new society and a new world  ...but I appeal to you to look also  at the short term need which women  have now.    The transition houses  of shelter,  the daycare centres,  the rape relief services - the  amended abortion laws,  prostitution laws,  the laws dealing with  assault and pornography - these  changes may be bandaids at best,  but they are bandaids we need now  - bandaids to at least stop the  bleeding until the cure can take  effect. "%  BCFW is alive and well  by SUE MOORE  The 5th Annual Convention of the  B.C. Federation of Women has come  and gone.  BCFW is alive and well after experiencing a year of inner turmoil and  self-criticism and, I think, is much  stronger for the open way the criticisms were made and dealt with at  the convention.  This was the third convention I have  attended, having been a member group  delegate at the 3rd Convention in  Vernon, and a standing committee  delegate at the 4th and 5th Conventions.  I was also a member of the  convention planning committee for  the last two conventions.  I feel that this was the most positive convention I have been to. The  entire event from the organizational  standpoint was very smooth, thanks  to the efforts of the convention  planning committee (comprised mainly  of women from the North Shore Women's  Centre and the 1978 standing committee) .  Many women from the North Shore Women's Centre worked on shuttle services to the bus depots, childcare,  registration, etc. There were of  course some problems.  Registration  was slow due to the system used.  Childcare arrangements fell through  at the last minute and there were  problems in arranging adequate childcare. The sound system had its  faults but the food was good, the  accommodation okay. All the other  pieces of the jigsaw fell into place.  When you work on a convention planning committee you are always sure  that pieces of the jigsaw will be  missing - it is a miracle when everything comes together and stays that  way.  The convention itself had a very  easy-going, sisterly attitude. The  rules of order were stated at the  beginning of convention but were  laid to one side at the will of  convention.  Non-participants were  allowed to speak, emergency resolutions brought to the floor that  were not strictly emergency resolutions, and delegates and observers  were able to check out the correct  procedures with the chair before  speaking so that they could participate fully.  The differences in political and  personal positions of the delegates  were out in the open, being listened  to and dealt with to the satisfaction  of all - I have never been to such a  large meeting without feelings of  antagonism and competition openly  pervading at least part of the discussion.  There was, of course, much heated  discussion over subjects, new policy  and action for the future. My observation was that there were no power  groups attempting to manipulate or  control the discussions (although I  wasn't present at all of them at all  times).  There were also no attempts  made by the various chairwomen to  control debate except as outlined in  the rules of order.  It was, in fact,  a very unifying conference.  One of the highlights for me was the  election of the new standing committee  for 1979. A full standing committee  was elected without any political or  emotional pressure being put upon the  women running. When a position was  being contested by two women, these  women conferred with each other to  decide who could perform the tasks  of the position most easily and  effectively.'  Regional representatives were elected  from 10 of the 12 regions (one of  the regions not filled was not represented and the other will be holding  a regional conference in January), and  the Vancouver region not only elected  two co-representatives, they organized  a support committee of an additional  eight women.'  It is necessary  The convention had a good balance of  BCFW business, information-sharing  workshops and periods of time for  socialization including a dance that  was open to all women.  My perspective of the crux of convention was the outcome of the BCFW workshop discussion "Why have BCFW? Is it  working? Is it necessary? How can we  improve it?" The conclusions were  YES, BCFW is_ a very necessary part of  the women's movement in B.C., if only  as a communications network and to  hold an annual convention for the  women of BCFW to get together to share  ideas, information and concerns.% 20  Put your money  where your politics are  "The ultimate goal? Self-sufficiency  for this community of feminists and  political activists, poor people and  social organizers, alternate schools  and day care centres,  housing developments run by the residents,  food  stores run by the shoppers, and industries run by the workers. "  - "Do You Know What Your Money  Is Doing Tonight?", Makara,  Vol. 2, #4.  newsletter  CCEC is a Vancouver credit union that  feminists should know of and support.  CCEC is located at 205 E. 6th Avenue  (at Main), and is open three half-days  a week. There are few credit unions  like it, and it is so far the only  one of its kind in B.C.  CCEC was created four years ago by a  group called the Lower Mainland Congress for Economic Change. This society of community and co-operative  groups saw that existing financial  institutions were not serving the  interests of poor people, community  organizations or social action groups.  So, over the next two years, until  CCEC opened its doors in February  1976, society members met with and  organized community groups and individuals around their common financial  needs.*  This was the beginning of a credit  union which is deeply aware of social  issues, and. of the connection of capital to producing social change. CCEC  asserts that the capital which is in  our hands should be pooled within the  community, so that it is available to  benefit community members.  CCEC believes in collective solutions to  individual problems.  Most of us have still to extend our  political awareness to the way we -  handle money - we bank our money,  whereupon the banks invest it, in  places like Chile and South Africa,  or in multi-national corporations.  Our capital can and should be withheld from bank owners who use it to  profiteer and exploit.  In its first two years of existence,  while establishing itself in terms  of assets, CCEC provided only savings  .accounts and small loans.  (Assets  of $250,000 are required before  chequing can be considered.)  CCEC  Chequing introduced  CCEC serves nearly 500 individuals  and more than 80 groups, and its  assets exceed $400,000.  The long-  awaited introduction of chequing in  June of this year brought a big  boost in assets, as expected.  CCEC does not pay interest on deposits. The founders of the credit  union reasoned that low- and middle-  income people usually cannot maintain  a large enough balance to see a significant return in interest on their  savings.  CCEC feels that by using  'interest' money to provide loans to  community groups (such as food co-ops)  members will benefit instead through  the lower cost of living the services  of these groups provide.  CCEC stores its assets at B.C. Central  Credit Union, as do all B.C. credit  unions, and a minimum of 15% of its  assets must be on deposit there at  any one time. Money on deposit at  B.C. Central earns interest which  helps to pay operating expenses at  CCEC, but money simply sitting in  B.C. Central is not in the community  working for its members.  CCEC would like to get more money into the community in the form of loans.  (Currently, about 44% of its assets  are in loans.) Its policy is not to  push loans, but to reach people who  need loans, especially among those  (like women and low-income people)  who traditionally have had much difficulty obtaining loans because banks  see them as "bad risks".  CCEC was  organized to better meet the needs  of just such people.  Currently, a member can obtain up to"  $900 oh her signature alone. Amounts  above that require collateral.  In  the case of housing co-op shares, up  to $2,500 can be obtained on signature. Loans interviews are conducted  every Monday night at CCEC by members  of the Credit Committee.  CCEC will consider a loan application  which falls in one of the following  nine categories:  *Research, culture, education and  communication  *Debt consolidation, finance and  legal services  transportation and recreation  *Social organizing and women  *Industry  *Shelter and land  *Child care  *Food *Health care -  One of CCEC's major goals has been  to provide major loans to community  groups who need them. This unfortunately has proven difficult.  CCEC  is now large enough to handle major  loans, but groups are not asking  for loans in the numbers hoped for.  Many groups fail to keep proper financial records. This can not only  prevent the group from seeing clearly  where its needs and opportunities for  growth lie, but it can also prevent  CCEC from granting  loans under  credit union regulations.  CCEC sees as one of its purposes  demystifying the ways in which money  works.  CCEC's quarterly newsletter  is informative and often very edu-  «cational in terms of financial issues.  In addition, the credit union holds  new members' meeting every two months  where members can learn about CCEC's  history and principles, and ask  questions about policies and services.  CCEC workers see the need for more  education and for financial counselling, but there has not yet been time  or energy to properly address these  needs. There are also groups within  the community that CCEC has not yet,  reached, and could be serving: older  people and people oh limited fixed  incomes in particular.  Spreading the word  Alternatives do exist  Growth of CCEC to date has been  largely due to word-of-mouth publicity. Outreach is lacking because of  lack of people and time to do it.  CCEC was begun by means of dozens  of meetings with community groups to  establish the need for the credit  union, and this tactic will again be  necessary to reach groups who are  not yet using CCEC.  CCEC hopes to take these problems  into consideration in planning future activities.  Two committees,  the Long Range Planning Committee  and the Mortgage Committee, are doing valuable research into the  directions CCEC could take. KINESIS,  December   '78 - January   '79  CCEC sees its priority as meeting  the needs of the community it serves.  Decisions are based on how they will  benefit most members, and their overall contribution to social change.  CCEC stresses member participation  and access to decision-making, and  in turn responds to members' needs  in ways that ordinary financial institutions largely ignore.  Because of this, CCEC is structured  differently than most other banks or  credit unions.  Service is provided  by a largely volunteer staff, and  the credit union hopes to maintain  a balance of paid and unpaid staff.  The three paid (part-time) positions  are those of treasurer (Katherine  Ruffen), loans officer (Ross Gentleman) , and accounting officer (David  Schendlinger).  Other workers include  tellers, office assistants, and the  elected members of the Board of  Directors and the Credit Committee.  CCEC needs more volunteers to work  as tellers, or in the office, to  produce the newsletter, or to serve  on committees or the Board.  Elections to the Board of Directors  and the Credit Committee are held  semi-annually (again, a concern for  accountability) at general meetings.  CCEC plans to provide soon orientation and training to newly elected,  members of the Board and Credit Committee so they can be integrated  quickly into credit union work.  The next general meeting is in early  December.  Call CCEC (876-0910) for  details.  Put your money where your politics  are, and become an active member of  CCEC.   0  MAKARA, vol 2, #4, has an excellent  item on CCEC, written by workers  at that credit union: Do You Know  What Your Money Is Doing Tonight?  XCEC^  Credit Union  Chequing...Savings...Loans  Retirement Savings Plans  YOU NEVER HAVE TO BE USED  EY THE BANKS AGAIN.  Address  205 East 6th avenue  Vancouver, B.C.  V5T1J7  Hours  Mon. & Wed., 11 am to 4 pm  Fridays, 2 to 7 pm.  Phone  876-09*0  LNS Women 's Graphics  Police will arrest wife beaters  When a woman in New York calls the  police and says that her husband  has threatened or assaulted her,  she will no longer be dismissed as  the petty victim of domestic disturbance .  The New York City Policy Department  has agreed, in an out-of-court settlement, to arrest wife beaters.  This agreement was reached last  July as a result of a lawsuit initiated in December 1976 by 12 battered wives.  The lawsuit was the  first challenge anywhere in the  United States to the legal system's  treatment of battered wives.  It  accused police and Family Court  of unlawfully denying them aid after  they had reported the beatings.  The police department has agreed to  send one or more police officers to  respond to every request by a wife.  An arrest will be made if there is  reason to believe that a crime has  been committed.  The police can no longer refuse to  arrest just because the people involved are married.  They cannot  refuse to arrest just because the  women has not been to Family Court.  The police department has also agreed  to remain at the scene of the crime  to protect the wife or to assist her  in obtaining medical aid.  Police  will also try to locate the husband  if he has left the scene.  While this suit has resulted in the  agreement with the New York Police,  the same suit has been dismissed  against New York's Family Court.  New York's Appellate Division of the  State Supreme Court ruled 4 to 1  that the 12 battered women did not  have a case against the administrative arm of Family Court.  That verdict overturned a ruling by the  State Supreme Court where it was  held that the women were entitled to  a trial to attempt to prove they had  been denied proper access to judges.  Briggs defeated  In California, the BRIGGS~INITIATIVE  was defeated in the November 6 ballot.  The initiative would have provided  legal grounds for the dismissal of  any teachers supportive of gay rights.  In Seattle, Proposition 13 also went  down to a timely defeat. This proposition would have eliminated the  Seattle ordinance which forbids  discrimination against lesbians and  gay men in housing and employment.  Both propositions were defeated  by votes of 2 to 1.  ERA wins three more years  Amid the cheers and applause of  hundreds of ERA supporters, the U.S.  Senate passed a resolution October  6 extending the deadline for ratification of the Equal Rights Amendment until June 30, 1982.  The victory was attained by a final  vote of 60-36, and the measure  passed without any of the amendments which had been used in an attempt to kill it by forcing a House  -Senate Conference Committee.  The extension bid had already passed  in the U.S. House of Representatives  by a vote of 233-189 on August 15.  Pro-ERA groups  are jubilant. reviewed  by JOANNE BOISSEY  In attempting to write this review,  I was constantly looking for a unified  impression to assist me.  The odds  were against it.  First of all, the  entries were numerous and diverse.  Secondly, the media ranged from painting to sculpture to photography to  fabric art to graphics to collage and  more.  The big question  Is there a women's art?  Beyond these considerations is the  big question: is there a women's art  and if so, what is it.  If the answer  to the first part of the question is  yes, which I think it is, then where  do we go from there?  A definition of women's art would certainly provide a framework in which  to do the review.  Lucy Lippard in  From the Centre, a collection of essays  on women's—art, puts forward a reply  to the question:  Here in any case for your consideration are some of these elements that  recur: a uniform density,  or overall  texture,  often sensuously tactile and  repetitive or detailed to the point of  obsession;  the preponderance of circular forms,  central focus,   inner  space  (sometimes contradicting the  first aspect); a ubiquitous  linear  "bag" or parabolic form that turns  in on itself,   layers,  or strata,  or  veils; an indefinable  looseness or  flexibility of handling; windows;  autobiographical content; animals;  flowers; a certain kind of fragmentation; a new fondness for the pinks  and pastels and ephemeral cloud  colours that used to be tabu unless  a woman wanted to be accused of mak-  ing "feminine" art.  I would also like to add the last few  sentences from that same paragraph:  Theories and refutations and new  themes and new refutations will continue to surround this issue,  but it  is a rewarding debate that can only  help women artists and critics to  develop a sense of our individual  esthetic directions and perhaps in  the process to define more clearly  the web formed by the multiple threads  of these individual developments.  Every piece in the show is representative of one or more of the items on  the above shopping list.  Pieces as  different as Josie Cook's "She  closes both the doors of the Palace  of Anat" and Elizabeth Shefrin's  "Changing the poopy baby" can coexist within that tentative definition.  There is a fundamental reason for  this, which is that all these artists  experience the world as female artists.  However, within that, I feel  each artist or group of artists has  a specific relationship with the  world.  The style and content of  their work reflects this.  Because  of my lack of history and experience  in the Vancouver women's art milieu,  I don't have the ability to adequately take this point up.  However, much  of what I have to say revolves around  it.  For the most part, not only is every  piece in the show representative of  one or more elements on the shopping  list, but many are representative of  many of these elements.  The works of  Josie Cook, Karen Chapnick, Maria  Fitzgerald, Judith Atkinson, Rhonda  Neufeld, Evelyn Armstrong, Laura Cos-  graves, Holly Devor and Marrianne  Pengelly fall very much into this  category.  The colours in these works are pale  yellows and pinks, luminous light  blue and pink, ochre, deep blue and  fresh yellow.  Some of the works have  real texture and others present a  picture of texture.  Most are abstract or patterned or preoccupied  with form.  Although each one is distinct, these works complement one  another and set the tone for the show.  Works which fit into this overall impact but which are a departure present  us with a question.  Why are these  works different and what does that  say about the specific relationship  "Chile"  6  3/4" by  7"  by Persimmon Blackbridge  each artist and her work has to the  world.  Why does Elizabeth Fischer show small  portraits of people with so much  pathos? Why are the colours so strong?  Why does Penny Arrand choose women  couples to photograph and why the ones  we see? Why are Claire Kujundzic's  artists so dour looking?  In part,  the answers are generally explainable,  in part the considerations are stylistic, but the larger question of choice  still remains.  More questions  Fabric art and "crafts" underline  this question.  They are related to  a traditional past-time of women.  "Changing the Poopy Baby" and "Woman  on the Go" are a revenge on tradition  because of their consciousness.  It's  great, but I wonder why these women  have chosen it.  Is it because it is  inexpensive?  Is it because they can  work at home?  Is it because they are  using developed (I almost said natural)  talents? What kind of a challenge  does it present to them.  Why buys it?  There are many artists I haven't mentioned.  It was impossible given my  time limitations.  Hopefully, there  will be more smaller shows.  Although  that is my preference, this annual  show is an absolute necessity not only  to give people a taste of what is happening, but to draw together the different women artists and to draw together the community.  The- input from  broader areas than the Women's Interart Society can only enhance the work  the women are doing.  Last but not least, I would like to  mention my personal impression of the  show.  I found it neutral and low-key.  With the exception of a few pieces -  Persimmon's runners, joyous figures;  Catherine Shapiro's "We All Come from  the Same Place", a bit of a shock; and  a few others - I felt the show was more  reflective than effective.  The Women 's Inter Art Co-op has studios at 165 West Pender St,   Vancouver. KINESIS, December   '78 - January   '79  23  ROOM OF ONE'S OWN  ROOM explores  Quebec   feminism  ROOM OF ONE'S OWN, a Vancouver-based  feminist journal of literature and  criticism, has just brought out a  double issue devoted to Quebec feminist literature: Vol 4, #1/2.  'In this interview, we spoke with  two members of the Growing Room Collective, which publishes Room of One's  Own.  Why did you choose to bring out this  issue?    What,  in your opinion,   does  it offer English-speaking readers?  ELEANOR: There's a tremendous sense  of excitement among Quebec feminist  writers; our issue conveys that sense  for the first time in English. None  of the material has ever been translated before.  In 1976, just when the  establishment media were busy proclaiming the death of the women's movement,  an explicitly feminist novel, L'Eugue-  lionne by Louky Bersianik, surfaced  in Quebec where it quickly became the  literary event of the year - 27 weeks  on the bost-scllcr list.  That same year, Nicole Brossard, France Theoret, Michele Jean and others  formed a collective to publish a feminist monthly newspaper, Les Tetes de  Pioches - literally Pickaxe Heads, or  idiomatically, determined people.  Then in November '76, of course, the  Parti Quebecois came to power. A lot  of women's political involvement that  had been siphoned off by the nationalist movement WcS now free to turn to  feminism.  And it did.  GAYLA: Also part of the literary femr-  inist energy in Quebec seems to come  from disillusionment with the very  PQ victory women worked so hard to effect.  There's Levesque and his cohorts  doling a tap-dance around such basic  feminist issues as abortion.  As Eleanor points out in the introduction  to this issue, and I think with truth,  there's an analogy between the resurgence of Quebec feminism in the wake  of the PQ victory and the rise of the  women's movement in the rest of North  America in the late sixties, when women' were fed up with the sexism of  the New Left.  The anger feels the  same.  (^x^x^x^x^x^x^x^x^x^j  ELEANOR: One of the things we try to  do in this issue is provide a context,  a literary and political context, for  the material we present. For example,  we relate the national question to feminist issues, and we point to a concern  central to both nationalists and feminists: language.  When feminists turned  to language, they found every word weighted with a sexual bias.  French is  a gender-based language, so language  itself had to be re-invented. The traditional use of language to convey lin-  eality, chronology, objectivity, order  - that's regarded as the very stuff of  patriarchy.  The writers in this issue believe that  those old moulds cannot contain the  new forms. They deliberately blur the  distinctions between essay and fiction,  for example. They set out to distort  grammar. Puns,.homonyms, and all kinds  of word play abound.  Both Brossard  and Bosco have played with the words  la mer, l'.amere, mere : sea, bitter,  mother. Words are sought, chosen, handled like the ingredients of poetry.  GAYLA: I remember when we wrote the  very first brochure for ROOM we said  something like "...culture is male...  if we are to reflect women's experience  we need new structures, a new language,  new myths." Words to that effect. But  most of the material which we have received and published has been based  broadly in a realist tradition. I  think the material in this Quebec issue  actually does work at developing those  new structures, new language. They do  have as an influence French writers  like Monique Wittig behind them, and  I guess that helps.  ELEANOR: Along with the painstaking  re-moulding of language, the writers  in this issue share an intense preoccupation with authoritarian structures  of church and family. They are concern- v  ed also with the process of reclamation of women's bodies. Our bodies; the  patriarchy, the language - these are  the three themes which link the works  of Quebec feminists.  GAYLA: Some of the women are writers  known inside Quebec, but whose work I've  not had a chance to read until now. Gen-  vieve Amyot is one example. Others, like  Nicole Brossard and Michele Lalonde,  are already well-known in translation.  How are you going to pay for this  issue? Where do you go for funding?  GAYLA: Canada Council gives us partial funding. With inflation and cutbacks we only have enough to last  for two out of four issues in 1979.  So we're in the process of applying  to every funding foundation in sight  trying to scrounge up the. rest. Not  an unusual scenario for a women's  movement group.  c^x^x^x^jc^x^x^x^x^x^j  l'/hat lies ahead, besides a push for  adequate funding?  GAYLA: We have two general issues  coming up, followed by Dorothy Live-  say's 70th. birthday issue. We're  interested in how her work reflects  women's themes and how she relates  to the community of women writers.  Another idea we have is to do an  issue on Canadian feminist literary  criticism.  How can readers contact you?  ELEANOR: The four of us who form  the Growing Room Collective can be  reached at ROOM OF ONE'S OWN, P.O.  BOX 46160, STATION G., VANCOUVER.  SUBS, are $7.50 a year. Please,  write us and subscribe. It would  give us a collective high.0  Room  of One's O\0n  A Feminist Journal of Literature and Criticism Advisory council %M  targets income     ^hM    J  security ■ ,4Jgfh  *  by DOROTHY HOLME  Members of the CACSW met in Saskatoon  on October 23-25.  Discussion covered  income security for older women, the  female offender, sex stereotyping in  advertising, and Bill C-51 - amendments to the Criminal Code.  _,<;, wep  What happens to older women?  This continues to be a matter of grave  concern.  The Council recommended that  the federal government immediately increase the Guaranteed Income Supplement (GIS) which is paid to people who  have no income other than Old Age  Security (OAS).  Statistics show that  64% of all women aged 65 and over get  all or part of the supplement compared  to 51% of the men.  Wendy Williams, Council member from  Newfoundland, commented that many  older women, having spent their lives  as homemakers, and having no access to  other pension plans, are attempting to  survive on old age security payments  totalling a maximum of $2,972.  The  recent $20 monthly increase in the GIS  does not bring this income above the  poverty level.  Female Offender position reviewed  Since publication of the Report of the  National Advisory Committee on the  Female Offender in the spring of 1977,  Council members have been concerned  with Recommendation #7 - that the  Kingston Penitentiary for Women be  closed.  Given the reality of a delay in upgrading provincial facilities as well  as inflexible community attitudes towards women and inmates generally,  CACSW had no alternative but to recommend that K.P.W. remain open.  But  we also urged that improvements be  made in psychiatric and counselling  services, vocational training and  service in the two official languages.  Council President Yvette Rousseau  and Vice-President Win Loewen had  visited Kingston to assess the facilities and talk to the women.  The  inmates questioned expressed a desire to stay at K.P.W. rather than  in provincial facilities.  I had submitted articles on the Proudfoot Inquiry as well as excerpts from  the Inmates Brief to the Commission,  and asked that these be passed on to  the National Planning Committee on the  Female Offender.  Focus on sex stereotyping  in advertising  ■A  spirited discussion on sex stereotyping in the media, particularly  television advertising, took place.  It was decided to conserve our resources by zeroing in on this one  area.  Council members felt that  the public, government and the communications industry would assume  that these problems are not exclusive to television but applicable to  other media as well.  Guidelines for non-sexist advertising  will be developed soon.  Several  Council members are willing to offer  their expertise to advertisers who  still don't know how to portray women  with the same dignity and diversity  now afforded to men.  A brief, using  the available research, will be presented to the Canadian Radio & Television Commission (CRTC) by November  6th.  A fundamental change in an historic  legal concept was supported by members of CACSW.  An amendment to the  Criminal Code to the effect that one  spouse may be forced to testify against  the other where the victim of the crime  is under the age of 14 received unanimous support.  Maria Masson, member from Quebec City,  stated that a choice had to be made  between protecting the marital relationship (as in the past) and the  protection of children. The time has  come when spouses must accept individual responsibilities as parents..  Several other changes were endorsed:  an expanded definition of obscenity;  widening of the offense of procuring  the sexual misconduct or defilement  of children to include the protection  of both male and female children  equally; raising the minimum age  from 14 to 16 years of age in setting  out penalties; broadening the protection for children under 16 years of  age.  The Council did not comment on the  proposed changes regarding soliciting.  We feel that more study is necessary  of all the implications of prostitution.  I will urge the Executive to  make this a priority area for 1979,  and would welcome any available research or input on the subject.  New members welcomed  CACSW welcomed six new members, among  I them Doris Anderson, former Editor  I of Chatelaine, and Rhoda Witherly of  Prince Rupert, a freelance broadcaster  who has been active in local women's  groups.  Norrie Preston of Victoria  was re-appointed for a second term -  so British Columbia now has three members.  We were also pleased to welcome Sue  Findlay of Ottawa as Vice-President.  She is filling the vacancy created by  the mid-August resignation of Monica  Townsend, who has since joined the  Economic Council of Canada.  Sue has a long history of association  with the women's movement and has become well-known to women across Canada  as Director of Women's Programs, Secretary of State.  Her close contact  with women's groups will remain a  major part of her new role with the  Council.  New research documented  The following projects are in the final stages of review, editing, translation and printing:  Women in the Federal Public Service, 1977; Problems of  Immigrant Women in the Canadian Labour  Force; Occupational Health Hazards,  Part II; The Second Time Around - The  Re-Entry of Women Into The Workforce.  Future topics for research will take  into account the regional priorities  that are brought to CACSW by its members throughout Canada.  Meetings with women's groups  CACSW members met with Saskatoon women's groups on several occasions. We  were most impressed with their enthusiasm, awareness of women's issues and  knowledge of current legislation.  This was the highlight of our visit  and gave us new ammunition to fight  the claims that the women's movement  is "dead".  If the women of Saskatoon  are any indication, it is "alive and  kicking".  The Advisory Council on the Status  of Women can be reached at Box 1541  Station B,  Ottawa,   Ontario..£ KINESIS,  December   '78 - January   '79- 25  HUMAN RIGHTS  How small can you get?  Janice Foster filed a complaint under  the Human Rights Code in March 1978,  alleging that B.C. Forest Products  Ltd. had discriminated against her on  the basis of sex and without reasonable cause.  Ms. Foster had previously worked in  a labouring job at Tahsis Co. Ltd.,  Sawmill Division, and was able to  perform all the job duties satisfactorily, including green chain work.  When she applied to B.C. Forest Products Ltd. to do the same kind of  work, however, she was refused employment because of her height and  weight.  Ms. Foster weighs 115 lbs.  and is 5' tall.  Even though she had proven she could  do the job and had experience, B.C.  Forest Products refused to hire her,  while men who had no mill experience  at all were being hired.  Height and weight requirements have  a serious impact on women.  Women  as a group weigh less and are shorter  than men.  If a woman can do the job,  is it fair to deny her employment  because of her height and weight?  In the U.S. height and weight restrictions have been ruled discriminatory  on the basis of race and sex, unless  the employer could demonstrate that  a particular height and weight really  are necessary in order to perform the  job.  In Ontario a complaint has been  referred to a B^ard of Inquiry challenging height and weight requirements  set by the police.  Williams inert as usual  B.C. Forest Projects refused to settle this case and it was referred to  the Minister of Labour, Allan Williams,  in July this year.  Since then nothing  has been heard. Ms. Foster is still  waiting to know whether the Minister  of Labour will allow her case to go to  a Board of Inquiry.  This case affects not only Janice  Foster but other women and minorities.  It is important that it be heard.  If  the Human Rights Code is to mean anything, it is important that the Minister refer cases, such as this one,- to  Boards of Inquiry.  Otherwise we  really do not have any rights under  the Human Rights Code at all.  PLEASE WRITE to the Minister of Labour  and insist that he appoint a Board of  Inquiry to hear this case right away.  The address is: Hon. Allan Williams,  Minister of Labour, Parliament Buildings, Victoria B.C. V8V 1X4.  Pipeline company to smarten up  The company responsible for the  Yukon portion of the Alaska Highway  gas pipeline will be required to give,  equal access for women and natives  to all pipeline-related jobs and  provide the necessary facilities to  accommodate them.  Martha "Tabor/LNS  Fight  for your rights  The Canadian Human Rights Commission  has been created to uphold the Canadian Human Rights Act.   To make a  complaint,  contact them in Ottawa  (613)  995 1151.   Collect calls are  accepted.  The Canadian Human Rights Act applies  to federal government departments  and agencies, crown corporations,  and to business and industry under  federal jurisdiction such as banks,  airline and railway companies.  The act applies to their employment  policies and their dealings with the  public, and protects you against nine  different kinds of discrimination  based on:  - race  - national or ethnic origin  - colour  - religion  - age  - sex  - marital status  - the fact that a person was convicted for an offence for which a  pardon has been issued  - the fact that a person has a  physical handicap (where employment  is involved).  The nine kinds of discrimination are  prohibited in the following areas:  1) A person may not be denied goods  or services. Example: A woman may  not be refused credit from a bank  because of her marital status.  2) A person may not be denied the  right to own or rent business premises or a residence. Example: A  person may not be prevented from  purchasing or renting business or  personal accommodation owned or  controlled by the federal government because of her or his religious beliefs.  3) An employer may not refuse to  employ or continue to employ someone, or treat employees unequally.  Example: An airline company may not  refuse to hire someone as a flight  attendant because of her or his  race.  4) Employment application and ad-  ver t isements may not appear to  exclude certain groups or individuals because of a prohibited ground  of discrimination. Example: A bank's  job advertisement for tellers may  not state that only women will be  considered.  5) A person may not be hindered or  prevented from belonging to an  employee organization. Example:  A person may not be denied membership  in the union of a railway company because of her or his ethnic origin.  6) An employment policy or agreement  may not deprive an individual or a  group of individuals of employment  opportunities. Example: A telephone  company may not have an employment  policy  that prohibits the employment  of physically handicapped people.  7) An employer may not in the same  establishment have a difference in  wages between male and female employees who are doing work of equal  value.  Value is defined as the  skill, effort and responsibility  required in the performance of the  work and the conditions under which  the work is performed.  There should  be basic equality of opportunity and  pay for women and men. Example:  The  federal government may not pay a  category of employees  largely composed of women less than another  category of employees composed  largely of men if the work is of  the same value.  8) It is a discriminatory practice  to publish or display before the  public any notice, sign, symbol,  emblem or other representation in  which any of the prohibited grounds  of discrimination is expressed or  implied, or which encourages others  to discriminate. Example: An inter-  provincial trucking company may not  post a sign reading "No one over  35 need apply. "  9) A person or group of persons may  not use the telephone to expose a  person or group of persons to hatred  or contempt by identifying them with  any-of the nine prohibited grounds  of discrimination. Example: Prerecorded telephone hate messages are  prohibited under the new law.   Call VSW for details about complaint  forms.     736  1313 26  EVENTS  Womanvision  CO-OP RADIO'S WOMANVISION, 102.7 FM  TUESDAYS - 6:30-7:15 PM   We are a very small group of women,  putting on a weekly program at Co-op  Radio for the women's community in  Vancouver and the lower mainland.  Our interest is to bring news to,  and about, women on issues which  affect our daily lives.  We do this  by: attending women's conferences,  interviews, research.  We also tape  music live from the Full Circle  Coffeehouse.  We need feedback on our shows so  that we can plan future programs  that incorporate the concerns and  interests of a wider selection of  women.  Also, and very importantly,  we would like some more women to  actually work with us on the show  in: production, newsgathering, interviewing, remote controls, operating.  We're all (all 3 of us, that is!)  at various stages of learning.  If  you've had radio training, your  skills are needed.  If you want to  learn, come join us.  For more  information, call before or after  the show at 684-8494 or call one of  us at home: Rosemary 876-6344,  Patricia 931-3063, Patty 438-4168.  Co-op Radio offers a unique medium  to the Vancouver community by:  - community involvement  - people and community-oriented programs  - non-commercial airtime  - providing a training area  - depth-oriented analysis, rather  than superficial analysis, of news  and local issues  - coverage of new ideas and trends  not normally heard on commercial  radio  - accessibility for minority grouns  to express their views  Last year Co-op Radio received a  grant from Canada Council in the  amount of $16,050 under a "Pilot  Program of Aid to Community Radio".  If this pilot program were to be  continued, Co-op Radio might receive  a significant amount of money.  We have heard from Renee Baert,  Program Officer, that "whether or  not the program will be reactivated  will depend largely on the input of  the radio community".  That's you, me, all of us, writing  letters to Ottawa, stating how  Co-op Radio affects the cultural  life of our community.  Without  continued funding by the end of the  year, we will be forced to close.  Your help is needed.  Write to: Renee Baert, Program  Officer  The Canada Council  P.O. Box 1047, Ottawa  KIP 5V8  Membership in Co-op Radio costs $2  for a lifetime share, and annual  fees are $12 for individuals and $50  for groups.  Members receive monthly  program guides, can participate in  the Buyers' Club, are entitled to  vote at the annual general meeting,  and are encouraged to participate  in station activities and production.  Support VSW  Dear members,  Once again we are in the process of  putting together a grant proposal  for the Vancouver Status of Women.  We are asking for letters of support  for the existence and increased  funding of your organization.  It  is essential that we demonstrate  support for VSW.  We need double our present grant to  maintain an office and the present  number of staff.  After five years, the lease on our  office has run out.  Due to inflation, we now face an increase of  over four times our present rent,  or a move to another location  which will still mean an increase of  at least our present rent.  To ensure the continuation of the  Vancouver Status of Women, please  send us letters of support from you  as individuals and from the groups  to which you belong.  Please send a copy to your MLA and  another to us at VSW and we will  take them to the Provincial Secretary ourselves.  We ask your support in our fight to  keep the Vancouver Status of Women  functioning and serving the women  of British Columbia.  Thank you,  VSW staff and executive  Grant offered  THE B.C. WOMEN WRITERS EDUCATIONAL  SOCIETY announces that it is able  to make a yearly grant of up to  $1,000 to assist in the completion  of projects concerning the history  of women in B.C. in the 20th century.  Since it is the aim of the Society  to make information on women available to the public, consideration  will be given to projects which are  in the final stages of preparation.  For example, grants could cover  costs for the typing of manuscripts,  transcription of tapes or other  technical or production costs related to publication or presentation  to the public.  Application should be made to:  B.C. Women Writers Educational  Society  372 E. 5th Street  North Vancouver, B.C.  and include: 1) detailed summary of  the project; 2) schedule for completion; 3) method by which the project  will be made available to the public;  and 4) budget.  Deadline for application is March 1,  1979.  Surrey White Rock centre opens  The SURREY-WHITE ROCK WOMEN'S PLACE  opened November 6, 1978.  The Women's Place is a drop-in centre  for women of all ages to get together  to exchange information and skills.  The centre will be setting up a library for public use and a play corner  where children can enjoy themselves  while mothers read or talk with other  women at the centre.  Location of the Women's Place is  15386 Buena Vista, White Rock, in the  basement of the First United Church.  Signs will direct you to the centre. KINESIS,  December   '78 - Januc  27  LETTERS  KIN'Ç ̈SIS  X  What, not depressed by Kinesis?  KINESIS:  What would I do without my Kinesis -  it raises my awareness and depresses  me each time I receive it.  Sometimes  it even cheers me!  KINESIS:  I have decided to discontinue my subscription to Kinesis.  I no longer  find anything new and challenging in  the issues and find your pre-occupa-  tion with abortion and lesbianism unacceptable, and not what I feel are  primary interests to your potential  readers.  Surprised  I was surprised, unpleasantly surprised, by the inclusion of a communist periodical advertisement in  your last issue of Kinesis.  I can  only assume that a tight budget is  forcing you to accept advertising  revenue from almost anyone.  I can  only regret however that in this  way you may be selling out the  ideals of freedom and equality for  a few extra bucks revenue.  I am not a communist.  As I get  older the more I realize that marxism is a souless, ultra-materialistic movement completely opposed to  the enlightened society of individuals that western men and women, in  the majority, would care to be equal  in.  As a matter of fact, I am a poet and  a monarchist, who recognizes a threat  to bis sensibilities in the form of  a corrmunist advertisement when he  sees it.  For the record, I am also  a democratic socialist, and certainly not against equal wages for women,  equal opportunities, etc.  Perhaps this is the turning point in  my relationship with your movement,  which I have supported in a small-  way through subscriptions over the  last few years.  I never was too sure  about the morality of unlimited abortions, and I am more and more opposed  to it now, which puts me in opposition  to the platform of the Vancouver  Status of Women.  I would like, therefore, to inform  you I will not take out a further  membership if you continue to advertise Marxist literature, etc.  I support your efforts to raise the  level of working conditions for women  but moral issues force me to weigh  the suitability of continuing my  membership.  I doubt whether you would lower yourselves to run an ad for the Social  Credit newsletter, why then do you  turn to the Canadian Marxist-Leninist  group for advertising revenue?  I see  little difference between the two,  both groups are totalitarian and  anti-creativity.  Robert Oldham,  Hamilton, Ontario  KINESIS:  It's a pleasure to receive Kinesis.  It helped me to get out of a depressing situation 3h  years ago, and I've  never looked back.  Keep up the good  work.  Women's studies  Take a course  WOMEN'S STUDIES AT VANCOUVER COMMUNITY COLLEGE offers a university  credit course: Women's Studies 216.  The position of women in society  today is explored in workshop settings .  In the LANGARA CAMPUS section,  workshops will be offered on the  Psychology of Women, and Feminist  Social Issues.  In the VANCOUVER PUBLIC LIBRARY  section, course content will focus on Women in Literature and  the History of Women at Work in  Canada from 1900 - 1960.  Pre-requisites are not required.  Time and place: LANGARA, Monday  and Wednesday evenings, 8.30 -  10.00 p.m.  VANCOUVER PUBLIC  LIBRARY, Tuesday evenings 6.-9  To pre-register, call 324 5221.  For details, call 461 1024.  WOMEN, CULTURE AND CHANGE is  a Women's Studies course offered  at Columbia College. This is an  academic credit course focussing  on,the changing roles and responsibilities of women. Time and  place: Tuesday and Thursdays,  7.30 p.m. to 9.0 p.m. at Colum-  bia College, 1619 West lQth Ave.  Media collective  The Feminist Media Collective is  compiling a catalogue of feminist  audio-visual material and equipment  readily available to women in our  area.  If you know of any such resources, please call Pat Feindel,  879-3851 or Shawn Diana Preuss, 874-  1968.  Transsexual group forming  Have you gone through or are you  going through any phase of sexual  re-assignment surgery (sex-change)?  Vancouver Status of Women is planning a support group for you.  If you are interested in meeting  others in the same position and  working out common problems call  or write:  VSW, 2029 West 4th Ave.,  Attention: Diana.  Flute looking for a good musical  home. Armstrong, silver-plated,  very good condition. $185. Call  Janet,. 731-5101 after 4pm.  KINESIS is published monthly by the  Vancouver Status of Women. Its objectives are to enhance understanding about the changing position of  women in society and to work actively towards achieving social change.  Views expressed in KINESIS are those  of the writer and DO NOT necessarily  reflect VSW policy. All unsigned  material is the responsibility of  the KINESIS editorial and production  crew.  CORRESPONDENCE: KINESIS, Vancouver  Status of Women, 2029 West 4th Ave.,  Vancouver, B.C. V6J IN3.  Membership in Vancouver Status of  Women is by donation. KINESIS is  mailed monthly to all members.  Individual subscriptions to KINESIS  are $8.00 per year. We ask members  to base their donations on this and  their own individual financial  position.  SUBMISSIONS: VSW welcomes submissions to KINESIS from the feminist  community and in particular from VSW  members. We reserve the right to  edit. Submission does not guarantee  publication. Include a SASE if you  want your work returned.  DEADLINE: The 15th of each month.  ADVERTISING: KINESIS welcomes nonsexist, non-racist advertising. Rates  available on request.  DISTRIBUTION: KINESIS needs distributors. Call 736 1313 for details.  CHARITABLE STATUS: As we now have the  status of a charitable organization  and as we are unable to pay for KINESIS  from these funds due to government regulations, we will be issuing  tax-deductible receipts for the balance of all donations over $8.00/  PLEASE REMEMBER: VSW operates on  increasingly inadequate funding.  We NEED YOUR SUPPORT, NOW MORE THAN  EVER.'  WORKERS ON THIS ISSUE: Janet Beebe,  Jean Faguy, Gayla Reid, Joey Thompson.  Vancouver Status of Women office  at 2029 West 4th Ave, will be  closed for Xmas break from 18th  December until January 3rd, '79.  For information on union organizing or tl  women's programme of the B.C. Federation <  Labour, please contact:  Director of Women's Programmes  B.C. Federation of Labour  3110 Boundary Road  Burnaby, B.C. V5M 4A2  430-1421