 4  JUNE 1999 Pamper your breasts-pg 10 CMPA $2.25  INES  News About Women That's Not In The Dailies Inside  kiN e tie  #309-877 E. Hastings St.  Vancouver, BCV6A3Y1  Tel: (604)255-5499  Fax: (604)255-7508  Email: kinesis@web.net  Kinesis welcomes volunteers to work  on all aspects of the paper. Our next  Story Meetings are on Tues June 1  and Tues Aug 3 at our office, 309-  877 E. Hastings St. Production for our  July/August 1999 issue is from June  15-22. All women welcome even if you  don't have experience.  Founded in 1974, Kinesis is published  ten times a year by the Vancouver  Status of Women. Its objectives are tc  be a non-sectarian feminist voice for  women and to work actively for social  change, specifically combatting  sexism, racism.classism, homophobia, ableism, imperialism and anti-  Jewish oppression. Views expressed  in Kinesis are those of the writer and  do not necessarily reflect VSW policy.  All unsigned material is the responsibility of the Kinesis Editorial Board.  EDITORIAL BOARD  Fatima Jaffer, Lissa Geller  Kelly Haydon (on leave)  Agnes Huang, Jenn Lo  Bernadette Phan, Laura Quilici  Amal Rana, Colleen Sheridan (on  leave)  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE  Robyn Hall, Fatima Jaffer  Gweny Wong, Diana, Nancy Pang  Bernadette Phan  Monica K. Rasi, Ruth Sauder  Marketing: Jenn Lo  Circulation: Audrey Johnson,  Chrystal Fowler  Production Coordinator: Amal Rana  Designer: Jenn Lo  FRONT COVER  Yang Huan-Yi, the only living  woman of her generation who is able  to read and write Nu Shu  [see page 14.}  Photo by Yue-Qing Yang  PRESS DATE  May 31, 1999  SUBSCRIPTIONS  Individual: $20 per year (+$1.40 GST)  or what you can afford  Institutions/Groups:  $45 per year (+$3.15 GST)  VSW Membership (includes 1 year  Kinesis subscription):  $30 per year (+$1.40 GST)  SUBMISSIONS  Women and girls are welcome to  make submissions. We reserve the  right to edit and submission does not  guarantee publication. If possible,  submissions should be typed, double  spaced and must be signed and  include an address, telephone number  and SASE. Kinesis does not accept  poetry or fiction. Editorial guidelines  are available upon request.  DEADLINES  All submissions must be received in  the month preceding publication.  Note: Jul/Aug and Dec/Jan are double  issues.  Features and reviews: 10th  News: 15th  Letters and Bulletin Board: 18th  Display advertising  (camera ready): 18th  (design required): 16th  Printing by Horizon Publications.  Kinesis is indexed in the Canadian  Women's Periodicals Index,  the Alternative Press Index, and is a  member of the Canadian Magazine  Publishers Association.  ISSN 0317-9095  Publications mail registration #6426  \  >H_  News About Women 1  t The Dailies  News  New feminist alliance forms 3  by Agnes Huang  Fairness, families and the tax system in Canada 3  by Shannon Daub and Margot Young  Features  The debate defining poverty 6  by Tara Andrea Nolet  Endometriosis: the toxin connection 7  by Lone Hummelshoj  A conversation on fat oppression 8  with Kalamity Hildebrant, Christina Savage and Sally Stevenson  Girl Boxes 9  a comic strip by Dea Webb  The making of a couch potato 12  a comic by Colleen Sheridan  Centrespread  Get to know your breasts .  by Pam Fitchtner  Arts  Elana Dykewoman's Beyond the Pale 13  reviewed by Amal Rana  Yue-Qing Yang on Nu Shu and sisterhood in China 14  an interview with Larissa Lai and Agnes Huang  Listen Upl'm review 16  by Nadine C. King  Regulars  As Kinesis Goes to Press 2  inside Kinesis 2  What's News 4  compiled by Wei Yuen Fong  Movement Matters 5  compiled by Robyn Hall  Bulletin Board 17  compiled by Amal Rana  Where does poverty begin? 6  Healthy breasts make healthy bodies 10 As Kinesis goes to press, we want to  talk about "journalistic ethics." Here at Kinesis, we do think journalistic ethics are a  good thing to possess and exercise. However, we're not so sure what they think  within Conrad Black's Southam chain of  newspapers, particularly at the Ottawa Citizen.  Last month, federal Justice Minister  Anne McLellan announced her government's response to the report from the Special Joint Committee on Child Custody and  Access. When "For the Sake of the Children" was released in December, custodial  mothers, anti-violence against women  front-line workers, feminist lawyers and  activists panned the report, just as they had  criticized the Committee's sham of a "consultation" process. Essentially, the report  represented the anti-woman, pro-"fathers'  rights" views expressed throughout the  "consultation" by Senator Anne Cools and  Liberal MP Roger Gallaway, the Committee's co-chair, and their "fathers' rights"  friends.  So back to where we started... journalistic ethics. A few days before McLellan  made her response public, the Ottawa Citizen ran an article written by Chris Cobb that  claimed McLellan would accept most of the  Committee's recommendations—including  eliminating the phrase "custody and access" and replacing it with "shared  parenting"—and immediately overhaul the  Divorce Act. No other publication (or  rather, no other Black-owned publication)  ran that story.  Well, needless to say, the claims made  in Cobb's article sent custodial mothers,  anti-violence against women front-line  workers, feminist lawyers and activists into  a tizzy. What the heck was going on? This  certainly wasn't what was expected. It  didn't make sense.  Emails and telephone calls were flying.  Anyone have a clue if this is what McLellan  is about to announce? A call to someone  in-the-know at the Justice Department resulted in this clarification: Chris Cobb's  story was not accurate.  Hmmm... journalistic ethics. Doesn't  that usually involve checking out the facts  of a story, Mr. Cobb?  Cobb didn't stop there with his sloppy  reporting. The next day, he wrote, and the  Citizen and other Southam papers (including the Vancouver Sun) published, another  article—this time on the responses of "fathers' rights" guys and "grandparents"  (namely, the "fathers' rights guys' parents)  to Cobb's version of McLellan's pending  announcement. Needless to say, they were  ecstatic about the outcome.  The Globe and Mail also ran an article  that day on the Justice Minister's now  much-awaited response. However, the article in the Globe predicted a totally different outcome: McLellan would agree to rewrite the Divorce Act but felt that more  consultation with the provinces and Canadians was needed. The process would take  three years to complete. And while she  agreed that the phrase "custody and access" needed to be replaced, she was not  endorsing (or rejecting) the Committee's  recommendation of the term, "shared  parenting," at this time.  Whoa, what's going on here?! The  Southam gang is saying one thing. The  Globe is saying another. Which right-wing  corporate newspaper conglomerate should  we believe?!  Unfortunately, we had to wait a few  more days to be enlightened, as the weekend was coming up. But on Monday morning (EST), when Justice Minister Anne  McLellan stood up in the House of Commons, she spoke in words and phrases that  didn't sound anything like what Chris  Cobb wrote. Surprise? Not really. Throughout the life of the Joint Committee, every  article—and we do mean every article—  Cobb wrote on the issue (or anywhere near  the issue) took the "fathers' rights" side as  gospel.  Well this time, it appears the Globe  story was more accurate. McLellan announced that public consultations on proposed changes to the Divorce Act will begin in 2001. The federal government plans  to overhaul the Divorce Act by 2002, which  is the same timeline in which it has also  agreed to review its child-support guidelines. [Of course, the final outcome may also  depend on the what happens in the next federal election which must take place by the  Spring of 2002.]  On that note, we want to leave you this  month as Kinesis goes to press with a quote  that someone saw on the wall of the women's washroom at the Vancouver Aboriginal Friendship Centre:  "Those in power define the truth. Is it  reality?"  Moving?  Let us  know!  Name:  New Address:  Phone:  e-mail:  . fox: .  MN€SIS;#309-877 6. Hastings St.. Tel:(604)255-5499;f:Qx:(604)255-7508  e-mail: kinesis@iueb.net  It's May in Vancouver and the clouds  and rain just won't let up. Isn't it summer  yet? Inside Kinesis this month, we felt a little cloud hovering over Kinesis when Kelly  Haydon announced she was resigning from  the Editorial Board.  It seems so long ago that Kelly first  walked into the doors oiKinesis. In reality,  it's only been two years, but a jam-packed  two years. And to think, Kelly's involvement was, in a way, by chance, but certainly  a sign of her character.  How did it all begin? It seemed so innocent back then. One day, Kelly called to  ask if we'd run a notice in Bulletin Board  about a women's painting group she was  involved with. Sure we said, just send or  bring it in to us. Simple, right? Well, not if  you Kelly. True to her "Type-A" personality—or rather, we think of it as her commitment to feminism and her strong sense  of responsibility—Kelly couldn't;'wsi drop  the notice off and walk away. Nooo, that  wouldn't be okay. Kelly had to offer to write  up Bulletin Board... this month, maybe next  month too, okay how about another  month...  Kelly has been invaluable in her contributions. She has compiled Bulletin Board  upon Bulletin Board, written article upon  article, brought in yummy treat after  yummy treat. She was also instrumental in  sniffing out the glitches in our subscription  database system last year. Most of all  though, Kelly always brightened up our  space with her good humour and love.  Whenever her health would allow it—Kelly  has ME (Myalgic Encephalomyelitis)—and  even on the days it wouldn't, Kelly found  ways to support the work of Kinesis and  the women's movement in Vancouver.  We cannot thank Kelly enough for all  her incredible work and support. Her political commitment, determination and  creativity are certainly acknowledged and  appreciated. Hey Kel, we wish you lots of  rest, painting good conversations and great  food (non-genetically altered, of course),  and much fun taking care of the cutest cat  in the world.  With every cloud, there is a silver lining . Well at Kinesis, we are fortunate to have  lots of silver linings in the form of some  incredible volunteers. As always, we would  like to thank all the women who took the  time to help out with making this issue a  reality and who helped out throughout the  month.  We want to start by welcoming the  women who contributed their thoughts,  analysis and skills as writers to Kinesis (ot  the first time this month. Thanks to Shannon Daub, Margot Young, Tara Andrea  Nolet, Lone Hummelshoj, Kalamity  Hildebrant, Sally Stevenson, Christina Savage, Pam Fichtner and Yue-Qing Yang. We  also want to thank Dea Webb for her incredible artistic talent. Take a peak at her  beautiful drawings on pages 8, 9 and 10,  and check out her hilarious comic strip,  Girlboxes, on page 9. We look forward to  the next installment, Dea.  We'd also like to welcome a new volunteer who wishes to remain anonymous.  (We know who you are.) She came in day  after day during production offering to do  whatever we wanted... um, we mean,  needed... um, we mean, needed to get the  newspaper done. Needless to say, we were  happy to discover that she is a great proofreader—we love great proofreaders—  among other things. And, we were most  happy that she was able to convert our production coordinator into a former "White  Rabbit" virgin. Thanks a lot and see you  next month.  As always, Kinesis invites women to  contribute their skills as proofreaders, writers, cartoonists, photographers, reviewers,  and more. Join us at one of our story meetings on the first Tuesday of the month or  drop in during production between the  third and fourth weeks of the month. If  those dates are too vague for you or if you  want to find out more, call Amal or Agnes  at 255-5499.  You may have noticed on page 17—  that is, if you start reading Kinesis from the  back and not the front—that we are looking for a new editor, starting October 1st.  For sure, the job is challenging and full, but  it is an incredible opportunity. Please check  the job posting out, and pass on a copy to  other women you know who might be interested and qualified for the position.  Thanks. Please remember: the deadline for  applications isAugust 15th.  It seems like every month, we can't  resist announcing something about a BBQ  or a party. Well, let this month be no exception. We have set a date for our annual (this  one's our first) summer BBQ: Saturday,  June 26th. We're hosting it to mark the start  of our summer—Kinesis is closed during  the month of July—and to thank all the  women who have been connected with and  are supportive of Kinesis.  We do have a location worked out, but  as it is someone's home, we didn't feel it  was appropriate to list her address here. So  if you are able to join us, please give us a  call—255-5499—and we'll fill you in on the  details. It will be a potlucky sort of affair.  Hope to see you on the 26th.  That's all for this, Inside Kinesis. We  hope some of you out there are enjoying  warmth and sunshine. Have a great month  and happy BBQ-ing wherever you are.  CORRECTIONS  In our last issue, we gave Annalies Van  Oers' an extra "e" for her first name  throughout the paper. Annalies wrote about  her life living with ME [page 7.] Our apologies to her.  Also in our May 1999 issue, we made  a big error in the review of Joane Cardinal-  Schubert's exhibit at the Surrey Art Gallery  written by Michelle McGeough. We  accidently placed the four panels of her  Four Directions - War Shirts piece upside-  down. Oops. We apologize to Cardinal-  Schubert and McGeough for the big gaffe.  kit^is News  Women's economic equality and the international scene:  New alliance forms  by Agnes Huang  Women's groups in Canada took another step in preparing for international  talks on women's rights and well-being.  Last month, more than 35 women's  organizations announced the formation of  a new alliance—the Canadian Feminist Alliance for International Action (FAFIA). The  specific goal of FAFIA is to assist Canadian  women's organizations in intervening strategically in international fora in order to  improve the economic conditions of Canadian women.  "The alliance is concerned about a  world-wide pattern of persistent poverty  and economic inequality among women,"  says Joan Grant-Cummings, president of  the National Action Committee on the Status of Women (NAC). "In addition to high  rates of poverty economic inequality, in the  form of lower incomes and less wealth, is a  fact of Canadian women's lives."  Shelagh Day, special advisor on human  rights to the National Association of  Women and the Law, notes that while women's poverty and economic inequality are  being reinforced and exacerbated by decisions made in Canada, Canadian women's  lives are also being affected negatively by  regional trade agreements and by decisions  made by bodies such as the World Bank and  the International Monetary Fund.  Plans for the new alliance took shape  in March at the 43rd Session of the United  Nations Commission on the Status of  Women (CSW) in New York. The CSW has  been the UN machinery for member states  to discuss and debate the situation of  women since the 4th UN World Conference  on Women in Beijing, China in September  1995. Grant-Cummings notes with interest  that the area of women and poverty was  not addressed during the last CSW session.  FAFIA's first major task will be to  evaluate Canada's progress in implementing the Platform for Action, which was  adopted by governments at the 4th World  Conference. Specifically, women's groups  will be gearing up for the special Beijing  +5 conference to be held next June in New  York.  "The Platform for Action is a modern  blueprint for achieving equality for  women," says Charlotte Thibault, spokesperson for the Comite Quebecois de suivis  de Beijing. She adds that FAFIA will have a  representative on both regional and global  organizing committees to coordinate NGO  participation at the Beijing +5 conference.  Since the 4th World Conference, women's groups have seen the urgency of taking more action in international fora, where  decisions are being made that affect women  at the local level.  "Appearing before UN treaty bodies,  bringing complaints to the UN when  Canada is not complying with its international undertakings, and participating in  the negotiation of agreements about how  governments will move women's human  rights forward are essential parts of our  work now," say Lee Lakeman of the Canadian Association of Sexual Assault Centres.  FAFIA is intended to be a loose alliance  which will allow women's organizations in  Canada opportunities to develop coordi  nated positions on regional and global economic policy issues in order to intervene  at the international level.  "The members of the alliance can participate in a number of ways, such as being  involved in research, by contributing and  disseminating information, or by endorsing FAFIA interventions," says Bhindu  Dhaliwal of the Students' Commission.  The alliance is currently in the process  of hiring a research coordinator and a communications coordinator. FAFIA will be  headquartered at the Canadian Research  Institute for the Advancement of Women  (CRIAW) office in Ottawa. CRIAW had  taken the lead in coordinating the post-4th  World Conference work of women's groups  in Canada.  For more information on FAFIA, contact  CRIAW at (613) 563-0681 or the National  Action Committee on the Status of Women at  (416)932-1718.  Agnes Huang is a regular contributor to Kinesis.  Fairness, families and the tax system in Canada:  The real discrimination is.  by Shannon Daub and Margot Young  Members of Parliament in Canada  have recently been in a flap over Canada's  tax system. Nothing new here. But this  time, the flurry isn't about high taxes. It is  about an alleged discrimination against  families with a stay-at-home parent.  The claim is that our tax system doesn't  value women's work in the home—that  two-parent families with a single earner  (usually a man) and a stay-at-home parent  (usually a woman) are unfairly treated by  the tax system compared to families where  both parents work in the paid labour force.  At issue is the fact that the latter families  have access to the childcare expense deduction and the former do not.  This charge of "tax discrimination"  against families with an at-home caregiver  is misdirected, skewing what is otherwise  an important debate over the economic  well-being of Canadian families and the  recognition and valuation of women's unpaid caregiving work.  The tax system's relative treatment of  two family types is basically fair (at least  as it applies to heterosexual couples.) When  both parents work outside the home, their  costs increase significantly. They forgo the  benefit of goods and services produced by  the stay-at-home parent. And they incur  additional expenses directly related to em  ployment, such as childcare costs. The  childcare expense deduction simply recognizes one such employment expense.  If the federal government wants to  address the issue of tax fairness for families, and if our MPs are genuinely concerned about the undervaluation of women's work in the home, a much broader focus is needed. We need to look at measures  that address women's unequal access to  paid work, the undervaluation of women's  caregiving work in all family types (not  simply the traditional two-parent model),  and poverty and financial inequality  among all Canadian families.  Since 1994, the gap in after-tax income  between the richest and poorest families  has been growing. As the federal tax system has become more regressive over the  last 10 years, the tax burden has shifted to  middle- and lower-income individuals and  families.  These days, most two-parent families  need two incomes. Moreover, the gap grew  fastest after 1995, the year in which the federal government introduced drastic reductions in social program spending. The resulting cuts to federal and provincial public programs have hit poorest families hardest, especially single-mother families.  A broader focus on these issues of fiscal and gender equality suggests a number  of obvious responses. We need a national  system of high quality, universally accessible and publicly provided daycare (an  unmet election promise of the current Liberal government.) If this were available, the  childcare expense deduction would be less  essential for many women seeking access  to paid work (although still necessary for  some women, such as farm women or others living in remote places.)  Restoration of the universal family allowance would be another important step.  It recognizes the value of caregiving work  and helps increase women's financial independence in the household.  We especially need to look at the situation faced by the poorest of families: single-mother families. In 1995, about 82 percent of single mothers with children under  seven were living in poverty. Single-mother  families account for more than double the  number of other families on provincial income assistance. Yet the current National  Child Benefit, for example, penalizes these  families by allowing provincial governments to claw back the benefit from them.  Finally, programs that support the  overall well-being of families need to be  expanded and strengthened. These include  such things as universal health care, public education, maternity and parental  leaves, and federal transfers to the provinces with national standards attached to  encourage adequate provincial social assistance programs. As well, women who work  in the home should have access to the employment benefits of workers' compensation, disability and retirement benefits,  employment insurance and retraining programs.  If women's work in the home isn't being valued (and clearly it isn't,) the answer  is not to create barriers for women who  need or choose to work at paid jobs or to  discriminate in favour of families which  take a more traditional form. The answer  is to create more support systems that recognize women's right to equality and that  value all women's work.  Shannon Daub is the Communications Coordinator with the Canadian Centre for Policy  Alternatives-BC Office (CCPA-BC). Margot  Young is an Associate Professor of Law at the  University of Victoria and a research associate  with the CCPA-BC. For more information  about the work of the CCPA, check out their  website at: www.policyalternatives.ca.  Kinesis means movement What's News  compiled by Wei Yuen Fong   "US, get out of the  Philippines"  Filipino-Canadians in Vancouver and  their supporters staged a rally at the United  States and Philippine consulates on May  26th to protest the ratification of a new military agreement between the two countries.  The protest also signals their opposition to the violent tactics the Philippine  government is using to suppress popular  opposition to the Visiting Forces Agreement  (VFA). It recently arrested three peasant  leaders, and rallies in front of the US embassy and the Philippine Senate in Manila  were violently dispersed by police.  Organizers of the Vancouver rally say  the recent US-led NATO attacks on Yugoslavia is an example of how the Americans  unilaterally use military force to further  advance their own economic and political  interests, at the expense of innocent civilians. During the Vietnam War, the US used  its bases in the Philippines as launching  pads for its military operations.  The VFA will allow the entry of weapons of mass destruction and will limit the  Philippine government's right to prosecute  American soldiers who commit crimes in  the country.  "As Filipino women in Canada, we are  strongly opposed to the VFA because it will  mean a rise in human rights violations,"  says Luningning Imperial of the Philippine  Women Centre of BC (PWC). "The proliferation of red-light districts and sex tours  to areas around the former US military  bases is testimony to the link between  militarization and prostitution. And it is  sure to heighten the sex-trafficking of  women out oi.the country as entertainers,  domestic workers and mail-order brides."  Last September, the BC Committee for  Human Rights in the Philippines, along  with the PWC, SIKLAB (a Filipino migrant  workers' group) and the Filipino-Canadian  Youth Alliance, launched the "Junk VFA"  campaign in Vancouver. The rally was a  continuation of their campaign against the  VFA and escalating US military aggression  world-wide.  Defense of  provocation upheld  Seven years. That's the sentence Bert  Stone received for stabbing his wife to  death... 47 times. Seven years. That's what  the Supreme Court of Canada (SCC) concluded Bert Stone deserved for stabbing his  wife to death... 47 times.  Stone, from Winfield, British Columbia, and his wife Donna Stone were sitting  in their truck in a parking lot in Burnaby,  British Columbia in March 1994. Stone  claimed he heard a "whooshing" sound,  awoke later from an unconscious state and  found his hunting knife in his hand and his  wife on the passenger seat lying in a pool  of blood. He stuffed her body in the truck's  tool box and drove back home. He then  flew off to Mexico. One month later, he  came back and turned himself over to the  police.  At trial, his defense argument was that  Donna Stone had provoked him. Stone  claimed his wife of 10 months (who was  also his third wife) "badgered" him relentlessly about his sexually inadequacy and  threatened to leave him. His lawyer also  tried to establish that Stone was either  "non-insanely" or "insanely" automatistic  —that is, in a robotic state and therefore not  responsible for his actions. The trial judge  - told the jury to only consider whether Stone  was in a state of insane automatism.  [The two types of automatism result in  different outcomes. The acceptance of the  defense of "insane" automatism leads to indefinite incarceration in a mental institution. The  acceptance of the defense of "non-insane" automatism leads to an acquittal.]  In the end, the jury bypassed ruling on  Stone's argument of automatism altogether.  Rather, it accepted his defense that he had  been "severely provoked" and convicted  him of the lesser charge of manslaughter.  The trial judge then sentenced him to seven  years. Stone is now out on parole.  After receiving thousands of letters  opposing the manslaughter verdict and the  sentence given Stone, BC's Attorney General Ujjal Dosanjh took the unusual step of  personally ordering an appeal to the SCC.  Dosanjh even flew to Ottawa to appear before Canada's highest court.  However, the SCC unanimously rejected the appeal, upholding Stone's sentence. The court ruled that Parliament had  fully intended for murder charges to be reduced to manslaughter in cases where  provocation robbed an individual of their  self-control. The court also ruled that judges  should have a wide leeway for sentencing  in manslaughter convictions when they are  faced with difficult, extenuating circumstances.  Women's groups, which have long  called for the end to the 109-year old  "defense of provocation" in cases of femicide, say the SCC decision continues to allow men justification for killing their female  partners or ex-partners.  "These killings are usually done by  men who are losing control over their  wives," says Andree Cote of the National  Association of Women and the Law. "They  get angry and kill, and we excuse them for  the very reason that they were angry."  In the other legal matter that arose from  Stone's case, the SCC ruled in a slim majority, 5-4, to tighten the requirements for  the acceptance of the defense of automatism. In writing for the majority, Justice  Michel Bastarache said it will now be up to  the defense to prove the accused person suffered from "non-insane" automatism. Previously, the onus was on the Crown to show  the accused was not suffering from non-insane automatism.  Federal Justice Minister Anne  McLellan issued a discussion paper on the  matter earlier this year as part of a review  of the "defense of provocation" argument.  Dosanjh says he will continue to advocate  for the elimination of the provocation  defense in cases of femicide. As well, several months ago, a member of parliament  from the Yukon introduced a private members bill into the House of Commons calling for just that [see Kinesis, April 1999.]  Memorial for missing  women  About 300 people packed themselves  into the First United Church in Vancouver's  Downtown Eastside on May 12th to remember the 23 women from the area who  remain missing since 1995.  Organized by the sister of one of the  missing women, with the support of various agencies and individuals in the community, the memorial set out to honour the  women and continue calls for a resolution  of their cases.  In April, after being criticized for caring more about property crimes than the  missing women—many of whom were sex-  trade workers and had issues with drugs  and alcohol—the City of Vancouver finally  approved a reward of $100,000 towards  solving their cases [see Kinesis May 1999.]  After the four-hour long memorial  service, a smaller group of people walked  down to Crab Park to make a dedication to  the women.  Since the memorial, two more women  from the Downtown Eastside have been  added to the list of women who are missing.  Taking on  homelessness  More than 60 housing advocates and  anti-poverty activists came together in Surrey, British Columbia in late May to create  a new provincial lobbying umbrella. The  Housing and Homeless Network of BC was  established to carry on the work started in  March at a national symposium in Toronto:  to collectively work towards ending homelessness.  The housing situation in Canada is at  a crisis level. It is estimated that more that  100,000 Canadians are homeless, in temporary shelters or substandard housing. As  well, thousands more are paying exorbitant  rents. Canada is the only country in the  western world without a national housing  strategy.  Surrey was chosen as the site for the  conference because local officials there have  closed, and obstructed the operation of, a  number of shelters over the last year, forcing people on to the streets.  At its founding meeting, the BC Net-  ■ work passed a number of resolutions, including one tb endorse the "one percent  solution" campaign, which calls on all levels of government to spend an additional  one percent of their total budgets on housing, and promotes the development of a  national housing strategy. (Federally, that  STITCHED  FABRIC BANNERS  MADE TO ORDER  Sima Elizabeth  Shefrin  [604] 734-9395  LEGAL REPRESENTATION  AND MEDIATION  SERVICES  in:  labour and employment law  human rights,  civil litigation  public interest advocacy.  MUNRO • PARFITT  LAWYERS  Melinda Munro and Clea Parfitt  401-825 granville street,  Vancouver, b.c. v6z1k9  689-7778 (ph)       689-5572 (fax)  quality legal services  woman friendly atmosphere  amounts to just an additional $2 billion over  five years.)  The Network is also calling on the federal government to add "housing" as a right  guaranteed under the Charter of Rights and  Freedoms.  In the House of Commons, the campaign is being advanced by the New Democratic Party's social policy spokesperson,  Libby Davies, who is also the member of  parliament for Vancouver East.  Davies has introduced a private members bill on homelessness (M-604) which  calls on the federal government to adopt a  national housing strategy, and to endorse  the one percent solution and the addition  to the Charter. Her bill is expected to get at  least one hour's debate in the House of  Commons, possibly in the second week of  June.  The BC Network plans to begin a postcard campaign to Ottawa urging adoption  of Davies' bill. The goal is simple: to shame  the federal Liberal government into living  up to its promises on housing and homelessness made in its "Red Book," outlining  the party's platform in the last federal election.  Anyone who wishes to endorse the campaign are asked to send letters to the federal  minister responsible for the homeless, Claudette  Bradshaw, asking her to support Davies' motion. (Fax: (613) 992-8083 or email:  bradsc@parl.gc.ca.) Supporters are also asked  to forward copies of any letters sent to the minister to Libby Davies by email:  daviel9@parl.gc.ca.. For more information  about the Housing and Homeless Network of  BC, contact the Tenants Rights Action Coalition (TRAC) in Vancouver at (604) 255-0546.  [Information from PAR-L, various press  releases and emails, Kinesis files, the Vancouver Sun, the Globe and Mail and The Province.]  SEXUAL ASSAULT  Published by the Montreal Health Press,  a women's collective, producing quality  books on health and sexuality for 30  The most up-to-date information on  sexual assault: how to handle an assault,  prevention, the social context.  1997 EDITION  New information on  ♦ Pregnancy and  STDs resulting  from an assault  ♦ Partner assault  ♦ Dating violence  ♦ Abuse of people  with disabilities  No other  resource offers  the combination  of personal and practical information,  an understanding of why sexual  assault happens and ways to work for  positive changes.  Send $5.00 (cheque or money order)  to:  Montreal Health Press Inc.  P.O. Box 1000  Station Place du Pare  Montreal (Quebec) Canada  H2W 2N1  Tel.: (514) 282-1171 Fax: (514) 282-0262  E-mail: mhpmontreal@msn.com Movement Matters  listings information  Movement Matters is designed to  be a network of news, updates and  information of special interest to the  women's movement.  Submissions to Movement Matters  should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double spaced and may be edited  for length. Deadline is the 18th of the  month preceding publication.  compiled by Robyn Hall  Program for women  with disabilities  A new career development program in  Vancouver for women with disabilities will  get underway starting in June. Coordinated  by the DisAbled Women's Network  (DAWN) Canada, the program is the first  step of an eight month pilot project intended to support women with disabilities  wishing to explore and develop their career options.  The program will teach women a specific skill called "Prior Learning Assessment," where women will evaluate their  life histories and skills to create a comprehensive personal portfolio.  The portfolio can be useful in a variety of ways: for job search, obtaining education, establishing a business, becoming  involved in community activities, and developing a career plan.  The format of the program is eight  weeks of part-time in-class instruction and  an eight week placement in a community  agency to aquire new skills and do a job  search using the portfolio. The course will  also focus on self-esteem building, future  skill-building and the development of a  personal support network.  The first session will start on June 7,  and the second session is tentatively scheduled to begin August 8.  To qualify, you must be a woman with  a disability and not eligible for Employment Insurance benefits. Women from diverse backgrounds are encouraged to apply, expecially young women, Aboriginal  women and women of colour. A training  allowance will be available for participants.  For more information contact Monika  Chappell, Portfolio Development Project, BC  Provincial Trainer, by phone: (604) 294-9958;  fax: (604) 294-6842; or email:  mchappll@winfonet.bc.ca  Women's groups and  fundraising  The Four Directions Women's Coalition in Halifax, Nova Scotia has produced  a manual on fundraising and women's organizations. "Funding Partnerships for  Women's Non-Profits, a Nova Scotia Perspective" focuses on the fundraising and  corporate giving climate in that province.  The manual is a valuable resource for any  women's organization just beginning to  develop a fundraising program.  The manual is easy to read and provides a lot of practical information, including samples of fundraising materials. It was  produced with the support of the Halifax  Interuniversity Graduate Program in Women's Studies and Status of Women Canada.  The booklet's authors found that, in  spite of shrinking government funding,  many Nova Scotia women's organizations  do not have a long-term strategy for raising private sector funds. Often fundraising  falls on an already over-burdened executive director and limited staff who may not  have any experience or training in  fundraising. Also, most women's groups  have few board members with experience  with fund development.  The authors note that women's groups  also struggle with the fact their cause is not  seen as "uplifting, warm and fuzzy," and  thus often challenges the very people from  whom they are attempting to raise funds.  On the positive side, they note that  women's groups have several qualities that  can make for successful fundraising, including committed staff and volunteers, a  good base in the community, good media  relations, ability to do a lot of work on a  shoe-string budget, and a real impact on  the quality of people's lives and the health  of the community as a whole.  The booklet provides information on  the process of approaching companies for  funds and choosing companies that are a  good fit for a particular organization. This  includes the creation of corporate partnership guidelines that make explicit the types  of arrangements women's groups will  make with corporate donors, and the kinds  of businesses groups say they will or will  not accept funding from.  To order a copy of the booklet send a cheque  for $5.00 to The Four Directions Women's  Coalition, 25 Medford Street, Dartmouth,  Nova Scotia, B2Y 3C2.  Lesbian library lives  on  Women in BC's Lower Mainland will  still have access to resources written by and  about lesbians, even though the Vancouver  Lesbian Connection (VLC) has closed its  doors [see Kinesis, April 1999.] Before vacating its space at 876 Commercial Drive,  where the VLC had been located since it  opened in 1985, the organization's collective members made arrangements with two  women's organizations—the Surrey Women's Centre and the Vancouver Status of  Women—to house its library.  Over the years, the VLC had built up a  substantive collection of lesbian and feminist novels, poetry books, anthologies, academic texts and journals through donations  from individual women, various feminist  and alternative publishers and women's  bookstores.  The VLC's collective also donated  much of its furniture, equipment and supplies to other women's groups in and  around Vancouver. Through its generosity,  the VLC's legacy will live on.  To find out about accessing the VLC library collections, contact the Surrey Women's  Centre at (604) 589-1868 or the Vancouver  Status of Women at (604) 255-5511.  Building sustainable  communities  This year's Community Development  Institute, hosted by the Social Planning and  Research Council of BC (SPARC), will be  held July 25-29 in Chilliwack, BC. In its fifth  year, the event brings together community  activists from around the province to build  capacity and local leadership for sustainable communities.  Workshops are being offered in the areas of social justice, community economic  development, environmental stewardship,  working together, strengthening our voices  and governing ourselves. There will be one-  day, two-day and half-day workshops, and  participants can attend some or all of the  institute.  The many workshops to be offered  range from "Breaking the Cycle of Family  Violence" to "Creative Community Solutions for Food and Agricultural Issues" to  "Ats'ken Ky cuztsasklh: What is Going to  Come," about the treaty negotiations of the  In-SHUK-ch N'Quat'Qua First Nation, to  "Mv McDonald's: the corporation in your  community."  Women may be interested in attending  "Stitching for Social Change" with Sima  Elizabeth Shefrin [featured in the March 1999  issue q/Kinesis] or "Women Taking the Lead  in Co-ops."  Throughout the week, there will be a  series of events including the keynote address by Henry Moore of the Asset-Based  Community Development Institute from  Savannah, Georgia, on neighbourhood  building, Sto:lo Family Night with members of the Sto:lo Nations language centre,  tours of the Chilliwack area and a closing  procession organized by the Public Dreams  Society.  There will be childcare for children 0-  5 and an Eco-Camp for children 6 and up.  Limited bursuries are available to assist  with workshop and accomodation costs.  To receive a program calender contact the  Community Development Institute, c/o  SPARC-BC, 106-2182 West 12th Avenue,  Vancouver, BC, V6K2N4; tel: (604) 718-7755;  or email cdi@sparc.bc.ca.  The EI Charter  challenge bulletin  Anyone wanting information on the  impact on women of the federal Liberal government's changes to unemployment insurance should get a copy of The Employment  Insurance (EI) Charter Challenge Bulletin.  Produced by the Community Unemployed Help Centre (CUHC) in Winnipeg,  with the assistance of the Public Interest  Law Centre of Legal Aid Manitoba (PILC),  the bulletin is aimed at informing women's  groups, unions, advocacy organizations  and individuals about a Charter challenge  being pursued by Kelly Lesiuk.  Lesuik had been working part-time as  a nurse in Brandon, Manitoba for two years  when she applied for EI. She was denied  because she had not worked enough  hours—she was 33 hours short of the required 700 hours. She also failed to qualify  for maternity benefits—she was five month  pregnant at the time—again, she lacked the  required number of hours worked [see Kinesis, April 1999. ]  In 1997, the Liberals overhauled the  Unemployment Insurance Act and renamed it EI. Among the changes was an  increase in the number of hours worked  needed in order to qualify for benefits—an  increase from 300 hours to 700 or more.  After the passage of the EI Act, the  CUHC, which works primarily in EI advocacy, held a national consultation to discuss  the impact of the new Act and begin to develop a Charter challenge. All involved  agreed that the changes would have the  greatest negative impact on women. As  primary caregivers, women tend to work  fewer hours and experience more disruptions in their working lives than men.  Lesiuk and her coalition partners, the  CUHC and the PILC, are arguing that the  new EI law has an unfair impact on the 1.5  million Canadians who work part-time, the  vast majority of whom are women. This  outcome contravenes the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  They are also arguing that the federal  government has failed to provide a reason  able quality of unemployment insurance te  all Canadians. Section 36(1) of the Constitu  tion Act states that Canada has a commr  ment to provide essential public services o  a reasonable quality to all Canadians.  The Charter challenge is being sup  ported through funding from the Cour  Challenges Program.  Lesiuk's challenge should be of interest to all Canadians, not just women Currently only four in 10 unemployed Canadians actually receive EI. The result is that  there is an cumulative surplus in the EI account of an incredible $20 billion, which the  Liberals have diverted to paying down the  federal budget deficit and making themselves "look good."  To receive a copy of the bulletin or for further information contact: the Public Interest  Law Centre, 402-294 Portage Ave, Winnipeg,  MB, R3C 0B9; tel: (204) 985-8540; fax: (204)  985-8544; email: PILCLAM@MTS.NET Or  the Community Unemployed Help Centre,  501-275 Broadway, Winnipeg, MB, R3C 4M6;  tel: (204) 942-6556; fax: (204) 947-9559; email:  cuhc@cuhc.mb.ca; website: cuhc.mb.ca. The  bulletin also has a section on ways to assist in  the Charter challenge and a reading list.  Two-spirit women on  film  In these current economic times, it is  more and more difficult for socially committed and challenging films about  marginalized voices and experiences to get  made. Prairie Girl Films, an Aboriginal  women's film production company, is asking for financial assistance in bringing its  current project, Two-Spirit Women, to screen.  Directed by Christine Welsh and produced by Colleen Craig, Two-Spirit Women  is a documentary film about two-spirit  women from across Canada and the United  States. It is about the women who are pushing the boundaries of what it means to be a  two-spirit woman today, and includes  women with a wide range of tribal affiliations, backgrounds and experience. The  film will explore the respected role of two-  spirit women in traditional Aboriginal cultures and the issues at the heart of two-spirit  women's experience.  Among the women featured are internationally acclaimed Menominee poet  Chrystos, Ojibway AIDS activist Sharon  Day, Lakota spiritual leader Beverly Little  Thunder, and Mohawk writer and storyteller Beth Brant.  Welsh, a Metis filmmaker and a professor of Women's Studies at the University of Victoria, has been making documentary films for 25 years. Her work has been  broadcast on public, private and educational television networks and has won  numerous awards. Her work includes  Women in the Shadows, Keepers of the Fire and  Kuper Island: Return to the Healing Circle.  Colleen Craig, the producer of the film,  is a two-spirit woman from Manitoba who  has an eclectic background as an artist,  businesswoman and entrepreneur. She is  currently producing a one-hour television  documentary on the Coast Salish  woolworkers of southern Vancouver Island.  For more information or to make a financial contribution to the project, contact:  Christine Welsh, Prairie Girl Films, #679,185-  911 Yates St, Victoria, BC, V8V4Y9; tel: (250)  370-0499.  KINESIS Features  The poverty line debate in Canada:  LICOs versus MBMs  byTara Andrea Nolet  Everybody's talking about the poverty  line in Canada. But depending on what side  of the political fence you're on, the solution to Canada's poverty line debate is varied. The problem is simple—we don't have  an "official" poverty measure. As a result,  some organizations use calculations to produce date which reflect their viewpoints.  Why should we care about poverty  lines? Because they determine how many  low income people are in Canada. If levels  are set too low (and fewer individuals are  considered to be poor,) governments may  be less willing to address important issues  of social injustice.  Here's a rough sketch of the poverty  measurement controversy-  Two belief systems (or poverty concepts) are at the heart of the matter. A "social justice" perspective (sometimes called  the relative approach) says people are poor  if they can't maintain a standard of living  which allows them to participate in society. This is reflected in Statistics Canada's  Low Income Cut-Offs (LICOs)—a measure  of low income in relation to all average incomes in Canada.  Then there is a "basic needs" framework (or absolute approach), which views  poverty as an inability to purchase food,  clothing and shelter—the basics. (The basic needs framework developed by Professor Charles A. Sarlo for the right-wing  Fraser Institute in British Columbia is one  of the better examples.) An absolute measure defines a minimum, acceptable standard of living (represented by a basket of  goods and services) which increases with  inflation.  In a nutshell, advocates of a basic needs  approach think StatsCan's LICOs exaggerate poverty levels, while social justice supporters claim that the basic needs approach  minimizes poverty.  The current debate is between LICOs,  an accepted indicator of poverty measurement for the past 25 years, and MBMs (Market Basket Measure). MBMs are being promoted by the provincial and territorial min  isters of social services, in partnership with  Human Resources Development Canada  (HRDC).  Most social justice groups, including  the National Anti-Poverty Organization  (NAPO), support LICOs, which are based  on family size and the population of the  region you live in. However, the National  Council of Welfare (NCW) in its 1999 report, A New Poverty Line: Yes, No or Maybe?  notes that StatsCan "has consistently maintained that it does not regard the LICOs as  poverty lines, presumably because the federal government does not want to give official recognition to poverty."  HRDC's MBM (based on the cost of  "basic" necessities) is an attempt to develop  an alternative definition of poverty measurement. Although this approach lets a  person rise above a basic needs level (food,  clothing and shelter,) it doesn't achieve a  standard of living equal to the LICOs. And  it would immediately reduce the recognized number of people across Canada liv  ing in poverty from 17 percent to 12 percent.  The question that also needs to be  asked is: Who gets to decide what goes into  the basket? If it's the Fraser Insitute or a  right-wing government, poor people are in  deep trouble.  HRDC's March 1998 draft paper on  MBMs was developed without the input of  low income Canadians and distributed to  just a limited number of people. A more  public release last December prompted  charges that governments were trying to  eliminate poverty by lowering the poverty  line, rather than fixing the problem.  Despite the controversy, the National  Council of Welfare has accepted the MBM.  According to one of its directors, Steve  Kerstetter, a market basket line is easier to  understand than a statistical line. But he  claims the NCW would include enough  items in the basket to allow people to fairly  participate in society.  Jacquie Ackerly, NAPO's second vice  president, says government efforts to re-define poverty is another example of poor-  bashing. She points out that, problems exist with the Gross Domestic Product (which  measures national wealth) and the Consumer Price Index (which measures inflation,) yet there has been no desire to change  these indicators. The very attempt to redefine poverty reflects the discriminatory  attitudes of the governments involved.  The MBM is not a reasonable compromise between the two approaches to poverty measurement: social justice and basic  needs. Essentially, the MBM is just a basic  needs strategy with a higher level than the  Fraser Institute's measure. Although there  are more items in the basket—for now—  it's not an acceptable method to measure  poverty in Canada. Why?  • The MBM supports the notion that  poverty is about people in need (which is  solved by charity.) Although the MBM provides higher levels than absolute poverty,  it ignores how people are oppressed by an  inherently unjust system.  • The MBM was developed without  the input of poor Canadians.  On December 4,1998, the United Nations released a report critical of Canada's  non-compliance with the International  Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural  Rights, which states it is a human right to  have access to an adequate standard of living. Maybe instead of a poverty line, we  should be aiming for an adequate standard of living for all Canadians, as a basic  human right.  Tar a Andrea Nolet is the Resource Centre Coordinator for the National Anti-Poverty Organization. This article was first published in  NAPO News, April 1999. For more information, contact NAPO at 440-325 Dalhousie St,  Ottawa, Ontario, KIN 7G2; tel: 1-800-810-  1076 or (613) 789-0096; fax: (613) 739-0141;  email: napo@web.net; website: www.napo-  onap.ca.  The 1999/2000  Seed Grant Application  is now available online at  www.bccewh.bc.ca  BC Centre of Excellence  for Women's Health  Phone: 604.875.2633  Fax: 604.875.3716  E-mail: bccewh@bccewh.bc.ca  Web: www.bccewh.bc.ca  Women with Disabilities  We Know What We  Need to Be Healthy!  by Shirley Masuda  For the BC Centre of  Excellence for  Women's Health  and DAWN Canada:  DisAbled Women's Network Canada  is available for $1 J  (Low Income Women pay what you can)  KINESIS  Paula Clancy, b.a.  Certified General Accountant  Auditing  Accounting  Financial Planning  Income Tax Services  Snzm  <^Cft>t/ier  Massage  Therapy  Craniosacral  for  Therapy  Organizations  Small Businesses  736-1910  '  and Individuals  Tel: (604)215-1720  Fax:(604)215-1750  pclancy @bc.sympatico.ca  315-2150 West Broadway,  V*K 4L9  Vancouver, BC  JUNE 1999 Feature  Toxins linked to endometriosis:  Something in the air  by Lone Hummelshoj  There is still no cure for endometriosis,  which affects an estimated half-a-million Canadian women. What's more, a recent study of  4,000 North American women suggests an  average diagnostic delay of over nine years. At  least 5.5 million women in North America suffer from this disease—and that number is rising. Symptoms are starting at an earlier age  and the severity is increasing. Could endometriosis be caused by toxins in our environment?  Research suggests it might.  Endometriosis is a condition where tissue similar to the endometrium, which is  the lining of the uterus, is found in the abdomen, on the ovaries, fallopian tubes, the  ligaments supporting the uterus, the area  between the vagina and the rectum, the  outer surface of the uterus, and the lining  of the pelvic cavity.  The tissue responds to hormones like  normal endometrium, so it swells and  bleeds each menstrual period. Because the  bleeding occurs in an abnormal location,  with nowhere to go, it can cause inflammation, formation of scar tissue, and develop  into cysts, implants or growths.  The most common symptom of endometriosis is pain—before and during  menstrual periods and during ovulation.  For some women this can escalate into a  month-long nightmare, which in turn may  prevent them from carrying out normal  activities of life. Other symptoms can include pain during or after sexual activity,  heavy or irregular bleeding, fatigue, pain  with bowel movements at the time of the  period, as well as bladder problems. Endometriosis is a leading cause of infertility  in women.  "It's impacted my relationships, finances, vacations, lifestyle, and my  dreams," said one woman in the  Endometrisis Association's Sourcebook.  A recent survey of women affected  with endometrisis in NorthAmerica found  that 79 percent of the women were not able  to carry out normal day-to-day activities,  and one-quarter were incapacitated between two and six days a month.  "Dealing with the physical pain has  been, and continues to be, difficult for me.  But even more traumatic has been suffering without understanding the cause," said  Beth, from Alberta, in the Sourcebook.  The cause, factors contributing to endometriosis, and the natural history of the  disease are not yet scientifically understood. There is no cure for endometriosis,  but we know that early diagnosis and treatment may prevent the disease from spreading and causing problems later in life.  The Endometriosis Association, set on  finding the cause and cure, maintains the  world's only large, ongoing research registry on the disease.  Aware of the many immune system  problems of those afflicted with endometriosis and knowing that United States Air  Force studies have now shown quite convincingly that radiation exposure of certain types and amounts leads to endometriosis in female rhesus monkeys, the Endometriosis Association set out in 1991 and  early 1992 to track down a rumour that  rhesus monkeys exposed to PCBs in scientific experiments developed severe endometriosis.  The association learned of a rhesus  monkey colony studied by the Canadian  federal Health Protection Branch. An unusually severe form of endometriosis had  been documented in some of the PCB-ex-  posed monkeys: several animals had apparently died from intestinal obstruction  caused by extensive disease. Reproductive  outcomes from the PCB-exposed animals  were poor.  The association then learned there was  also another colony of rhesus monkeys in  Madison, Wisconsin, in which two monkeys had died of endometriosis. This  colony had been part of a toxicology study  to evaluate long-term effects of TCDD  (2,3,7,8-tetra-chlorodibenzo-p-dioxin)—  commonly called dioxin.  Groups of eight animals received either 25 parts per trillion (ppt, high dose)  or 5 ppt dioxin (low dose). Control monkeys were not exposed to dioxin.  time to diagnosis  Less than 6 months  6 months to 1 year  1 to 2 years  2 to 3 years  3 to 5 years  5 to 7 years  7 to 10 years  10 to 15 years  Over 15 years  H8  H9  H8  H8  ■5  I9  When the Endometriosis Association  discovered that the experiments were over  and the colony would be closed, it decided  to fund the colony for two months to determine if endometriosis was present in the  remaining animals.  The association carried out  laparoscopics (minor adbominal surgery)  on the entire colony and brought in one of  the leading experts in the field on the appearance of endometriosis and a leading  authority on the immunology of endometriosis.  At the end of a long day of  laparoscopics, the investigators were astounded by the results: 79 percent of the  animals exposed to dioxin developed endometriosis. And the disease increased in  severity in direct proportion to the level of  dioxin exposure: the more dioxin, the more  severe the disease.  They later carried out immunological  studies with the colony, and the results suggested that endometriosis in these animals  was associated with immune dysfunction  similar to that seen in women with endometriosis.  Since the dioxin results were published, more than a dozen related studies  have been launched in research institutions  worldwide. Most notably, the US National  symptoms  Pain at time of menstruation I  Fatigue, exhaustion I  Diarrhea, painful bowel movement I  Abdominal bleeding I  Heavy or irregular bleeding I  Pain during or after sex I  Nausea, stomach upset at time of period I  Dizziness, headaches at time or period I  50%  70% 80%  KINESIS  Institute of Environmental Health Sciences  and the Endometriosis Association are carrying out a joint study to determine blood  levels of dioxin, furans and PCBs in women  with endometriosis. The US Environmental Protection Agency has carried out studies to determine the effects of dioxin on  endometriosis in a rodent model. Several  animal studies and human endometrial cell  culture lines have also shown dioxin causes  development of endometriosis.  More studies are nearing publication,  but far from easing fear over endocrine disrupters and endometriosis, the new studies are alarming.  Women must take action now to prevent this disease spreading to our daughters, impairing their lives, jeopardizing  their education and careers, and reducing  their chances of having children themselves. We must influence governments and  healthcare authorities to take this debilitating disease seriously. We must raise funds  for vital research into the causes of the disease. We must take measures to ensure the  factors that cause endometriosis are eliminated.  For more information contact the Endometriosis Association International Headquarters,  8585 N.76th Place, Milwaukee, Wisconsin,  53223, USA; tel: 1-800-992-3636; email:  endo@endometriosisassn.org.  Lone Hummelshoj is the European representative for the Endometriosis Association. This  article is reprinted from the Canadian Women's Health Network newsletter, Fall 1998 issue. To subscribe to the newsletter or for more  information about the CWHN, contact them  at 203-419 Graham Ave, Winnipeg, Manitoba,  R3C 0M3; tel: (204) 942-5500; email:  cwhn@cwhn.ca.  WOMEN  IN PRINT  BOOKS & OTHER MEDIA  Discounts for  book clubs  ♦  Special orders Feature  Women and fat oppression:  Getting to the core of  troubled eating  by Kalamity Hildebrant, Christina  Savage and Sally Stevenson   Three women living in Vancouver—  Kalamity Hildebrant, Christina Savage and  Sally Stevenson—got together recently to talk  about the links between fat oppression, systemic  discrimination and issues women have with  food and their bodies. Among other strategies  to confront fat oppression, all three women have  conducted workshops on "troubled eating."  [They use the term "troubled eating"—versus "eating disorders" or "disordered eating"—because it takes the whole issue right  out the realm of psychology, psychiatry and  the medical profession. To them, women's  "unhealthy" relationship to food and their  bodies is a response to injustice; it is not a  disease (or disorder).]  Stevenson told Kinesis that the three of  them feel this is just the beginning of the conversations that need to happen about "fat oppression " and the use of food and starvation as  coping mechanisms to systemic discrimination.  We await the next installment, and invite other  women to join in on the discussion.  Kalamity Hildebrant: A lot of the time  when I use the term "fat oppression" with  women who identify as feminists, I get a  response like, "Yeah, all women get that,  it's terrible." I don't believe fat oppression  is something that targets all women, I think  it's something that targets all fat people. For  me, fat oppression is the systemic exclusion,  exploitation and abuse fat people experience.  By this definition, a person is "fat"  when they can no longer access what they  need, like clothing and seating and basic  respect, because society excludes people  whose size exceeds the standards of what  is considered "normal" or "human." I think  if people were able to understand "fatness"  in this way it would clear up a lot of confusion for non-fat women who tend to label  their painful feelings as "feeling fat," and  then damage themselves as they try to  make those feelings go away by restricting  food or hurting their bodies in other ways.  Sally Stevenson: Often when fat oppression is mentioned in mainstream feminist dialogues, it is framed as prejudice or  individual attitudes about fat. When I say  fat oppression, I'm talking about institutionalized, systemic forms of oppression.  For example, many people are denied  health insurance in the US on the assumption that fatness is a health risk, which it's  not. Talking about fat oppression in terms  of attitudes alone limits the analysis.  Christina Savage: I also think fat oppression varies a lot in terms of class and  sexual orientation. Depending on your  sexual orientation or ethnicity, your experiences are going to be different.  Hildebrant:Each form of systemic oppression interacts with and modifies one  another. A fat person may not be just a fat  person, she or he may also be a fat person  with a particular position in relation to racism, sexism, heterosexism, ableism, anti-  semitism, or some other oppression.  In a Canadian context, even if they  aren't officially turned away from seeing a  doctor by being denied health insurance,  many fat people are effectively denied access to healthcare. We're told, "Why should  I worry about your health? You obviously  don't because you won't lose weight." I've  gone to the doctor with a sore neck and  been told it's because I'm fat, when really, I  have pinched a nerve in my shoulder.  That's not because I'm fat, but that's all the  doctor could focus on. This meant I  couldn't get appropriate medical treatment.  Stevenson: I remember reading about  a fat woman who was correctly diagnosed  with cancer only after going to several doctors. Each doctor she had previously seen  told her: "All that's wrong with you is that  you're fat and you need to lose weight."  By the time she was diagnosed with cancer  it was too late for interventions.  Hildebrant:lt's not just doctors who do  that; even non-medical professionals hold  the belief that if anything is going on, it is  because that person's fat. I have a non-cancerous tumour on the back of my neck and  I grew up having everyone tell me it was  there just because I was fat. I believed them;  I had accepted that being fat made me hideous, and this was just one more example.  So I never showed it to a doctor.  I found out about two years ago that  it's actually a tumour. Fortunately it is noncancerous, but it could have been. It was  something that should have been watched  throughout my life but wasn't.  Savage: When you visited the doctor  for your pinched nerve, his attitude was  that you have a duty to lose weight, that  you should take diet pills and strive to be  thin, right?  Hildebrant: Yes, the attitude is that I  have a duty to be thin, and until I fulfill  this "duty," their duty to give me appropriate medical attention doesn't kick in.  The bias against fat people in the medical profession has no grounding in medical fact. There is a researcher named Steven  Blair who did a study at the Cooper Institute for Aerobics Research in Dallas. He  looked at over 25,000 people and found that  weight is not a health problem at all, as long  as you exercise. When fat people exercise,  there is no increased risk of health complications or death due to fatness.  Unfortunately, when you look at how  hostile society is to any fat person who is  out in public doing physical things, it is no  wonder some fat people choose to avoid  exercise! There is also a denial that there  are fat people who do exercise and who are  really strong and healthy.  Stevenson: Another thing that tends  not to be factored into studies on the supposed health risks of excess fat is socio-economic status. In terms of the links between  size and class, usually the assumption is  that first you become poor and then you  become fat because you're poor and can't  afford healthy food.  But other studies have shown that, in  fact, it goes the other way round: first you're  fat and then, through systemic discrimination in terms of education and employment,  you become poor. Poverty is one of the largest factors in ill-health. The fact that those  studies on "the health risks of obesity"  aren't controlling for this is a point of significant bias.  Hildebrant: Another thing left out of  the studies is that the stress of living under  systemic oppression damages a person's  health. They claim "obesity" causes heart  disease, it causes diabetes... But they've  never shown cause, they've only shown  correlation! And correlation only means  these two things come together. There's  nothing that shows "obesity" causes heart  disease anymore than heart disease causes  "obesity!"  I've seen several different studies that  look at populations that experience systemic oppression and they all have high  incidences of the diseases fatness supposedly causes. Moreover, when you look at  populations of fat people where there is no  systemic discrimination the diseases don't  show up.  Savage: Dieting is more of a health risk  than fatness. The process of repeated dieting and restricting food means you're not  getting all the nutrients your body needs. Feature  This causes harm. But, of course, this is not  factored in.  Hildebrant: There's also a long list of  health risks with so-called "healthy dieting" (if there is such a thing). Even the mild  "one-pound-a-week" thing leads to bone  and muscle loss.  Stevenson: And there are health risks  associated with weight cycling—losing  weight and regaining it, losing weight and  regaining it. The creepy thing is that, although dieting and weight cycling have  proven health risks, many medical professionals still advocate dieting as a cure for  fat women's health concerns. In reality, the  so-called "solution" is one of the contributing causes of health problems.  Savage: Drastic weight loss and weight  gain contributes to heart failure. The psychological, emotional and physical impact  weight cycling has on women can lead to  death, not the fact you are "obese."  I just thought about how commercials  for diet programs often include the phrase,  "contact your physician." I'm thinking:  "Why?! The physician isn't going to warn  you that if you lose a drastic amount of  weight you may experience health problems..."  Hildebrant: Like death! The ultimate  health problem.  Savage: ...so why exactly are they recommending you consult your physician?  Stevenson:! think that phrase is really  important because it keeps intact the illusion that your physician will tell you if dieting is contrary to good health, if it's going to damage your health.  Hildebrant: Doctors generally don't tell  patients that 90 to 95 percent of diets fail  and that once you start, you're likely to do  this for the rest of your life. There is major  collusion between the diet industry and  many doctors.  Savage: And that's a powerful industry.  Hildebrant: It's $40 billion-a-year powerful!  It took a while for me to become comfortable with the word "fat." It's a very  scary word because it's often used as an  attack and is associated with a long list of  negative traits. "Fat and ugly," "fat and  lazy," "fat and dirty." But when it comes  down to it, "fat" is the only word that has  any potential of actually being neutral.  "Obese" is a medical term that defines my  body as a disease. The term "overweight"  has a "standard of normality" built right  into it...  When I identify myself as fat, I'm taking on a political identity and looking at  the reality of what happens to people who  are outside this standard of normality. Fat  people are a political community who,  whether they know it or not, share a common context of oppression. It's worth it for  us to identify that, and it's necessary for  our survival. I get really stressed when people use terms like "obese" and "overweight" because I feel those terms reinforce  the structures that are trying to kill me.  Stevenson:Many of us, as lesbians and  queer women, reclaim the word "dyke" as  an act of celebration. It's an act of taking  back a word that has been used to denigrate us, and that reclaiming is an act of  pride. It seems to me that reclaiming the  word "fat" is similar.  Hildebrant: Yes, I've never seen a fat  activis. identify as doing work around  "obesity." There's absolutely a celebration  of the word "fat" and an insistence on using it in an "in-your-face" way to get people to deal with their emotions around it.  Savage: I don't like the words "obese"  and "overweight"... but I always question  how people will react to me when I say the  word "fat." Will they think that I intend it  in a mean way? When I hear someone call  someone else "obese," I hear the hatred, I  hear the discrimination.  Stevenson:The word "overweight" implies a person is outside the normalized  weight and size: you're abnormal and should  do something to correct that abnormality.  Hildebrant: At it's core, that term defines me as wrong. On the other hand saying, "I'm a 'fat' woman, I'm going to feel  good about myself and be proud, and I'm  going to resist this form of oppression," is  powerful. The word "fat" ultimately has the  potential to take us somewhere outside of  oppression, in a way that "overweight" and  "obese" do not.  In all the discussion that goes on  around troubled eating, there's a real resistance to looking at what actually happens  to fat people and how that serves as a motivating factor for fat and non-fat people to  fear fatness and to reject fatness at the most  fundamental level, like refusing to eat.  Until we deal with fat oppression we  will never, ever impact the level of troubled  eating we have. As long as there is fat oppression, fat women are going to struggle  to avoid fat oppression through the only  option presented to us, which is to hang on  to the dream of being thin—even though it  doesn't work for the vast majority of us.  We will keep pouring our money into the  diet industry; we will keep injuring ourselves in an effort to fit in, so that maybe  people won't be mean to us or take our jobs  away or destroy our lives!  Also, as long as non-fat people, again  particularly women, continue to accept the  lies that fat oppression tells about fat people, and as long as they continue to believe  that body size is a matter of will rather than  biology, then a high percentage will continue  to choose troubled eating as a way of coping  with the stresses and pain in their lives.  The troubled eating movement is not  really seeing improvement and I think that  a key reason for this is that they have not  paid real attention to how fat oppression  motivates both fat and non-fat people to  develop troubled eating. They have also not  paid enough attention to how other systems  of oppression besides sexism impact the  development of troubled eating.  For me, experiences arising from fat  oppression, poverty and disability were  more important factors in why I starved  myself and threw up after eating. The lack  of attention paid to these issues in the troubled eating movement meant that when I  needed help, the services were not relevant  or accessible.  Stevenson: I'd like to talk about nonfat privilege. I think that often gets lost or  masked in discussions of fat oppression. It's  important, for me, to clarify that I am not a  fat woman because that informs what I say  and, as a relatively thin woman, I experience very real privilege.  I'm not yet sure what language I would  use to describe this. I could say "thin-privilege," but that isn't quite accurate as it's not  only thin people who experience privilege  within fat oppression.  Hildebrant: Non-fat is a useful term,  as an option for how things can be thought  about. In my workshops I often draw a  pyramid diagram, and at the top I put the  ideal, what people will call thin. The middle part is what I call non-fat and it's people who fit within "the standards of nor-  see FAT page 12 Take control of your health   ^w ycnijL.tireasts   Pam Fichtner  "Breast is nourishment is life is sun is  round and warm and full. A simple drawing of a breast is the symbol for sun,  nourisher of all life. And life is sacred, so  breasts are sacred, so women are sacred,  holy, whole. Always and everywhere women's breasts have been honored.  "Has anyone ever told you that your  breasts are holy and sacred and moving  with the energy of life? Has anyone ever  told you that your breasts are a source of  power? Has anyone ever given you permission to love your breasts, touch your  breasts, adore your breasts? Has anyone encouraged you to honor your breasts and  women's breasts as life, the support of  life?"  - Susun Weed, Breast Cancer? Breast  Health  As women, we tend to have an unhealthy relationship with our breasts. Why?  Undoubtedly, it is due to the patriarchal society we live in which reinforces the sexualization and idealization of our breasts.  This may seem like a trivial concern—it's  just another part of a woman's body that is  undervalued. However, the devaluing of  women's breasts can lead to major health  concerns for women, in particular breast  cancer.  As young girls, we are taught to be  concerned about the development of our  breasts-—through the eyes of boys and men.  Are they growing quickly enough? When  will I be able to wear a bra? Will boys be  attracted to me? How do I stick my chest  out so I can look like I have big breasts?  As we venture into high school, we  learn how to wear sexy bras that expose  our cleavage or we hide our breasts, depending on where they fit on the "perfect"  breast spectrum. We are given all sorts of  reasons to hide, ignore or feel ashamed of  our breasts, especially if they are not the  right size, shape or colour, as defined by  sexy lingerie ads in magazines.  Even mothers who breastfeed their  children are encouraged to hide their  breasts to ensure the "public" does not have  to encounter breasts performing their nurturing function in a mall or a restaurant or  wherever. Breastfeeding mothers are told  that no one wants to see exposed breasts  full of milk—feeding our children is a "private" thing, not something suited for "public" consumption.  Most women probably wouldn't object to receiving some attention for our  breasts, as they are a significant part of our  beautiful bodies. Unfortunately, the perceptions of what our breasts should look like  are shaped too much by a woman-hating  society that worships pert, luscious and always sexy (and sexualized) breasts. This is  a marketing image that is not based on the  true nature of breasts. Sagging breasts are  the truth, yet women are told these must  be avoided at all costs—even if it means  liposuction or reconstruction.  Take control of your breasts  It is important to change the relationship we have with our breasts by taking  control of our own healthcare. Our breasts  are rarely seen as beautiful in their own  right, so we need to reclaim them as a  source of pride and empowerment for us  as women.  The first step is to discover what our  breasts actually look like. Most women  don't really know what defines a normal  healthy breast. We are socialized into striving for "perfect" breasts. We rarely get to  see the true variety of women's breasts,  since it is illegal almost everywhere in this  country for women to bare their breasts.  This interference ensures We.do not to have  the visual accuracy to determine the true  nature of our physical characteristics.  The reality is that breasts differ in size,  shape, coloring and skin texture, changing  from month to month, at different times in  a woman's cycle, and at different times in  our lives. There is no such a thing as a normal breast.  Here are some interesting facts about  breasts:  □Breast size is genetically determined—it depends on the percentage of fat  to other types of tissue present in the breast.  The fat varies as you gain or lose weight,  but the breast tissue is constant.  □The breast is a mammary gland and  its main function is to produce milk.  □ Nipples may protrude a little or a  lot and may even be inverted. Nipples become stiff with cold or other stimulation  (sucking, stroking) because they contain  spongy tissue which fills with blood and  which causes them to become taut.  □ Breast tissue covers a large area—  from the collar bone, through the sternum  and down to the bra-line under the breast,  and from the breast bone to the middle of  the armpit, lying on the ribcage.  □ Breasts contain no muscle of their  own, so you will never be able to strengthen  them! They are surrounded by pectoralis  muscles that go all the way into your armpit. Breasts are also full of connective tissue which holds the glands together and  contains blood, lymph and nerves.  □It is in the nature of breasts to sag as  women age. The glandular tissue is replaced by fat over the years and sagging  occurs as the ducts and ligaments decrease  in number. (Bras have been promoted as  "supporting" our breasts to reach their ideal  uplifted form. Once again, bras interfer  with the sagging nature of our breasts. In a  recent book by Sydney Singer and Soma  Grismaijer called Dressed to Kill: The Link  between Breast Cancer and Bras, the authors  suggest that bra usage limits lymphatic circulation to the breasts and may lead to  breast cancer.)  I was inspired to really acknowledge  the beauty of women's breasts when I saw  6,000 women, most of whom were topless,  at the Michigan Womyn's Music Festival  last year. It was a profound experience to  witness so many breasts in all their shapes  and sizes. I was in shock, wonder and excitement for days!  Step 2  Once you've made the perception shift  towards loving your breasts as they are, accepting whatever form of "non-conformity" they come in—sagging, pimples, hairs,  inverted nipples, et cetera—the next step  is to develop a positive touching relationship with them. Discovering how your  breasts actually feel will allow you to understand and really feel the true nature of  your unique breasts.  One of the ways you can build this  positive relationship with your breasts is  through self-massage—experimenting and  learning how to touch them with caring  hands. Breast self-massage can allow you  to develop a relaxing, safe and nurturing  relationship with your breasts, without always being concerned about looking for  cancerous tumors.  There are numerous benefits from giving yourself a breast massage regularly. It  increases blood circulation, decreases toxins through lymph drainage, stimulates or  sedates the nervous system, adds resiliency  and suppleness to breast tissue, and helps  to prevent and detect cancer. And it's free,  safe, fun, simple, intimate, pleasurable...  So take a trip into the beautiful land of  breast self-massage:  □ Create a comfortable quiet space—  in your bedroom, bathroom, on the couch  or on some cushions.  □ Have oil ready, preferably warm  with your favourite essence.  □ Lie on your back and cup both hands  with your palms over your nipples.  □ Breathe slowly and deeply into your  breasts. Feel the movement of the breast tissue and gently rock each breast to its own  rhythm. Do both breasts together and then  one at a time.  □ Stroke each breast one at a time with  the opposite hand, starting from the lower  ridge of the breast and lightly stroking upward into your armpit. Move from the midline of your body towards the outer edge,  slowly covering your whole breast. Use the  pads of your fingers.  □ Play with the depth of your touch—  lighter to firmer—using pain as your guide.  Stop if it's painful; feeling good is the goal.  □ Visualize healthy, vibrant, nourished, stimulating breasts as you enjoy the  pleasure of touching them.  (Precaution: if you have been diagnosed with breast cancer, see your doctor  before doing any vigorous massage, as  there is a slight possibility that the cancer  may spread.)  r«st«rjtapij  The final step towards reclaiming your  breasts involves giving yourself a regular  Breast Self-Exam (BSE). Most women are  at least vaguely aware of BSEs and that we  should do them once a month, but most of  us rarely do them. We usually wait until  our annual physical then get our doctor to  feel our breasts for any lumps.  Why do we not trust our own hands?  One reason certainly is the fear that we may  find cancer, yet this is the very reason we  need to do BSEs regularly and properly.  Breast cancer is the leading cause of death  among women. This must be stopped and  it certainly won't be by the medical profession. We need relevant information that  teaches us what to look for to ensure we  catch any developing tumours as soon as  possible.  Breast Self-Exams offer women a way  to get in touch with our physical bodies—  to know intimately what our breasts feel  like on a daily, weekly or monthly basis.  The more you touch your breasts, the more  you will be able to notice any changes that  occur, especially subtle abnormalities that  may arise.  The medical alternative to BSEs are  mammograms, which are heavily promoted by doctors and cancer agencies.  Mammograms are x-rays of the breasts, and  women, especially after they pass the 40-  year mark, are "encouraged" to have yearly  mammograms to check for the presence of  cancerous tumours. Mammograms may be  helpful in many instances, but there is no  conclusive evidence to prove their accuracy  and effectiveness. There are also many concerns regarding the safety of women getting mammograms that need to be addressed before they can be accurately  viewed as the best form of breast cancer detection.  Annual mammograms or no annual  mammograms, it is still crucial for women  to trust themselves to recognize any  changes in their breasts. We should not rely Get to know yoyjrJbreasts  (Remember, if you feel  any pain, discomfort or find  anything that you feel uncomfortable touching, get another  health professional to look at it  immediately.)  Getting to know your  breasts is about getting to know  your body more intimately. The  more you know about your  body, the more you have control over your healthcare  choices. Once you recognize  your breasts as a source of  power within, you will feel a  greater sense of security and  more importantly, self-respect.  Enjoy your journey into the  subtleties of your breasts!  Resources used for this article were numerous but my top recommendations are: Breast Cancer? Breast Health by Susun  Weed; The Informed Woman's  Guide to Breast Health by Kerry  Ann McGinn; Dr. Susan Love's  Breast Book; and Dressed to  Kill: The Link between Breast  Cancer and Bras by Sydney  Singer and Soma Grismaijer.  Pam Fichtner is a Registered Massage Therapist interested in breast  health, among other women's  health concerns. She is committed  to empowering women in their  health through a compassionate  heart and healing hands. If anyone would like any breast health information,  a massage therapy workshop at their place of  work or leisure, or a private massage therapy  session, call her at (604) 434-9943 or 736-1910.  PREPARING FOR YOUR FIRST MAMMOGRAM  on an external machine to detect cancerous  cells. The BSE is proven to be effective in  prevention of breast cancer, which is exactly  why women need to do them. Most women  notice abnormalties in their breast before  they go to the doctor to check out their suspicions.  A complete BSE involves a manual inspection of breasts—called palpation—and  noting if there are any one-inch lumps [see  diagram above.] The first step in a BSE is to  observe your breasts in the mirror and see  their normal shape and size. Then, using  the pads of your fingers and beginning at  the nipple, press your breasts lightly in a  circular fashion, inch by inch, until you  cover the entire area of your breast. Your  breast area is a big circle that extends towards your collarbone, armpit, rib (beneath  your breast) and your sternum.  Next, using a firmer pressure, press  harder so that your fingers are pushing  midway into the tissue, and do the circular  inspection again. Finally do this one more  time with a strong pressure so that you  probe deeply into your breast.  Repeat the exam by going up and  down the area (vertically), then by making  lines that radiate from your nipple outward  ("orange-segment"), using all three pressures, light, medium, and deep.  What will you find?  In her book, Breast Cancer? Breast  Health, Susan Weed explains some of the  common findings women make when they  do BSEs. She explains what it means if you  feel the following.  Healthy findings  □ Soft or spongy = fat (The older you  are, the more fat you will feel)  □Lumpy cream, large curd cottage  cheese = lumpy glandular tissue (The older  you are, the less there will be)  □ Ridge, corrugated, fibrous, bony, and  big = ribs and connective tissue and muscle surrounding them  □Thick, gel, softly firm thickening  (usually in semi-circle under breasts or near  armpits)  Unhealthy findings  □ Regularly shaped pea, pebble or  marble cyst (if it shrinks or swells over  time) = harmless, but if growing see a doctor  □Hard and dense, dried rice, uncooked lentil, dried cheese = possibly cancer (If it is a mirror image to the other breast,  it is probably not cancer)  □Tender, rounded lump in armpit =  swollen lymph node (May indicate infection, injury or cancer possibility. Go to a  doctor if swollen for more than one month)  Many women are afraid of their first mammogram, but there is no need  to worry.   By taking a few minutes each day for a week preceding the  exam and doing the following practice exercises, you will be totally  prepared for the test. And best of all, you can do these simple practice  exercises right in your home.  EXERCISE 1:  Open your refrigerator door and insert one breast between the door  and the main box.   Have one of your strongest friends slam the door  shut as hard as possible and lean on the door for good measure.  Hold that position for five seconds.  Repeat with the other breast.  EXERCISE 2:  Visit your garage at 3 a.m. when the temperature of the cement  floor is just perfect.  Take off all your clothes and lie comfortably on  the garage floor with one breast wedged under the rear tire of the  car.  Ask a friend to slowly back the car up until your breast is sufficiently flattened and chilled.  Hold for 1 minute.  Turn over and  repeat with the other breast. _____  EXERCISE 3:  Freeze two metal bookends overnight.  Strip to the waist, then invite  a stranger into the room.  Have the stranger smash the bookends  together as hard as possible against one of your breasts.  Repeat  with the other breast.  Set an appointment with the stranger to  meet next year and do it again.  You are now properly prepared for your first mammogram.  [source unknown) Feature  from FAT page 9  mality" [Hildebrant first encountered this  concept in a women's studies course taught by  Sue Wendell on women and disability at Simon  Fraser University.] You can recognize the  standards of normality by looking at the  structures around us. At what size can you  no longer get clothes in the mainstream  stores; you have to go to a "special" store?  At what size do you stop fitting into chairs  and theatre seats and turnstiles? Those  structures are what tell us who's considered human. People who fit within those  structures are the representative humans in  this society.  The ideal body size is what we're all  supposed to strive for, but an exclusive focus on this ideal is misleading. You don't  have to fit the ideal to get the basic privilege of being considered human in this society. People who are trying to locate themselves in relation to fat oppression, who do  not meet the "ideal" and so would not identify with the word "thin," but who also  know they are not excluded by the standards of normality, might find the term nonfat useful.  Savage: For me, it's important to acknowledge myself as Portugese Canadian.  The stereotypes about Portugese women  have really affected me in terms of my body  and food, because people have often been  shocked that I'm so "small for a Portugese  woman."  As a non-fat queer woman, it's important for me to address that I do struggle  with my weight and my body image. As a  feminist, how can I be concerned with and  affected by how I look? Why is it that when  I get up in the morning, the way that my  clothes fit is an indication of how my day  is going to go? It really sets a pattern. If my  clothes are somehow tighter I am often disturbed by that, and why is that? I think it's  important to let other people know that I  do struggle with my body and food—that  I'm not "cured" or "fixed" yet!  Hildebrant: I really appreciate when  non-fat women identify as non-fat, and  build that into their identity. I need non-fat  women to do that, that feels essential to my  survival and the ongoing survival of fat  people in this society. When a person identifies as non-fat, it tells me they've thought  about what happens to fat people. I identify as fat and my identification there  doesn't come from feeling fat, it comes from  experiencing fat oppression—daily lived  experiences of exclusion and violence.  The word "fat" is used all the time by  people when they don't feel good about  themselves. When they do that they make  it impossible for people, like myself, who  are experiencing fat oppression to identify  what we're dealing with on a daily basis.  Walking down the street I've been spit on;  I've had things thrown at me and people  yell, "fat bitch" at me. Many non-fat women  have partners who say, "oh you fat  bitch/That's an abusive partner who uses  that woman's fear of fatness to hurt her.  However, this is different from a fat woman  who gets called a "fat bitch." The fat  woman is experiencing it systemically everywhere she goes. That distinction is important...  Fat oppression is really fundamental  in terms of troubled eating. I can look at  my own life and see that. I started throwing up daily because I hated my body and  I was experiencing violent harassment. I  was desperate to escape that. I believe fat  oppression is fundamental to non-fat women's experiences of troubled eating as well,  but I think that's something they're not usually aware of. I'm wondering what you two  think about that?  Savage: For me, anorexia and bulimia  were definitely coping strategies towards  physical and sexual abuse, abduction and  acculturation. Being taken away from my  mother and being in a very dysfunctional  and horrific environment led to ineffective  ways of dealing with that. I tried covering  it up: "Let's pretend everything's okay,"  and it wasn't okay! I took the anger and  hatred I felt toward me out on myself. As I  understood it back then, everything was  my fault. I dealt with that by starving myself.  Hildebrant: If you'd grown up in a  place where the mainstream dominant culture didn't have fat oppression, and instead  you were offered the other ways of coping,  do you think you would have been as likely  to pick "disordered eating?" Or do you  think the fact that fat is so hated and so  stereotyped was a factor in your "choice"  of coping mechanisms?  Savage: I think that if we didn't have  the ideal standard of beauty as thinness, I  would not have chosen those patterns as a  coping mechanism. Because I had just  moved from Portugal, because I was adjusting to a whole new family, a whole new  culture, fitting in was very important for  me. I thought losing weight was the solution. Later, I realized it wasn't just about  fitting in, but also about the violence I had  experienced in my life.  Stevenson: When I watch the movies I  first viewed during adolescence, I'm  floored by all the anti-queer comments. I'm  floored because I ingested all of that, and  that hatred was part of the climate that  helped instill fear and shame about being  a lesbian. Likewise, there are so many images in movies of fat women as the objects  of scorn and ridicule, or as evil women or  women to pity. I ingested those images too.  I think what keeps non-fat women motivated to chase the idealized body image  is fear of the discrimination, abuse and ridicule that is attached to fat women. To answer your question, Kalamity, I don't think  I would have relied so heavily upon food  and body stuff to express and deal with  what I was going through, in terms of violence, ableism and heterosexism, if  fat oppression and  non-fat privi-  lege  didn't  exist. There's a  reason for the focus on food and the body:  the lie is "you'll get endless rewards" and  you know that because it's advertised everywhere.  Hildebrant: Fat women are stereotyped  in the movies, but I think it's also a fact that  non-fat women learn to fear fatness from  seeing what actually happens to fat women,  kids and men. That gets ignored in a lot of  the discussion around troubled eating.  There's a real resistance on the part of nonfat women doing this work to actually look  at the abuse that fat people survive on a  daily basis. There's a reluctance to admit  they're afraid of having a fat woman's body.  Non-fat women's fear of fat is not theoretical. It's personal and it's about me and  other fat people. The denial of fat people's  experiences and the focus on the "ideal" is  one way non-fat privilege plays out. It's  much easier to leave fat people out of the  discussion; this keeps non-fat women's experiences at the centre. It's fat oppression  in action!  The dialogue around troubled eating  needs to incorporate input from fat activists, and the voices of fat women need to  be part of the centre. Non-fat women need  to explore their beliefs about what "fat"  means and their daily lived experience of  non-fat privilege. An analysis of fat oppression allows for a more direct, truthful analysis of what is happening. Until this kind of  anaysis is used, fat people will continue to  be oppressed and develop troubled eating  as a response to injustice, and non-fat people will continue to develop troubled eating out of a rejection of fatness. If you don't  understand fat oppression you can't really  deal with the core of the problem.  Kalamity Hildebrant describes herself as "a  white, fat, disabled, queer, crazy, poor/working class, ethnically Mennonite woman, living on stolen land. My passion is learning/educating about ways to resist all forms of systemic oppression through effective coalition  building and ally work." Christine Savage is a  Portugese Canadian feminist lesbian with an  interest in troubled eating from a social injustice perspective. And Sally Stevenson says she  is "a white, feminist and femme lesbian with a  disability, of Danish, Cornish and Scottish ancestry, from an upper class background. I am  passionate about the use of the creative arts as  tools of insight and learning, and as vehicles  of resistance and social change."  Dea Webb, who provided the illustrations for  this article and the centrespread [page 10,] is  a white, working class butch dyke who struggles with depression. Her goal is to continue  writing her comic strip, "Girl Boxes," [see  page 9] as her career and her form of social  activism.  T**********^*^^******1^^  Kr^E^IS Arts  Review of Beyond the Pale:  Living, loving as lesbians  by Amal Rana  BEYOND THE PALE  by Elana Dykewomon  Press Gang Publishers, Vancouver, BC,  1997  / am original alphabet/ Letters unfurl/  from my spine/cutting ciphers in/my mother's  cells/1 scan my fate/on the wrinkled walls/ of  that first room/clenching/in my red fist scraps  of prophecy.  These are the rhythmic words that  open Beyond the Pale. After ten years of  meticulous research, Elana Dykewomon's  first attempt at historical fiction explodes  from the pages and leaves an indelible  mark on its readers. It is, indeed, "original  alphabet" with letters unfurling and uncovering the hidden stories of Jewish lesbians  living within and moving beyond the Pale  of Settlement [The Pale refers to the large area  in western Russia to which Jews were restricted  between 1791 and 1917. The boundaries of the  Pale changed depending on the whims of the  Tsar].  How many times have Jewish lesbians  listened to story after story of the hopeful  passage of countless Jews from the "old  country" to the "Goldne Medine"[land of  gold/America], knowing that somewhere in  the holds of those old ships there existed  women loving women—lesbians—who  along with the rest of their people had left  behind old hopes and dreams for an attempt at a new life in an alien land?  Like other Jewish lesbians, I have  found myself searching and questioning,  reading between the lines, seeking out the  hidden truth of women's lives. It is this  truth that Dykewomon weaves into an intricate web of history and fiction, presenting us at last with a lesbian account of the  Jewish passage from Tsarist Russia to  America.  From the outset, Dykewomon rewrites  into our memories the languages of our  ancestors, languages that many of us, as  diasporic Jewish lesbians, have lost or have  had ripped away from us. The novel is  sprinkled throughout with Yiddish, Hebrew, Aramic and Russian words. Having  never learned—let alone heard—the languages of my great grandmother, the author's usage of these words along with her  invaluable glossary have brought me closer  to a sense of myself as a Jewish lesbian from  a long lineage of proud women who loved  and dreamed in these words.  The story of this epic journey is told  through the voices of four central characters: Gutke, Chava, Rose and Dovida.  Though each arrives in her own way, all  come to discover their love for women and  begin to name their desires. Dykewomon  allows us to look into her characters' lives  with the intimacy of old friends. The novel  opens with the difficult birth of Chava. It is  Gutke, a midwife with prophetic vision,  who helps bring Chava into the world.  The first few chapters of the novel take  us through the corridors and mazes of  Gutke's life, travelling the dusty corners of  her memory as she recalls her childhood  in Kishinev and the moment when she first  realizes her passion for another woman.  Along the way we meet Pesah, with her  enormous strength and her even more enormous heart. It is Pesah who feeds and lectures her young charge back to life.  Following the footsteps of numerous  Jewish women, it is in the kitchen that  Pesah imparts her priceless wisdom to  young Gutke, filling her mouth and her  mind with a rich mixture of fried garlic,  black bread and old Jewish proverbs. She  is full of telling and hertory reciting stories  that belong both to her and the women who  have come before her for "[wjhenever you  tell the story of one woman, inside is another." Tantilizing smells—of fried garlic,  onions and freshly baked challah—waft  their way through the novel, making our  mouths water and enticing us to devour  page after page in order to engage us and  our hunger in the stories of these incredible women.  With this same hunger, Gutke feasts her  eyes for the first time upon two women  making love: I knew because they were frightened, that they were doing something forbidden, but I didn't know more than that/If there  were words for it - women putting their hands  on each other -1 had never heard them.  , Gutke's desire for women is recognized at a young age, as are her incredible  powers of sight. She is a woman imbued  with magic. The wisdom of the old world  surrounds her and guides her as a midwife,  bringing into the cold, hard, world young  Jewish lives. At each birth she sees a vision,  a prophecy of what the newborn child's  future will hold. It is this prophetic insight  that leads her to Dovida whom she meets  one cold winter night under the light of an  old street lamp.  Dovida's character is an engima, a bed  of living contradictions and transgressions.  She lives as a man, thus gaining access to  both money and power. To Gutke, she is  flame and iron, challenging yet reassuring  and most definitely one who can see into  Gutke's soul: Back and forth her eyes went,  into mine, so far I could feel her walking inside  my breastbone. Walking inside each other's  bones, loving underneath each other's skin,  Gutke and Dovida depart and arrive from  each other, pressing each other's boundaries but loving each other deeply along the  way.  The deep loving that exists between  women—between mother and daughter,  between sister and sister, between lover and  lover—this is the consistent stitch that holds  Beyond the Pale together. However, with  deep loving must also come deep sorrow.  Sorrow and loss are emotions that resonate  for all Jews, including the young Chava.  Dykewomon grabs hold of our imaginations and forces us to witness a bone chilling pogrom through Chava's eyes. Even in  sorrow, fear and grief, Chava and her  mother fight till the bitter end, standing up  to the searing hatred of the Cossacks. This  part of the book is, perhaps, the hardest to  read. Hatred, fear, Cossacks searching for  Jewish women and girls to rape, homes  destroyed, families wiped away. Genocide  and blood.  The fear of  this happening  today is very real,  as real as the  countless stories  and incidents of  Jew hating that  surround us. We  were not meant to  exist as Jews, let  alone as Jewish  lesbians. We were  not meant to exist,  let alone love, live  and thrive. Yet,  this is the message the author  burns into our  hearts through  the stories of  Gutke, Dovida,  Rose and Chava.  These are strong  Jewish women,  lesbians who  thrive by living  with and loving  each other  through the ever  shifting landscapes of their existence.  Their landscapes do shift, transporting  them by steamship from the Russian city  of Odessa to New York, and that infamous  port of arrival, Ellis Island. The significance  of this journey is brought home to us by  Chava's words as she travels to America  with her cousin Rose: Trains now steamers/  the brilliant new engines underneath the century/ take me away from the Ukraine/ away  from Moldavia our family graves/ The wave  has a name it whispers as it slaps the ship:  diaspora. /Carried away on the curve of faith/  with millennia of Jews/1 give myself up/to the  water/to the route.  As Beyond the Pale unfolds, we are carried away, giving ourselves up to the route,  to the journey. Chava and Rose arrive full  of hopes and dreams of life in the golden  land. But the streets are covered with dirt  and their dreams of gold are soon replaced  with life in overcrowded tenements filled  with other poor Jewish immigrants. It is  here that Dykewomon's meticulous research is best displayed. She describes with  incredible precision the realities of Jewish  immigrant women in New York, living and  working as garment workers and in the factories.  Rose is forced to work under exploitative conditions for substandard wages in  various garment factories. Life for her  mother—Bina—is even more difficult. Like  many Jewish mothers whose daughters  work in factories, she is forced to take in  piece work, stiching in the sweltering New  York heat in the isolation of her tenement  apartment. It is because of this exploitation  that Chava and Rose become active in the  labour movement and in fighting for women's suffrage. They are drawn into a world  that is rife with political activity and new  ideas.  Yet beneath the heated political arguments and the fatigue-filled eyes of these  women is a deep love for each other and a  deep appreciation of Jewish women's  beauty. Chava opens herself to the beauty  in Rose. In the dusty, grimy, heat filled corners of their small apartment room, they  find comfort, relief, and joy in each other's  bodies: Rose was short and round and dark /  When I curled around her at night 1 was curling around a lit coal.  Chava's love for Rose's round, dark  flesh; Gutke's desire for Dovida, men's  clothes and all. Four women from the old  world breaking bread together in the new,  forging fresh bonds built with tradition,  food and the lingering taste of women on  their lips. Loving each other through  memories of pogroms, of bloodshed, of  poverty, of hunger, of genocide. Loving  each other through ever-shifting landscapes. Remembering and reclaiming  memory and history through the gazes of  their women lovers. These are the threads  that pull this novel together, creating a lovingly crafted tribute to the strength, resilience and beauty of Jewish lesbians who  dared to exist, let alone love:  My heart is the mother country/and your  eyes are the stories of my people /Come close  and look upon me/ that I may read my own  history.  Amal Rana is well on the way to reclaiming  her Jewish heritage while happily sampling  an assortment of "traditional" foods. This review is dedicated to the memory of her great  grandmother Emelia Morkowich.  SIS  13 Arts  Nu Shu: a hidden language of women in China  Sprung from sisterhood  by Yue-Qing Yang as told to Larissa  Lai and Agnes Huang   "East of the Guilin hills of China, there is  a secret hidden in the mountain villages... No  man could read it. Not even the emperor knew  about it, for it was forbidden. The secret is Nu  Shu, meaning women's writing..."  These are the words that lead into the opening credits of Yue-Qing Yang's film, Nu Shu:  a hidden language of women in China.  Completed as an independent production in  April, the film celebrates the unique language  system created and used exclusively by Yao  women in Hunan province [see box, facing  page.]  The film's Vancouver premiere, sponsored  by the David See-Chai Lam Centre for International Communication at Simon Fraser University, is set to take place on June 4th. An earlier version was shown on Vancouver Television (VTV), and at the Women Filmmakers  Conference co-hosted by the women's studies  departments at SFU and the University of British Columbia.  Yang was born and raised in Shandong  province in eastern China. Although trained  as a biologist in both China and Canada, Nu  Shu is not her first foray into the filmmaking  world. In 1989, Yang made her first documentary, The Chinese Forest Frog, which won the  "Shennong Honour Award."  As a feminist, Yang says she is "dedicated  to uncovering and telling the stories of Chinese women." Her next project is to expand  her 10-minute demo film, Footbinding: the  Three Inch Golden Lotus, into an hour-long  documentary.  Just before Nu Shu's premiere in Vancouver, Larissa Lai and Agnes Huang had the opportunity to interview Yue-Qing Yang for Kinesis.  Larissa Lai: How did you first hear of  NuShu?  Yue-Qing Yang: I first heard about Nu  Shu from a friend. In the 1980s when Nu Shu  was first recognized as a written language,  China's Central Television Station made a  national news broadcast about it. The news  broadcast was shown in Canada, which is  how some people here heard about it.  Then, at the 4th United Nations World  Conference on Women in Beijing, where I  was presenting my video on footbinding, I  met a woman from the Taiwan Women's  Bookstore. We talked about Nu Shu. And  later, I found a researcher at a local university in Beijing who also knew about it.  Lai: I like the self-reflexivity in your  film—you place yourself as a narrator from  the very beginning. You start by talking  about searching out Nu Shu in Hunan province. Later on, there's a segment about a  woman you interviewed named Wu. You  explain how your crew forgot to give her a  red money packet, which was given to all  the other women, so she was beaten by her  husband and forbidden to come back the  next day.  Could you talk about why you decided  to include yourself in the body of the film,  instead of making the film as a conventional, distanced documentary?  Yang: It was easier for me to tell a story,  and it was clearer why I was telling this  story when I linked it with my own process  of finding out what Nu Shu is all about.  Nu Shu says a lot about the past and  present status of women. Not many people  know about Nu Shu, even in China. Sadly,  we don't know how popular Nu Shu was  before it was destroyed because there is no  record [of its herstory]  Lai: What kinds of things did women  write about in Nu Shu?  Yang: Women wrote Nu Shu most before they got married and after their husbands died. Before their marriages, they  mainly wrote about sisterhood, and after  their husbands died, they mainly wrote  about widowhood. Most of the writings  during widowhood were autobiographic.  The tradition has carried on even today—a  few women still go to Yang [Huan-Yi (pictured on the front cover), the only woman of  her generation still living who can read and  write Nu ShuJ and ask her to write about  their lives.  Lai: So Nu Shu as a language is still  alive then?  Yang: I wouldn't say that. Nu Shu is not  naturally alive; it is interfered with.  Lai: What do you mean by that?  Yang: There was a break [in using in Nu  Shu] during the Cultural Revolution (1966  to 1976). There are two reasons some  He Yian Xin (left) shows Wu Liang Yu how to write Nu Shu  Yue-Qing Yang on location  women have come back to Nu Shu. One is  that elder women only know Nu Shu; they  don't know Nan Shu ["men's writing,"  which is what Chinese characters are referred to as.] The other is the attention Nu  Shu women have received from researchers interested in the subject.  Lai: Is there any interest among young  Hunanese women in learning Nu Shu, or is  it purely an academic pursuit?  Yang: It's mostly academic. Young  women nowadays don't learn anything  about Nu Shu when they're in school. It  would be a totally new thing for them to  learn.  Before the 1930s, when young women  weren't allowed to get [a formal] education,  they learnt Nu Shu from other women.  When they were allowed to attend school  to learn Nan Shu, they still went to other  women to learn Nu Shu, so they received  a double education.  During the Cultural Revolution, a  number of women were publicly prosecuted for using Nu Shu. This was a strong  message from the authorities telling  women to shut up. In fact, when the Communists took over in 1949, they abolished  many of the local customs—everything  old, which was considered backward, was  abolished. In the early stages, what many  women wanted to abandon and what the  Communists wanted to abandon were the  same: the "backward" traditions.  I was very influenced by the Communism's strong stance on the equality of  women. The Communists improved women's status—in order to get women's support, the Communists had to give women  freedom. Women supported the [Communist] revolution because from the revolution, women stood to gain the most. And  with women's support, the men [supporting the revolution] gained the most.  It's interesting that the Communist  feminist movement didn't make a link  with Nu Shu, which sends me a message  that the feminist movement in China was  and is very male-oriented!  Agnes Huang: Why wouldn't the feminist movement consider Nu Shu "feminist?"  Yang: Even today, prominent feminists  in China don't think Nu Shu is feminist  because it's not about "political" rights.  When I got to Hunan, I felt so empowered.  This is the strongest source of the feminist  movement in China. Our mothers and  grandmothers—who had bound feet and  who looked very "backward"—survived:  they brought up families, they were  abused, they suffered... but they sustained.  Our feminist source is not middle-class,  British, go-to-the-streets-and-ask-for-our-  rights... That is not our way.  Look what Nu Shu says about marriage: "Zhi yuan huang di zhi cuo li" (This  damn emperor made the wrong custom /  why should I have to be married away).  This kind of statement to me is so enlightening. The Confucians for thousands of  years have been saying, "Jia tien xia" (Family under heaven). So if the women are saying marriage is wrong, then they're also  saying the whole Confucian system is  wrong.  Lai: It's interesting that the bulk of Nu  Shu writing takes place before marriage  and after widowhood. These are the moments when women are the most independent; the moments that seem to be the  most ideal states.  Yang: What the women wrote and received in Nu Shu, they never let their husbands see. Most of their stories were about  their husbands. In that case, it was inconvenient [to be married] because there were  men in the house. When their husbands  died, there were no limits.  Huang: It isn't clear to me from your  film whether all women and girls learned  Nu Shu or if only specific women and girls  learned Nu Shu and became sworn sisters.  Yang: Nu Shu was available to all the  women. However, not every woman knew  how to write. In each village, there were a  few women who were good at Nu Shu and  they acted as scribes for other women.  Lai: Could you talk about the sworn  sisterhoods—how were they organized,  how did they came about, what were their  roots, and did they constitute some sort of  feminist practice?  Yang: Sworn sisterhoods have a long  tradition in China. It's parallel to brotherhoods. A man's friends were other men,  never women. Men respected their mother  because she brought them up, not because  she was a person. In order to respect their  father and the emperor, men had to respect  their mother.  Within marriage, men and women  didn't have any intimacy at all. The family  was totally functional—to bring up children, to let the husband's blood continue.  Confucius said, "Brother is like my hand /  14  SIS  JUNE 1999 Arts  wife is like my clothes." Clothes  can be taken off and thrown away  and you can get another set, but  you cannot chop off your hand  and get another one. Under these  beliefs, a lot of sworn brotherhoods formed.  Women's sisterhood has  never been recognized. The difference in Hunan province is that  the women there have similar ceremonies  as men when they form their sworn  sisterhoods. This kind of practice is allowed,  while in the North, any kind of sisterhood  remains in-the-house.  Lai: Why do you think that is?  Yang: The Yao culture is more democratic in nature. When Confucius was alive,  no one accepted his ideas. When he went to  the South to publicize his ideas, he was  laughed at. After Confucius died, his ideas  were adopted by the emperor because he  found it was the best way to support his  power.  Today in China, I think we've quit our  cultural identity—in the way we dress and  the way we manage our country. Before,  mainland China held up a strong identity,  saying we're Communists, we're Chinese.  But since the open door policy in the late  1980s [which opened China up to foreign  investment,] people in China have been un-  questioningly adopting things from the  West, particularly America. When I see the  young people playing rock-n-roll—lousy  rock-n-roll—I think, "Wow, Chinese people  have quit their form and their souls too."  I think the Yao system is more democratic than today's Western democracy.  Women in Canada still get married and  change their last names to their husband's.  So even in this society where many women  see themselves as feminist, I haven't seen  any system better than the Yao's.  That was another discovery I found  very empowering. We have lots of resources  in China. In the past, we overlooked the Yao  people because we thought they were barbarians. In the present, we overlook them  because they're not modern enough. We  should learn to pay more attention to equality and not just power.  Lai: Do you think the Yao's way of being manifests itself in Nu Shu, in its shapes,  sounds and meaning?  Yang: Language-wise, Nu Shu was a  revolution. Nu Shu is syllabic; Chinese Nan  Shu is pictographic. It's like when I studied  English in university. I was totally shocked;  it was an entirely new language system.  Jian-yong county in Hunan province: where Nu Shu began  Huang: Did the Yao people have their  own written language?  Yang: Historically, they may have had  some symbols they carved in stone or embroidered into patterns. Over the years  though, that was probably lost. Later on,  the emperor forbid anyone to make their  own script, so the Yao people don't have  their own written language now.  Huang: Do you know if Nu Shu came  out of the Yao language?  Yang: There's no evidence of that. The  evidence is that Nu Shu describes [words  and concepts in] the Chinese language itself. It's kind of a local dialect.  Lai: I found the idea that Nu Shu may  have come out of embroidery very interesting. In one of the Nu Shu songs, the  women sing, "Women embroider / Men  study books." There seems to be a sense  of equality, a balance between these two  practices.  Yang: Men have Nan Shu; women  have Nu Shu. Men have their male brothers; women have their female sisters. So  yes, they had a strong sense of equality.  Lai: There's very much a sense of empowerment—empowerment embedded in  women's practices.  Huang: Nu Shu script was often written on fans and handkerchiefs and embroidered into quilts and clothing. Was this  done on purpose so nobody knew the  women were passing letters to each other?  Yang: First of all, the summers in  Hunan are very hot and long. Fans are  popular as a gift. There's a poem called,  "Chu shan"—a fan is a pleasant gift be  cause it can bring comfort to you. A handkerchief is also very common and handy.  Even the third day book [written in Nu Shu,  explaining the ceremony Yao women held  on the third day after marriage] was used  to hold embroidery patterns.  Lai: I'm amazed at how the practice of  Nu Shu is embedded in everyday life.  Yang: It's very organic. Nu Shu is more  alive [as a language] because it uses things  the women use in their day-to-day lives.  Lai: It'd be really interesting to go to  Guangzhou [in Guangdong (Canton) province] and hook up with the descendants of  these Nu Shu women, to see how they live  their lives.  Yang: The Nu Shu customs died and  young Yao women mostly learn Chinese  Nan Shu and adopt "modern" lives. Some  young women know Nu Shu, but it's like  when the earth is gone: How long can a  flower stay? Nu Shu is like a flower that is  growing in the air.  Yue-Qing Yang is currently trying to get  Nu Shu accepted at various film festivals and  screened at other venues. Copies of Nu Shu  are available on VHS video; the cost is $50 for  personal collections and $185 for institutional  use. For tapes, future screenings or more information, contact Yue-Qing Yang, East-West  Film Enterprises Ltd, 8058 Fraser St, Vancouver, BC, V5X 3X4; tel: (604) 322-6146; fax:  (604) 322-6177; email: yang@intouch.bc.ca;  website: www.iniouchhc.ca/publyang.  Larissa Lai is the author of When Fox is a  Thousand. Agnes Huang works at the Vancouver Status of Women.  Nu 5hu: carrying the soul of freedom and equality  For several centuries, and perhaps  even a millennium, Yao women in the  Hunan province in southern China communicated with each other in a script that only  they could understand. This "secret" script  was called Nu Shu. Nu = women. Shu =  writing. Nu Shu = women's writing.  Nu Shu was revolutionary on a  number of levels. As a language, Nu Shu  represented a completely new system: Nu  Shu was syllabic, whereas Chinese (Nan  Shu = men's writing) was pictographic.  Nu Shu also signified the revolution of  women against male dominance, and of  the Southern Yao people against Northern Confucian Han Chinese culture.  As a language created by and for  women, it is not surprising that Nu Shu  sprung out of the sisterhood of women.  Many of the Nu Shu women in a particular  village were sworn sisters, bonded for life.  Nu Shu was embedded in the everyday practices of these women, such as  weaving, and was written on the everyday things they used, such as fans, handkerchiefs and clothing items. As it was  sung and often written in seven character  phrases, Nu Shu was also very poetic.  Nu Shu remained "secret"—unacknowledged outside the region—until  more recent times. It wasn't until the 1980s  that Nu Shu was "recognized" by academics and authorities as a language system.  There is now a Nu Shu dictionary and  many of the songs have been translated  into Chinese.  Sadly though, Nu Shu was devastated  during the revolutions which purported  to liberate women. After the Communist  liberation of 1949, Nu Shu customs (along  with many customs in local regions) were  indiscriminately abolished. By the 1960s,  and particularly during the Cultural Revolution, Nu Shu was virtually extinguished.  Today, there are just a few Yao women who  can read and write Nu Shu.  There are several different stories as to  the origins of Nu Shu. Although it is not  certain who started Nu Shu, all the legends  agree on one point: it was a most gifted  young woman who created Nu Shu by  transforming the Chinese she knew with  embroidery and weaving patterns.  One scholar noted that in Han Chinese  areas, oppression of women was greater  than in the Yao regions; yet, no Nu Shu was  invented. Yue-Qing Yang concludes that  "perhaps it wasn't oppression that initiated  Nu Shu's invention, though this undoubtedly explains its secret use. Its creation may  be better explained by the relative freedom  and equality of Yao culture, which allowed  women's natural creativity to flourish."  9  to  i  *  KINESIS Arts  Listen Up!:  Rhyming into  the real  oy Nad-ne C. King  LISTEN UP  edited by Zoe Anglesey  3allantine Publishing Group, New York,  1999  Listen Up! is a collection featuring nine  of the newest generation of oral poets  straight out of the New York arts scene. The  name-list on the contents page reads like a  NYC cross-cultural map where a  "Hammad" is next door to a "Chin" who  is five, six steps down the way from a  "Tallie."  Spoken word as presented here is the  kind raised on hip-hop, rap and R&B, yet  still mindful of the Beat generation, griots,  free-style jazz vocalization and probably  the gospel shout of the neighbourhood  preacher.  One of the places where all these  streams of influence meet is the Noyorican  Poets Cafe where the ground is urban, percolated through the American social machine, steaming with an agency "[that] did  not spring from an assumption of freedom  based on birthright."  Zoe Anglesey has brought together six  women and three men of colour, many of  them recognized within the spoken word  circuit both in America as well as in international circles.  Starting with a foreword and an introduction, (a tad bit unnecessary for all but  the reader unfamiliar with this art form),  an ABCD line-up coincidentally places the  women right on top of the roster. The first  two, Tish Benson and Ava Chin were warm  enough as appetizers, but did not do too  much for my p(a)late. However, Suheir  Hammad, poet and memoirist born in a  Jordan refugee camp and raised in NYC,  caught my eye with her poem, "nother man  dead."  Yes, Rwanda, East Timor, Sierra Leone  and Kosovo came to mind with this one:  no words there/are no words to/  sugar this up/genocide passes as/eye  candy for /media hungry cash/and  like cash people/are passed from  hand to dirty/hand open palms/  passing sand through/time not mine  living/on borrowed clocks....in language ugly and time/up where is  there space/for flowers/in hearts  jailed there are/no morning glories to  bid/god a good day/kids lick flames  of /hot ice screams/rain  stark...memory absorbs like soil/  there are no words/and not one  word/erases my earth.  In "angels get no maps," Hammad  rolls hip-hop and gospel right along side  her Muslim sensibilities and makes it all fit  as she "run[s] between safa and marwah/  bed stuy and bush wick." Her introduction  in this anthology definitely piqued my interest in her published book of poetry, Born  Palestinian, Born Black.  The writer who really got me in the gut  was Jessica Care Moore. For this review I'm  featuring two sections of her work. Take  One:  Carving out windows at the top of my  head/I scream vulgarities, politics,  principles, my panty size, and/my  oral fetish for pen tops /in the com  fort of my own  home/I will not define myself with the  false definitions of  survival/There are so  many dead pretending to live among us  now/So many who  wait for the opinion  of others before getting out of bed/I recognize sistas hiding in  groups of sistas/bonded by foreign  letters, colours, class and the fear of  loneliness/  In "one afro's blues," Moore is unashamed about revealing the fears tangled  in her hair, weaving mainstream rhyming  into the real and underestimated strength  of a woman—a heterosexual Black woman,  who dares to write in endlessly trying  times.  Take Two, an excerpt from Moore's A  work in progress:  Your name will be one African syllable too many / ...pretending that she  just can't pronounce Kenya or  Brendesha/with america's alphabet/  this is the moment you will find  meaning in cuss words/you will take  the cuts attempting to find the front  line/your scent will leave hunters  running in the wrong direction/as  your home becomes brick your bones  become thick/clocks will confuse the  moon into thinking/dark is a synonym for gloom.../strength will ap  pear from behind the sun/they will  call you a freak/ you were born writing and will soon learn to run./  We are born writing /but will  learn to wait/  Looking over the book, it seems Anglesey made a concerted effort to double  the ratio of women to men. But apart from  Hammad and Moore, the other women  failed to catch my eye. Now, I will be the  first to admit I have a lavender bias. However, even without it, I'd still need the notes  to run from periwinkle to indigo. Listen Up!  has a smidgen too much of one shade of  the relationship blues.  Flipping past a short afterword, which  was an unnecessary stamp of academic approval, the anthology ends with a fine listing of film, video and relevant works.  Listen Up!—a stew that's missing a variety of ingredients but with a few fairly  spicy pieces...nevertheless.  Nadine C. King is grateful to the Feminist  Newspaper Goddess for granting Kinesis a  merciful editor who hasn't meted out punishment for tardiness.  ISImstS MteBftilim 25 ifaans  is*   Western Canada's  V 1       Lesbian & Gay  Bookstore  Open Daily 10am to 1 lpm  Our Books/Our Issues  Gay Fiction  Lesbian Fiction  Our Magazines & Journals  AIDS/Health  Humour  Erotica  Queer Theory  Feminist Theory  Biographies, Essays, Poetry  Religion & Spirituality  Art & Photography  Community  Little Sister's Book & Art Emporium  1238 Davie Street, Vancouver, B.C. V6E 1N4  (604) 669-1753 Phone Orders 1-800-567-1662  Internet Address: http://www.lsisters.com  Speaking Out For Safe and Respectful  Health Care for Women  COMMUNITY  HEALTH  ADVOCATES  There are 10 Volunteer Advocates helping women in  various communities of the Vancouver/Richmond Region.  SPECIAL THANKS to our partners who provide  safe space and support for the Advocates:  bo South Vancouver Neighbourhood House  bo Richmond Women's Resource Centre  bo UBC Women's Centre  so South Asian Women's Centre  bo Downtown Eastside Senior Centre  bo Multi-Cultural Family Centre  bo The Centre  bo Women with Disabilities Health Action Group  The Vancouver Women's Health  Collective supports women in  making their own decisions  about their health care.  (31  Visit the InfoCentre at  #219-1675 W 8th Ave  Call for Information & Hours  736-5262 Bulletin Board  read   t h i s I     INVOLVEMENT  EVENTS  Bulletin Board listings have a  maximum of 50 words. Groups,  organizations and individuals eligible  for free space in the Bulletin Board  must be, or have, non-profit  objectives.  Other free notices will be items of  general public interest and will appear  at the discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $8 (+$0.56 GST) for  the first 50 words or portion thereof,  $4 (+$0.28 GST) for each additional  25 words or portion thereof and must  be prepaid.  Deadline for all submissions is  the 18th of the month preceding  publication. Note: Kinesis is  published ten times a year. Jul/Aug  and Dec/Jan are double issues.  All submissions should include a  contact name and telephone number  for any clarification that may be  required.  Listings will not be accepted over the  telephone.  Kinesis encourages readers to  research the goods and services  advertised in Bulletin Board. Kinesis  cannot guarantee the accuracy of the  information provided or the safety and  effectiveness of the services and  products listed.  Send submissions to Kinesis, #309-  877 E. Hastings Street, Vancouver, BC,  V6A 3Y1, fax: (604) 255-7508, or email:  kinesis@web.net. For more  information call (604) 255-5499.  INVOLVEMENT  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis? We want to get involved with  you too. Help plan our next issue. All women  interested in what goes into Kinesis—  whether it's news, features or arts—are  invited to our Story Meetings held on the  first Tuesday of every month at 7pm at our  office, 309-877 E. Hastings St. The next  meetings are on Jun 8 and Aug 3. For more  information or if you can't make the meeting  but still want to find out how to contribute to  the content of Kinesis, give Agnes a call at  (604) 255-5499. New and experienced  writers welcome. Childcare and travel  subsidies available.  INQUIRING MINDS WANTTO KNOW!  Do you ever wonder how the pages of text  in the newspaper you're holding get lined  up so neatly? Want to know what the fastest  way to get wax off your hands is? How  about all the cool things you can do with a  scanner? Does thinking about the right dot  pattern keep you up at night? Or do visions  of rubylith enter into your dreams? If so,  then you definitely need to come down and  help put Kinesis together. Just drop by  during our next production dates and help  us design and lay out Canada's national  feminist newspaper, and all your questions  will be answered. We'll be in production for  our July-August 1999 issue from Jun 16-  22. Come and join us. No experience is  necessary. Training and support will be  provided. If this notice intrigues you, call us  at (604) 255-5499. Childcare and travel  subsidies available.  FEMINIST FUNDRAISERS WANTED  VSW is seeking enthusiastic, energetic and  creative women to join the Finance and  Fundraising Committee. If you enjoy raising  money for a great cause, organizing events,  or just want to have fun, call Audrey at (604)  255-6554 today!  VSW IS LOOKING FOR YOU!  If you want to learn to do referral and peer  counselling work, at VSW we are offering  a great opportunity to women interested in  volunteering in the day. Come answer the  phone lines, talk to women who drop in,  and help connect them with the community resources they need. For more  information call Shana at (604)255-6554.  Childcare and travel subsidies available.  VOLUNTEER NEWSLETTER  Are you a volunteer at VSW or Kinesis? If  so, please feel free to make contributions  to our new monthly "Volunteer Newsletter."  The newsletter is for us—for all VSW/  Kinesis volunteers—and will be a place for  updates on committee work, gossip,  recipes, things for sale/barter, a calendar  of events, and whatever else volunteers  want to put in. if you want more info  contact Amal Rana (Kinesis production  coordinator) at 255-5499 or Rita Dhamoon  of the VSW Volunteer Development  Committee at (604) 255-6554.   KINESIS MARKETING GANG  Are you interested in being on the hottest  new committee at VSW? Then check out  the Kinesis Marketing Gang. We're looking  for women who have experience or are  interested in marketing. The Marketing  Gang works as a collective to strategize  on innovative ways to promote and raise  the profile of Kinesis. The gang meets  monthly. Training and support will be  provided by Kinesis marketing coordinator  Jenn I .c. Call her at (604) 255-5499.  DESH PARDESH  The 10th annual Desh Pardesh festival  celebrating South Asian culture, politics  and arts will be held in Toronto from June  9-13. For more information or if you are  interested in volunteering contact Amie at  401 Richmond St. West, Suite 450, Toronto,  ON, M5V 3A8; tel: (416) 340-0485 or fax:  (416) 340-1418. Or check out Desh's  website at http://home.ican.net/desh.  CHILDREN AND DOMESTIC  VIOLENCE  The BC/Yukon Society of Transition Houses  is hosting an International Conference on  Children Exposed to Domestic Violence in  Vancouver Oct 27-29. The focus of the  conference is on integrating research,  policy, and practice. Among the conference  presenters will be Helen Dempster of the  Society and local counselor Val Oglov, with  other presenters from across Canada and  the US. To register, or for more info, call  (604) 669-6943 or email  hdempst@istar.ca.  MENOPAUSE  Marion Smith will talk about menopause  from her personal experience on Sat Jun 5  from 11am-1pm. She will also present info  she gathered in creating the new and  improved Menopause Kit, now available.  The talk will take place at the Women's  Health Information Centre, 219-1675 West  8th Ave, Vancouver. For info leave a  message for Tamara Flick-Parker at (604)  736-4234.  EVENTS  MICHIGAN WOMYN'S FEST  The Michigan Womyn's Music Festival will  be held Aug 10-15. The annual event  attracts 5-8,000 women for a week-long  event that includes 40 performances, 200  workshops, a film festival and crafts faire,  and 650 secluded acres for camping. Some  of the artists scheduled to appear include  Suzanne Westenhoefer, Dar Williams, The  Drumsong Orchestra with Ubaka Hill,  Marga Gomez and Tribe 8. For the full  week tickets are $260-310 sliding scale  (before Jul 17) and $290-340 (after Jul 17).  Includes all activities, meals, concerts,  dances, workshops, film festival, camping  and childcare. For more info call (616) 757-  4766; fax (616) 757-3414; or write  WWTMC, Box 22 Walhalla, Ml, 49458. Or  visit their website at: www.michfest.com.  POPULAR EDUCATION  Vancouver Status of Women is holding its  popular education program "Gaining my  Voice, Taking our Strength" for five evenings starting Jun 2. Issues to be addressed will be determined by the participants. Among the goals are identifying  skills, enhancing self-esteem, recognizing  our common struggles, and taking collective action. The program is free. Preference  will be given to women living on limited  income. The venue is partially accessible to  women with disabilities. Childcare and  transportation subsidies are available.  Space is limited. To register call Ema at  (604) 255-6554.  KINFSiS  III  ?!  __«i  _=«i  Dudes:  full-timel  Editdf1  The Kinesis Editor is a full-time staff person who supervises the production of a 20-28 page newspaper, 10 times a  year. With the volunteer Kinesis Editorial Board, the Editor will:  • actively solicit articles; write articles; edit and copy edit; and make decisions regarding final copy in  accordance with Kinesis editorial policies;  • maintain and expand Kinesis' contact with women's groups, other political and social justice organizations,  individuals; and news/information resources which may be a source of stories;  • keep abreast of current issues, debates and news relevant to a feminist newspaper;  • actively recruit and assist in the training of volunteer writers;  • conduct the day-to-day administrative work associated with publishing a newspaper, along with the  VSW Administrator and the Subscription Services Coordinator;  • work closely with the Kinesis Production Coordinator, Designer, Marketing Coordinator to fulfil the  newspaper's goals and work in their respective areas;  • facilitate monthly Story meetings and Editorial Board meetings. The  Editor also sits on the Kinesis Marketing Gang, which meets monthly;  • assist with VSW activities where feasible, and attend weekly VSW  staff meetings and monthly Coordinating Collective meetings.  Qualifications  The successful applicant will have:  • an ability to work effectively and collectively with volunteers and paid  workers;  • an ability to interpret Kinesis' editorial policy and translate it into a tangible  product each month;  • excellent editorial, writing and copy editing skills, with an ability to work  under deadline pressure;  • an ability to initiate and maintain contact with local communities, as well as  provincial, national and international contacts;  • a broad-based knowledge of women's issues and women's groups in  British Columbia and across Canada, with a particular awareness of the  struggles of women of colour, Aboriginal women and working class  women;  • familiarity with advocacy journalism in general, and feminist journalism in  particular;  • computer skills relevant to Kinesis' administration and production. (Kinesis  uses IBM-compatible software: WordPerfect, PageMaker, Adobe  Photoshop, Netscape Communicator.) The Editor requires a working  knowledge of WordPerfect, and some knowledge of PageMaker is helpful  but not required.  • knowledge of publication design and production  • organizational skills, especially regarding production flow and volunteer  training.  Medical/dental; seven weeks  vacation annually  (after 1st year)  There will be a one-month  training period.  Monday. August 16,1999  Please send applications to:  Kinesis Hiring Committee,  #309-877 E. Hastings St,  Vancouver, BC, V6A3Y1;  fax: (604) 255-7508  For more information, call (604)  255-5499. '. • >» \ # X WvX. -,   • V..WV*VV*A'  Bulletin Board  EVENTS  GROUPS  SUBMISSIONS  SUBMISSIONS  MAQUILA WORKERS  Jobs Yes, But With Dignity, a presentation  on Maquila workers in Honduras will be  held Tues June 1 at 7pm at La Quena  Coffeehouse, 1111 Commercial Drive,  Vancouver. The presentation will be made  by Maria Luisa Regalado from CODEMUH  (Honduran Women's Collective), a women's organization that supports the efforts  of women maquila workers. This event is  hosted by the Trade Union Group for  International Solidarity (TUG) and  CoDevelopment Canada (CoDev). Admission is free. For more info call TUG at (604)  708-8732.   MIDWIFERY PICNIC  The Ottawa Area Aspiring Midwives and  the Midwifery Consumer Collective Ottawa-  Carleton invites all former midwifery  clients, midwives, families and friends to  the second Midwifery Family Picnic on Jun  12 from 11am-2pm.The picnic will be held  at Vincent Massey Park at the corner of  Rivershide and Heron in Ottawa. For more  info contact Susanne Bergmann at  susannebergmann @ yahoo.com.  WAR ZONES  War Zones, an exhibition and public event  project about conflict and war presents  "Present Tense," is now showing at the  Artspeak Gallery. "Present Tense" highlights the works of Mona Hatom and Nancy  Patterson. The exhibit runs till Jun 26. For  more info contact the Artspeak Gallery at  (604) 688-0051.   FAMILY LAWTALK  Rosemary Hunter, an associate professor  of law from the University of Melbourne in  Australia, will be in Vancouver Mon Jun 21,  2pm, to talk about "Legal Services in  Family Law." Hunter is currently engaged in  a major project investigating family law  legal services in the Australian context,  GROUPS  POSITIVEWOMEN'S NETWORK  The Positive Women's Network in Vancouver is looking for new board members for  immediate appointment. The Network  supports women living with HIV/AIDS to  make their own choices by providing safe  access to services and resources. If you  are interested in women's issues and want  to be part of a dynamic and vital organization for women or for more info, call Nancy  Pang at (604) 893-2200.   ALLIES TO FIRST NATIONS WOMEN  "Allies to First Nations Women," a subcommittee of the National Action Committee on  the Status of Women-BC region, has been  re-activated. The subcommittee works in  solidarity with Aboriginal women, particularly in the areas of research, proposal  writing and organizing. Any woman wishing  to join is welcome. For more info call  Donna at (604) 254-0812.   CUSTODY AND ACCESS SUPPORT  Battered Women's Support Services in  Vancouver offers a free, once a week drop-  in support group to share information,  problem solve, strategize and support on  custody issues for women who are involved  in custody and access issues as a result of  separating from an abusive relationship.  Call (604) 687-1867 for more info.   MENOPAUSE AWARENESS GROUP  The Surrey Women's Centre is sponsoring  a Menopause Awareness Group which  meets the 4th Monday of each month for  informal discussions around menopause  issues. The group starts at 7:30pm and will  be held at the centre. For location or more  info call Janet or Sharon at (604) 589-  BUILDING BLOCKS  Building Blocks Vancouver offers information and support for Spanish-speaking,  Vietnamese and Aboriginal women living in  the Grandview Woodlands area expecting  their first baby or with newborns under  three-months old. The program has a great  team of Home Visitors to assist women. For  more info call Mosaic at (604) 254-9626 or  the Vancouver Aboriginal Friendship  Centre Society at (604) 251-4844, local  311.   WOMEN ABUSE SUPPORT GROUP  A support group in Vancouver for women  abused by women is available for lesbians,  dykes and bisexual women through  Battered Women's Support Services.  Emotional support, legal information and  advocacy, safety planning, and referrals  are offerred.The group is free and confidential and onsite childcare is available.  For more info call Sarah or April at (604)  687-1867.  BWSS DROP-IN GROUPS  Battered Women's Support Services in  Vancouver is offering support groups for  women who are in or who have been in an  abusive relationship. Women can drop-in to  just one session or come to as many as  they like. Offered two times a week. In  these groups, women meet to talk about  issues related to abuse and healing that  are relevant to them. Pre-registration is not  needed. For more info call (604) 687-1867.  COMPULSIVE EATING SUPPORT  A drop-in support group for women with  issues of compulsive eating is held twice a  month at the Eating Disorder Resource  Centre of BC, St. Paul's Hospital, Room  2C-213, 1081 Burrard St., Vancouver.  Drop-in times are 7:30pm to 9pm every 1st .  and 3rd Wednesday of the month. Facilitated by Colleen Hyland and Cynthia  Johnston. For more info call (604) 631-  5313.   RAPE RELIEF VOLUNTEERS  Vancouver Rape Relief and Women's  Shelter needs women who are interested  in volunteering for their 24-hour crisis line  and transition house for women and  children. Volunteer training sessions are  held Tuesday evenings. For more info and  a training interview call (604) 872-8212.  SHAKTI  Shakti (meaning "strength") is a self-help  group in Vancouver for South Asian women  who have experienced the psychiatric  system. The group meets every 1st and  3rd Saturday of the month 1 -3pm at South  Vancouver Neighbourhood House, 6470  Victoria Dr. Join the group for outings,  discoveries, peer support, relaxing massage. Participation is free. For more info  call Helen (604) 733-5570 (for English) or  (604) 682-3269 box 8144 (for Punjabi,  Hindi and Urdu). Sponsored by the Vancouver/Richmond Mental Health Network.  SATRANG  If you are into drama, theatre sports, etc.  and feel strongly about issues affecting  South Asian women, come and check out  the South Asian Theatre & Networking  Group. Satrang is about enthusiasm and  having fun with your creativity in a positive  scene. Meetings are every Monday from  3:30 to 5:00pm at the South Asian Women's Centre at 8163 Main Street, Vancouver. For more info call Anu at 592-0013 or  Sonia at 325-6637.  HEALTH NETWORK  The Canadian Women's Health Network  invites submissions for its quarterly  newsletter, Network. If you'd like to contribute or want to suggest a topic we should  cover, please contact the  editor at news@cwhn.ca. Or contact her at  CWHN Network, 203-419 Graham Ave,  Winnipeg, MB, R3C 0M3, or visit the  CWHN website at www.cwhn.ca.  PRIDE IN ART  The Pride in Art Society in Vancouver  invites submissions of art and short stories  for this year's queer art exhibition, which  will take place from Jul 29-Aug 15 at the  Roundhouse Community Centre, 181  Roundhouse Mews. Submissions will be  accepted in from May 29-Jun 6. Send  entries to Pride Art Exhibition 1999, c/o  Robert L. Hong, 103-1065 Burnaby St,  Vancouver, BC, V6E 1N9. For more info  contact by email: robbieh@direct.ca or tel:  (604) 683-3884.   TRUE TALES OF PUBLIC TRANSIT  Anvil Press Publishers want your real-life  stories (3,000 words max) about heading  out, heading back, and everything that  happened in between on public transit—  whether the trip was across the country or  just across town. Selected submissions  will be published in the anthology Exact  Fare Only: Good, Bad and Ugly Rides on  Public Transit. Publication date: Sept 2000.  Payment: honorarium plus complimentary  copies of the anthology. Only submissions  accompanied by a self-addressed stamped  envelope will be returned. Email entries will  not be considered. Send submissions to:  Exact Fare Only, Anvil Press Publishers,  204A-175 E. Broadway, Vancouver, BC,  V5T 1W2. Tel. (604) 876-8710. Deadline is  Dec 1.  ART SHOW SPACE  The Vancouver Women's Health Collective  has opened its space to women artists.  Shows will run for 4-6 weeks under  contract guidelines. The Collective will host  an opening, and provide some advertising  as well as hanging materials. For details,  leave a message for Christine Campbell or  Tamara Flick-Parker at (604) 736-4234.  FILIPINA NURSES  Are you a Filipina nurse who came to  Canada under the Live-in Caregiver  Program? The Philippine Women Centre is  gathering the experiences of Filipina  nurses who enter Canada as domestic  helpers. By sharing experiences, participants can identify what the systemic  barriers are that prevent them from developing to their full potential in Canada. One  strategy is to begin the process of getting  collective recognition for the education and  skills Filipina nurses bring to Canada. For  more info about this research project or the  PWC's Nurses' Support Group, call Maita  or Mayette at (603) 215-1103.   APIWIMMIN AND GIRLS  Are you a wimmin or girl of full, mixed or  partial Asian or Pacific Islander origin?  Have you always wanted to see your  work—be it poetry, art, recipes, rants,  fiction or non-fiction—in print? Fire Moon!  Asian and Pacific Islander Wimmin's  Alliance, wants to print your stuff for its  zine. All submissions can be handed into  the Simon Fraser University Women's  Centre, c/o Janet. Submissions are  accepted on an ongoing basis. For more  info call (604) 291-3670 or email:  boun@sfu.ca.  ABUSE OF PARENTS  A group of women in Nova Scotia is  collecting information about the abuse of  parents by their teenage children. They  hope to publish a booklet for families which  includes reading lists for professionals and  parents, and ideas for what groups,  including support groups of parents, can  do to help themselves and their communities. The group is looking for any research,  resources or projects on this issue. To  share info or for more details about the  booklet, email to  barbara.cottrell@dbis.ns.ca.  BINET CONFERENCE  The BC Bisexual Network (BiNET) is  seeking workshop submissions for its 1999  conference to be held Sep 11-12 at a  location to be announced. The organizers  are Interested in a variety of subject matter  exploring experiences and identities of  those in and "around" the bisexual community. Workshops in all languages are  welcome. For info email  binet@hotmail.com or call 875-6336.  Deadline for submissions is Jun 30.  ACTIVISM AND GLOBALIZATION  Submissions are being sought for Women's  Community Activism and Globalization:  Linking the Local and Global for Social  Change, an edited collection on women's  community activism. This collection seeks  to make visible the links between women's  community-based organizing and global  political and economic forces. Original  studies and first person accounts of  women's community organizing that are  explicitly or self-consciously dealing with  global processes affecting the lives of  women and their communities in rural and  urban locations around the world  are of interest. Submissions from community activists as well as academics and'  development workers are welcome. For  more info or to submit a proposal, contact  Nancy Naples by phone at (949) 824-5749  or by email mnaples@uci.edu. Deadline for  proposals is Aug 15. Deadline for completed papers is Dec 31.  CALL FOR ABSTRACTS  Abstracts are being sought for a conference on women's health. Building Bridges:  Creating an Integrated Approach to  Women's Health that will take place from  Apr 29-May 1,2000 in Victoria, BC. The  goal of the conference is to encourage an  integration of social determinants and  biomedical approaches to wome's health  and enable health practitioners, community  groups, researchers, policy makers and  health educators to engage in productive  dialogue about ways to bring different  perspectives together to create a new,  more holistic approach to understanding  women's health. For more info contact  Anne Speer of the Women's Health  Bureau, BC Ministry of Health, by phone at  (250) 952-2237 or by email  anne.speer@moh.hnet.bc.ca. Or call  Pamela Gole at (604) 806-5322 or email  pgole@ha.bc.ca. Deadline for submissions  is Aug 3.   GAY PRIDE IN KELOWNA  The organizers of Kelowna's first annual  Gay Pride Talent Show are seeking  potential entrants. The show will take place  Fri Jun 25, 8pm at The Laurel, 1304 Ellis  St. Those interested in showing off their  talents should submit their names, a  description of their act, and contact  information to The Okanagan Rainbow  Coalition, Talent Show, 1960 Water St,  Kelowna, BC, V1Y 1K6. Deadline for  applications is June 7. For more info  contact the gay line at (250) 860-8555. CLASSIFIEDS  OCEAN FRONT CABIN  Charming, secluded, ocean front cabin,  Roberts Creek, Sunshine Coast. Two  bedrooms, full bath, kitchen with all  amenities. Relax in picturesque setting.  Ideal for cycling, hiking, swimming,  kyaking. Children welcome. Friendly,  trained outdoor felines OK. Smoke free  indoors. Weekly $350. Group retreat rates.  Weekend rates. Available from May/99.  (250) 352-3609 or hgh@netidea.com  SPINSTERVALE  Work exchanger(s) wanted at Spinstervale,  on Vancouver Island. Three hours a day for  cabin and food. Opportunity exists in salad  business for local farmer's market. Apprentice also needed to care for goats. Or, rent  cosy cabins for $7.50 night/person. Contact  Box 429, Coombs, BC. V0R 1M0; call (250)  248-8809 or e-mail: sunshine ©macn.bc.ca  GAIA ADVENTURES  GAIA (Mother Earth) Adventures presents  Outdoor Adventures for Women. Hike easy  but beautiful nature hikes in Lynn Valley  Sat May 22 or Squamish Estuary Sun  June 27 with our experienced guides. You  can also discover the adventure of rock  climbing with us on Sat June 26 (no  experience required) or Backpack Vancouver Island's Carmanah Pacific old growth  forest in early July. Call 875-0066 today or  check out our website at www.vancouver-  bc.com/Gaia  WOMEN'S SELF-DEFENSE  Women Educating in Self-defense Training  (WEST) teaches Wenlido. In Basic classes,  you learn how to make the most of mental,  physical and verbal skills to get away from  assault situations. Continuing training  builds on basic techniques to improve  physical and mental strength. By women,  for women. For info, call 876-6390.  HELP WANTED  CDA or chairside with x-ray certificate for  friendly eastside dental practice. Call Cindy  at (604) 251-1322.  CLASSIFIEDS  CITYVIEW CO-OP  Cityview Housing Co-op is accepting  applications for its waitlist for one, two and  three bedroom suites ($565, $696, $795  per month and refundable share purchase).  Carpets, blinds, appliances, parking and  laundry room. Children and small pets  welcome. Participation required. Please  send a business size SASE to Membership  Committee, Cityview Housing Co-op, 108-  1885 E. Pender St, Vancouver, BC, V5L  1W6.   WOMEN'S FUNDRAISING  The WELL Society (Women Embracing  Lives of Liberty,) a registered charity in  Vancouver that helps women and their  children leaving violent situations with  household goods and clothing, is seeking  creative and woman positive revenue  generating people to help the Society with  its fundraising efforts. An incentive of 20  percentage of total proceeds will be  offered. The Society also offers a pre-  employment program (Liberty Works) and  operates a thrift store (Liberty Thrift.) If  interested, submit fundraising proposals in  writing with a cover letter/resume to The  WELL Collective, Liberty Thrift, 3070  Commercial Dr, Vancouver, BC, V5N 4E2  or by fax at (604) 255-3060. Deadline is  Jun 4.  DAWN CANADA  DAWN Canada (DisAbled Women's  Network) is offering a four-month skills  development program in Vancouver,  specifically tailored for women with any  type of disability and who are not eligible  for El. The course will run from Jun 7-Sep  24. (A second course is tentatively set to  run Aug 8-Nov 26.) The program runs three  days a week, with eight weeks of classes  and eight weeks of community placement.  A training allowance will be available for  participants. For more info contact Monika  Chappell by phone at (604) 294-9958 or by  email at mchappll@winfonet.bc.ca.  A POWERFUL LINEUP OF  WOMEN OF MUSIC & SONG  Including: BARBARA HIGBIE AND  TERESA TRULL; VEDA HILLE; SWEET  HONEY IN THE ROCK; STACEY  EARLE; WAYQUAY, KINNIE STARR  PI IIQ THE PAPERB0Y8; DAN BERN; a  I LUUspectacular, a celebration of taiko  music from China, Persia, Africa, Cuba  EARLY BIRD TICKETS NOW ON SALE! Early Bird weekend  passes are $85 and are available until June 19 through the  Vancouver Folk Music Festival office with no service charge.  BUY IN PERSON at 100 - 207 West Hastings, CALL 602-9798,  FAX your order to 602-9790 or E-MAIL to tix@the  festival.bcca. Tickets are also available at all TICKETMASTER  OUTLETS, by PHONE at 280-4444 ar|d online at  www.ticketmaster.ca. For further information VISIT OUR  WEBSITE (courtesy of WaterStreet  Technologies) at www.the festival.bcca. LIB1Z8  LIBRARY PROCESSING CTR - SERIALS  2206 EAST MALL, U B.C  VANCOUVER BC  V6T 1Z8  Brighre  &Ml  One year  □$20 + $1.40 GST  Two years  □$36 + $2.52 GST  Institutions/Groups  □$45+ $3.15 GST  □ Cheque enclosed  □ Bill me  □ New  □ Renewal  □ Gift  □ Donation  □ Visa  Card#:    Name   Address   Country   Telephone _  E-mail   □ Mastercard  For individuals who can't afford the full amount $  for Kinesis subscription, send what you can.  Free to women prisoners.  Orders outside Canada add $8.  Vancouver Status of Women Membership  (includes Kinesis subscription)  □$30+$1.40 GST  Expiry date:   Postal code_  Fax   Published ten times a year by the Vancouver Status of Women  #309-877 E. Hastings St., Vancouver, BC V6A 3Y1  ______