 <°\ MAY 1997  'S 9mPs « i*°P*dJ^tg^m$L  PH§2.25 Inside  KINESIS  #309-877 E. Hastings St.,  Vancouver, BC V6A 3Y1  Tel: (604)255-5499  Fax:(604)255-5511  Kinesis welcomes volunteers to work  on all aspects of the paper. Our next  Writers' Meeting is Mon May 5 and  Tues June 3 at our new office, 309-  877 E. Hastings St. Production for the  June issue is from May 21-27. All  women welcome even if you don't  have experience.  Kinesis is published ten times a year  by the Vancouver Status of Women.  Its objectives are to be a non-  sectarian feminist voice for women  and to work actively for social change,  specifically combatting sexism,  racism.classism, homophobia,  ableism, and imperialism. Views  expressed in Kinesis are those of the  writer and do not necessarily reflect  VSW policy. All unsigned material is  the responsibility of the Kinesis  Editorial Board.  EDITORIAL BOARD  Fatima Jaffer, Lissa Geller (on leave),  wendy lee kenward (on leave), Agnes  Huang, Sook C. Kong, Rachel Rosen  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE  Dorcas, Christine Thompson, Marlene  del Hoyo, Selina Todd, Nancy Pang  Judy Miller, Anne Web, Faith Jones,  Carol Read, Fatima Jaffer, Jehn Starr,  Catherine Munn, Kathleen Barrett,  Centime Zeleke  Advertising: Sur Mehat  Circulation: Audrey Johnson, Chrystal  Fowler  Distribution: Fatima Jaffer  Production Coordinator: Swee Sim Tan  Typesetter: Sur Mehat  FRONT COVER  Rika Yuto and Ellen Woodsworth join  the protest in support of afffordable  housing outside the Woodwards  building (see page 5).  Photo by Fatima Jaffer.  PRESS DATE  April 22,1997  SUBSCRIPTIONS  Individual: $20 per year (+$1.40 GST)  or what you can afford  Institutions/Groups:  $45 per year (+$3.15 GST)  VSW Membership (includes 1 year  Kinesis subscription):  $30 per year (+$1.40 GST)  SUBMISSIONS  Women and girls are welcome to  make submissions. We reserve the  right to edit and submission does not  guarantee publication. If possible,  submissions should be typed, double  spaced and must be signed and  include an address, telephone number|  and SASE. Kinesis does not accept  poetry or fiction. Editorial guidelines  are available upon request.  DEADLINES  All submissions must be received in  the month preceding publication.  Note: Jul/Aug and Dec/Jan are double  issues.  Features and reviews: 10th  News: 15th  Letters and Bulletin Board: 18th  Display advertising  (camera ready): 18th  (design required): 16th  Printing by Horizon Publications.  Kinesis is indexed in  Women's Periodicals Index,  the Alternative Press Index, and is a  member of the Canadian Magazine  Publishers Association.  ISSN 0317-9095  Publications mail registration #6426  Mews  Women get ready for the federal election 3  by Agnes Huang  Women's centres to lose funding 3  by Emilie Coulter  Women, community and the Internet 4  by Shannon e. Ash  Fighting for affordable housing in the Downtown Eastside 5  by Rachel Rosen  Remembering the Vernon Massacre 6  by Fatima Jaffer  P0otii res  Violence against women is endemic and epidemic 11  speeches by Bonnie Agnew, Fay Blaney, Agnes Huang  and Yasmin Jiwani  Report from the Sixth World Congress on Women 15  by Habiba Zaman  Women and the Internet 4  Jentrespread  Organizing against free trade in Mexico 12  by Lilia Vazquez Garcia as told to Ema Oropeza  Arts  Asian Heritage Month makes debut in Vancouver 16  by Rita Wong  Two handbooks to help women get on-line 17  reviewed by Penny Goldsmith  As Kinesis Goes to Press 2  Inside Kinesis 2  What's News 8  compiled by Andrea Imada, Faith Jones and Carol Read  International What's News 9  compiled by Smita Patil  Movement Matters 10  compiled by Rachel Rosen and Andrea Imada  Paging Women 18  compiled by Nancy Pang and Gita Lyfe  Letters 20  Bulletin Board 21  compiled by Selina Todd  Don't forget Kinesis and the Vancouver  Status of Women have moved. Our new  address is:  Suite 309-877 East Hastings Street  Vancouver, BC   V6A 3Y1  Our telephone and fax numbers  will remain the same:  Kinesis: (604) 255-5499  VSW public line: (604) 255-5511  Fax: (604) 255-5511  Asian Heritage Month As Kinesis goes to press, the Liberal  government is set to drop the writ on another federal election. June 2: that's the date  most are predicting now. June 2...how did  the Liberals come up with that date. One  comment made in the Globe and Mail was  that the Liberals wanted to hold the election before the next set of unemployment  figures are released (on June 6).  It shouldn't surprise us that the Liberal government is trying to hide its track  record on the employment front—we all  remember their promises about job creation  (and what about even just job "preservation").  As women, and as the ones hardest hit  by the restructuring of the workforce that  the Liberal government is pushing, we need  to remember that the Liberal government  has sold us out (and is continuing to do so)  to the global imperialist, capitalist agenda.  (Remember, the recent trip to a number of  Asian countries by Jean Chretien and the  provincial premiers? Remember  APEC?...it's coming to Vancouver soon.)  We're already getting close to a decade of  the free trade experience, and women have  faced so many setbacks in terms of our well-  being. And it's not just our economic well-  being. Free trade has also damaged our  health and our educational opportunities  (bye, bye social programs), our safety (what  do you mean you can't find $50 million for  rape crisis centres and transition houses),  and on and on and on.  So during the election campaign, when  you hear politicians go "blah, blah, blah"  about how expanding free trade will stimulate the economy by encouraging investment which will lead to more jobs for  Canadians....remember to say, "We're not  buying this anymore."  Remind the politicians about all the  women who are stuck in low-paying jobs,  part-time jobs, homework situations, who  can't find a job, who can't take a job because they don't have access to affordable  childcare, who can't quit their jobs even if  they're being sexual harassed because they  can't be certain they'd be able to get unemployment insurance it they did...  For all our sisters, we need to take collective responsibility as women to take on  the right wing, neo-conservative,  corporatist (and whatever else you'd like  to call it) agenda. That's the only way we  can successfully fight against global imperialism.  If you're interested in finding out more  how free trade affects our lives as women,  the NO! to APEC Coalition in Vancouver  will be holding a popular education workshop on APEC. It's on Saturday, May 17  from 11am to 5pm at the Kalayaan Centre,  451 Powell St. Drop by or if you can't make  it that day, call them at 215-1103 because  the Coalition is holding workshops on an  ongoing basis.  Moving back to the election...one interesting thing that always seems to happen during election campaigns is that the  media and many in the public at large asks  feminists the question: "What exactly is a  women's issue?" The answer of course it  that every single issue is a woman's issue,  because they all will have an impact on  women's lives in some way.  Of course, the next comment that usually follows after we talk about particular  issues that women are (or ought to be) concerned with is: "Well, that's not just a women's issue; it also affects men. Don't those  issues affect all people...so they're human  issues, not women's issues..." and on and  on and on.  The thing is, feminists have never  taken "ownership" over all the issues;  we've just been trying to stress that many-  -no, most—of the issues we're talking about  (and it's not just because it's election time—  we talk about them on a daily basis—have  a particular, and often more adverse, impact on women. And this is what we want  governments, men and other women who  don't support the struggle for women's liberation to all understand.  But in reality, they don't listen much.  So we continue to take our issues—perhaps  we should say, our perspectives on the issues—to them.  Let's start with pensions...the Liberal  government introduced in February  changes to Canada's pension system that  will essentially take apart the public pension system in this country. The proposal  includes changes to CPP and the rolling of  Old Age Security and the Guaranteed Income Security into something called the  "Senior's Benefit." Of course, the scheme  the Liberals are promoting will ultimately  hit women the hardest. The shift is towards  a more privatized system, which will lead  to more poverty for women in their senior  years given that women usually have less  money to invest in RRSPs and other private investment plans at all times of their  lives.  Even Secretary of State for the Status  of Women Hedy Fry has admitted that  women will be adversely affected by these  changes. But what is her government going to do about it? They're going to do a  gender analysis on the new pension  package...you know, the one already before  the House of Commons. Are these things  supposed to be done beforehand?  And now how about the question of  who is doing the gender analysis. Apparently it is being done by the Caledon Insti-  Our appreciation to the following supporters who became members, renewed their  subscriptions, joined our Lawyer Referral list or donated to Vancouver Status of Women  in April.  Ann Doyle * Dorothy Kidd * Heather George * Patricia Lane * Ruth Taylor *  Kenneth R. Watson  A special thanks to our donors whc give every month. Monthly donations assist  VSW in establishing a reliable funding base to carry out our programs, services and  Kinesis throughout the year. Thanks to:  Wendy Baker * Nancy Duff * Mary Fry * Barbara Lebrasseur * Ursula Litzcke *  Lolani Maar * Elizabeth Whynot  Thanks to the following who supported our annual fundraising event, Recommending Women VEIL  Sherry Baker * Susan Boyd * Charlene Brisson * Gwen Brodsky * Lorraine  Cameron * Mardie Campbell * Betty Carter * Andrea Corwin * Gillian Creese * Veronica Delorme * Johanna Den Hertog * Julia Goulden * Marion Gropper * Nora  Horner * Audrey Johnson * Naomi Katz * Else Kennedy * Ursula Litzcke * Lolani  Maar * Dr. Kathryn McCannell * Myrtle Mowatt * Joanne Namsoo * Jan O'Brien *  Marion Poggemiller * Jane Rule * Gale Stewart * Mayling Stubbs * Bull, Housser &  Tupper * Burnaby Teachers' Association * Coffey Miller & Co. * Greyell MacPhail  Barristers and Solicitors * Simon Fraser University  tute, which is headed by the same man who  brought us the new Senior's Benefit. There's  no conflict of interest here, is there?  That's just one of the issues we need to  stress to all political candidates during the  federal election. There's also the whole  matter of the destruction of social programs  and the lack of national standards.  Then there's violence against women.  Ask candidates what is their position on  the recently introduced DNA databank legislation. Cops and victims rights groups are  saying this is a good thing. Feminist anti-  violence activists counter that it will cost  millions and millions of dollars (which  could be put into rape crisis centres and  transition houses) and won't result in  greater conviction of men who sexually  assault women.  Healthcare: remember the drug patent  bill [see page 8], our rights to safe and accessible abortions...  Aboriginal women's rights: what ever  happened to the report of the Royal Commission onAboriginal Peoples, and where  do the candidates stand on the treaty process and on the challenge by Aboriginal  women to be allowed access to matrimonial properties...[see Kinesis April 1997.]  Childcare: Didn't some political party  once promise a national childcare strategy?  There are so many issues that are our  issues. Our challenge is to ensure the politicians and public are clear on what those  issues are. In solidarity and sisterhood.  April showers bring May flowers  bring...June power-struggles? Actually,  April brought Kinesis a lot more than the  prospect of flowers in May and elections  in June. It brought us brand new production memories in our brand new offices at  877 East Hastings Street.  If you live in Vancouver and want to  check out our new space, please come on  by (Suite 309). The Kinesis production room  is (still) resplendent in its coats of mango-  painted walls but it now has that lived-in  feel—papers all over the place, wax on the  floor, can't-find-the-right-Xacto-knife  messes, and Kinder toys all lined up on the  window ledges.  All in all, it was a terrific first Kinesis  production in our new offices—except for  the (un)usual crises that tend to erupt just  when you think there's justice in the  world...like the fact that some of our stuff  is still in boxes and the scanner went on  the blink for some inexplicable reason.  We ended up having to bus over to  Chaos Consulting (thanks Neil) and  FREDA (thanks Yasmin) to use their scanners. Lots of thanks to Swee Sim for doing  the bussing and scanning.  We also had some problems getting  time on the computers as the Vancouver  Status of Women's annual audit was taking place.  But we persevered, revelled in our  new—albeit smaller—production room,  and made it to press: thanks in large part  to Kinesis volunteers, old and new, for writing, proofing, pasting-up, and other production tasks. Thanks everyone.  We'd like to extend special welcomes  to new production volunteers Christine  Thompson and Selina Todd. If you'd like  to see your name in this column or on the  masthead on the Contents page, come by  the office or call Agnes at 255-5499. The  production period for our June issue is May  21-27.  We'd also like to welcome new writers  and voices in this issue: Ema Oropeza, Lilia  Vasquez Garcia and Gita Lyfe.  Women who would like to write or  learn a little more about how Kinesis is put  together are encouraged to come to our next  story meeting on Monday, May 5th. If you  can't make it, call Agnes at 255-5499 or  come by for the following story meeting on  Tuesday, June 3rd.  That's all for this month. Enjoy this issue of Kinesis and please come back for  more—we keep on publishin' thanks to  your financial and reading support!  Corrections  Just a couple of short boo-boos in our April issue that need some correctin'.  First, we called Elsa Pang "Elsie" in our photo-story on the launch of the NO! to  APEC Campaign on page 5. Sorry Elsa.  Then we were a little unclear in our What's News story on page 7 titled "Residency  requirement in BC lifted." We were trying to announce that the BC government has lifted  the three-month residency requirement for all people on social assistance, not just for  immigrants and refugees.  Lastly, the photo credit accompanying the transcript of Sunera Thobani's speech on  page 12 fell off during printing. The photo is by Fatima Jaffer.    ^ °h''  MAY 1997 News  Women and the federal election in Canada:  Listen to what we say  by Agnes Huang   The federal election is upon us...and  women's organizations across Canada are  gearing up to ensure political candidates pay  heed to the voices, issues and solutions of  women.  To support women's participation in the  election process, the National Action Committee on the Status of Women (NAC) has just  released its Voter's Guide. The guide is divided  into 15 sections, in which NAC examines the  record of the Liberal government and the  stated platforms of the other four major political parties on different issues as they relate to women.  NAC president Joan Grant-Cummings  says the Liberal government has been "waging a war against women." In its pursuit of  slaying the "deficit dragon," the government  is destroying any gains women have made  towards equality in the past few decades, she  says.  Since the Liberals got into power, women's poverty has drastically increased. Statistics Canada shows that in 1995, there were  110,000 more adult women than men living  in poverty and twice as many older women  than men living in poverty. Sixty percent of  adult women living in poverty are single  mothers.  Grant-Cummings says there is a clear  link between women's poverty and the Liberal government's policies, particularly the  Canada Health and Social Transfer (CHST).  "We want a government that will be fair and  accountable, and that supports social programs because social programs reduce the gap  between rich people and poor people," she  says.  "The CHST is ultimately a fancy way of  off-loading to the provinces federal fiduciary  responsibilities, particularly with respect to  Aboriginal peoples," says Viola Thomas,  president of the United Native Nations, an  organization representing off-reserve Aboriginal peoples in BC.  A significant blow to women's ability to  influence, and even participate in, the political process were the changes announced to  the Status of Women Canada {see story below],  says Sunera Thobani, NAC's past-president.  "We're seeing a dangerous attempt at  mainstreaming and totally de-politicizing the  women's movement." As an example of this,  Thobani points to the Liberals' attempt at  gender analysis. "Gender impact analysis is  just something the Liberal government is using to try and convince women that the  budget cuts are good for women," says  Thobani.  "When we lack the funding needed to  do advocacy work, it erodes women's participation in the decision-making process and the  quality of our democracy," adds Grant-  Cummings. "In the midst of us feeling there  is no hope, we need to work to get back to the  feeling that the people-not the business councils-control the government."  Thomas says that because of male dominance in the political decision-making structures, Aboriginal women will continue to be  discriminated against and abused. She adds  that many Aboriginal leaders have become  co-opted and elitist—they do not follow Aboriginal forms of government but rather have  bought into forms based on the Indian Act.  "At the end of the day, there will never  be real democracy for Aboriginal peoples  under the Canadian political system," says  Thomas. "Ultimately Canadians-including in  the mainstream feminist community-are racist and forget whose land this is."  The challenge activists face is in building solidarity, according to Viola Thomas. "It's  about finding ways to empower the most  vulnerable members of society in ways that  are not tokenizing or patronizing," she says.  The status of the Status of Women Canada:  Co-opting our agenda  by Emllie Coulter   Women's organizations are the losing  operational funding they currently receive  from Status of Women Canada, which will  jeopardize the ongoing, day-to-day work  of Canada's women's centres.  On March 14, Secretary of State Responsible for the Status of Women Hedy Fry  announced that program funding for women's organizations will be eliminated starting in the 1998-99 fiscal year. Monies from  Status of Women Canada (SWC) will instead be given on a project basis, within the  priority areas set out each year by SWC.  Sunera Thobani, past-president of the  National Action Committee on the Status  of Women (NAC), says Fry's announcement is a major step back for women's organizations who fought for funding around  a broad agenda of women's rights.  "The Liberal government is very sophisticated in wanting to co-opt the agenda  of the women's movement," says Thobani.  "This new funding arrangement will really  restrict who gets funding and give SWC  more control over women's organizations  and determining which issues are priorities for women."  She adds that women's organizations  that work on a number of issue areas will  have more difficulty getting funding.  SWC Consultations with women  Last year, SWC held its first consultation in ten years with "stakeholders" to discuss the future of Status of Women Canada,  funding for women's organizations and  independent research on women's issues.  MAY 1997  The consultations were held because the  Liberals had just restructured the bodies  responsible for dealing specifically with  women's issues.  First, the Liberal government disbanded the Canadian Advisory Council on  the Status of Women, a semi-independent  agency, which conducted research on a  wide range of issues as they affect women.  The responsibilities and the budget of  CACSW were moved over to SWC.  The government then merged the body  that provides funding to women's organizations, the Women's Programs, into Status of Women Canada.  Between March and May, SWC put a  call for submissions from individuals and  conducted six consultation meetings across  Canada to ask for input into the future direction of the expanded SWC. [Ed note: A  consultation for national women's organizations was held in Montreal, and regional consultations were held in Halifax, Montreal, Toronto, Edmonton and Vancouver.]  Many grassroots women's organizations say SWC's process for conducting its  consultations was flawed. A lot of women's  groups who are stakeholders were not allowed to participate.  The Fort St. John (BC) Women's Resource Centre was one of the groups not  invited to the consultations. "How can you  run a consultation with a feminist perspective when you're not inviting the front line,  grassroots, feminist organizations to the  table?" asks Centre coordinator Cheryl  Kelly.  Many of the groups that were invited  to the table say they were disappointed  with the lack of time and funding available  to them to discuss the issues with their constituents beforehand.  Theresa Woods of the Native Women's  Association of Canada (NWAC) says that  no money was allocated to NWAC to consult with Aboriginal women across Canada,  especially in northern communities.  "SWC should finance the consulting of  grassroots people. I should go out to communities where [Aboriginal] women are,  before saying I represent them," says  Woods. She adds that this was particularly  important given that only three Aboriginal  women were present at the federal consultation meeting.  Another concern with the SWC consultations was process. Many women did not  like the fact that SWC provided a set  agenda, nor the continual presence of government officials and the use of facilitators  employed by SWC. Thobani says NAC had  been asking for consultations with SWC for  a long time, based on the model used by  the federal ministry of justice.  "[Under this model] women's groups  have control of the agenda and there is time  for women's groups to meet by themselves  with no bureaucrats present," she says.  Eileen O'Brien of the DisAbled Women's Network Canada (DAWN Canada),  was one of the participants uncomfortable  with the way the agenda was imposed on  the women participating.  "Questions were set up in ways that  pre-determined the answer," says O'Brien.  "We need to remember that the oppression of  one woman is the oppression of all women.  No one has greater oppression-oppression is  oppression."  As well as publishing its Voter's Guide,  NAC is also currently pursuing CBC  Newsworld to televise three "town hall"  meetings-in Toronto, Montreal and Vancouver-focussing on women's issues and ensuring that most of the audience spaces are reserved for women.  And in Vancouver, the Feminist Networking Group is planning various actions.  Among them are: organizing an all-candidates meetings on women's issues, and holding informational sessions with women at  neighbourhood houses, community centres  and schools. One of the more exciting projects  the FNG is working on is a "mobile kitchen  table," where the group will set up a kitchen  table on street corners, in mall parking lots,  and invite women passing by to sit at the table with them to the discuss their issues.  To get a copy of NAC's Voter's Guide, contact the NAC regional representative in your  area, or call NAC's national office at 1-800-665-  5124. For more information about the Feminist  Networking Group's actions, call the Vancouver  Status of Women at (604) 255-6554.  Lucille Harper of the Antigonish (Nova  Scotia) Women's Resource Centre agrees.  "[The model used] allowed SWC to pick  and choose the issues that represented their  agenda and not what women in Eastern  Canada wanted to discuss."  Harper remembers with particular  frustration that the format used dissuaded  women from seeking unity. "Women  wanted to come to consensus in order to  send forward our recommendations to  SWC in a stronger voice," says Harper.  Participants in the process were also  concerned about the apparent lack of transparency of the consultations. "The process  is not very open," states Thobani. "None  of us have access to the submissions, and  we wonder if equal weight was given to  individual written submissions as those  prepared through group consensus."  A year after the consultations, many  women's organizations say it is now clear  SWC did not really listen to comments from  women actively working to advance the  status of women in Canada. Decisions  made by SWC around the two main areas  of discussion during the consultations—  funding to women's organizations and independent research on women's issues—  are radically different from what most feminists participating in the consultation process were recommending.  Funding to women's groups  In 1973, the Women's Program was created to provide support for women's  See SWC page 7 News  Women and the Internet:  Conference casts a  critical eye  by Shannon e. Ash  What are the political issues surrounding the Internet? Wll it help or hinder  democracy and equality? What are the  experiences of grassroots and marginalized  groups in using new information technologies? These were some of the questions discussed at Making the Links: A Critical Look  at Community and the Internet, a conference  hosted by the British Columbia Library  Association last March at the downtown  Vancouver campus of Simon Fraser University.  "Women and Access" was a major  theme of the conference. Fatima Jaffer, of  Vancouver Status of Women and the South  Asian Women's Centre, noted that very few  women's organizations are on-line,  although many do use e-mail (mostly women's personal e-mail accounts). She asked  the questions: "Why get on-line? Are the  extra work and costs involved worth the  benefits?" Jaffer noted that information  from the Internet is not always useful, citing as an example an international Asian  lesbian list she subscribes to which is often  cluttered with "junk" mail and is US-dominated.  Jaffer also said she is concerned the  Internet could encourage "armchair activ-  i " with the exchange of information  booming an end in itself, rather than a  means for building political movements.  She suggested two criteria for assessing  Internet information: Is it useful, and does  it change or affect day to day life? Although  Jaffer says she is not convinced of the  Internet's current usefulness, she acknowledged the argument that popular movements must get involved in the Internet to  prevent it from being dominated by corporate interests.  Many speakers during the conference  did note that the use (and especially the  control) of the Internet is presently limited  to a minority of people—mainly white  males with above average income levels.  Those with resources dominate the debate  about new technologies, said Brian  Campbell of the Canadian Library Association, and exclude political questions. According to Campbell, 31 percent of homes  have computers, 15 percent have modems,  but only seven percent of these homes have  "up to date" equipment to allow them to  access the Internet.  Ellen Balka, a professor at Simon Fraser  University and the author of Computer Networking: Spinsters on the Web [see review page  19], gave the most detailed analysis of  women and the Internet. She cited a study  that revealed 33 percent of the people in  households that do have computers are not  using them. She suggested these non-users  are predominately women, who have less  free time, and tend to put their children's  computer access first.  Balka cited barriers to women's participation: economic inequality—most  women have less money to spend on new  technologies; time inequality—women  have less leisure time than men; and the  "gendered nature of computer technology"  and support—white middle-class men traditionally control technical areas and discourage women's equal participation.  Balka cited discrimination in computer  stores as an example of a common occurrence.  Jaffer talked about how women's organizations also face barriers to using the  Internet and new computer technologies.  The organizations are usually inadaquately  funded and rely on volunteers. Often their  computers are close to being obsolete and  they may often use pirated software because they can't afford to buy new programs. This makes it difficult to maintain,  let alone upgrade, the computer technology. And, with many different women using the computers, the likelihood of viruses  or deletions of programs and files may increase.  BC's Minister of Women's Equality, Sue  Hammell, also spoke at the conference and  addressed some of the cost concerns expressed by women's groups. She noted a  new grant program which would pay for  the cost of installation and one year of  Internet costs (through the BC21 Investment  Program). [Thegrant makes available to women's groups up to $2500 to get started on-line  and train a staff person on the Internet. However, there would be no monies available to purchase necessary computer equipment (which  most organizations are lacking), and the grant  Most people are not being  encouraged to think critically about  technology, and the problems and  difficulties surrounding new  technologies are glossed over.  requires women's groups to train 40 women  on the Internet although there is no funding  allotted for this training.]  Hammell said that 15 to 30 percent of  current Internet users are women. During  her talk, she referred to a story about how  some single teenage mothers were able to  form a support network by communicating through e-mail using donated computers. However, she also acknowledged that  women in remote areas have difficulty getting on-line due to a lack of private (nonparty) phone lines, and substandard phone  lines.  Balka noted that it is not merely access  that women have to fight for, but relevant,  women-produced content. Just as feminists  established women's presses, periodicals,  and bookstores, and lobbied for books by  and relevant to women in libraries, Balka  says we now need to fight the same struggle over again, in regard to new information technologies. Balka suggested Community Access Programs—putting Internet  /e-mail access in telephone kiosks and at  laundromats as a way to increase access to  the Internet. However, more is needed than  just setting up terminals to get women involved. There must be access to skills training and more feminist content.  Some women discussed how the  Internet is useful to them. Anitra Freeman  spoke about a homeless women's resource  (web) page in Seattle. Lorena Jara, a programmer at Vancouver Cooperative Radio  for America Latina al Dia, discussed the  benefits and drawbacks of the Internet. She  said that more information from and about  Latin America is available on the Internet,  and it is more current. The tradeoff is that  those involved withAmerica Latina al Dia  are becoming more fragmented as a collective, no longer having meetings where they  work together trying to find material and  put it together as less labour is needed.  Lynn Hauka and Heather Gordon of  the Sunshine Coast Women's Resource Centre spoke glowingly of the opportunities the  Internet offers women in their region. The  Centre offers the only public internet access on the Sunshine Coast, and it is the  most popular activity for women at their  Centre. It offers assistance in job search and  specific information search (for example,  health information) for women living in a  rather isolated and high unemployment  area. Women who can't afford long distance  phone calls can stay connected with their  families. Some women are even starting  small Internet businesses.  While Balka said she agrees that some  aspects of the Internet and new information technologies are good for women, she  also argues that most people are not being  encouraged to think critically about technology, and that the problems and difficulties surrounding new technologies are  glossed over. "All technology exists within  a social context," Balka reminded conference participants.  Shannon e. Ash is a regular writer who has  never used the Internet. She's just trying to  get her "old" computer to work at all. News  Affordable housing in Vancouver's Downtown Eastside:  People's needs  by Rachel Rosen  "One more time, women get let down.  One more time people lose out over bucks.  When is our society going to stop valuing  money over people?" asked Marion Dubick  of the Downtown Eastside Women's Centre, in response to the latest affordable housing sellout in Vancouver's Downtown  Eastside.  On April 4, Kassem Aghtai, the president of Fama Holdings Limited, announced  he was pulling out of a promise to build  200 co-op housing units in the old Woodward's building. The development of the  Woodwards site (almost as large as one city  block) was supposed to have been a mix of  for-profit housing, social housing and retail stores. Now, Fama Holdings says it intends only to build 400 market-priced  condos above three floors of retail space.  Community members are shocked and  angered by the announcement. "Woodwards is a huge project that anchors the  Downtown Eastside community in the area  where gentrification is the strongest, says  Muggs Sigurgeirson, president of the board  of the Carnegie Community Centre. "Low  cost housing is the backbone of the community. Without it, the spirit that holds the  people together can't flourish."  The Downtown Eastside has the distinction of having the lowest per capita income in Canada for an urban area, but is  also located right next to the capitalist  downtown core of Vancouver. This means  the Downtown Eastside is viewed as extremely valuable property by money-hungry capitalists. Over the years, developers  have been trying to encroach on the neighbourhood by building upscale and pricey  condominiums—witness the artists' lofts  at the corner of Carrall and Cordova  Streets—which, of course, are not accessible to those living in the Downtown  Eastside.  Affordable and safe housing remains  one of the most critical issue for almost all  vs developers' greed  residents of the neighbourhood. Currently,  there are six to seven thousand people living in single room occupancy (SROs) housing in the Downtown Eastside. The majority of the SROs are in cheap, run down hotels which have typically charged $325 a  month rent—the maximum housing allowance permitted to people on social assistance. While SROs in the area represent the  lowest cost per unit housing in the city, they  also represent the highest rental cost per  square foot because the units are so small.  (Most SROs also do not have a bathroom  or kitchen inside the suite.)  Because of their low rental rates, the  SROs are the only units many people in the  neighbourhood can afford. However, there  are dangers to living in such places. Many  women who live in the hotels say they face  a lack of security, safety and privacy. Because hotel owners reserve only a small  portion of their income for repairs, often  doors and locks remain unfixed and hallways to washrooms unlit. "Women are the  most vulnerable in the Downtown Eastside.  The lack of housing hits women and children the most," states Sigurgeirson.  Sigurgeirson says the neighbourhood  is being gentrified. As examples of this, she  points to the creation of backpackers and  tourist hotels, and the move of many large  educational institutions, such as Simon  Fraser University and the BC Institute of  Technology, to the downtown core. These  shifts are pushing rents and land values up  as well as changing the type of services offered in the area. Sigurgeirson believes this  shift is pushing the traditional residents of  the Downtown Eastside out of the area or  onto the street.  The latest statistics from the City of  Vancouver [see box] show that the rent for  approximately half of the SRO units are not  covered by the $325 shelter portion allowed  to people on social assistance. For residents  who are on fixed incomes, if their rent is  mwM  It's going to be a long, hot summer of protests in Vancouver's Downtown  Eastside.That sentiment was echoed often by many of the almost two  hundred people who showed up at the Woodwards building on Hasting  Street on a wet day in April. "I'd urge people to come out and join us," says  Maggie Carmichael, an Aboriginal woman who lives in a Downtown  Eastside hotel. Carmichael says she had planned to apply for one of the  affordable housing suites that were to be offered in the Woodwards building before the developers, Fama Holdings, cancelled their agreement to  provide suites at affordable rates for residents of the Downtown Eastside.  over $325, they must use their food and living expenses budget to cover the cost of  housing, which can leave them with little  more than $2-3 a day to live on.  The decrease in the number of affordable units is most pronounced in the Victory Square area (which is closer to the  downtown core) where just 27 percent of  the rooms are under $325. The Woodward's  building is in this section of the Downtown  Eastside and is seen by housing advocates  as part of the solution to the current housing crisis.  Fama Holdings Ltd. bought the  Woodwards building in 1995 and began developing plans for its $75-million project.  All along, community residents and housing activists have lobbied for the project to  include safe and affordable housing. As a  result of this pressure, the provincial government stepped in and made a commitment to buy 200 units of social housing in  the Woodwards building. The NDP government agreed to pay Fama Holdings Ltd. $25  See HOUSING, page 6  Some housing statistics for the Downtown Eastside  Over half of all the low-income housing units in the Downtown Eastside are  within the residential hotels and rooming houses, also known as Single Room Occupancy (SRO) hotels and rooming houses.  Change in the residential hotel housing stock (SRO hotels): A  legacy of lost units  1970 to 1991  In 1970, there were about 13,300 SRO units, in 436 buildings, in the downtown  core. By 1991, this stock had shrunk to 7,900 units, in 174 buildings. Over the twenty  year period, this represents a 40% decrease in units, a 60% decline in the number of  buildings, and an average loss of about 270 units a year.  1991 to 1996  Over the past five years, the SRO stock decreased by just over 400 units to a total  of 7,481 units.  Today  While fire and closure due to lack of maintenance were the greatest reasons for  the loss in SROs during the 1970s and 80s, conversion is becoming the largest factor  contributing to losses in the SRO housing stock.  Numerous SRO hotels and rooming houses that used to accommodate long-term  residents—some over 40 years—have over the years been converted to backpacker  hostels and tourist hotels (especially since EXPO 86). For example, the Patricia Hotel  (430 E. Hastings: 195 units) now strictly rents to tourists. Another recent conversion  was Hartney Apartments (347 W. Pender: 20 units), which is now a backpackers hostel  managed by the same owner/manager of the backpacker hostel conversion on  Main Street  Greater than 65% of the total income goes to renting a room with no washroom or kitchen.  Nearly half of all the hotel units in the Downtown Eastside and Granville  Street neighbourhoods rent above the $325/month shelter allowance a GAIN (social assistance) recipient receives to pay rent. This forces hotel residents on GAIN  to put money from their basic allowance toward their rent, which for most means  making do with even less than $6 a day. For example, the Winters Hotel (203  Abbott St.) charges $400/month., the Chelsea Inn (33 W Hastings St) charges  $425/month for a room that faces the street and $350/month for an internal room  with no window.  Downtown South & Victory Square  These two areas of the downtown core are experiencing the greatest decrease  in rooms renting at $325/ month-the Downtown South.25%, Victory Square 27%.  These are two areas that have been the subject of revitalization efforts by the city  and are areas where redevelopment (i.e. gentrification) is very intense.  [The housing statistics are provided by the City of Vancouver in its 1996 Survey of  Low-Income Housing in the Downtown Core, (January 1997). The information and  analysis was put together by the Community Action Project (CAP) at the Carnegie  Centre.] News  Looking back at—and beyond—the Vernon massacre  by Fatima Jaffer  Over a hundred people gathered on the steps of the Vancouver Public  Library last month to commemorate the nine people massacred in Vernon,  BC on April 5th last year [see Kinesis, April 1997]. The vigil was organized  to raise awareness of the prevalence of violence against women, particularly in BC, and to offer a feminist context to how and why massacres such  as the one in Vernon occur and can be prevented.  Speakers, all front-line women workers from South Asian and mainstream  women's organizations, drew particular attention to the fact that Rajwar  Ghakal and eight members of her family were shot by Rajwar's estranged  husband in part because the Vernon RCMP refused to act. All the speakers  stressed that the Vernon massacre is not an isolated case and that various  forms and degrees of violence against women are being condoned by  police and justice systems.  Among those participating in the vigil were women from women's organizations in the Lower Mainland, activists from South Asian organizations, and  some women survivors of male violence from transition houses. Organizers  say the low attendance was disappointing, given the amount of pre-public-  ity and the fact that mainstream radio had also publicized the vigil. However, there was a strong feeling of solidarity among those who did gather  on the steps. Candles were lit, there was a moment of silence, and buttons,  urging us to remember the Vernon massacre and work towards an end to  violence against women, were sold to raise funds for the vigil next year.  The Vernon vigils are organized by the Coalition of South Asian Women  Against Violence in Vancouver, which formed in April 1996 to counter racist  and sexist media reaction to the Vernon massacre. The Coalition lists  among its aims the need to draw attention to the prevalence of violence  against women in all cultures, and the coordination of nationwide activities  commemorating the Vernon massacre.  Towards these ends, the Coalition also sponsored a press conference  earlier the same day in support of a pilot study that shows BC policies to  end violence against women are being arbitrarily enforced and are inadequate [seepage 77/.The study was conducted by FREDA (the Feminist  Research, Education, Development and Action Centre).  HOUSING, from page 5  Residents of the Downtown Eastside, social workers from the neighbourhood, activists and supporters of the Woodwards affordable housing  project leave marks of protest using sidewalk chalk and paint outside the  Woodwards building. Messages included: "No Condos", "Woodwards  belongs to all of us, not to property developers", "Homes for the Homeless"  and "Save Woodwards, Save the Community: Give people hope."  million in exchange for building the 200 coop units.  After 14 months of negotiations with  the BC government and community organizers, with only bonding and indemnity  issues left outstanding, Aghtai made his  shocking announcement to withdraw from  the agreement because he felt the bureaucracy was too slow. During this time, Downtown Eastside residents and community  organizers did the work to set up a legal  coop society. Organizers with the Woodward's Co-op say the outstanding issues  were all things that Fama needed to do anyway in order to guarantee his financial position.  According to Cecilia Diocson of the  NO! to APEC Coalition the fact that Fama  Holdings is now saying it will not include  affordable housing units is hardly  suprising. "Because of the global crises  capitalists are facing now, they are really  looking at everywhere they can invest. The  government is deregulating development  and basically giving the city to private developers."  She adds that poor people are not profitable for developers, who see them as eyesores and hindrances to their profit-making. "The developers try to push people out  in their search for profit, so it is a contradiction to have a developer work with poor  people," says Diocson. "If the government  is really committed [to addressing the housing situation], then they need to say no to  the investors and develop affordable housing themselves."  Community activists agree that it  makes more sense for the government to  take a larger role in the housing issue. "If  many of the SROs are financed by shelter  portions [of government cheques], then it  is better for the government to own these  buildings and collect the money back for  public use," says Sigurgeirson. However,  the Canadian Mortgage and Housing Corporation (CMHC) is refusing to finance  new social housing developments and the  current Vancouver City Council is predominantly in favor of large scale development.  Affordable housing advocates say they've  turned their efforts towards stopping the  Fama's Woodward's development permit  from going through, and towards lobbying  Kassem Aghtai directly through actions at  his office and at the Woodward's site.  Aghtai was scheduled to bring his proposal forward to Vancouver's Development Permit Board on April 21, but he cancelled that appointment just days before the  hearing. (The Board already gave its preliminary approval for the design before  Fama entered into the agreement with the  provincial government to include social  housing units.)  Sigurgeirson believes that the actions  taken by community organizers influenced  Aghtai to put off the meeting. Since  Aghtai's announcement, organizers have  been meeting with provincial Municipal  Affairs Minister Mike Farnsworth, staging  protests inside the offices of Fama Holdings, holding candlelight vigils outside the  Woodwards building, organizing demonstrations opposing Fama's revised development plan, and spraypainting grafitti on  the walls of the Woodwards building.  Community organizers say they will  continue staging actions until the coop  units are reinstated to the building.  Sigurgeirson says Fama Holdings will  likely forward a new proposal to the Development Permits Board at a later date that  does include an affordable housing component. If that is the case, City staff are expected to recommend strong restrictions on  Fama's development proposal. However,  NDP MLA and former City Council member Jenny Kwan says the City should have  taken action much earlier on in the process  to ensure that any development of the  Woodsworth building would include social  housing. "The City of Vancouver had an  opportunity when the matter was before  city council when I was on council, when  we went through the rezoning process,"  said Kwan in the Vancouver Sun. "The City  of Vancouver, unfortunately, at that time,  failed to take any action to ensure that there  was a mixed housing development within  Woodward's."  Social housing advocates say they  want to send a loud and clear message that  they still want the coop housing to happen  in the Downtown Eastside and that they  want it to be in the old Woodward's building.  Sigurgeirson says people in the community are prepared to fight to ensure the  neighbourhood isn't turned over to the  developers. "The fabric of the Downtown  Eastside community is the richest in the  Lower Mainland. The organizing and support in the community is astounding.  Twenty-four hours after the crisis [Aghtai's  announcement], many different community groups and individuals united to fight  to save the Woodwards housing. We need  to slow down the gentrification that is happening, do education in the hotels and  build up a base of people who are prepared  to be active, and fight for affordable housing."  To support the call for affordable housing  in the Downtown Eastside, lobby your city and  provincial politicians to ensure Fama Holdings  Ltd. follows through with its agreement to build  coop housing at the Woodwards site, as well as  the federal government to support funding for  affordable housing projects through the Canadian Housing and Mortgage Corporation. To  directly lobby Kassem Aghtai, contact him at  Fama Holdings Ltd., 801-100 Park Royal  South, West Vancouver, BC, V7T 1A2; tel:  (604) 922-5128; fax: (604) 922-1528. For more  information about the lobbying and protest  actions, contact the Community Action Project  at the Carnegie Centre, (604) 689-0397.  Rachel Rosen is a Vancouver-based community  organizer. She is involved with the NO! To  APEC Coalition and with a project through  Environmental Youth Alliance to construct a  community building in Strathacona Community Gardens. (It's almost finished.)  6 News  SWC from page 3  organizations working towards women's  equality. The Women's Program provided  two types of funding: project funding and  program funding. Over the years however,  program funding has became more and  more like project funding, requiring a "specific program of activities, with clearly defined, concrete outcomes that address the  objectives."  Alison Reid of the Victoria Faulkner  Women's Centre in Whitehorse says the  direction being taken by SWC is very damaging for women's organizations.  "[Women's] groups have core administrative needs and require resources to  meet those needs. Not every hour of  "funded" time can be given to specific programs which were developed months and  months in advance."  Reid mentions the necessity of reacting to events in one's community as they  No new organizations  have received program  funding since 1990  because of the "budget  constraints."  occur, such as court cases, legislative  changes, et cetera. "SWC needs to support  and value this."  Josee Belleau of Le rellais des centres de  femmes in Quebec says that SWC seems to  be "oriented to [funding] projects and not  core activities, which are instead relegated  to provincial funding." Not all provincial  " governments provide funding to women's  organizations.  In 1990, the federal government attempted to cut "core" funding to all women's centres, as well as to feminist publications. When women in Newfoundland occupied SWC offices and other women began to do the same in their areas, the government backed down on the cuts to most  women's centres (but not to feminist publications).  However, what was previously known  as "core" funding became "program" funding and since then, that funding has been  cut by more than 25 percent. The total operating budget of SWC in 1996/97 was less  than $8 million, which translates into  slightly more than 50 cents per year, per  woman and girl in Canada.  No new organizations have received  program funding since 1990 because of the  "budget constraints." This has meant that  new groups, in particular groups of Aboriginal women, women with disabilities,  women of colour, and women living in rural areas, have not had access to the resources needed to adequately carry out  their work. As well, the federal government  does not provide core funding to anti-violence against women's groups such as the  Canadian Association of Sexual Assault  Centres (CASAC) or the NationalAssocia-  tion of Transition Houses.  At every stage of the recent consultation, women's organizations pressed SWC  to reinstate core funding and to extend this  funding to more recently emerging equality-seeking women's groups.  In its Report on the Consultations and  Follow-up Action Plan published in November 1996, SWC states that "[it] will  MAY 1997  examine what modifications can be made  to its existing funding mechanisms, keeping in mind...the desire for more equitable  access to funding." These comments were  not accompanied by a commitment to increase funding available to the women's organizations.  SWC asserts that collapsing the program funding into project funding was  done to address concerns about inequitable access to funding for newer organizations.  But women's groups reject this explanation, saying that SWC is pitting women's  groups against each other—new groups  versus established groups.  The real problem, many women point  out, is that there is not enough funding for  women's organizations to begin with.  "Women are calling for an increase in  the overall budget for funding women's  groups and not a redistribution of existing  monies," says Thobani.  She adds that at the national consultation in Montreal, Hedy Fry made a promise that she would lobby federal Finance  Minister Paul Martin to increase SWC's  budget and funding for women's organizations.  "SWC needs to realize that women in  Canada have expectations of them, that  they are accountable to us. It is our money  they are spending so our recommendations  must be their priorities," says Thobani.  She adds: "Women pay taxes. Ultimately, this is our money and a little more  of it should be dedicated to working for  equality."  However, no new monies seem forthcoming from the Liberal government. "Either Hedy Fry is totally powerless or she  doesn't think it's worth it," Thobani surmises. "Neither of these bodes well for  women."  Aboriginal women's groups also expressed concerns that funding for the Aboriginal women's programs will be shuffled  over from its current portfolio under the  Ministry of Canadian Heritage to SWC.  "Aboriginal women should be consulted nationally regarding where their  money should come from," says NWAC's  Woods. "We have the capability to control  our own programs. The Native Friendship  Centres have been given the management  of their programs. It's a slap in the face that  we are not given the same control over ours.  We want to administer our own work, so  we can determine where we go and how  we do it."  Partnerships with business?!  SWC's Report on Consultations also  states that "The Women's Program of SWC  will examine the option of matching  funds... [and] will undertake a small  number of pilot projects on partnerships  involving different sectors." This is despite  concerns raised by participants throughout  the course of the Consultations on matching and partnership funding.  "It would be difficult to find funding  [outside government] for equality work,"  Thobani explains. "Women's groups will be  made even more vulnerable. Government  will use the fact that they can't find matching funds as an excuse to cut their funding  by arguing that they don't enjoy community support."  Trudy Jones and Beulah Hayley of the  Gander Women's Centre (in Newfoundland) also say that being required to search  for matching funds would jeopardize the  work of many women's organizations. "It  would be a compromise. Time spent on  doing your stuff would be spent on doing  fundraising. [SWC is] not giving us enough  money to keep us busy looking for more."  Partnership funding is especially problematic in rural communities. "Because  we're not dependent on industries in the  area, we're one of the only voices speaking  out about exploitation in the workforce,  harassment, labour standards and working  conditions," says Jean Livingston of the  Fort St. John Women's Resource Centre.  "If we're forced to seek funding by  forming partnerships with corporations,  fighting exploitation would be like slapping  the hand that feeds us," she adds.  Monies for women's equality?  The Report on Consultations often  mentions the funding of not only women's  organizations, but also "other voluntary  organizations committed to women's  equality." At no time is a definition given  of this latter group.  But women's groups fear that monies  from the already sparse SWC budget will  be directed to groups that are not working  towards women's equality, such as the anti-  feminist group REAL Women, or organizations offering programs directed at counselling abusive men as the way to deal with  violence against women.  "The wording [in the report] opens the  door to funding groups that are not feminist," says Belleau. "The budget is small.  SWC should prioritize funding women's  equality groups."  Accountability to whom?  Participants in the consultation process also spoke of the government's mistaken notion of the "inefficiency" of the  women's movement. SWC's report declares: "SWC will develop an evaluation  framework with outcome indicators for the  women's program as part of the government's efforts to improve accountability for  public expenditures." A working group at  the Vancouver consultation took issue with  the suggestion that women's groups are not  efficient or responsible with the monies  they receive from the federal government.  Decisions made by  SWC..are radically  different from what  most feminists  participating in the  consultation process  recommended.  "Women's groups are run on extraordinary amounts of volunteers and  underwaged labour. There is a lack of acknowledgement [by SWC] that women's  organizations are underfunded and that  women who are paid or who volunteer  their time are overworked," the working  group stated.  The Independent Policy Research  Fund  In 1996, when SWC took over the responsibilities and budget (about $1 million)  of CACSW, it moved to establish an "Independent Policy Research Fund" (IPRF) to  administer research dollars.  Sunera Thobani says, suddenly the  branch of the government responsible for  public relations around women's issues  was also being made responsible for moni  toring the government's record on advancing the status of women.  "This is like the hawks minding the  chickens," says Thobani. "SWC should, instead, strengthen the capacity of women's  groups to do the kind of research and monitoring that CACSW was mandated to do."  Under the new research scheme, SWC  would administer the fund and set the research priority areas. Other decisions, such  as finalizing research priorities, selecting research proposals to be funded and exercising quality control over the research, would  be made by a committee whose members  are selected by SWC [SWC recently made  its selection of committee members. All six  members are current or former professors at  various universities across Canada.]  CASAC's Lee Lakemen says that all  national women's organizations at the federal consultation endorsed a very different  vision of how research on women's issues  should be done.  "We proposed that the fund be  overseen and decided on by a team of national women's groups and that no research  be funded unless it has been sponsored by  a women's group."  Many women organizations also  stressed that the research had to be feminist. "When we heard it was going to be an  independent research fund, we thought  that they meant independent from government," says Thobani. "[But] SWC seems to  want it to be independent from women's  groups."  There are some positive changes which  have been made to the research funding  mechanism. On the recommendation of  women's groups, SWC has agreed to fund  participatory action research, and not just  research based on traditional social science  methodologies. DAWN Canada recently  received funds for researching the effect of  the CHST (the Canada Health and Social  Transfer) on women with disabilities.  "[It is] one thing I am very excited  about," says Eileen O'Brien. "It means that  community groups can be included in research-funding."  Urgent call for action  Sunera Thobani says that it is critical  that women mobilize to challenge the direction Status of Women Canada is taking,  otherwise many women's organizations  may be forced to shut down.  She says it is urgent that women act  immediately, especially before the federal  election is held (most likely June 2).  "I fear that funding to women's organizations will get lost during the election  given the number of issues women will be  trying to raise with political candidates,"  says Thobani. "And after the election, whoever gets the portfolio responsible for the  Status of Women will assume that the  changes are a done deal."  According to SWC staff, to date, very  few women's organizations have issued  their opposition to the recent changes. It is  critical that women let the Liberal government know they cannot co-opt our agenda.  To do so, contact: Hedy Fry, Secretary of  State Responsible for the Status of Women and  Multiculturalism, House of Commons, Centre Block Room 558-D, Ottawa, Ontario, K1A  0A6; tel: (613) 992-3213; fax: (613) 995-0056;  email: fryh@parl.gc.ca  Emilie Coulter is the coordinator of the Fort  Nelson Women's Centre. She spends an inordinate number of hours every week ensuring  that the centre, like other women's groups, remains one of the most efficient organizations  in Canada. compiled by Faith Jones, Andrea  Imada and Carol Read        StatsCan catches on  A recent study by Statistics Canada  confirms what independent feminist researchers have been saying for decades: that  women and children bear the heaviest financial burden of divorce.  According to the StatsCan study, women's income drops by an average of 23 per  cent after separation, while men's income  rises by 10 percent. The study also confirms  that men's child and spousal support payments do not equalize income between  men, who typically have higher incomes,  and women, who more frequently have  custody of children.  The study concluded that the most  common way for women to return to their  former levels of income is to enter a new  spousal relationship. Yet the majority of  women choose not to have such a relationship within five years after divorce.  Beginning on May 1, women will no  longer be taxed for receiving child support  payments. The effect this move will have  on the income difference between divorced  men and women is uncertain, but there is  no chance that the inequity will be removed. At most, the income gap will become smaller.  Feminists continue to question the  logic of policies at the judicial and social  level which penalize women and reward  men for divorcing their spouses. "Women  should not be punished for achieving independence from male partners," said Ema  Oropeza, of the Vancouver Status of  Women.  Breastfeeding case gets  hearing  Breastfeeding has significant health  benefits for children and mothers, yet  women have no guarantee that they will  be allowed to breastfeed their children if  they also have paid employment outside  the home.  A case currently before a BC human  right tribunal seeks to make breastfeeding  a right. Michelle Poirier, who works for  BC's Ministry of Municipal Affairs, says she  was discriminated against by not being allowed to breastfeed her child at work.  "I do not think that a woman should  ever have to make the choice between the  health of her child and paid work," Poirier  said.  As in a case where the Supreme Court  of Canada ruled that discrimination on the  basis of pregnancy is sex discrimination  because only women get pregnant, Poirier  is arguing that not allowing women to  breastfeed is also sex discrimination.  Since Poirier launched her case in 1991,  the provincial government has created  policies to accommodate breastfeeding  women working in the public service.  However, it has failed to legislate such accommodations for women working for  other employers.  According to INFACT Canada, an organization concerned with promoting  healthy infant feeding policies and practices, a number of US states have  breastfeeding legislation in place which  enshrines the rights of women to breastfeed  in any location, public or private.  Poirier points out glaring hypocrisy in  the fact that many of those who complain  about public breastfeeding also believe it  is the healthiest option. Sociologist Cecelia  Benoit of the University of Victoria says this  may be because our culture still does not  view women as both workers and mothers. Many people also still consider women's breasts to be sexual objects which  should not be exposed to the public, especially to men.  Health benefits of breastfeeding range  from lower rates of gastrointestinal, respiratory, urinary tract and ear infections  among babies to lower rates of breast cancer among mothers.  Doctors remove healthy  breasts  Draconian measures to prevent breast  and ovarian cancers are being promoted by  several prominent US medical researchers.  Rather than focus on diet, environment, and lifestyle factors, doctors at both  the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota and  Creighton Medical School in Nebraska are  suggesting complete removal of both  breasts or both ovaries for women who fall  into high-risk categories.  What makes this "treatment" more bizarre is that researchers propose removing  the organs before any sign of cancer is detected. Rather, the operations are being recommended based on genetic tests.  While some research has shown that  genetic factors are linked to cancer, no research has actually found what causes cancer to develop. Correlations have been  found with smoking, high-fat diets, and  prior medical history. However, no research  has shown genetic susceptibility to be the  sole cause of any cancer.  Double breast or double ovary removal  has in the past been considered a last option because of the changes in body chemistry which result when organs are removed. Removal of any reproductive organ can cause hormone changes which also  have health risks. For example, osteoporosis and heart disease are the most common  long-term risks caused by double ovary  removal. Osteoporosis is then frequently  treated with synthetic hormones, which  also have health risks. Women entering into  these surgeries may find themselves caught  in a cycle of medical intervention, in which  the treatment or "prevention" of one disease initiates another disease.  As a final irony, even double mastectomy cannot fully prevent breast cancer  from forming, as some glands are left in  place which can develop breast cancer.  NDP bashes poor people again  British Columbia's New Democratic  government has made another move  against poor people.  New welfare regulations will go into  effect June 30 to eliminate the category of  "medically unemployable" recipients. This  move will disqualify most of the 27,000  people who currently fall into the category  from receiving an additional $96 per  month. Only those people considered permanently disabled will continue to receive  the "special needs" allowance. Those with  temporary (even long-term) illnesses, and  lesser degrees of physical, emotional or  mental disabilities will almost all have their  cheques reduced.  Precise criteria for deciding who will  keep and who will lose the allowance have  not been publicly released, and those cut  off the allowance will be allowed to appeal.  Anti-poverty activists point out that the  appeals process can take months.  "They're trying to make it so much  hassle with paperwork and tribunals that  you just go away," said Sheila Baxter, an  anti-poverty activist who has a disability.  AIDS activists point out that people  with AIDS are among those who will be  denied the allowance. Other benefits will  also be removed, such as bus passes and  Pharmacare (which covers the cost of prescription medication). They also point out  that in targetting sick people, the government is picking on a group in which many  people will be unable to actively advocate  for their own rights.  Though the government denies the  elimination of the "unemployable" category is a budget-chopping move, and refused to estimate savings, Canadian Press  estimated annual savings of up to $20 million. Welfare recipients have been on the  receiving end of government cuts throughout both terms of NDP government.  While the federal NDP struggling to  find enough support in the upcoming election to regain official party status in parliament, the provincial NDP's move against  a group of traditional supporters may have  serious consequences for the party.  Conrad Black  quarantined  Newspaper boxes containing Vancouver's two major daily newspapers were put  under quarantine this month by Guerilla  Media with a warning to readers about the  long term effects of concentrated media  control. Both papers—the Vancouver Sun  and the Province—are owned by Conrad  Black, who controls the Southam chain of  newspapers.  On April 16, Guerilla Media placed  Health Canada contamination bags over  1,000 Sun and Province newspaper boxes  in the Lower Mainland area and Courtney,  BC, along with a notice warning readers of  "Black Contaminated Ink."  The notice warned of: "ever-increasing  concentrations of the e-conrad blackterium.  This parasite can cause Transnatiocorpus  Selfagrandial Execugreedeopathy (TSE),  the brain-softening disorder commonly  known as Mad CEO Disease. Symptoms  include: loss of balance; bloody staff  eliminations; insatiable hunger for power;  ego-bloating; and sudden ethical impairment. "  The notice also warned that that "long-  term exposure of the body politic to Black  Contaminated Ink. may lead to a number  of complications such as: cancerous growth  of corporate control, severe democratic  dysfunction and, in advanced cases, necrotizing facism."  Guerilla Media is a Vancouver-based  group of "cultural critics who routinely  poke fun at corporations and generally deride governing elites that carry out their  business at society's expense." Guerilla  Media's Chief Health Officer Noam de  Plom explained why the group took action  against Black and his media empire. "We  felt that the public needed a reminder about  the long-term effects of having more than  half of Canada's daily newspapers under  the fat thumb of one single owner," said de  Plom. "Everyone recognizes the important  role that the media plays in shaping debate  in the world today. Nevertheless, nothing  is being done to assure that this power is  being used in the best interests of society.  That has to change."  To get in touch with Guerilla Media  Health Protection Branch, contact them at  Box 65746, Vancouver, BC, V5N 5K7; tel:  (604) 877-4721; e-mail: gmedia@mindlink  .bc.ca; or web: mindlink .net/gmedia.  To register your complaints with Conrad  Black about his spreading of a deadly disease,  contact him through his company Hollinger  Inc. at (416) 363-8721.  Liberals keep Tory drug  patent bill  Hypocrisy at its worst: Before coming  into power, the Liberal Party fiercely fought  against Bill C-91—Brian Mulroney's version of a drug patent law—but now that it  has formed the government, the Liberals  have backtracked from its previous stance.  Bill C-91, passed in 1992, provides up  to 20 years of patent protection to pharmaceutical companies for new drugs. The  Mulroney government said Bill C-91 would  allow drug companies to recoup money  spent in research and development and  fund further research.  Bill C-91 is currently under review by  a parliamentary committee. And while  many feminists, health care workers and  anti-poverty activists have condemned the  drug patent law, the Liberal government  has already made clear it has no intention  on pulling the legislation.  So far, Bill C-91 has failed the Canadian public and only increased profits for  multi-national drug companies. Although  in 1995 the patent-medicine manufacturers  invested twice as much research and development money into Canada than they  did ten years earlier, only a fifth of that  money went into research for new drugs;  four-fifths went to clinical and pre-clinical  trials of existing drugs. Only two of the 81  new patented products m IWb were considered "breakthroughs" or "substantial  improvements" over existing therapies,  according to Marcy Cohen, a research and  policy analyst with the Hospital Employee's Union.  The patent protection ensures drug  companies there will be no competition  from cheaper generic drugs for 20 years.  As a result drug prices have risen.  BC.Health Minister Joy MacPhail says Bill  C-91 costs provincial taxpayers $40 million  a year. It is estimated that Canada-wide, the  bill will cost consumers and taxpayers $3.6  to 7.3 billion by the year 2010.  People with low incomes—women,  seniors, people with disabilities, people on  social assistance—are suffering the most, as  most do not have medical plans to cover  the cost of drugs. Welfare recipients who  must now pay a user fee or co-payment  toward their medicine, may not have the  money to buy both food and prescription  drugs.  Newfoundland women  win pay equity case  About 6,000 Newfoundland healthcare workers may receive $80 million in pay  equity. In April, an arbitration board overturned legislation passed in 1991 by former  premier Clyde Wells that delayed the implementation of full pay equity as set out  by a contract of the Newfoundland Association of Public Employees. The union represents lab and x-ray technicians, laundry  workers, hospital support staff, and group-  home workers—most of whom are women.  The current Liberal government, led by  Premier Brian Tobin, may appeal the arbitration board's decision. It claims Newfoundland can't afford the $80 million settlement. Int'l What's News  by Smita Patil  Lesbian hotline in  Beijing  A hotline beeper service catering to lesbians, gays and bisexuals in China's largest city, Beijing, was set up to begin in  March.  The hotline's main function is to provide information on what's happening in  Beijing's lesbian, gay and bisexual scenes,  but it will also provide access to on-phone  counselling. Volunteers running the hotline  are "concerned members of the community  in Beijing," who will receive some training.  The number for the beeper is only being advertised in China by word of mouth,  through networks and contacts. Calls from  Beijing, and only where possible from other  parts of China, will be answered on Tuesday and Thursday evenings from 7-10 pm,  and on Saturdays from 12 noon-6 pm. The  telephone number is (010) 6833 8800 hu  99575.  Anti-lesbian rapes in  Four lesbians seeking refuge at a feminist centre in Calabar, Nigeria were raped  at gunpoint in 1994 by an unknown number  of men who stormed the centre. Just a few  days earlier, one of the women had published an article on lesbianism in Nigeria  in which she traced the advent of Nigerian  lesbianism and condemned previous attacks against the centre.  The rapes were recently confirmed by  reports from the International Gay and Les-  bian Human Rights Commission  (IGLHRC). According to the IGLHRC publication Emergency Response Network, "the  reporting of the September 1994 attacks  sheds crucial light on the often undocumented regularity and impunity of anti-lesbian rapes in Nigeria."  The rapes of the four women are also  being directly linked to an earlier attack  against a woman in the town of Eket in  Akwa Ibom state, who reportedly was gang  raped at gun point by the same men. She  was undergoing medical treatment at the  feminist centre there when the rapists attacked the centre.  IGLHRC ties the attacks against  women, and especially lesbians, to the increased repression that has reached unprecedented levels in Nigeria since June 1993,  when General Sani Abacha's military regime annulled the national elections that  strove to end military rule in Nigeria.  Among more publicized examples of human rights violations are the March 13 raid  of the offices of the Institute of Human  Rights and Humanitarian Law (IHRHL),  and the November 1995 execution of environmental activist Ken Saro-Wiwa and his  colleagues.  However, despite the repressions, the  newspapers have been unable to completely ignore the increased attacks on  women since 1993. On November 9 last  year, a local Nigerian daily, the Saturday  Punch, reported that ten men raped and  murdered a market business woman in an  Owena boundary market, the nerve centre  of trade between Osun and Ondo states in  Nigeria.  Nigerian feminists contextualize the  increasing incidence of rape as a manifestations of male-domination and subsequent female exploitation. According to a  recently published concept paper by a  MAY 1997  group of Nigerian feminist activists, "Christian and Islamic religions brought by the  colonialists introduced new roles [for  women] that reinforced traditional [patriarchal] provisions, and new areas not covered by tradition." Add to this the current  deteriorating political and economic climate, and endemic violence against women  is only intensified.  Thousands to march on  US Summit  Women and community activists from  across the US will march on a US Presidential "Summit on America's Future" on April  27th to protest globalization policies that  have hurt tens of millions of people across  the United States and the world.  The "President's Summit is an attempt  by US President Bill Clinton, Republican  and Democratic politicians, and their top  corporate backers to give a human face to  the bi-partisan assault of the last decade on  basic rights for the elderly, poor people,  youth, Black and Aboriginal peoples,  women and other marginalized groups.  Thousands are expected to descend on  Philadelphia where the Summit is being  held. It is predicted that political leaders at  the Summit will defend massive cuts in  social spending, corporate downsizing and  the destruction of welfare, and continue to  call on "volunteerism and private charity"  to replace the lost government dollars for  social services.  Issues being raised at the march on the  Summit are reminiscent of those being  raised in Canada by activists who oppose  the slashing of social programs and other  measures favouring corporate control over  the Canadian economy.  In the US, the issues include: end  workfare; expand welfare; real jobs at living wages; money for people not the Pentagon; hands off Medicaid, Medicare and  Social Security; stop cuts in education; no  tuition increases; CIA drugs out of the  community; end the death penalty; defend  affirmative action; full rights for immigrants; reproductive rights now; end clinic  bombings; full lesbian, gay and  transgendered rights; and the freedom of  political prisoners such as Mumia Abu  Jamal, Leonard Peltier and Geronimo Pratt.  US wants end to sweatshops—Not!  Some feminists, workers and human  rights activists across the world are critical  of a pact signed by the US last month that  aims to end sweatshop labour and poor  working conditions around the world. The  pact, announced by US President Bill  Clinton, ultimately seeks to end damaging  boycotts by concerned American consumers through assertions that the clothes and  shoes they buy are not made by exploited  workers.  Called the Apparel Industry Partnership, the agreement brings together corporate representatives, labour, and some consumer and human rights groups in an effort to eliminate child labour and abusive  conditions in factories that make clothes  and shoes for the US market.  But in fact, activists say, the pact camouflages the hypocrisy of corporations that  locate factories in low-wage countries with  poor labour standards, and where union  organizing is illegal or minimal.  The accord's recognition of workers'  rights to form unions is "pure hypocrisy,"  says Medea Benjamin of the US-based hu  man rights organization Global Exchange.  "Why then do the companies manufacture  in countries where it is illegal to organize?  "I think it's business as usual, while  giving the consumer the impression that the  issue has been taken care of," she adds.  The agreement took eight months to  negotiate and requires companies that join  the partnership to monitor compliance by  suppliers and contractors. It calls for "internal monitoring" by participating corporations, as well as "independent external"  monitors. The agreement bars the use of  forced labour such as in prisons, and prohibits the employment of workers under  age 15 in most nations, or age 14 in others.  It calls for recognition of the rights of workers to "freedom of association and collective bargaining," and general adherence to  a country's basic laws on wages and working hours. Workers are to be paid at least  the minimum wage "or the prevailing industry wage, whichever is higher," and the  work week is limited to 60 hours, except in  "extraordinary business circumstances."  Labour activists insist the pact should  call for workers to be paid a "living wage,"  not minimum wage, which is extremely  low in the countries where US corporations  tend to locate factories. They are often set  way below the country's poverty line by  governments eager to attract foreign investment, and often it is only by working forced  overtime that workers make enough to  cover basic living expenses.  "It's not good enough to be the best  plantation owner on the block," says  Benjamin, pointing out that companies  could easily afford to pay "living wages"  which in some countries are as low as 40  cents an hour.  So far, nine companies have signed on  as direct participants: Liz Claiborne, LL  Bean, Nike, Karen King, Nicole Miller,  Patagonia, Phillips-Van Heusen, Tweeds,  and Reebok.  Activists are calling for local labour,  human rights and religious groups to be  allowed to ensure that basic agreements are  adhered to. For example, currently workers often aren't paid for all the hours they  work and corporations such as the Nike  (shoe) corporation refuse to allow independent monitors to verify hours and pay  levels. However, the pact only allows "independent" monitoring by private multinational accounting firms, which labour  groups say is not enough.  Lesbian-hunt underway  in Kenya  Mainstream newspapers in Kenya in  March and April announced that the ministry of education, among other government offices, is launching a thorough investigation of a "lesbian sex syndicate"  operating in the country's elite circles, the  United Nations Environment Program and  at Kinare school in the capital city, Nairobi.  The newspapers attack an unnamed  former wife of a cabinet minister and  "wealthy and elderly women" working at  UNEP headquarters in Gigiri for "luring"  schoolgirls into "lesbian sex with elderly  women" in a high-income suburb of Nairobi.  An outcry by Kenyan newspapers,  church leaders, politicians and parents has  forced closure of the Kinare school and all  350 girl students have been sent home. A  psychologist called in by the school says  that lesbianism is "on the rise" not only at  Kinare, but in many Kenyan schools. She  called for "serious therapeutic help" for the  students.  The anti-lesbian backlash in the media  also seems to have targetted two white  European women working at UNEP who  are said to have left the country "to cool off  attacks from the irate public." However, it  is expected that a backlash targetting lesbians of all classes and races is underway on  the streets, similar to the backlash following the UN World Conference on Women  in Beijing in 1995 which raised the issue of  lesbianism on a global level.  Last month's stories in the Kenyan  media also allege that lesbian child sexual  abuse is rampant, and that some of the girls  "lured into lesbianism" are as young as "14  years old."  Homosexuality is illegal in Kenya.  Under laws enacted in the 1930s and 40s  when Kenya was still under British rule,  homosexuality is described as against the  order of nature and anyone who commits  a homosexual act or forces another person  to, is liable to 14 years in prison. However,  over at least the last decade, a number of  Kenyan lesbian and gay groups and individuals have traced the long history of lesbians and gays in Africa. As well, their research shows that a number of terms describing homosexual sex and people have  existed for hundreds of years in various  African languages. More recently, even the  Kenyan newsapers have had to admit that  lesbianism and homosexuality are not absent from African society, although they  commonly attribute it to "foreign" influences.  Sources: IGLHRC Emergency Response Bulletin; Features Africa Network; APLB network;  and various mainstream media.  Where in fhe  heck  can I find  Kinesis?  Vancouver  Banyen Books, Women in  Print, Duthie's on 10th,  Duthie's on 4th, Duthie's  @ Library Square, Capers  on 4th, Little Sister's,  Manhattan Books, Spartacus  Books, People's Co-op  Bookstore, Magpie Magazine  Gallery, Eastend Food  Co-op, Mayfair News, and  UBC Bookstore  Victoria  Everywoman's   Bookstore  Ganges  Brooks   Books  Seattle  Red   and  Black   Books  Everywhere else  Kinesis is distributed to stores  all across Canada by the  Canadian Magazine Publishers  Association (CMPA), so ask  your local alternative  bookstore or new/stand to  carry Kinesis for you. Movement Matters  listings information  Movement Matters is designed to  be a network of news, updates and  information of special interest to the  women's movement.  Submissions to Movement Matters  should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double spaced and may be edited  for length. Deadline is the 18th of the  month preceding publication.  compiled by Andrea Imada and  Rachel Rosen   More dirt on Nike  The campaign against Nike is picking  up the pace after a recent fact-finding mission to the sport equipment company's contractors in Vietnam. Through interviews  and eyewitness accounts, the mission has  reinforced the reports of atrocious working  conditions in what have been described as  factory "boot camps." [see Kinesis, December/January 1997]  A report by Thuyen Nguyen of Vietnam Labor Watch outlines the horrendous  labour conditions witnessed in his visit to  subcontractors' factories in March. Nguyen  had the opportunity to interview many of  the workers in the factories which produce  Nike footwear. Most are young women  from poor rural areas who seek work in the  factories to support themselves and their  families. Nguyen writes, "These are young  women used to working on farms, used to  poor living conditions. Yet they told me that  their lives working in Nike factories are  even worse."  In a cruel and ironic twist on March  8th—International Women's Day—a supervisor at one of the Nike factories forced 56  women to run four kilometres around the  factory grounds—twelve women fainted  and were taken to hospital. The punishment was demanded because some of the  women were wearing outdoor shoes inside  the factory, instead of "regulation" footwear.  In addition to these extraordinary conditions, enduring regular work is equally  punishing:  "Many of them work up to 12 hours a  day. They work in noisy, hot factories that  are filled with the smell of paint and glue.  In an eight-hour shift, they are not allowed  to go to the bathroom more than once; they  are not allowed to have a drink of water  more than twice..." says Nguyen's report.  "The real problem is the pace of their work:  they are forced to meet very high quotas,  so the assembly line is very fast-paced.  There is also a lot of stress, stress from the  fear of corporal punishment, stress from  enduring daily indignities and stress from  the fear of sexual harassment."  The basic factory pay is $1.60 a day—  not enough to pay for food let alone rent,  clothing and other necessities. As well,  working unpaid overtime to meet the stringent quotas is routine.  The campaign to focus consumer attention on Nike is ongoing in Canada and  the United States. Recently, protests and  information pickets were organized by  Development and Peace, and the East  Timor Action Network (ETAN) in Canada.  [The most recent ETAN protest was held outside the Nike store on Robson Street in Vancouver on April 19.] In the US, efforts are  being spearheaded by a number of labour  groups including Global Exchange, the  Campaign for Labor Rights, Press for  Change as well as Vietnam Labor Watch.  A North-American speaking tour this  May will feature Cicih Sukaesih, who for  merly worked for a Nike subcontractor in  Indonesia. The tour is scheduled to stop in  BC, Alberta and Ontario and is being  funded by the Canadian Autoworkers Social Justice Fund and the Alberta Federation of Labour.  The Campaign for Labor Rights along  with Press for Change are also organizing  an international mobilization against Nike  in October.  The Campaign for Labor Rights can be  reached at 1247 E Street SE, Washington, DC  20003. To receive labour alerts by e-mail, send  a message with the subject "labor alerts—Nike  campaign" to clr@igc.apc.org  New newsletter in the  Downtown Eastside  After months of work and getting  ready, women in Vancouver's Downtown  Eastside have finished their very first issue  of DEW Drop In. The new monthly newsletter of the Downtown Eastside Women's  centre came out in April and features a calendar of activities at the Women's Centre,  an article on the IWD events, a press release  from the BC Native Women's Society about  a court challenge against the Minister of  Indian Affairs for discrimination in the Indian Act against Aboriginal women living  on reserve, news from the DEWC's advocates on welfare, taxes and school, and poetry from the women at the Centre.  The newsletter, produced by women  for women, was put together by a group at  the centre and they welcome new volunteers and contributors. There will be weekly  meetings on Thursdays from 11:00am to  12:30pm at the DEWC for all those interested in contributing to the newsletter—  typing, writing, photos, drawing, layout,  the works—or giving feedback about the  issues.  For more information about DEW Drop  In, drop in to the Downtown Eastside Women's Centre, 44 E. Cordova St, Vancouver or  call (604) 681-8480.  Urgent! Support  Bill C-46 now  Women's organizations across the  country are putting out an urgent call for  letters, faxes and phone calls to the Senate  of Canada in support of Bill C-46, which is  aimed at protecting the confidentiality and  equality rights of survivors of violence. In  late April, Bill C-46 was sent to the Senate  for approval.  Bill C-46 would limit the "fishing expeditions" into the lives of women who file  sexual assault charges by, restricting what  personal records must be disclosed to lawyers for the accused rapists.  Bill C-46, which is widely supported  by women's organizations as the next best  alternative to their demand of "no records,  anytime," contains provisions requiring  lawyers to prove the relevance of medical,  employment, mental health, and counselling documents before they can be subpoenaed in court.  In recent court cases, confidential counselling and medical records of women  claimants and witnesses have been subpoenaed and exposed in court. Sexual assault  centres, anti-violence women's organizations and other counselling services have  witnessed a reluctance to seek counselling  and file charges as a result of the threat of  court access to their records. In addition,  counsellors have had to divert their work  from counselling and anti-violence work to  responding to court demands. (See Kinesis,  March 1997 for an indepth article Bill C-46  and recent court cases involving the disclosure of personal records.)  Liberal Senator Anne Cools, who recently spearheaded a vigorous challenge to  the Child Support Bill, has already indicated she will oppose Bill C-46. With the  Child Support Bill, Cools sided with anti-  women "fathers' rights" groups and pressured the federal Liberal government to  water down the Bill before she would agree  to support it. The Liberals agreed.  Women's groups are concerned that  Bill C-46 will not be passed and will die on  the floor of the Senate once the federal election is called.  Out for justice on May  Day  Trade unionists and their allies will be  out in force on May 3rd for a National Day  of Protest. Protests, held under the banner,  "We're Out for Justice," will focus on increasing unemployment and escalating  cuts to social programs, the Canada Pension Plan, health care, education and the  CBC. The National Day of Protest coincides  with annual May Day (labour) celebrations.  Women are particularly affected by  federal cuts. Most women union members  work in the public sector and their jobs are  directly threatened by government cuts.  The loss of the social safety net makes it  even more difficult for the large number of  low-waged women workers in restaurants  and the service industry to protest working conditions or to leave their jobs. Cuts  to social programs mean more and more  women and children are living in poverty.  The Canadian Labour Congress (CLC),  which is assisting in organizing rallies  across the country, is hoping that the demonstrations will help to "overcome divisions" in the social change movement and  "build ongoing connections among trade  unionist and others who depend on social  programs."  In Vancouver, the Vancouver District  Labour Council is organizing a march and  rally which begins at Library Square (at  Robson and Homer) starting at 11:00am.  The march will take protesters to the Royal  Bank head office and then to the Art Gallery. A late afternoon reception from 3:00  to 6:00pm at the CAW office in New Westminster (326-12th St.) will feature federal  NDP leader Alexa McDonough and CLC  President Bob White.  Marches are also planned in Victoria,  Courtney, Campbell River, Prince George,  Prince Rupert, and New Westminster.  Women & Words  Society dissolves  After 15 years in existence, the West  Coast Women & Words Society (WCW&W)  in Vancouver is dissolving. The decision  to shut down was made at the organization's AGM in November. The Society issued its last newsletter in March.  Over the past year, WCW&W had been  trying to recruit more members for its Board  of Directors to stave off having to dissolve  the society. Their efforts failed to generate  enough interest from women in the community. In the end, the two women who  remained on the Board had the unenviable  task of winding down the business of the  Society.  WCW&W developed out of the 1983  conference called Women and Words/Les  Mots femmes et les mots, as a feminist, nonprofit society. Over the years, the Society  has held workshops and readings, and  have produced a regular newsletter. As  well, WCW&W sponsored an annual short  story writing contest.  WCW&W has made an arrangement  with Simon Fraser University, Acquisitions  Department to house the Society's archives,  so that they will still be accessible in the  future. As well, the Society has decided that  what ever monies are remaining, after all  obligations are met, will be donated to  Women in View, the annual women's arts  festival in Vancouver.  Women say NO! to  APEC  "Women cannot achieve freedom from  all forms of exploitation and oppression  without confronting imperialist globalization and its related structures which thrive  on the displacement, commodification, and  modern day slavery of women." This statement was made by women who participated in the People's Conference Against  Imperialist Globalization in the Philippines  last November as part of the anti-APEC  work that is happening throughout the Asia  Pacific.  To increase the opposition to so-called  free trade agendas, NO! To APEC, a coalition of grassroots organizations and individuals, is hosting a Women and Children's  Conference in Vancouver from June 13-15.  The conference will provide women  and children an opportunity to deepen their  understanding of imperialist globalization  and APEC as a tool of imperialist powers  such as the US and Japan, develop strategies of resistance to expose and oppose  APEC, and participate in an international  anti-imperialist movement.  APEC, the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation, is a forum of 18 economies in  the Asia Pacific, including Canada, working to impose free trade in the region. For  women, APEC means increased poverty,  lower wages, subcontracted work, forced  migration as laborers, increased numbers  in the sex trade especially where tourism  is thriving, labor flexibilization schemes,  and dislocation from livelihood and home.  The No! to APEC Women and Children's Conference will be held in the downtown eastside of Vancouver. It will be an  international conference including speakers, workshops, children's programs, and  a mobilization. The conference organizers  include groups such as Grassroots Women's Discussion Group, Philippine Women  Centre, Nuestra Voz, End Legislated Poverty, and GAATW-Canada (the Global Alliance Against the Trafficking of Women).  Registration is by donation. Billeting  will be available for out of town participants. Deadline is May 23.  The organizing committee is open to any  women who join us in our call: Women Resist  Imperialist Globalization: Women Say No to  APEC! To register, help organize or offer billeting for the conference call (604) 215-9190;  email: notoapec@vcn.bc.ca; or come by the  Kalayaan Centre at 451 Powell St, Vancouver.  10 Feature  Violence against women:  Another Vernon waiting  to explode  On April 4th, the Coalition of South Asian  Women Against Violence called a press conference to remember Rajwar Ghakal and eight  members of her family who were all murdered  in Vernon, BC by her estranged husband Mark  Chahal (on April 5,1996). The Coalition called  the press conference to raise awareness about  violence against women, making clear that the  Vernon massacre was not an isolated incident  and that there could be many other Vernons  simmering and ready to explode. The Coalition  also called the press conference to release the  results of a pilot study done by FREDA, the  Feminist Research, Education, Development  and Action Centre, assessing the Attorney  General's Violence Against Women in Intimate  Relationships policy (AG's VAWIR policy) and  its mandatory arrest requirement. The Coalition also held a candlelight vigil later that  evening [see page 4].  The press conference was endorsed by a  number of women's organizations, many of  whom were represented there that day. Prem  Gill spoke on behalf of the South Asian Women's Centre, Zara Suleman on behalf of the  Coalition, Bonnie Agnew on behalf of Vancouver's Rape Relief and Women's Shelter, Fay  Blaney on behalf of the National Action  Commmittee on the Status of Women's Anti-  ■ violence Committee and the Aboriginal Women's Action Network, Agnes Huang on behalf  of the Vancouver Status of Women, and Yasmin  Jiwani on behalf of FREDA. Below are excerpts  of comments made by four of the speakers at  the press conference.  What's happened since  Vernon  Bonnie Agnew   Bonnie Agnew gave examples to highlight  how the police have failed to implement the  AG's VAWIR policy (and have failed women)  since the Vernon massacre.  I wanted to talk today about was some  examples that have come to the attention  of our organization concerning the police  since the Vernon massacre, since heightened awareness about violence against  women, since the provincial election in BC,  and since the Attorney General's changes,  in his opinion, toughening the VAWIR  policy.  We were among a coalition of groups  who put together the Women's Election  Agenda before the last provincial election.  We asked all the parties if they would guarantee that women in BC would receive a  swift response to their calls to 911. All of  them, except the Reform party, said they  would do so. That was in May. None of  them has called for police accountability.  Here are some examples of things we  know about in relation to the police since  that time:  The Vancouver police and the City of  Vancouver are being sued civilly by a  woman, Arlena Carla Jones, who did not  receive adequate and proper police re-  MAY 1997  sponse, in her opinion, to her plea for help  when she was being beaten by her ex-boy-  friend. [The day after, she was again physically assaulted by the man, who slashed her  with a broken bottle.] The response in September 1996 of the police and the City of  Vancouver to this lawsuit was to say that  they were not negligent. If there was any  negligence, and this is in their official response, it was on the part of the woman  herself because, they say, she did not report  to the police in the manner in which they  deemed appropriate. It's also her fault because she stayed in the turbulent relationship and because she "provoked" a fight  with this particular man. That is the official response of the Vancouver police.  Coquitlam RCMP, November 1996—a  very similar situation to Vernon. A man was  arrested—nine rifles were taken from  him—but he was released on bail with a  no-contact order. What he did was call his  wife's daughter (his step daughter) and  threaten her life and the life of her family.  Where had we heard this before, months  earlier. The police, upon getting a complaint  from the daughter, phoned the man and  told him not to do it again. Under theAG's  policy, this is a crime in progress. The man  has broken the no-contact order, threatened  the daughter's life and the life of her family, and the police phoned him. They  phoned him. And you know what he did?  He took it as a tip-off just like Mark Chahal  did, as a tip-off that the police are not going to do anything but phone him. And if  he's not near a phone, then they're not going to do anything. They did not do anything. It took our organization getting in  touch with the Attorney General to make  the RCMP find the man, arrest him and  hold him until his entitlement to full trial  and hearing. The woman is safe, the daughter and her family are safe because of us,  because of women's organizations, and because the Attorney General's office moved  when we said "Vernon tragedy."  Richmond RCMP in May and July 1996  and March 1997—They failed to investigate  or enforce a peace bond, and instead threatened to charge the woman with mischief  when she reported three times that the man  had contacted her. When we finally attended with her, the police in Richmond  were very antagonistic to us and her saying they did not need to be babysat by us.  This, after the Vernon murders.  The New Westminister Police are no  different. In March 1997, they refused to  believe a woman who said her ex-husband  was threatening her life. Instead they believed him when he called in to complain  that she was harassing him. The thing that's  significant about the New West Police is  that the officer in the situation did not ask  whether or not he had weapons. We asked,  and he did—a hand gun. The officer made  a report to the Crown recommending no  charges, and did not say anything to the  Crown about death threats or weapons.  And when we intervened, the officer said:  "Look, I've had the sensitivity    m  training but in this case this is the    II  exception; she's lying, she's crazy,  she was harassing him." They are  all exceptions.  I have several other examples,  but I want to conclude with a couple of points. One is about mandatory arrest. For us it has come to mean  whether or not the police officer wishes to  arrest; it is not about the woman's wishes  anymore; it is about the police officer's. We  have come to think of mandatory arrest  much more in that light.  I'd also like to say that when I joined  Rape Relief in 1979, at the very first meeting I attended we discussed whether or not  to continue training the police at the police  academy which Rape Relief had done for  five years. There was debate and discussion among some women, but it was clear  that this training that we'd been doing for  five years was not working. I heard the Attorney General this morning on the radio  suggest that what was needed was police  training. Let me say that was what should  have happened 20 years ago. We don't need  mandatory training; there is no mandatory  learning going on. There is nothing to be  trained about, in my opinion, except believe  the woman, believe us and do your jobs,  investigate. What is needed is the authority of the Attorney General, the Solicitor  General, parliament and the legislature to  tell the police that they must do their jobs.  Regaining control over  our lives  by Fay Blaney   Fay Blaney spoke about how the police are  not responsive to (and often discriminate  against) Aboriginal women being abused or assaulted.  For the Aboriginal Women's Action  Network, the ill effects of mandatory arrest  is not news to us—we have known all along  that the mandatory charging is not effective in the Aboriginal community. For Aboriginal women, the delivery of police services has always been either inconsistent or  non-existent whether we live on- or off-reserve. On some reserves—and I stress  some—they have access to either the tribal  police or circle sentencing or other programs. But for those of us living off-reserve—the huge majority of Aboriginal  peoples in BC—we are subjected to either  the municipal police or the RCMP Regardless of which police force we're dealing  with, we still have to deal with a male-  dominated system which does not have the  interests of Aboriginal women as a primary  concern. In fact their interest is usually to  be against Aboriginal women.  Violent men whether they're Aboriginal or non-Aboriginal can be expected not  to be accountable for assaulting Aboriginal  women. This is evident in the Arlena Jones  case. She was brutally attacked and beaten  by her ex-boyfriend. She had previously  called the police to help her on several occasions, and when he came to attack her  she was already separated from him. He  found her apartment, broke down her door  and brutally beat her. Arlena called the  Continued on page 14  Fay Blaney and Agnes Huang Organizing against free-trade in Mexico:  Unified in the struggle  by Lilia Vazquez  Garcia as told to Ema Oropeza  Last March in Vancouver, the BC  Teachers Federation hosted a Tri-Na-  tions Forum in Defense of Public  Education. The forum brought to-    '  gether almost 80 teachers from  Mexico, Canada and the United States  to talk about the state of the public education system in each country. Among the topics  of discussion were the links between globalization and the state of public education, the increasing privatization of education, and the  shifting of curricula away from teaching students to think logically, analytically and creatively, towards training students in skills intended to prepare them for the job market in  the global imperialist capitalist system.  Lilia Vazquez Garcia was one of the 28  teachers from Mexico who participated in the  forum. She is involved with the Frente Amplio  por la Construccion del Movimiento para la  Liberacion Nacional (FAC-MLN), a national  coalition of groups using education, advocacy  and direct action to ensure people's rights are  protected under the constitution.  While Vazquez Garcia was in town, Ema  Oropeza had the opportunity to speak to her  about the work of FAC-MLN and the impact of  neo-liberal agendas, such as NAFTA (the North  American Free Trade Agreement) and APEC  (Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation), on the  living conditions of Mexican people. Oropeza  is an immigrant woman of colour from Mexico  who currently works at the Vancouver Status  of Women. The interview was conducted in  Spanish and was translated into English by  Magaly Varas, a Chilean feminist living and  working as a translator in Vancouver.  Ema Oropeza: Could you please tell us  about the FAC-MLN?  Vazquez Garcia: [In English, it means]  the Broad Front for the Reconstruction of  the National Liberation Movement. We are  a popular front of democratic organizations  willing to fight in order to improve the living conditions in our country and to  achieve democracy, justice and freedom.  At present, FAC-MLN is comprised of  unions, teachers, civilians, students, peasants, housekeepers, human rights activists,  and workers from all the different industries.  Oropeza: What are the origins of the  FAC-MLN?  Vazquez Garcia: We realized that different workers' struggles were being carried  out separately from each other. Consequently, the expected results were not attained and repression was easily enacted  by the government. This made us look for  some type of unity. We cannot deny, though,  that the surfacing of the Zapatista Army in  January 1994 speeded up our process of  unity. [On New Year's Day, 1994, the  Zapatistas staged an uprising against NAFTA  and the policies of Mexican president Carlos  Salinas. The Zapatistas are indigenous peoples  from Chiapas who have a common front of fighting against NAFTA and neo-liberalism. They  fight for the rights of indigenous peoples, such  as self-determination, land and democracy.]  Oropeza: How many organizations are  involved with FAC-MLN?  Vazquez  Garcia: We now have       around 400 organizations from all over the  country.  Oropeza: What is your role within the  FAC-MLN?  Vazquez Garcia: I am a member of the  National Coordinating Commission, which  represents the FAC-MLN at a national level.  The Commission is made up of two delegates from each organization and is organized into work committees. These committees are: Press and Advertising, Communications, Organizing, Finance, and Human  Rights. I participate in the Organizing Committee, and one of my tasks is to promote  unity among the existing organizations  within the country and abroad. The FAC-  MLN is divided into five geographical regions. We are also working to promote whal  we call the Sixth Region. This region addresses the struggle of Mexican people living and working in the United States.  Organizing the regions represents different challenges because the industries and  economic situation of each region are not  the same. For example, the southern region  is poorer than other regions, and the northern region has the highest concentration of  maquiladoras [factories which produce  goods for export and operate under sweatshop conditions.]  Oropeza: Given those differences, what  kind of strategies does FAC-MLN use for  organizing the work nationally?  Vazquez Garcia: Together with all the  companeros and companeras that form the  Organizing Committee, I visit different  states, talk to members of the organizations,  inform people about our struggles, and try  to get agreement on joint actions. Though  member organizations are not required to  participate within the FAC-MLN, we are  very interested in having some unity in our  actions. In Mexico, this is not a difficult task  in spite of the distances and the number of  people you have to inform about the work.  Most of the organizations have years of  experience and they already know the  work; it is only a matter of finding the right  links to coordinate efforts.  We respect the organizations' autonomy, since the FAC-MLN is the umbrella  group for all of them. We cannot ask them,  at least for the time being, to give up on  their own mandates. We just gather all the  dispersed efforts to come up with a unified plan of action. These joint actions can  be marches, street sit-ins (plantones), petitions, et cetera. It is only through common  actions that we reach a concrete unity.  And it is not a  small group deciding what to do.  Every two months  we hold meetings at  a national level. The  organizations tell us  about their own problems and we suggest  joint actions to carry out.  Oropeza: What kind of educational work does the FAC-MLN do?  Vazquez Garcia: The FAC-MLN is  formed by a wide range of sectors with distinct cultural backgrounds and with different levels of education. That's why just one  training plan cannot be designed. We are  currently discussing a working plan to offer lectures, video workshops and cultural  exchanges. However, the organizations are  the ones responsible for the education of  their members.  Oropeza: Is there any exchange in terms  of skills among the organizations that form  the coalition?  Vazquez Garcia: Yes. For example, peasants have a very specific experience in  terms of trying to recover their land, and  the paracaidistas [people who come to cities from rural areas to look for work and  who set up shelter in previously unoccupied areas and build up neighbourhoods]  have a very specific experience as well in  terms of struggling to be able to claim the  land they're living on. They are two different movements with the same goal, so they  exchange experiences and strategies to  complement their knowledge and their  struggles.  Oropeza: What's the impact of NAFTA  on the work of the FAC-MLN?  Vazquez Garcia: Basically, it's at the centre of the FAC-MLN's most recent struggles.  All our actions are aimed at fighting neo-  liberalism, and we have designed a four-  point plan to defeat it: the creation of a new  government, a new distribution of power,  a new constitution, and a new economic  order. Of course, this will benefit the whole  working class which, since 1994 when  NAFTA was brought in, has seen the rapid  decline of its purchasing power and working conditions, and of all types of social  programs. To ensure Mexican conditions  conform to NAFTA, the government and  the ruling elites are even demolishing historic achievements [in terms of workers'  rights.] As you can see, NAFTA is playing  a key role and there is an urgent need to  organize in order to fight for better working conditions.  Oropeza: So FAC-MLN was set up as a  response to the increasing poverty in  Mexico.  Vazquez Garcia: Exactly. It's the result  of a whole organizing process that the  Mexican social movement has had for  years. In 1968, the Tlatelolco massacre  brought about a dismemberment of the  Mexican social movement. [The massacre  occurred just before the Olympics were to be  held in Mexico City and during a time when  the popular movements in Mexico were growing, as they are now. The Mexican government  sent in the tanks and crushed thousands of civilians—women, students and children—who  were participating in an anti-government demonstration at the National Autonomous University of Mexico in Mexico City.] Later, in  the 70s there was an attempt at regrouping  the movement. The FAC-MLN is one of the  results of that move.  Oropeza: How do you see Mexico's future with the onset of APEC?  Vazquez Garcia: One of the effects of  APEC is the opening of the Mexican market to Japanese capital. In the past, we had  to fight only with American investors, but  today Japanese capitalism is expanding  more into Mexican territory. At the same  time, general concessions are being given  to foreign capitalists for establishing businesses and industries in Mexico. Obviously,  any foreign corporation would be glad to  start operations in Mexican soil because of  the significant savings in wages.  There is a boom of Japanese industry  in Mexico, employing many workers. But  once again, the working conditions of the  labourers have been affected. In the long  run, these conditions will deteriorate leading to further misery and the exploitation  of Mexican labour, which as you know is  already the second cheapest in the world.  Oropeza: Could you tell us how the  standard of living in Mexico has been most  affected? Are things such as pensions and  salaries being "reformed," like they are here  in Canada?  Vazquez Garcia: Salaries are being  capped. There is a policy that limits all salary adjustments to a maximum annual percentage already agreed upon. This percentage may not be changed under any circumstance. So wages can only increase within  this cap, whereas inflation—except for the  canasta basica (basic products)—can far exceed this percentage. [The government has  listed certain basic products or necessities, such  as beans, tortillas, milk and eggs, whose prices  are not to be increased because of inflation.]  Therefore, purchasing power is always way  below the real cost of goods.  One of the illogical measures of the  Mexican government now is to decrease the  number of goods protected as canasta basica.  What they should be doing is generating  conditions whereby the working class can  attain the canasta basica. As for social services, the whole system is being privatized...  Oropeza: Such as medical services?  Vazquez Garcia: The government is  aiming at a total privatization. There has  been a reduction in the health care budget,  so there is not enough cash to cover the  demand on medical services. Whoever  needs medical assistance has to pay cash  up front or wait in line for who knows how  long. Sometimes people have to book appointments two or three months down the  road, and, obviously if there is an emergency situation, no one can afford to wait  that long.  There is no logical infrastructure for the  medical services. For example, you may be  seen by a doctor, provided by the IMSS (social insurance for workers) or another  agency such as ISSSTE (social insurance for  government workers), but you have to pay  for your own medicines. The lack of resources has resulted in insufficient equipment—some x-ray and clinical lab tests cannot be provided by the government system.  People are then forced to pay for private  services. In addition, the government medical plan has introduced some further  changes lately, such as the access of non-  members to government services for a fee.  Oropeza: What about the education system?  Vazquez Garcia: Since 1992, there have  been a series of changes that have affected  the working conditions of teachers as well  as the curricula. Three major changes were  introduced by the government and the  National Executive Committee of the teachers' union. I should mention that the Committee has no legitimacy. It's legal in the  sense that its members are appointed under existing laws, but it is not recognized  by the membership of the union.  The first major change was that the  teachers' union is now organized at a provincial level, when previously the union  was a national body. Once a large union, it  has been transformed into small unions.  These weakened unions have not been  changed in their formal, legal structure, but  in real terms they have. Each individual  union has to conduct independent negotiations with the government.  The second major change was the introduction of the so called teacher's career.  The purpose is to classify the teacher's  work into levels. [Teachers are given points  related to the level of education and training  they have. Points are translated into salary levels.] The alleged purpose in creating the  teacher's career was to improve the quality of education. The result has been quite  the opposite. Another objective was to improve teachers' wages. This has not been  attained either since teachers' incomes are  still subject to the salary cap introduced by  the government. As well, a new element of  professional competition has been introduced preventing any possibility of teachers working in unity. One last objective was  the encouragement of professional enhancement of teachers. In reality, this is difficult to achieve—a teacher who has to  work two shifts or who has to work one  shift and look for another job to make ends  meet simply cannot afford the time to take  additional courses.  The third major change was the revision of contents of the curriculum for elementary education. Education is now reduced to a training that enables a student  to join the workforce at a very early age.  Teaching children logical reasoning and  grammar has been removed from the curricula. Contents are limited to basic operations needed to understand Spanish, so that  the child is able to receive orders but noth  ing else. There is no training in logic which  might help students analyze and question  their situations.  Oropeza: What about social impact?  Has poverty increased?  Vazquez Garcia: In fact, poverty has increased considerably. Seventy percent of the  population live below the poverty line.  Forty million Mexicans are considered extremely poor. These extremely poor families have a large number of children they  cannot afford to support.  In Mexico in the last few years, the  number of street children has increased by  almost 400 percent. This has resulted in  problems of drug addiction and vandalism.  Many of them are already in rehabilitation  centres at a very early age. But there is no  solution in sight. The appalling conditions  in which they live are made visible by their  ever increasing presence in the street intersections, cleaning windshields or somersaulting just to get a meagre coin. It's simply a reflection of the lack of appropriate  education, health and wages policies.  In the poorest regions of the country—  the rural areas—fifty out of 100 children die  of malnutrition before they reach three  years of age. Lately, there has been a proliferation of child pornography. Many children are also subject to violence at home.  This is a problem that worries us in  particular. Children are every country's future, but in these conditions, what future  can we expect if our children are completely  unprotected? They have no right to medicine, housing, education, et cetera. The Constitution states they do, but the reality is  children are living on the street.  Oropeza: Can you talk about the living  conditions for women?  Vazquez Garcia: Their living conditions  are the same as their partners or their coworkers. Traditionally, women are doubly  exploited. We are exploited by the establishment which as a whole oppresses the  working class and we are also exploited as  women doing domestic work, which is the  unpaid and unacknowledged work. Prostitution is rampant. There are many single  mothers. Getting jobs is harder for women  than men. In women's cases it's even worse,  because employers take advantage of women's need for a job in order for them and  their children to survive. Women are often forced to accept any kind of employment they can get.  Oropeza: What about violence  against women?  Vazquez Garcia: There is too  much violence at home and  on the streets. Unsafe  conditions have increased a lot and  this  is  not new.  Women are the most  common victims of abuse and rape. However, the Mexican legal system is shaped in  such a way that, in most cases, women prefer to keep quiet instead of reporting the  assaults because, most often, after they file  complaints and after the investigation proc  ess, what they are told is that they are responsible for the violence against them.  Recently, the Mexican media extensively publicized a case of a woman named  Claudia [Rodriquez] who was going to be  sexually assaulted outside a bar by a male  acquaintance of her friend. She defended  herself and and put in jail. [Rodriguez shot  and killed the man and was charged with murder.] After two hard years of legal process,  the judge issued the verdict that Rodriguez  had acted in self-defense but that her  defense was "excessive." She was released  from jail but was ordered to pay compensation to her attacker's family.  Oropeza: So, the legal system doesn't  provide any support to women?  Vazquez Garcia: No, it doesn't  Oropeza: I would like to ask you about  the change that is happening among  women. Because of globalization, there are  more women in the labour market. There  have been changes in the unions and  women are becoming more conscientious  about the political environment. Would you  say there has been significant advance in  terms of women's participation in the struggle?  Vazquez Garcia: Yes. It has a lot to do  with the development of the social movement in Mexico, in which both men and  women have to get involved. Women have  demonstrated the capability to take on important representative roles. Right now,  there are companeras who are secretary generals of some unions and leaders in other  parts of the social movement. Women are  becoming more determined in  their participation in the  struggle. This is something we have noticed and that we  acknowledge with  joy. The number  of companeras  who, in spite of  having less formal education  than men, know  the need for their  participation is  increasing. They treasure their own participation as women, as citizens and as human  beings.  Every day, there are more women who  open their eyes to themselves, acknowledging themselves as human beings with dignity and demanding this acknowledgement  from others. We also see with joy that every  day the number of men who are helping  women break the chain is increasing. Do  we still have lots ahead? Yes. There is considerable backwardness in many communities regarding this situation. However,  participation is becoming more evident...  Oropeza: Finally, I would like to finish  this interview with your outlook for  Mexico, for women's organizations, the  FAC-MLN...  Vazquez Garcia: We believe that the future of the whole social movement in  Mexico is very promising. There are high  expectations for change, but unfortunately  these expectations do not depend exclusively on the movement. They also depend  on the disposition of authorities and government to understand people's needs and  to create options for the development of the  country as a whole. Right now, we're hitting our heads against a very thick wall.  The current government has no intention  of changing anything. The government is  more concerned with satisfying the ruling  class' interests. They ignore the needs of the  rest of the population who are justly demanding better conditions.  If the government were sensible, they  would understand these conditions, give  answers and present options. But if the government continues with its current campaign—sending the military into communities, depriving people of their individual  rights, violating human rights, increasing  the persecution, murder and political disappearances of those who oppose it—the  end result will be a deepening of the strong  anxieties already existing in the country,  which will obviously have extremely negative consequences for all of us. Feature  Violence against women:  Continued from page 11  police, and the police officer who came verbally abused her and said some very derogatory things to her. The police did not  arrest her ex-boyfriend; they drove him five  blocks away and then they dropped him  off. The next day, this man found Arlena  and beat her again. This time, she had to  go to the hospital for stitches.  There are many, many Aboriginal  women killed each year in the Downtown  Eastside and in various other parts of the  province in rural areas. There are never any  investigations conducted into their deaths  and this is a clear indication that the justice  system does not work for us. NAC and  AWAN would like to know who is  benefitting from the mandatory charging  policy because it certainly wasn't the family killed in Vernon and it's not the Aboriginal women who are still being killed. If  the police force and the court systems cannot protect our interests, then I suggest the  government turn these resources over to us,  turn the decision making over to us so that  we can protect our own interests. I challenge our allies—the service providers, the  police department, Coalition partners—to  support us in this bid to regain control over  this critical area of our lives.  No more patriarchy  Agnes Huang   Agnes Huang spoke about the  connectedness of all incidents of violence  against women in relationships and about the  need, not for bandaid responses like the AG's  VAWIR, but for an end to the root cause of violence against women: patriarchy.  What I wanted to do today was to  make very clear that what happened in  Vernon a year ago—the murder of Rajwar  Ghakal and her family by her estranged  husband—was not an anomaly. It was not  an isolated case.  I was just thinking (off the top of my  head) of the cases I have come across where  men have killed their wives or ex-wives. I  think of Linda William who was killed by  her husband. He got five years and as he  came up for parole, he applied for custody  of their children. He's now out. I think of  Nora Seymour who was killed by her husband, John. He was convicted of manslaughter rather than murder because he  claimed, and the court bought it, that he  was too drunk to know what he was doing. I think of Susan Klassen in the Yukon  who was strangled by her husband from  whom she had recently separated. He got  manslaughter, not murder. He claimed she  provoked him [because she had asked for  a separation after 13 years of marriage and  abuse]. I think of the case in Florida—a custody case—where a woman lost custody of  her daughter to the child's father because  she was a lesbian and lived with a woman,  and because her oldest daughter was also  a lesbian and lived with a woman. He was  awarded custody, despite the fact that he  had been convicted of murdering his first  wife over a custody dispute.  Through every society, through every  culture, violence against women is endemic  and epidemic. Last month, on the day Kinesis went to press, a woman called me not  knowing what to do or say; she just wanted  some action to be taken. Why? Because she  had just heard on the radio that a man in  Kelowna who had stabbed his wife 46  times, killed her, put her body in a garbage  bag, dumped it in the trunk of his car, took  14  it to an isolated spot and dumped her body,  received a four year sentence for manslaughter. (He was able to convince the  court that he was provoked into killing her.)  She had just heard that that four year sentence had been upheld by the BC Court of  Appeal as adequate.  This woman did not know what to do;  she was so frustrated and angry. And this  was a woman who wasn't in a situation  where she was directly experiencing violence; she wasn't an activist working [in her  day to day life] to end violence against  women. But this was a woman who knew  that violence against any woman affects her  life and affects all our lives as women in  this society.  And she asked what can we do about  it? I told her to come to the vigil tonight.  And I would ask her, and all of us, to make  the link between the murders of women by  their male partners and ex-partners to that  of the response of the police, the court system and society.  What we need to do is confront the root  cause of male violence against women, and  that is patriarchy. Patriarchy gives men the  right to exonerate themselves of any responsibility for beating and killing their  wives or girlfriends. Patriarchy gives police the right to disregard women's complaints about their abusive male partners  or ex-partners.  Patriarchy gives judges, juries, Crown  prosecutors and defense lawyers the right  to accept men's excuses for killing their  wives and girlfriends—like they were too  drunk to know what they were doing or  they were provoked—and to convict these  men on lesser charges of manslaughter and  not murder. (Manslaughter usually gives  them four to five years in jail only, and  they're often out in two-thirds of that time.)  Patriarchy also gives society the right  to believe that the cases of male violence  against women are rare and isolated, rather  than endemic and epidemic and supported  by the system and structures of the society.  Whatever policies are put into place,  like theAG's policy against violence against  women in intimate relationships, are just  bandaid solutions. No policy will ever be  enough to end violence against women.  We've even seen theAG's policy being used  against women, just as the criminal harassment legislation—the stalking law—is being used against women.  What needs to happen is a fundamental shift in the attitude of society, of men, of  the courts, of the police. We're not here to  educate them. We want them to educate  themselves and to change, because until  there is an end to patriarchy, there will be  no end to violence against women.  The survey says...  Yasmin Jiwani   Yasmin jiwani released the results of a pilot study conducted by FREDA on the AG's  VAWIR policy and the mandatory arrest requirement.  I'd like to present a larger context—  namely, that we live in the province with  has the highest level of violence against  women in relationships. Research shows  that 59 percent of women in BC have been  subjected to violence by their male partners.  We also live in a country that sees more than  110 women a year being murdered by their  partners and ex-partners. What we witnessed in Vernon last year is certainly not  Yasmin Jiwani and Bonnie Agnew  an aberration—it's an aberration only in  that it actually came to light.  The pilot survey we conducted included a survey of 45 organizations around  the province. Of those organizations, 74  percent were located in areas under the jurisdiction of the RCMP; 18 percent in areas  under the jurisdiction of the Vancouver  police department; and eight percent in  areas governed by other municipal forces.  Sixty percent of those surveyed were located in urban areas and 40 percent in rural settings, so it was a wide variety and  represents a good cross section of organizations around the province. All of these  organizations provide services to women  who are in or leaving or recovering from  abusive relationships. By conservative estimates, there were about 65,000 women  served by these organization in the last year.  Of these organizations, 53 percent indicated that police are implementing the  mandatory arrest scheme as defined by the  VAWIR policy, and another 37 percent said  police are not implementing it. (The remaining 10 percent did not respond to the  question.)However, 82 percent of the participants indicated they had real concerns  about the way in which the police were implementing the mandatory arrest policy.  In terms of the effectiveness of the  VAWIR policy, only 49 percent—less than  half the organizations surveyed—thought  the situation was changing for the better.  Another 42 percent indicated the policy has  not been effective—in other words, it  doesn't work—and 84 percent indicated  they had real concerns about the way in  which the policy was being implemented.  Among the general findings that came  out of the study, there are several that really stand out. One is the indication that  police are exercising an enormous amount  of discretion as to whether or not to arrest  the offender. They are reluctant to arrest the  man if they have only the woman's story  as verification; in other words, they want  witnesses or some other form of corroboration. Interestingly, some organizations reported that even if there were physical signs  of a woman being abused, the police will  still not arrest the abuser. And in some areas, the police were simply not arresting,  even when the man threatened violence or  threatened to kill the woman. In many cases  around the province, it's interesting to note  that the police are in fact interpreting the  mandatory arrest policy in a gender neutral way; in other words, they're also arresting the women who are being abused,  which shows a clear lack of understanding  about the cycle of violence.  In terms of general findings, it seems  as if some parties have thought the policy  was not being implemented across the  board in an even fashion—simply put,  many respondents said that yes, there is this  policy; and yes, if it's implemented it does  work successfully. But in most cases, it isn't  being implemented. It also depends very  much on the luck of the draw, on which  particular police officer a woman happens  to get. It's like playing Russian roulette with  women's lives.  Participants expressed concerns that  police are not enforcing the policy, and that  they feel the police often believe the policy  is unenforceable. Some felt the police are  sabotaging the policy and some also noted  that positive experiences with the policy depended too much on certain police officers  who are implementing the policy.  There is an understanding that police  are only one side of the system that's failing women: the Crown and the courts were  also indicated by participants as impediments to the effectiveness of the policy. The  coordinated effort of the entire criminal justice system is necessary to implement the  policy if it is meant to be successful.  One of the other findings that came  across very strongly is that not only does it  depend on which particular police officer  you happen to get, but on who you are as a  woman. There are groups of women whose  calls are not being responded to appropriately by the police. These include women  with addictions, sex trade workers  andAboriginal women.  Some of the recommendations that  came out of the survey were: the real need  to implement this policy in a consistent  manner—there has to be clarity about the  goals and objectives of the policy; and an  increased training of members of the criminal justice system and a protocol developed  to provide direction. Another recommendation was the consistent application of the  mandatory arrest policy and the assurance  of flexibility, choice and options for women  after the man is arrested. Further recommendations were the enforcement of protection (restraining) orders and ensuring a  women's cases weren't dragged through a  long process.  Survey participants also said there  needed to be an increase in support and resources for shelters and transition houses,  as well as more second stage support and  access to counselling for women. Finally,  there was a very strong recommendation,  from organizations both in the rural and  urban centres, that somebody has to track  these cases, somebody has to monitor  whether or not the police are doing what  they're supposed to be doing.  FREDA plans to complete the second  phase of its study on the AG's VAWIR policy  by the end of the year. For more information  about the study, contact: Yasmin Jiwani at  FREDA, SFU Harbour Centre, 515 W. Hastings St, Vancouver, BC, V6B 5K3; tel: (604)  291-5197; fax: (604) 291-5189. Feature  Sixth world congress on women:  Bringing activists and  academics together  by Habiba Zaman  Over 900 women from 67 countries  showed up for the Sixth International Interdisciplinary Congress on Women in Adelaide, Australia last April (1996). Jointly  hosted by the three universities in Adelaide  city—the University of Adelaide, Flinders  University, and the University of South  Australia, it was the first Congress held in  the southern hemisphere. (The Congress on  Women is held every three years; the next  congress will be held in 1999 in Norway.)  This event was one of the largest gatherings of female academics and activists on  Australian soil. Participants and speakers  from Asia, Africa, Europe, and the Pacific  joined the six-day celebration to exchange  ideas, experience, research and scholarship.  Many of the activists present had also participated in the NGO Women's Forum and  4th United Nations Conference on Women  in China in September 1995. They came to  Australia to continue the work of building  international solidarity.  The theme of the Congress was "Think  Global, Act Local." Unlike most other academic conferences, the Congress aspired to  promote exchanges of information between  feminist activists and academics, and to  . build strategies for feminist movements by  developing networks between feminists  from the North and from the South. Organizers selected topics for discussion ranging  from Aboriginal women's issues, domestic violence, reproductive politics, health  and sexuality, and eco-feminism to poverty,  sustainable development and a critical  analysis of global restructuring and its impact on women and children worldwide.  In all, there were 212 sessions and panels which highlighted everything from very  theoretical issues—feminist research and  methodologies, historical construction and  feminist pedagogies of women's studies—  to matters of practical concerns of women  in their everyday life—family, work, migration, sexual harassment and racism.  The deliberations at various sessions  did not aim at achieving any unanimity of  feminist strategies or goals. Rather, diverse  strategies and/or approaches, derived from  various experiences and knowledge, were  presented, shared, and analyzed from feminist perspectives by the participants.  Sixteen keynote speakers spoke at the  Congress over the six-day period. The  speakers, representing many different intellectual perspectives—"third world"  feminists, Black feminists, socialist feminists, eco-feminists—were chosen for their  distinctive contributions to the feminist  cause and their advancement of knowledge  through research, teaching and community  activism. Notable among those are: Mary  Ann Bin-Sallik (Australia), Beatrix  Campbell (UK), Hilary Charlesworth (Australia), Bev Hanson (Jamaica), Wazir Jahan  Karim (Malaysia), Marcia Langton (Australia), Rosemary Machicado (Bolivia), Jane  Mogina (Papua New Guinea), Wang  Jianxang (China), Vandana Shiva (India),  Roberta Sykes (Australia), and Lindowe  Zulu (South Africa).  In the opening keynote speech, Marcia  Langton, an anthropologist and Ranger  Chair for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Island Studies at the Northern Territory University, spoke on religion and the administration of human rights of Australian Aborigines. An Aboriginal activist herself for  20 years, Langton used the Hindmarch Island Bridge "affair" as a case study to illustrate how religious beliefs of  Ngarrindjeri were attacked by the construction of a bridge connecting the island to  southern Sydney. The building of the  bridge, which the state viewed as representing "progress and modernization" of the  Aboriginal life on the island and as a necessity which should not be stopped because of "superstition." Ngarrindjeri  women had tried to stop the the building  of the bridge.  This case was further discussed in the  final session of the Congress by Mary Bin-  Sallik, associate professor of Australian  Studies at the University of South Australia.  Bin-Sallik told Congress participants that  the Ngarrindjeri women were considered  the wise persons in their community and  that by opposing the bridge, they were trying to protect what was sacred to them.  However, she remarked that the state and  the media persecuted this group of Aboriginal women, using a Royal Commission  inquiry to try and discount the beliefs and  knowledge of the Ngarrindjeri women.  (This is similar to how inquiries were used  to fuel the witch-hunts in Britian, Europe  and NorthAmerica.)  The "feminization of poverty" was a  cross-cutting theme in many sessions. Despite the United Nations declaration of 1996  for the International Year for the Eradication of Poverty, keynote speaker Roberta  Sykes reminded Congress delegates that  governments around the world, and even  the women's movements, have largely ignored this issue. Sykes, a human rights activist and chair of Black Women's Action  in Education Foundation (in New South  Wales, Australia), introduced herself by  saying; "I'm every Black woman who has  ever been raped; every Black woman who  has ever been murdered; every Black girl  who has ever been called 'nigger;' and  every Black girl who has ever been called  'slut.'"  A community activist, poet and author,  Sykes told the Congress that there are no  conferences for the poor and no response  from "the un-poor"—the middle class and  the rich. Through her thought-provoking  speech, Sykes pointed out society's lack of  "generosity" of spirit and said: "We all  thought Imelda Marcos had too many  shoes. I feel we all need to look at what we  have got in a comparative manner, comparing ourselves and our acquistions not with  the Marcoses or Trumps, but with those  who have little."  Participants in the Sixth World Congress on Women held in Adelaide,  Australia  Wazir Jahan Karim, president of  Malaysian Academy of Social Sciences,  focussed her discussion on women, Islam  and sexual equality. Karim remarked that  the "Islamic women's movement" is far  from having a full understanding of the  socio-psychological dimensions of Muslim  women. She expressed concern with those  who interpret Islam as upholding sexual  equality, vis-a-vis populist and academic  interpretations which challenge that position. She argued that Islam does not advocate complete sexual equality, since Islam  highlights differences in biology, sex and  function between men and women. According to Karim, Islam is more concerned  with complimentarity (that is, that both  men and women have their roles in society  which complement each other) rather than  equality. The extent to which this  complimentarity influences ideas of social  equality in various Islamic societies is the  important question. More often, Karim  said, local cultural definitions ultimately  determine social equality and status of  women in Muslim societies.  In her address, British journalist and  broadcaster Beatrix Campbell said that  policies and regulations surrounding men's  brutal and crappy behavior have clarified  "what's on, what's off, what's abuse, what's  respect, and what's none of their business."  Campbell, producer of several documentaries including J Shot My Husband and  Nobody Asked Me Why and Listen to the Children, also told the audience that women in  the 1990s are facing different issues and  challenges than women of their mothers'  and grandmothers' eras, and that older  generations of feminists needed to accept  that, in order to be able to carry on the feminist struggle.  Vandana Shiva, a leading eco-feminist  and an enviromental scientist from India,  made her presentation on sustainable development, economic globalization and  ecological feminism. Shiva, who heads the  Research Foundation for Science, Technology and Natural Resource Policy in Dehra  Dun, examined the dominant western  MAY 1997  models of economic development and scientific progress. She described how these  models are based on a particular construction of production and knowledge that excludes women and the "third world" communities as producers of economic value  and as generators of intellectual knowledge. She argued that current economic  globalization further deepens this exclusion  and hence has become a threat to the survival and integrity of local communities.  Shiva presented cases of emerging  movements fighting against globalization  and informed by ecological and feminist  perspectives on economic activity and  knowledge systems as representing alternatives to the global capitalist paradigm.  One example she often cites is the case of  the Chipko movement in southern India.  The movement started 25 years ago to challenge the leasing of land by the government  to a forestry company, which gave the company the right to clearcut the land. It was  the women in the villages in the area who  led the protest actions against the forestry  company and the government.  While the weeklong Congress brought  together hundreds of activists and academics, one of the real disappointments was  that Congress organizers did not initiate  any formal time or place for women to talk  about ways to connect activist and academic work and the building of international networks for activism. Still, overall,  the Congress was a great success both in  terms of attendance and the deliberations  on critical issues affecting women globally.  One important outcome of the World Congress on Women was the establishment of  the Worldwide Organization of Women's  Studies to promote feminist critique of  knowledge, to rewrite feminist ideas, and  to provide an international network to support research and practices in order to improve the quality of women's lives.  Habiba Zaman is an assistant professor of  Women's Studies at Simon Fraser University  in Burnaby, BC. She received partial funding  to attend the Congress from an SFU travel  grant.  15 Arts  Asian Heritage Month in Vancouver:  Building coalitions and  community  by Rita Wong  This May, Vancouver's first Asian Heritage Month (AHM) will kick off with a  wide variety of events showcasing local,  national and international Asian artists. The  broad banner of Asian culture links a great  range of backgrounds—Chinese, Japanese,  Filipino, Indian, Indonesian, Korean,  Malaysian, Sri Lankan, Thai, Tibetan, Vietnamese, et cetera— and offers something for  almost everyone. Inspired in part by Black  History Month (in February) and by Asian  Heritage Month festivals in other cities such  as Toronto, Montreal and Seattle, AHM organizers in Vancouver have brought together over thirty events and coordinated  dozens of artists, performers, educators and  activists with very little money and lots of  good will.  With no paid staff and no corporate  sponsorship, the six women who form the  core of the AHM organizing group are  working on a coalition model, trying to tap  into organizations which already exist and  to work with them in providing forums for  artists and organizations to meet, network  and showcase their work. The key organizers of AHM are Nashreen Dhalla, Judy  Lee, Mo-Ling Chui, Priscilla Yeung, J.J. Lee  and Yasmin Tayob.  Planning for AHM began last summer,  after a visit from Saeed Khan, coordinator  of the Toronto AHM festival, brought some  local artists together to discuss the possibility of organizing AHM events in Vancouver. Artists Judy Lee and Priscilla Yeung  had also met that summer at Fusions, a  meeting of Asian Canadian women artists  organized by the Powell Street Festival, an  annual celebration of Japanese Canadian  arts, culture and history.  Both Lee and Yeung became more involved with various Asian-focused artists  projects over the next few months. One of  these projects became AHM, which Judy  Lee describes as "an opportunity to learn  about the many communities which are  locally active as well as to develop experience in arts administration." She also mentions that although Vancouver is a centre  for people of Asian descent, she and the  organizers felt a need for more Asian visibility in the arts and more opportunities  to work in coalition with each others. "The  challenge is to be both focused and to connect," says Lee. Not an easy balance to  strike.  Nashreen Dhalla views AHM as an  opportunity for artists to get "involved in  the processes of organizing, determining  where their work is shown, and participating in community building. "For example,  the art venues include not just galleries and  artist-run centres, but also in coffee shops  and various stores, broadening access to the  work of the over 30 local artists involved  with AHM.  AHM will be launched on May 2nd  with an opening reception at the Western  Front. Special guests Anita Rau Badami  and Hiromi Goto will read at the reception.  Journalist and writer Badami moved from  Organizing Committee of Asian Heritage Month. Standing: Judy Lee, Mo-  Ling Chiu. Seated: J.J. Lee, Priscilla Yeung, Yasmin Tayob. Missing:  Nashreen Dhalla  India to Canada in 1991. Tamarind Mem, her  first novel, originally written for her masters of arts thesis at the University of  Calgary, portrays two generations of  women in humorous and touching ways.  Badami currently lives in Vancouver, where  she is working on her second novel.  Born in Japan, Hiromi Goto came to  Canada with her family when she was three  and grew up to be a writer and a feminist.  Her first novel, A Chorus of Mushrooms, was  awarded the 1995 Commonwealth Writers  Prize for best first book (Canada and Caribbean region) and more recently, it was the  1996 co-winner of the Japan-Canada book  award. Goto lives in Calgary and is a member of the editorial collective for absinthe  magazine.  Other literary events throughout the  month include a Saturday evening reading  series at Harry's Off Commercial, and a  poetry editing workshop with Marisa Alps  on May 17.  Visual arts events featuring women  include the following exhibitions: Binh  Truong's mixed media photo collages at  Lugz Coffee Lounge, Peggy Lee's and N.  Gitanjali Lena's work at the Access Gallery,  Hyun Jung Park's oil paintings at Dream  Clothing, Med Ida's oil paintings, Ameen  Gill's collages, and Adrienne Lai's work at  Mainspace Gallery, Lisa Miki at @ Gallery,  Linda Nakashima's art at Cordova Cafe,  and many more.  As well, concurrent exhibitions include  the following: External Recall, opening at  the Burnaby Art Gallery on May 21 and  featuring Haruko Okano, Teresa Marshal  and Dolleen Manning; Apple Series featuring painter Katie Cheung at Heffel Gallery;  Hye Sun Baik's show at the UBC Asian  Centre from May 15-25; Uncertain Pleasures  at Art Beatus; and a show on contemporary art in Asia at the Vancouver Art Gallery.  The film and video component,  curated by Mo-Ling Chui, Winston Xin and  Lewis Lam, showcases some exciting contemporary work. Film and video screenings  of particular interest include Gitanjali'sNeiv  View, New Eyes on May 9 at Video-In; gay  and lesbian films exploring sexuality on  May 10 co-sponsored by ASIA (Asian Society for the Intervention of AIDS) and  Monsoon: Asian lesbians and bisexuals of  Vancouver. Other screenings include: South  Asian videos on May 11 at Video In, featuring Leila Sujir's Dream of Night Clean  ers; and "Thirst and Foremost: Recent work  by Asian Canadian Women" featuring the  world premiere of Mina Shum's docu-di-  ary Thirst, screened with five other short  films on May 13 at Pacific Cinemathque.  According to Mo-Ling Chui, it was a  challenging process to select the films, but  eventually "the themes just emerged."  Educational and political events to  look out for include a free workshop held  by the NO! to APEC Coalition at the  Kalayaan Centre on May 17; a presentation  held by the UBC Women of Colour Group  at the Sun Yat Sen Gardens on May 18; a  family history workshop by the Powell  Street Festival Society on May 24; and the  launch of HTV/AIDS resource materials by  the ATISH Network Society on May 29.  A number of dance and music events  are also happening, culminating with  Dance Asia! on May 31 at the Roundhouse  Community Centre, featuring contemporary and traditional works by the  Strathcona Dance Company, the Main  Dance Society and others, followed by a  closing reception that evening.  For an overall program of Asian Heritage  Month events or to get involved as a volunteer  call Nashreen at 667-1755.  Rita Wong will be reading with Susan Nishi,  Kuan Foo and Finder Dulaifor Asian Heritage Week on Saturday May 3,7:30pm, at Harry's Off Commercial, 1716 Charles St. This  event is part of the Evening Reading Series  sponsored by the Asian Canadian Writers'  Workshop and the Japanese Canadian Studies  Society.  off our backs  27 years of the finest  feiniriistjouriialisrn  News International  Health Conferences  Lesbian issues       Interviews  Sexoate? Radical  Subscribe Today!  ONE YEAR FOR JUST $25  Name   Address    City, State, Zip   Or write for a free 2-issue  trial subscription  off our backs  2337B18thSt.NW  Washington, DC 20009  16 Arts  Women and the Internet:  by Penny Goldsmith  THE INTERNET FOR WOMEN  by Rye Senjen; illustrated by Jane  Guthrey  Spinifex Press, N. Melbourne, Australia,  1996  COMPUTER NETWORKING: SPINSTERS ON THE WEB  by Ellen Balka  CRIAW, Ottawa, Ontario, 1997  There's a kind of conversation that  goes on in small corners at parties these  days when the subject of the Internet comes  up. Several people sigh loudly and wander off. Then someone starts talking about  the computer she just bought; someone else  (usually me) gets indignant about how  much information is only available on-line  and what about people who can't afford  computers and who don't know about the  CommunityNet (or don't have one in their  community or don't have accessible phone  lines) and about why the government isn't  paying for free access for everyone. The  new computer owner goes on about megabytes and the size of her new modem until  she gets a response, and someone else eventually asks, "how do you get on-line anyway and what about all the pornography?"  Rye Senjen's The Internet for Women  attacks all of these questions and issues, and  does so in plain language. Chapter 1 starts  with an explanation of what the Internet is  and who uses it, describes the World Wide  Web, and relates how grassroots networks  sprung up to create Bulletin Board Systems  in the late 1970s, independent of the military-industrial complex that created the  Internet in the United States. Senjen then  goes on to explain how Internet services  work.  Chapter 2 is called "Women are doing  it for themselves," and at its beginning we  are introduced to Ada, Countess of  Lovelace (1815-52), who played a key role  in the development of the computer.  Brought up by her mother who was a single parent (she separated from Lord Byron,  Ada's father, a year after she was born),  Ada was encouraged in her mathematical  pursuits. Her mother felt that math was a  "suitable antidote for the overheated imagination of adolescence," as well as a route  to squelching any possible tendencies that  she might have inherited from her romantic poet father.  There are other heroines in the history  of computer development referred to in the  book. Senjen talks about Grace Hopper who  wrote the first program which used English words instead of mathematical symbols (COBOL), and mentions that during  WWII, almost all the computer programmers were women.  The chapter then continues at some  length to describe women who are using  the Net today all over the world, from  Croatia, to rural communities in Queensland and Nova Scotia. And all of the  MAY 1997  Helpful handbooks  for going  so        on-line  descriptions of course provide Internet addresses for email and web pages.  The next chapter, on gender issues, is  full of practical information on how to deal  with sexual harassment on-line. (Senjen  doesn't recommend ignoring it, as many  people have suggested.) Pornography and  censorship are discussed, and Senjen offers  some practical suggestions (along with the  addresses for "Netnanny" and "Cyber-  sitter") for shielding children from the porn  and hate literature on-line. An interesting  section on gender communication analyzes  the language of electronic mail and how it  encourages extreme reactions. Senjen suggests that "flaming" (angry, opinionated  "yelling" on-line) is a result of gender specific communication styles—adversarial  (male) versus personal (female).  The rest of the book is more practical;  it's a guidebook to using the Internet. Once  you get this far, you've made a commitment  to getting on-line and are no longer just  browsing. The information gets more technical and potentially complicated, but  Senjen and Guthrey's commitment to  avoiding bafflegap continues to bring out  both the text and the illustrations.  Different chapters cover how to get online, how the Internet works, different kinds  of connections, software and modems.  Senjen goes into some detail about email,  using as examples both a text-based (less  expensive) system, as well as a more sophisticated one. She talks about what  makes computer-mediated communication  different from other forms of communication, and how to connect with "like-minds"  around the world and do research on the  World Wide Web. There's even a section on  creating your own Web page, complete  with coding instructions.  The final chapter is an interesting one:  "Privacy, anonymity and security on the  Internet." There's information about how  to send anonymous messages, how to encode your email and how to keep your files  safe and private. Senjen points out that  women working in transition houses, or  any activist movement, may be seen as subversive and should be especially aware of  issues around privacy and security when  using Internet facilities. Senjen and Guthrey  close the book with pages of resources to  keep you busy on-line for long periods of  time.  I highly recommend The Internet for  Women. Jane Guthrey's illustrations and  cartoons illuminate the text and may help  relax the reader who  gets panicky about the  amount of information  coming at her The book  is well designed and  easy to work through.  However, I wouldn't  recommend reading it in  one sitting if you're new to  the Internet, as the amount of  information will overwhelm  you. It's a reference book: you won't  want to lend out once it's in your hands.  There's a tendency in the world of computer technology to be seduced by the  things you can do on the Internet and forget about the limits of the technology and  its political ramifications. Computer Networking: Spinsters on the Web by Ellen Balka  is a very different piece of work from Senjen  and Guthrey's book. Based in part on material the author compiled while she was  studying at Simon Fraser University, it is a  handbook that is dedicated to "women  communicating about how to make the  world a better place."  In the introduction, Balka outlines her  goal for the research: "...this handbook assumes as a starting point that technological systems reflect social values. This handbook will ideally aid women's groups in  understanding both how organizational  communication might be affected through  the selection of a particular networking  system, and how organizational goals may  be met or hampered through the implementation of a computer networking system."  Balka explores issues about group  process on-line, how women are using  computer networks in the context of feminism, and the bottom line: can individual  women and women's groups use computer networking technology for feminist social change?  The handbook starts with a history of  computer communications networks.  Balka then goes on to talk about the expansion of computer networking and the development of using computers for social  change. She follows with a chapter on  women's networks and the evolution of  newsgroups and mailing lists for women.  For illustrative purposes, Balka goes into  some detail about CRIAW's (the Canadian  Research Institute on the Advancement of  Women) experiences going on-line and  some of the trials and tribulations they went  through.  Two chapters address issues related to  the politics of access and the  use of computer networks for feminist  organizing. Balka follows these discussions  with a chapter detailing how users can be  the designers of the system (and therefore  keep some control over it), and how to decide what your organization's communications needs are. A valuable aspect of the  book for women's organizations is the specific exercises included to help women's organizations determine what tasks the computer network can be useful for, what kind  of equipment and training they will need,  and what new work will be created by setting up a network system.  Computer Networking: Spinsters on  the Web is available from CRIAW/ICREF, 151  Slater Street, Ottawa, Ontario, KIP 5H3.  Penny Goldsmith is the president of the Vancouver Community Network (formerly the  FreeNet) and a Vancouver publisher.  Surfing the Net. Rule #1. Know when  it's time to stop. Graphic from The  Internet for Women. Paging Women  r^^H  m  \uu  o  e  n\  A number of new books written by women come into our offices  each week, so Kinesis thought we'd share with you, our readers, a  sampling of some of the recently-published fiction and non-fiction  titles. If you are interested in reviewing any of the books listed below  for Kinesis, or know of any other exciting titles you would like to  review or that Kinesis should review, please give us a call (604) 255-  5499 or drop us a line.  compiled by Nancy Pang and Gita Lyfe   In Another Place Not Here, by  Dionne Brand. This Ontario-based,  Blackfeminist writer sets her novel in both  Toronto and the Caribbean, and gives voice  to the power of love and belonging in a  story of two women, profoundly different,  each in her own spiritual exile. Brand  gives us a sensuous, political and emotional novel of women dealing with racism and migration. Adrienne Rich writes:  "In Another Place Not Here is a work  of great beauty and moral imagination."  (Knopf Canada, Toronto, 1996.)  Gut Symmetries, by Jeanette  Winterson. Gut Symmetries is a celebration of love and explores parallel lives  and universes. Set on board the QE2 and  in New York and Liverpool, Winterson's  sixth novel tries to redefine not only what  is likely but what is possible. Stretching  ideas from the Greeks to the Grand Unified Theories of modern physics, it is a  story of earth and heaven, sex and the  spirit, the real and the fantastic, male and  female, science and religion. (Knopf  Canada, Toronto, 1997.)  Pushing The Limits: Disabled Dykes Produce Culture,  edited by Shelley Tremain. Pushing the Limits is a multi-media anthology of fiction, personal narrative, poetry, song, and artwork by disabled dykes. Taking cultural space for their language  and art, Anne-Marie Alonzo, Sherree Clark, Laura Hershey, Audre  Lorde, Mary Frances Piatt, Sherry Shute, Shahnaz Stri, Frances  Yip Hoi and others challenge exlusionary notions about who counts  as a dyke, and subvert pervasive stereotypes about disabled people.  The anthology strives to address the power and importance of language, illustrate the misuse of power, corruption and convenience  that governs the medical profession, and question the passive disinterest of non-disabled lesbians. (Women's Press, Toronto, 1996)  Women In Trouble: Connecting Women's Law Violations to their Histories of Abuse, by Elizabeth Comack. This  book addresses two areas of feminist scholarship—the recognition  of violence against women and the endeavour to make visible the  lives of women in prison. Beginning with women's own accounts  of their troubles with the law, Elizabeth Comack uses a combination of socialist and standpoint feminism to piece together the stories of 24 women incarcerated for a range of offences. In the process, the women's experiences of abuse since childhood, the nature  of their law violations, and the (interconnections between the two  are revealed. The book also examines whether the experience of  prison enables the women to resolve their troubles and concludes  by raising several questions that pertain to our efforts to respond  to violence against women. (Fernwood Publishing, Halifax,  1996.)  Cancer In Two Voices, an expanded edition by Sandra Butler and Barbara  Rosenblum. Rosenblum died on Valentine's Day, 1988, in the arms of her life partner,  Sandra Butler. In the three years between Rosenblum's diagnosis of breast cancer and her  death, Butler and Rosenblum documented the impact of Barbara's illness on both their lives.  This compilation of their essays,  journal entries and letters provides  a unique glimpse into the intimate  lives of two women in a relationship in crisis. This book is about  the power of love to transform experience and about family, choices,  disorder, conflict and uncertainty.  (Spinster Ink, Duluth, 1991.)  Broken Teapots, by A.  Alexon. A. Alexon shares her life  and her experience of abuse  through her poetry. In Broken  Teapots, she takes us on a journey—-from the pain and desperation of living with family violence,  across the minefields of social denial, to a place where new beginnings can be made. For over ten  years, A. Alexon survived domestic violence, the result of which left  her and her children emotionally  and psychologically scarred. She  documents her futile efforts to get  help from "the system"—police,  social workers, judges and psychologists. She finds assistance  through women's support services,  groups for abused women, personal counsellors, family and friends. (FREDA - Feminist Research, Education, Development and Action, Vancouver, 1997.)  Cookin' with Honey: What Literary Lesbians Eat, edited by Amy Scholder.  TTii's 192-page book is as much about the lives of these lesbian writers as it is about their  recipes and opinions on matters of food. Contents range from Carmelita Tropicana's meditation on food's low and high points in history along with her recipe for Arroz con Polio,  Barbara Wilson's culinary experience in Transylvania—including a fabulous recipe for  Carpathian Forest Trout, and Kitty Tsui's Thangsgivingfeast—Chinatown style, to Katherine  Forrest's Play-Cards-All-Night Chili. (Firebrand Books, New York, 1996.)  Across Boundaries: The Journey of a South African Leader, by Mamphela  Ramphele. "Survival is a stronger force than fear of offending others," writes Ramphele,  who was bom black and female in apartheid-ruled South Africa and went on to become a  prominent activist, medical doctor, teacher and advisor to the Mandela government and a  mother of two sons. In this book, Ramphele records her journey and personal losses that  coexist with her political and professional achievements. (The Feminist Press, New York,  1997.)  Hot Licks: Lesbian Musicians of Note, edited by Lee Fleming. TTii's book is a  one-stop reference to some of the most famous—hottest and up-coming—lesbian musicians  in the English-speaking Western world. It includes discographies, personal information, a  specially chosen song by each musician and photographs. Musicians include Janis Ian, Chris  Williamson & Tret Pure, Melissa Ferrick, Perron,  Heather Bishop, Jennifer Berezan, Faith Nolan, Tribe  8, The Topp Twins, and Judy Small, (gynergy books,  Charlottetown, PEI, 1996.)  Two Ends of Sleep, by Lizard Jones. This fictional account of coping with Multiple Sclerosis is  by Vancouver writer Lizard Jones, also known as one  of three members of the Kiss & Tell Collective. Her  character Rusty has MS but doesn't fit the mold. She  is a 30-something lesbian who lives on welfare, fights  with her partner, indulges in wildly inventive sexual  fantasies, and sleeps a lot. She used to be a writer and  political activist, but overwhelmed by the fatigue of  her illness, the lethargy of political disillusion and  self-pity, she now lives within the two ends of sleep:  waking up and dozing off. (Press Gang Publishers,  Vancouver, 1997.)  Slow Dance: A story of Stroke, Love and  Disability, by Bonnie Sherr Klein, in collaboration with Persimmon Blackbridge. In 1987,  Bonnie Klein had a catastrophic stroke that left her  paralyzed and on a respirator. Slow Dance is the candid story of the Vancouver-based filmmaker's fight  back—relearning to swallow, to talk, to stand and to  adapt to life with a disability. It is billed as "an in- Paging Women  spiring book with the pace of a thriller [and] from first to last, a remarkable love story."  (Knopf Canada, Toronto, 1997.)  Connie Many Stories: A novel of Abuse and Healing, by Sarah Murphy. In her  new autobiographical novel, Murphy examines, resists, contains and overcomes the damaging forces that brought her close to repeating the abuse she suffered as a child. It is an account of one woman's struggle and her ultimate victory to reclaim her life and moral centre.  This is the fourth book by Murphy, who was born and raised in New York and now lives in  Calgary. (The Mercury Press, Toronto, 1996.)  Across Borders: Women with Disabilities Working Together, edited by Diane  Driedger, Irene Feika and Eileen Giron Batres. Across Borders portrays the multi-  faceted work by women with disabilities from "developing" and "developed" countries.  Through literacy and economic development projects and community organizing, women  with disabilities collaborate to improve their standard of living and create new opportunities for themselves and their communities. The book combines personal stories with accounts  of political activism from around the world, (gynergy books,  Charlottetown, PEI, 1996).  Dick for a Day: What Would You Do If You Had  One? edited by Fiona Giles. "What would you do if you  woke up with a penis?" the book jacket asks. About 50 "celebrated" women (and one man) respond with words and  graphics in this book billed as "serious, humourous and downright strange." Writers, feminists, scholars, performers and  artists responding to the question include: Terry McMillan,  Vicki Hendricks, Germaine Greer, Linda Gray Sexton, Luisa  Valenzuela, Ginu Kamani, Amy Jenkins, Tracy Sondern, and  Sidney Biddle-Barrows. (Villard Books, New York, 1997.)  Queer View Mirror 2: Lesbian and Gay Short Fiction, edited by Karen X. Tulchinsky and James C.  Johnstone. This anthology is a follow-up to the first anthology of lesbian and gay short short fiction published in 1996.  Queer View Mirror Two contains 101 stories from writers  in eight countries. Their contents run the gamut of lesbian  and gay experience, from first kisses to journeys home, from  families and childhood to tales of furtive glances and one-night  stands. By again collecting the work by lesbians and gay men  in one volume, the anthology attempts to find common ground  within the collective gay experience while at the same time  celebrate its diversity. (Arsenal Pulp Press, Vancouver,  1997.)  Call me crazy, by Irit Shimrat. Shimrat went crazy as a young woman in the late 70s  and spent two years incarcerated in psychiatric wards. Her book documents her escape and  subsequent involvement in the psychiatric survivors movement (aka the Mad Movement.)  The book also includes the accounts  of other activists. The Mad Movement is a three-decade old international organization opposed to the  use of forced drugging, solitary confinement, electroshock and other  psychiatric abuses. (Press Gang  Publishers, Vancouver, 1997).  Cereus Blooms at Night, by  Shani Mootoo. The Vancouver-  based, Trinidadian-Canadian writer  follows up her first novel Out on  Main Street with the story of Mala,  an eccentric and reclusive old  woman, told through Mala's gay  nurse, Tyler. As he pieces together  fragments of Mala's life, his own life  changes forever. Part magic realism,  part psychological drama, the novel  explores a world where treachery  and love collide. (Press Gang Publishers, Vancouver, 1996.)  Bad Attitude/s on trial: Pornography, Feminism and the  Butler Decision, by Brenda  Cossman, Shannon Bell, Lise  Gotell and Becki Ross. This book  attempts a debate on pornography  and feminism in the context of contemporary Canada. It examines the notion put forth in the landmark Canadian Supreme  Court decision ofR. v. Butler that pornography both reflects sexual domination and 'victimizes' women. Most feminists had at first embraced the new law as progressive. However,  straight, mainstream pornography continues to flourish in the post-Butler years, while it is  sexual representations that challenge conventional notions of sexuality, such as gay and  lesbian sex, that are the focus of censorship. (University of Toronto Press, Toronto, 1997.)  Sunnybrook: A true story with lies, by Persimmon Blackbridge. 77ii's Vancouver-based writer, sculptor, video-maker, visual artist, performer and member of the Kiss &  Tell Collective tells the hilarious and angry story of a woman who fakes her way into a job  that changes her life. One cover-up follows another as Diane hides her learning disabilities  from her new employer, the "Sunnybrook Institution for the Mentally Handicapped." When  Diane meets Shirley-Butch, her lesbian identity, psychiatric history and dreams of becoming  a "professional" collide and begin to unravel. (Press Gang Publishers, Vancouver, 1996).  Something I'm Supposed to Remember, by Holly Kritsch. In poems drawn from  her rural Nova Scotia childhood and from her professional life as a physiotherapist, Kritsch  tells of violation and irrepressible love and harrowing blasphemies against childhood. The  mother of three children, Kritsch lives in Nepean, Ontario. (Carleton University Press,  Ottawa, 1996.)  Risking Utopia: On the Edge of a New Democracy,  by Irshad Manji. In her first book, Manji attempts to break  away from "socialism, feminism and identity politics to embrace a post-modern Utopia of responsible individualism," writes  Michael Adams, author of Sex in the Snow, on the jacket of  Manji's book. In an era of mass disillusionment with democracy, the 28-year-old political iconoclast, writer and broadcaster,  who lives in Toronto, unveils challenging ways for people to  assert their individuality while building community. Arguing  that Canada is the best place to experiment with her vision of  21st Century citizenship, Manji attempts to challenge Canadians to see beyond the conventional options and risk Utopia.  (Douglas & Mclntyre, Vancouver, 1996.)  Eye Wuz Here:Stories by Women Writers Under 30,  edited by Shannon Cooley. Eye Wuz Here presents short  fiction from some of English Canada's emerging writers. All  the contributors were 30 or younger at the time their stories  were submitted. Set in the city, in the country and on the road,  in bars, bedrooms and nuclear family homes, their stories are  told in a range of prose styles, from the traditional to the fiercely  original. They write about sex, desire, and power; about making decisions and living with the consequences; about being  afraid, being cool and being alone. Eye Wuz Here is the message scrawled on a bathroom wall, carved into a park bench,  stroked onto a misted window. In a similar way, the writers in  this collection boldly declare themselves present, creating a literature that insists on their variety and speaks their own  language.(Douglas & Mclntyre, Vancouver, 1996.)  This Imagined Permanence, by nathalie Stephens.  This Imagined Permanence is Stephens' second collection of poetry. In it, she traces the  reflections of a lesbian preoccupied by the what-ifs of existence. She contemplates life as a  metaphor for absence. Poet and voyeur, philosopher and recluse, the narrator contemplates  the passions and desires of women who exist as she herself cannot. Burdened by her decision  to lead a life on the margins, she attempts to make other women's lives her own. This is an  investigation of the universal difficulty of reaching out, entering forbidden territory and  living in a precarious world. Stephens'writing has appeared in a variety of journals, both in  French and English. Jewish, feminist and lesbian, Stephens was born in Montreal and currently lives and writes in Toronto. (Gutter Press, Toronto, 1996.)  Different Daughters: A  book by Mothers of Lesbians, edited by Louise Rafkin.  Twenty-nine mothers of lesbians  come together to trace their journeys towards acceptance of their  daughters. Writing about families, community, religion, grandchildren, bisexuality,  transsexuality, and coming out,  the authors o/Different Daughters raise the questions mothers  ask: How can we accept our children for who they are? How can  we love our children even when  they are different from us? This  updated and expanded second  edition of Louise Rafkin's landmark anthology includes new  stories and progress reports on  some favourites. Rafkin is the author of Different Mothers: Sons  & Daughters of Lesbians Talk  about Their Lives, Martial Arts:  Mastering the Self and Street  Smarts: A Personal Safety Guide  for Women. (Cleis Press, Pittsburgh, 1987,1996.)  jJtfjemnt_        :iers Letters  dear   re ade r s  Kinesis loves receiving mail. Please  get your letter to us by the 18th of  the month.  If you can, keep the length to about  500 words. (If you go way over, we  might edit for space.)  Hope to hear from you very soon.  Love,  Kinesis  How we represent  ourselves  Kinesis  With all due respect I have to  question your choice of putting the  picture of the woman in the IWD  March with the sign reading "Fuck  you, I love myself" on the cover of  your latest issue. It's one thing to read  it in a parade where people on the  street in a large city will likely only see  it once if at all, among others, but did  anyone ever think that this paper goes  into homes where there are children  and grandchildren?  I have a 14 year old granddaughter I  am trying to encourage to read papers  like yours to educate herself about the  "news not found in the dailies." At the  same time I am trying to encourage her  to find more imaginative ways to  express herself than using the word  "fuck" every time she gets angry.  I know it's a common form of  speech, I use it fairly frequently myself  among the type of people I know can  handle it, and won't misinterpret it;  however, in a small town one has to  pick one's way carefully as to who,  where and when it is appropriate and  won't be taken out of context. I also  like to give my copies of Kinesis away,  leave it at the women's centre to be  given away or taken to the transition  house, or I take it to the library along  with other leftover mags to be resold in  the used bin. It's a way of giving others  a chance to read it who may not have  heard of it before (and perhaps get you  a few new subscribers).  But this time, I'm reluctant to give it  to anyone. Even if this picture had  been used inside; but on the cover,  there's no way to avoid it and I know  my reaction, even as someone who  uses the word, was to be taken aback  and embarrassed by it. Surely it does  not represent what IWD stands for. In  the context in which it's used, it sounds  childish and defensive, not tike the  affirmative, assertive, celebratory  stance of a 90s woman facing the world  head-on while working on her own  equality issues of racism, relationships  and politics of one kind or another.  But please remember that how we  represent ourselves has a lot to say  about who and what we are, and when  you represent a publication and a  group as important as Kinesis and  VSW, a little discretion indeed shows a  great deal of valour. "Women together  marching forward" don't need to use  foul language to make their point.  Surely we've gotten a little past that at  this late stage.  Thank you again for all you do for  women. Congratulations on the move  to your new colourful office. I know  you will perform wonders there as you  all have in the past.  Yours in sisterhood,  Mary Billy  Squamish, BC  Loud, proud and feminist  Dear Kinesis  I wanted to congratulate you on the  front cover—and the content!—of the  April issue of Kinesis. I arrived in  Vancouver from Britain on April 10.  Feeling a little lost, I wandered into a  downtown bookstore. I couldn't  believe it when I saw Kinesis on the  news stand. Not only had I come to a  city with a feminist newspaper, but  judging by the eye catching IWD photo  on the front cover, it was a newspaper  open and proud of what it stands for.  A publication willing to yell its  allegiance to all that IWD stands for is  something I can really appreciate as a  British woman. Several years ago our  national feminist magazine, Spare Rib,  folded. A magazine named  Even/woman then attempted to develop  a feminist approach, but it  subsequently folded in 1996. At  present only the radical feminist  journal Trouble and Strife is comparable  to Kinesis, but it is more limited in its  scope.  A loud, proud feminist publication  provides an invaluable service. It is a  forum for developing and  strengthening feminism. It also  publicizes feminist principles to every  person who just glances at a news  stand. As a student in Britain I spoke  with many young women who  believed feminism to be a worthless  cause. Memorable images like that on  the front of last month's Kinesis, which  show women can achieve more than  the "Girlpower" of the British Spice  Girls, question that assumption. In  these hard times, we need all the  inspiration we can get—keep up the  great work.  SelinaTodd  Newcastle, England  Liberals lip service lacks  lustre  Dear Kinesis:  "This will not be a good country for  any of us until it is a good country for  all of us."  Brave words from [federal Finance  Minister] Paul Martin, but does the  reality match the rhetoric? Take for  example, the Liberal's sudden  attention to "gender" equality by  vaulting women candidates into  ridings and bypassing democracy.  Indeed "bypass" should be their  party slogan when they have bypassed  the cherished desires of Canadians in  so many of their policies: lighthouses,  port police, the CBC, not increasing  door-to-door deliveries in the post  offices—all going, going, gone or  gutted.  Let's scratch below the surface at the  "window dressing" of choosing female  candidates. When one looks at the cold  hard facts on women's issues, this  window dressing suddenly looks  rather shabby. [The liberal  government's] worship at the altar of  Bay Street has particularly devastated  women. Only 20 percent of women  now hold full-time jobs (as compared  to 40 percent of men). Canada now has  the second highest rate of low income  employment for women and second  highest rate of child poverty. The  public service has been a valuable area  for women to address their issues, but  it has been downsized, demoralized  and demonized.  Indeed, in Martin's last budget,  putting a female face on the agenda  has been virtually erased.  Unaddressed is the fact that 50 percent  of the population is female and that  during their lives, the biggest obstacles  to climbing out of poverty are the sky-  high cost of daycare and housing.  These issues have magically  evaporated into the refined air of  Ottawa, unspoken but not unnoticed.  Another trap facing single moms is  not being able to get a job without  training, not being able to get the  training without a loan and not being  able to get a loan if attending courses  part-time. Even if you get a loan to  support your children and pay for the  course, the debt load after four years of  university would be a crushing $60,000  (based on two people being able to live  on $1,000 month and the course being  no more than $3,000 annually).  The feminization of poverty seems  to be overlooked by the Liberal caucus.  Do the female members of the  Liberal party remind Martin of this  harsh "New Reality" faced by their  constituents? Do the recent candidates  bring these concerns to the corridors of  power in Ottawa, or do they smile,  organize their wardrobe, and toe the  "male-dominated" party line?  Amanda Hamilton  Vancouver, BC  OB A A-feminist radio by and about women of colour  OBAA is a weekly public affairs show on co-op radio 102.7fm  We need new women to carry on the tradition of  bringing anti-imperialist, pro-feminist news and  views to Vancouver's airwaves.  We will train new volunteers in all aspects of radio.  For more info call Centime at Co-op radio mon -  thurs 12-6pm @ 684-8494.  ufrs  Book&  Art Emporium  Western Canada's  Lesbian & Gay  Bookstore  Open Daily 10am to 1 lpm  Our Books/Our Issues  Gay Fiction  Lesbian Fiction  Our Magazines & Journals  AIDS/Health  Humour  Erotica  Little Sister's Book & Art Emporium  1238 Davie Street,Vancouver,B.C.,V6E 1N4  (604)669-1753 Phone Orders 1-800-567-1662  Internet Address: http://www.lsisters.com  Queer Theory  Feminist Theory  Biographies, Essays, Poetry  Religion & Spirituality  Art & Photography  Community  20 Bulletin Board  read   this  Bulletin Board listings have a  maximum of 50 words. Groups,  organizations and individuals eligible  for free space in the Bulletin Board  must be, or have, non-profit  objectives.  Other free notices will be items of  general public interest and will  appear at the discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $8 (+$0.56 GST) for  the first 50 words or portion thereof,  $4 (+$0.28 GST) for each additional  25 words or portion thereof and must  be prepaid.  Deadline for all submissions is  the 18th of the month preceding  publication. Note: Kinesis is  published ten times a year. Jul/Aug  and Dec/Jan are double issues.  All submissions should include a  contact name and telephone number  for any clarification that may be  required.  Listings will not be accepted over the  telephone.  Kinesis encourages readers to  research the goods and services  advertised in Bulletin Board. Kinesis  cannot guarantee the accuracy of the  information provided or the safety  and effectiveness of the services and  products listed.  Send submissions to Bulletin Board,  Kinesis, #309-877 E. Hastings Street,  Vancouver, BC, V6A 3Y1, or fax: (604)  255-5511. For more information call  (604) 255-5499.  INVOLVEMENT  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis? We want to get involved with  you too. Help plan our next issue. All  women interested in what goes into  Kinesis—whether it's news, features or  arts—are invited to our next Story Meetings Mon May 5 and Tues June 3 at 7 pm  at our office, 309-877 E. Hastings St. For  more information or if you can't make the  meeting, but still want to find out about  writing for Kinesis, give Agnes a call at  (604) 255-5499. No experience is necessary. Childcare and travel subsidies  available.  CALLING ALL VOLUNTEERS  Are you interested in finding out how  Kinesis is put together? Well...just drop by  during our next production dates and help  us design and lay out Canada's national  feminist newspaper. Production for the  June 1997 issue is from May 21-27. No  experience is necessary. Training and  support will be provided. If this notice  intrigues you, call us at 255-5499.  Childcare and travel subsidies available.  WOMEN  IN PRINT  BOOKS & OTHER MEDIA  Discounts for  book clubs  3566 West 4th Avenue  *  Vancouver BC  Special orders  Voice   604 752-4128  welcome  Fax       604 732-1129  10-6 Daily ♦  12-5 Sunday  INVOLVEMENT  VSW WANTS YOU!  Want to get more involved but not sure  where to begin? Join us—become a  volunteer at Vancouver Status of Women.  VSW volunteers plan events, lead groups,  raise funds, answer the phone lines,  organize the library, help connect women  with the community resources they need,  and get involved in other exciting jobs! The  next volunteer orientation will be on Thurs  May 15 at 7pm at VSW, 309-877 E.  Hastings St. For more info, call 255-5511.  Please call before the orientation to  confirm attendance. Childcare subsidies  available.  OPEN HOUSE  We did it and we want to show you what  we did...The Vancouver Status of Women  and Kinesis want to show off our new  home to all our supporters. We invite you to  attend our official open house on Thurs  June 5. Drop in anytime between 2-8pm for  a guided tour, complete with refreshments.  Don't forget our new address: 309-877 E.  Hastings St (between Campbell and  Hawks). Of course, you're welcome to drop  by any other time as well (during our  regular office hours, Monday to Thursday  9:30am-5pm) to check our space, our  resources and find out more about the  work we do.  SINGLE MOMS' DAY  The Vancouver Status of Women invites  women to come and participate in the  organizing of our annual Single Mothers'  Day in the Park event to be held on Sun  May 11. It's fun and it's cool—there's face  painting and games! If you are interested in  helping out, call Ema at 255-5511.  EVENTS  EVENTS  Bed & Breakfast  A Beautiful Place  Centre yourself  in the comfort and tranquility  of B.C.'s Super Natural  Gulf Islands.  Healthy Breakfasts  Hot Tub & Sauna  5 acres of forested  foot paths with ponds  ocean and mountain views  A Memorable Escape  (604) 537-9344  1207 Beddis Road,  Salt Spring Island, B.C. V8K 2C8  CREATIVE WRITING FOR WOMEN  The Kootenay School of Writing in Vancouver is hosting Creative Writing for Women.  a workshop with Karen X. Tulchinsky for  eight consecutive Wednesdays, May 28-  Jul 16 from 7-9pm. The workshop will be  held at KSW, 112 W. Hastings St, Main  Floor and costs $98. Through a series of  exercises, this course will teach students  how to go within and pull up their own  stories, how to get a first draft onto paper,  the process of rewriting, practical techniques for character and scene development, how to overcome writer's block,  knowing and using the tools of the trade,  plus tips on how to get your work published. This course is offered to women  only, and will create a safe, supportive  environment in which students can overcome self doubt and start (or continue)  writing. All students will have an opportunity to read their own work at a literary  cabaret when the course finishes. Writer  and editor Karen X. Tulchinsky is author of  In Her Nature (Women's Press), a collection of short stories which won the 1996  VanCity Book Prize; co-editor of Queer  View Mirror: Lesbian and Gay Short  Fiction; and Queer View Mirror 2 (Arsenal  Pulp Press).  KOOTENAY SCHOOL READINGS  The Kootenay School of Writing presents  readings by Marie Annharte Baker and  Lisa Downe. Baker, a First Nations writer  who has two books of poetry Being on the  Moon (Polestar) and Coyote Columbus  Care (Moonprint), will be reading on Sat  May 17 8pm at KSW, 112 W. Hastings St,  Main Floor. This Experimental Writing  Group reading is free and is sponsored by  the Canada Council. Toronto poet Downe  will read from her new book The Soft  Signature (ECW Press) on Sat Jun 7. For  venue and time call (604) 688-6001.  FREE MOVIE NIGHTS  Radical Women and the Freedom Socialist  Party in Vancouver are hosting weekly  Friday films nights at the Rebel Centre,  2278 E. 24th Ave. Upcoming films include:  Ballot Measure 9, May 9; Forbidden Love,  May 16; Stonewall, May 23, / am Cuba,  May 30, and Up to a Certain Point on Jun  6. Admission to the films is free. Super  refreshments and food will be on sale at  the shows with proceeds benefitting  Radical Women and the Freedom Socialist  Party. For more info call 874-9048.  PAMELA DONOGHUE  Nova Scotia writer Pamela Donoghue will  be reading from her debut short story  collection, Comfort Zones, linked stories of  maritime working class life, at Women in  Print, 3566 W. 4th Ave, Vancouver, on Tues  May 13 at 7:30pm. Writing with wit, grit,  grace and compassion, Donoghue illuminates the workday lives of memorable  characters and lets us glimpse, when we  most need it, the possibility of redemption.  Admission is free. For more details call  731-4128.   SYLVIE MCCLEAN  Sylvie McClean will launch her new  biography on Evlyn Fennwick Farris, A  Woman of Influence, Thurs May 15 from  6:30-8:30pm at Women in Print, 3566 W  4th Ave, Vancouver. The book charts the  life of a woman who influenced the development of women's, children's and workers'  rights in British Columbia. Admission is  free. Call 732-4128 for more info.  ADEENA KARASICK  Performance poet Adeena Karasick will  read from her latest work, Genrecide, at  Women in Print, 3566 W. 4th Ave, Vancouver, on Tues May 20 at 7:30pm. Through  multiple, and often discordant, discourses,  Genrecide explores the social construction  of female identity and challenges language  itself to stretch and give into new tracks.  Karasick is the author of two other collections, Memewars and The Empress has no  Closure. Admission is free. Call 732-4128  for more details.  RAPE RELIEFWALKATHON  The annual Vancouver Rape Relief and  Women's Shelter Walkathon and Picnic will  be held on Sun May 25, at Stanley Park,  Vancouver. Women and men can walk,  wheel or cycle the 10 km Seawall route to  raise money for the organization. Registration is at 10.30am at Ceperley Picnic Area  near Second Beach. The Walkathon begins  at 11am and is followed by a free picnic  and entertainment. Pre-registration is  advised; to do so and to order pledge  sheets call 264-9988. For more info call  Rape Relief at 872-8212.   LESBIANS RAISING SONS  The Vancouver launch of Lesbians Raising  Sons, a fascinating chronicle of lesbian-  feminist parenting, will be held at The Lotus  Club, 455 Abbott St on Thurs May 15 at  8:30pm. Editor Jess Wells from San  Francisco and local contributor Karen X.  Tulchinsky will give readings. Admission is  $1-4 by sliding scale. For more info call  (604)251-5085.   UTA BARTH  An exhibition of work by Los Angeles-  based artist Uta Barth, examining the  photographic conventions of presenting  and framing a subject in the context of  cityscapes, is at the Presentation House  Gallery, 333 Chesterfield Ave, North  Vancouver, until May 11. Barth will be in  town to give an artist's talk on Sat May 3 at  2:15pm. Gallery hours are Wednesday to  Saturday, noon -5pm and Thursday noon-  9pm. For more info call 986-1351.  JAN PEACOCK  Reader by the Window, an installation work  by Halifax artist Jan Peacock will be at the  Presentation House Gallery, 333 Chesterfield Ave, North Vancouver until May 11.  Her evocative work draws on video landscape walks across the globe and examines the familiar in unfamiliar places.  Gallery hours are Wednesday to Saturday,  noon-5pm and Thursday noon-9pm. Call  986-1351 for info.   FERRON  Singer/songwriter Ferron will perform her  songs at Vancouver East Cultural Centre,  1895 Venables, on Mon May 5 at 7:30pm.  Ferron's songs are autobiographical and  she creates sophisticated musical-  poetic forms that communicate her feelings  and beliefs. Tickets are $20 Students/  Seniors, $25 other Adults. Call  Ticketmaster on 280-4444 or the VECC on  254-9578 for info.   FIGHT AGAINST CUTS  Concerned about Welfare Cuts in BC? End  Legislated Povery is holding a public  meeting at the Carnegie Centre Theatre,  Hastings and Main St, Vancouver on Thurs  May 1 at noon. The meeting will give  people an opportunity to learn about the  NDP government's most recent changes to  welfare and to talk about how the cuts to  welfare affect them. Lunch is provided, as  are bus fares for people with low incomes.  Call End Legislated Poverty on 879-1209  for details. Bulletin Board  EVENTS  1  GROUPS  1  GROUPS  GROUPS  ORGANIZERS'TRAINING SCHOOL  The Vancouver Organizers' Training  School, offering education and skill-  building for anti-poverty work, will be held  on May 9-10 at St Andrew's Wesley  Church, 1012 Nelson St, Vancouver. The  school is open to everyone with a special  focus on women. Admission is free for  those with low incomes, but space is  limited, so apply early. The training school  is sponsored by End Legislated Poverty  with funding support from Status of Women  Canada. For more info call Michelle, Linda  or Terrie at ELP, (604) 879-1209.   ANNE POPPERWELL  Saturna Island painter Anne Popperwell  presents Why Don't You Just Leave, an  exhibit of her personal response to the  issue of domestic violence, expressed  through the use of symbolic abstract and  figurative imagery and text, at the Surrey  Art Gallery. Her show runs until May 11.  For more info call (604) 501-5580. The  SAG is located in the Surrey Arts Centre in  Bear Creek Park, 13750-88th Ave, Surrey,  MICHIGAN WOMYN'S MUSIC  FESTIVAL  The 22nd Michigan Womyn's Music  Festival will be held Aug 12-17. Situated on  650 acres, the festival offers plenty of  camping in a village-like setting. The  schedule includes a 6-day women's film  festival, 300 workshops and 3 performance  stages featuring 40 sets of music, dance,  comedy and theatre. Some of the artists  scheduled to appear include: Vancouver's  Sawagi Taiko, the Toshi Reagon Band,  Ulali, Cris Williamson and Tret Fure, Elvira  Kurt, and Lea Delaria. For tickets or more  info write to WWTMC, PO Box 22,  Walhal/a, Ml, 49458 USA or call (616) 757-  4766.   SADIE KUEHN  Sadie Kuehn, president of the Vancouver  Society of Immigrant & Visible Minority  Women (VSIVMW), will speak on the  Society's past successes and present  challenges at Women in Print, 3566 West  4th Ave, Tues May 27, 7:30pm. [No  admission charge.] VSIVMW is a broad-  based women's group with a focus on  immigrant women's needs and issues.  Among the many programs and services  offered are employment counselling and  advocacy, and the Multicultural Women's  Resource Centre. For more info call 732-  4128.   QUEER MOMS DAY  Queer Moms Do Quickies and other  shenanigans. Readings and music by local  dyke and bi mothers. Come dressed up as  your favourite Mom! Prizes for the silliest  costumes. Free massages and manicures  for moms. Onsite and offsite childcare and  general hi-jinks for kids. Door prizes!  Debauchery! Festivities begin at 6:30pm  on Mon May 12 at Harry's Off Commercial,  1716 Charles St, Vancouver. For information call Terra at 254-1588. Celebrate  Mothers' Day. Everyone welcome. Admis-  sion is by donation.   A REAL LIFE SERIES  The Main and Hastings Community  Development Society and Simon Fraser  University have co-sponsored a series of  workshops exploring the myths and  realities of the Vancouver Downtown  Eastside. The last in the series—Employment and Training)—will take place Sat May  3, 10am-3pm, at the PRIDE Centre, 1st  Floor, 425 Carqall St, Vancouver. Admission  is $50, ($20 for students or those currently  underemployed). If you cannot afford the  full admission fee, please bring refundable  cans/bottles instead. To register, call (604)  291-5000. For more information, call (604)  685-2092.  22  NO! TO APEC  NO! to APEC, a grassroots coalition based  in Vancouver that is working to expose and  oppose APEC and imperialist globalization,  is looking for volunteers to get involved with  the coalition, begin staffing its new office  space, and get training in facilitation and  organizing, as well as learn more about  APEC and its impact on marginalized  people internationally. Currently, the  coalition is facilitating a public education  campaign leading up to November 1997  when it will host the People's Conference  Against Imperialist Globalization: Continuing the Resistance countering the APEC  Leader's Meeting to be held here in  Vancouver. NO! to APEC is also asking  community members for donations of office  equipment, including a computer and fax  machine to be used in its office until  November 1997. Finally, the coalition is  calling for billets to offer homes for our  international guests to stay in from Nov 20-  27. For more information, to volunteer or  get involved with the coalition, or to offer  billeting call 215-1103 or come by the new  office space at the Kalayaan Centre, 451  Powell St.   WOMEN'S CENTRE AGM  The Downtown Eastside Women's Centre  is holding its Annual General Meeting on  Mon Jun 23, 5pm at the Centre, 44 E.  Cordova St, Vancouver. All women and  children are welcome. The Centre is also  looking for Steering Committee members.  For more info call Marlene at 681-4786 or  Karen at 872-2320.   WISER  Women Involved in Spiritual Exploration  and Recovery in Holistic Health (WISER) is  a support group for women 18 years or  older wishing to explore spirituality and  alternative holistic health forms. The group'  meets at the Women's Health Collective,  219-1675 West 8th Ave, Vancouver every  second Thurs, 7-8:30pm. Cost is by  donation (to contribute to space rental). For  info call Chris on 873-3003.  LIBERTY VOLUNTEERS  Volunteers are needed for the Liberty Thrift  Store, 1035 Commercial Drive, Vancouver,  for various hours and jobs, Mon-Sat 10am-  5pm, Sun 12pm-5pm. Liberty Thrift is a  non-profit charitable organization whose  mission is to provide women and their  children with the resources to help them  live lives of liberty and independence, free  from violence. Liberty Thrift is also looking  for houseware items—dishes, irons,  kettles, linens, pots and pans, lamps,  radios, blankets—to provide hampers to  help women and children start over. To  volunteer or for more info call 255-3080.  imiiiiMiiiiiMi  Sangam Croat R.P.C.  REGISTERED PR0FFESSI0NAL COUNSELLOR  Private Practitioner,  Workshop + Group Therapist  phone (604) 253-5007  when the music changes se does the dance..,  Relationship Therapy  DANA L. JANSSEN, M.Ed.  Reg. Clinical Counsellor  Relationship Therapy  Individual Counselling  Integrative Body Work  Oak & 8th Ave. Vancouver, B.C.  Tel: (604) 731-2867  PWN BOARD  The Positive Women's Network in Vancouver is seeking potential Board members to  be elected at its annual general meeting in  June. Women interested in joining the  Board are expected to become familiar with  PWN's mission statement, purposes,  policies and services, and to sit on at least  one of its committees. The priority areas for  Board members this year are HIV-positive  women, legal expertise, fundraising  experience and public relations/communications experience. For more info call  Diana Peabody at 681-2122, ext 200.  THEATRE WORKSHOP  SUCCESS (the United Chinese Canadian  Enrichment Society) and Headlines  Theatre are looking for participants for a  "Theatre for Living" workshop, exploring  intergenerational issues inside families  where the parents have come to Canada  from another country and the children are  growing up in Canada. The purpose of the  project is to create a cross-cultural understanding around issues of resettlement.  Participation is limited to people whose  family have English as a second language.  Workshops will be held May 15-19,  rehearsal May 20-22, performances May  23-25. For more info call Catherine Angelo  at (604) 684-1628.   VCN VOLUNTEERS  The Vancouver CommunityNet, a community-based internet service provider, is  looking for 10-15 community minded  volunteers to work with community groups  interested in getting online and to conduct  basic internet introductions. Some internet  and other skills training provided. Interpersonal communication skills a must. Call  Katherine on Mondays at 257-3811 or Ian  at other times at 257-3872.   FEMINIST NETWORKING GROUP  Vancouver feminists are invited to participate in the Feminist Networking Group  (FNG). The group, comprised of individual  feminists and feminists working in women's  organizations, meets monthly to network,  discuss political issues from feminist  perspectives, and plan action. Currently  the FNG has as its priority, organizing  around the federal election (expected to  take place June 2). Feminists who are  interested in analyzing issues and policies,  or in planning actions to ensure women's  voices are heard by federal candidates are  invited to participate in FNG meetings and  campaigns. For the next meeting date or  more info call the Vancouver Status of  Women at 255-6554.  Want to  advertise  In Kinesis?  Call us  255-5499  May '97vancouver's1st^  Asian Heritage Month  j  The AHM Launch Party is On.  Be There.  May 2 The Western Front  303 East 8th 7-11pm  "   j. Music . Food . Drink  Readings. Music. Entertainment  For More Info Contact  AHM Group  4590 Todd Street  Vancouver BC V5R 3P8  341.7359   667.1755  WEB:hhtp://www.shinnova.com  /asianheritagemonth  Full Program Available Now!  Over 40 Exciting Events in May !  Art. Film . Performance . And More .  visual Arts . film/video . performance, literary . workshops . more Bulletin Board  SINGLE MOMS' DAY INTHE PARK  Come out for some fun, fun, fun  and (hopefully) lots of sun, sun,  sun.The Vancouver Status of  Women invites women and children  to celebrate Mothers' Day at its 7th  Annual Single Mothers' Day in the  Park Sunday May 11th, 1-5pm. Food  and laughs for everyone. For children there will also be face painting, arts and crafts, games, friends.  For mothers, there will be dance,  music, theatre and relaxation.The  event will be held at Grandview  Park (at the corner of William St.  and Commercial Drive) and is free  for single mothers and their children. Call VSW for info on 255-5511.  Photos by wendy lee kenward and  Erin Graham.  SUBMISSIONS CLASSIFIEDS CLASSIFIEDS CLASSIFIEDS  VISUAL ARTS AWARDS  The Assembly of British Columbia Arts  Councils invites applications for visual arts  development awards. The awards range  from $3000-$5000 and are available for  any visual artists working in any medium,  who are learning a new artistic technique  but are not in school. The deadline is Jun  16. Call Elizabeth Shefrin for info at 738-  0749.   NATIVE WOMEN INTHE ARTS  Native Women in the Arts is inviting  submissions from First Nations women  writers and visual artists for their next  annual journal. Established in 1993, NWIA  works to build networks that help to break  down isolation, forge connections, gain  access to resources and support cultural  self-determination. Unpublished poetry,  short stories (2,500 words max), songs,  essays, photography, film stills and visual  art work are welcome. Send submissions  to NWIA, 401 Richmond St W, Suite 363,  Toronto, ON, M5V 1X3. For more info call  (416) 598-4078. Deadline is Jun 1.   UNDERTHEVOLCANO  The 8th annual Under the Volcano Festival  of Art and Social Change is calling for  submissions from artists, musicians, poets  and activists. This year's theme is "Artists  Resisting Globalization of Cultures." Annual  themes include Grrlapalooza and Decade  of Indigenous Peoples. Submission  deadline is May 12. Call 254-8782 for info  or email volcano@netidea.com  NATIVE YOUTH ZINE  Redwire, a recently formed 'zine produced  by and for Native youth, is putting the call  out for submissions for their next issue.  How sick are you of being shut out and  shut down? How tired are you of having  nowhere to speak? And how ready are you  to speak out and speak proud? Then  submit your non-oppressive, non-discriminatory work (stories/poetry/art/?) to Nena  and Billie, PO Box 34097, Stn D, Vancover  BC, V6J 4M1. For more info call 873-0616.  CABIN ON GALIANO  Cabin on Galiano Island (in the Gulf  Islands between Vancouver Island and the  BC mainland) for rent on weekends or by  the week. Close to ferry, or, if you're coming  without a car, we will pick you up. Call (250)  539-5844.   LAURA JAMIESON COOP  Laura Jamieson Housing Co-op is accepting applications for 1, 2 and 3 bedroom  units. Monthly housing charges from $559-  821. No subsidy available. Active participation is enjoyable and necessary. Share  purchase ($1500) required. Great eastside  location and wonderful people. For an  application, send SASE to: Membership  Committee, 100-1349 E. 2nd Ave, Vancou-  ver, BC,V5N 1C4.   PACIFICWEST DRIVERTRAINING  A woman-owned and operated business  specializing in defensive driver training.  Become a confident and safe driver with an  experienced instructor. Learn to drive  regardless of age or previous experience.  Overcome driving fears. Basic car maintenance (theory) upon request. Reasonable  rates. Call El Apostol at (604) 691-1332.  AFFORDABLE CERTIFIED REFLEXOLOGIST AVAILABLE  R.A.C. Certified Advanced. Professional  and experienced. Experience and enjoy  this natural healing art for better health.  Releases stress and tension and toxins  that have built up in your body. Feel deeply  relaxed, nurtured and a wonderful sense of  well-being. Be good to yourself; you  deserve it. Ask about "specials." For info  and appointment, please call Leta at (604)  291-2019. Treat yourself or someone you  love. Also a great gift idea! Gift certificates  available.   LESBIANS 50+  University of British Columbia graduate  student researching lesbian history is  talking confidentially to lesbians who were  in British Columbia for part of the 1950s  and 1960s. To get involved, call Vanessa at  (604) 730-1341, or write her at the Department of History, 1297-1873 East Mall,  UBC, Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z1.   COUNSELLING FOR WOMEN  A feminist approach to sexual abuse,  depression, grief and loss, sexual orientation issues and personal growth. Sliding fee  scale. Free initial appointment. Call Susan  Dales, RPC, at 255-9173.  SHARED ACCOMMODATION  Roommate wanted to share a 2 bedroom/2  bathroom house on the beautiful Sunshine  Coast in Roberts Creek. This is a quiet  non-smoking home. Temporary situations  considered. Must be gay friendly. Available  immediately. Sorry, no dogs. $385/month  plus half utilities. Call (604) 740-0614  evenings.  B.C.'s newest full-service law firm  Dahl findlay Connors  BARRISTERS & SOLICITORS ^  • A full range of servicesto meet your business and  personal legal needs  • Free initial consultation  • Lawyers experienced in protecting the interests and  advancing the rights of the lesbian, gay, bisexual and  transgendered communities  Suite 620, 1033 Davie (near Burrard), Vancouver, B.C.  (604) 687-8752 • Toll Free 1 888 4 GAY LAW LIB128  PP^AcLPR0CESSING   CTR   -   SERIALS  2206   EAST  MALL,   U.B   C  VANCOUVER   BC  V6T   1Z8  Lib«r*l  P*r+y *l*c-Ti©n -Hps  for weKtn  c*n<Mck*+«%  (from "Women working to win"]  %     Usin«j  s-e>us+  Un«jU<\«j-<t  is  r\o+  a.   cri***,  bu+   i +   is  a.   *ms+a,K-£.  #    R.<^«M.lo*r +W*.+ ekurin^ +V\«  co.^po.i'jn,  +V\-cr-t  twill  b«  no  + »■*.«  !for +V\in«js  l»K*   Uunekry,  cl**nin«^  +V\*   V\ous*,   cooKin^,  pic.K«n«j  up  +W*  cV\>l<*r*r\  or +V\«  ekrycl-c^nin^.  # Twi^K -Viwic-e.  b-efort  «joir\«j  A.rouneV.  in  fla.sV\y>  ***p«nsive.  t^rs.  W Don'+ b* el i scour* ^* A by iwV\«.+  you V\««kr in +V\* i*.*cVi«k *boU+ V\OIaj  i*j*ll your oppon-tn-V is eVoin^J i+ is  of+-tr\ t/uisV\ful +V\inKin^ or cr*«.+iv-&  «.cW*r+isin^. Us* +Wis s+r«+*«jy +o  trt*+*  your  own   spin.  ttin«*is election +ip% for  woK^n   c*r\eMck*+t«»  //>»« M« women at kinesis)  # T+*s no+  jus+  s<.itis+  l<\n=ju«.«)-e  you sKouleX iworry «.bou+i  X+  is  s*"*.is+  r\o+  +o fund*, mor^-en's ot—  ^«ni*A.+ions, r*p*  crisis c*n+r*s  *ncV. +r«.nsi+ion  V\ous*s.  ^     R.-ftr^.«^b«r iwi+V\  a.  n*+«on*,l  cV\ilcV.c*r<. s+rA.+*«jy,     i+  is **si<.r  for ujo^-dn  +o b«  «,bl<  +o  r^«,nA.«j-c  iworW *nel V\oi*.*  rtsponsibili+i-cs  —  iwWicVx of cours* f*ll  on iwor^-tn.  # EncV l«^islA>i-&eV pov*r+y. S+op  •eitploi+^+ion  of iworK*rs. nn«X  r***.***b*r, ^eleVin^ +o"*tns (fro**  c».rs) +o +V\* <nviro«Ktr»+  in~  cr<.*,s*s our cV\«,nc-ts  of  ^*++in«j  br**s+  c*,nc<.r «*- o+V\*r cV.is«*,s*s.  W     &*  -encoure^-ftcl. by  buVvA.'t  ujo^-cn   s*y  in  *l+*rn*,+iv-e.  ^-deXi^.  Subscrtb-d  -Vo   ft in e sis.  One year  □$20 + $1.40 GST □ Bill me  Two years □ New  □$36 + $2.52 GST □ Renewal  Institutions/Groups □ Gift  □$45 + $3.15 GST □ Donation  □ Cheque enclosed   For individuals who can't afford the full amount 3  for Kinesis subscription, send what you can.  Free to prisoners.  Orders outside Canada add $8.  Vancouver Status of Women Membership  (includes Kinesis subscription)  □$30+$1.40 GST  Name   Address—  Country   Telephone _  Postal code_  Fax   Published ten times a year by the Vancouver Status of Women  #309-877 E. Hastings St., Vancouver, BC V6A 3Y1