 An interview with Ferron  INESiS  Memory  & Desire  Pornography:  The Supreme  Court ruling  A lively time  with Gloria Steinem,  Lee Maracle et al  Victories in BC • Women and cancer • Free trade  plus much more Kinesis welcomes volunteers  to work on all aspects of the  paper. Call us at 255-5499.  Our next Writer's Meetings  are Tues. April 7 and Tues.  May 5 at 7 pm at Kinesis, #301-1720 Grant St. All  women welcome even if you  don't have experience.  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE:  Nancy  Pollak, Janisse  Browning,    Anne    Jew,    Christine  Cosby,  Fatima   Jaffer,   Char-  I lene   Linnell,  Sophie  Fernan-  ! dez,    Janette    Hellmuth,    Ni-  ! na Wolanski, Sandra Gillespie,  Xannin,   Frances  Was-  I serlein,    Charmaine   Saulnier,  Kathy   March,   Faith  Gabrielle Cordelia-Chew, I  ■ ly O'Brien,  Allisa   McDoi  I Gladys We, Ria Bleumer, :  | ny    Madden,    Jackie  ! Marsha Arbour, Chris Me}  ! FRONT COVER: Haruko Ok-  ano's detail from the Memory  I and Desire collaborative piece  i (see page 15).  j PRESS DATE:  March 25, 1992.  ; EDITORIAL   BOARD:  I cy  Pollak,  Heidi  Walsh,  nes Huang, Christine Cosby,  I Sandra Gillespie, Lizanne Fos-  | ter, Gladys We, Fatima Jaffer,  CIRCULATION AND DISTRI-  I BUTION: Jennifer Johnstone,  j Birgit Schinke, Tory John-  I stone, Cat L'Hirondelle.  j ADVERTISING:  Birgit Schinke  | OFFICE: Jennifer Johnstone  Kinesis Is published 10 times  a year by the Vancouver Status of Women. Its objectives  are to be a non-sectarian feminist voice for women and  to work actively for social  change, .specifically combatting sexism, racism, homopho-  [ bia and imperialism.  j Views expressed in Kinesis  are those of the writer  and  | do not necessarily reflect VSW  policy. All unsigned material is  the responsibility of the Kine-  ? Editorial Board.  SUBSCRIPTIONS: Individual  subscriptions to Kinesis are  $20 per year (+ $1.40 GST)  r what you can afford. Membership in the Vancouver Sta-  s of Women is $30 (+ $1.40  GST) or what you can afford,  includes subscription to Kine-  lail in your or-  back cover). For more  call   (604)   255-  SUBMISSIONS: Women and  girls are welcome to make sub-  . We reserve the right  and submission does  arantee publication. If  :, submissions should  I double spaced and  signed and include  and phone number,  lote: Kinesis does not  oetry or fiction con- .  . For material to be  returned, a SASE must be included. Editorial guidelines are  'ailable on request.  ADVERTISING: For information about display advertising  I rates, please contact Kinesis.  For information about classifieds, please see the classified  page in this issue.  DEADLINE: For features and  reviews: the 10th of the  month preceding publication.  News copy: 15th. Letters and  Bulletin Board listings: 18th.  Display advertising—camera  ready: 18th; design required:  I 16th.  MEANS MOVEMENT  jf|  ■E9p  C*£? >.  Wsgp  ;'-~-r  The Tories have just bulldozed the baby bonus  and a child care program 3  Ferron talks about singing, writing and the dinner table of life 12  There's a surge of new books on women and can-  cer 19  INSIDE  FTE  lump child care, baby bonus   by Slgny Madden  Provincial funds for centres, abortion   by Jackie Brown  Legal services shuffle—who is consulted?   by Fatima Jaffer  Porn, obscenity and the Supreme Court   by Corlnne BJorge  Court Challenges Program fight back   by Kelly O'Brien  The constitution and First Nations women   by Joan Crow  IWD Snapshots   Lively evening with Gloria Steinem and friends..  by Heidi Walsh  Breast implants scandal: Dow ducks   by Heidi Walsh  ^^dttfj? American Free Trade, times three   yl bydpenlse Nadeau  {Ferron tells almost all..  as told to Lauri Nerman  Women in Trades and Technologies...  by Ellen Dixon  Memory and Desire: in review   by Janice Wong and Zara Suleman  Short shots on women in film   by Jillian M. Hull  Faces of Feminism: in review   by Angela Page  Fresh Talk: Youth & Sexuality reviewed..  by Pearl Klrby  Women and cancer: books in review..  by Betsy Nuse  ...9  .10  .11  .12  .14  .15  .16  .17  .18  .19  Kinesis is indexed in the  Canadian Women's Periodicals Index, and the Alternative  Press Index.  Kinesis is produced on an  IBM PC using PC TeX and an  LC-800 laser printer. Camera  work by The Peak. Printing by  Web Press Graphics, Burnaby  BC  Inside Kinesis.  What's News?.  by Fatima Jaffer and  Liz O'Shea-Murray  Paging Women....  by Gabriella Cordella-i  Letters   Bulletin Board 21  compiled by Cathy Griffin  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status of  Women, 301-1720 Grant St.,  Vancouver BC V5L 2Y6  Kinesis is a member of the  Canadian Magazine Publishers  Association. ISSN 0317-9095  Second class mail #6426 Movement Matters  Movement  Matters  listings information  Movement Matters is designed to be  a network of news, updates and information of special interest to the  women's movement. Submissions to  Movement Matters should be no  more than 500 words, typed, double-  spaced on eight and a half by eleven  paper. Submissions may be edited for  length. Deadline is the 18th of the  month preceding publication.  Conf. on lesbian,  gay rights  The coordinating committee of Out-  rights/Les Droits Visibles announces the  Second Pan-Canadian Conference on Lesbian and Gay Rights in Vancouver for the  weekend of October 9-11, 1992. The conference will be a bilingual (English-French)  participatory forum where registrants can  exchange information and work together  to develop strategies—political, organizational, legal—to take the lesbian and gay  rights movement into the future. Organizers are busy networking with a broad range  of groups to put together an agenda that  reflects the concerns of communities from  coast to coast.  Organizers are applying to a number of  funding bodies for support and are committed to making the conference as accessible  as they can. Registration fees will be set  on a sliding scale and childcare will be provided. All events will be wheelchair accessible. Simultaneous translation into French  and sign language will be available at as  many sessions as possible.  OutRights/Les Droits Visibles will be  both a celebration of victories to date and  an opportunity to focus efforts, energies and  expectations for the future. For more information, contact barbara findlay at (604)  251-4356 or Ken Smith at (604) 683-4176,  or write to: OutRights/Les Droits Visibles,  321-1525 Robson St., Vancouver BC, V6G  1C3.  Outreach program  for isolated women  Sisters Pick You Up: Sistering 's Outreach Program is a new booklet put out  by a Toronto-based women's organization  called Sistering. The organization offers  practical and emotional support to women  through its Drop-In Centre and Outreach  Program.  In 1989, Sistering launched a Seniors' Independence Program, a three year project  funded by Health and Welfare Canada to  raise awareness of the needs of the women  who use the Outreach Program: women who  are living in poverty with frail health, and  are very isolated.  Sisters Pick You Up is a. booklet about  the development of a community support  program for women who live on low incomes  in isolation from their families and friends.  To provide a complete picture, the booklet  includes details of how the Outreach Program was developed, how it operates, a list  of potential funding sources, and an annotated list of resources (in Toronto). As well,  stories about the women who come to the  Outreach Program are included to give a  sense of what the women are like and what  they do during a typical program day.  Sisters Pick You Up can be used as a  resource in developing similar programs for  women who are isolated. Copies are available free of charge in English from Sistering, 181 Bathurst St., Toronto, ONT, M5T  2R7. Tel: (416) 861-1954  W  Initiatives in  film from NFB  New Initiatives in Film (NIF) is a program from Studio D of the National Film  Board (NFB) which aims to increase opportunities in film for women of the First Nations and women of colour in Canada.  NIF is comprised of three distinct components: a Resource Bank, a Film Institute  and an Internship Program, all designed to  operate for a five year period. The first edition of the ND? Resource Bank has been  produced and is available at local NFB offices. The Resource Bank will be updated  once a year; women who wish to be listed in  1993 edition should send their up-dated entry or first-time entry to the address below.  Funding is close to being realized for the  Internship component of NIF, and the first  two interns should begin this year. Information regarding the application process for  the Internships will be available soon. Also,  when funding comes through, some money  will be available for individuals to pursue  advanced work/study programs of their own  creation.  For more information write to: Fabienne  Pierre-Jacques, Administrator NIF, Studio  D, Box 6100, Station A, Montre'al PQ H3C  3H5. Tel: (514) 283-9534; Fax: (514) 283-  5487.  Reduce the Risks  of assault  The Vancouver-based Women Educating  in Self-defense Training (WEST) have published an informative and practical look at  ways every woman can Reduce the Risks  in her own life. Reduce the Risks is a  12-page booklet offering practical strategies  for avoiding assault and enhancing personal  safety.  The guide is packed with positive steps  rather than the usual litany of forbidden actions. Women are encouraged with more options and strategies as they take control of  their fears and learn their own strengths.  WEST wants to acknowledge that women  lead active and full lives in our society while  being aware the violence is a real fear in  each of our existences.  Reducing the Risks is written by Alice  Macpherson, a long-time Wenlido instructor. The booklet is available from WEST  for $2. Contact WEST, 2349 St. Catherines  St., Vancouver, BC, V5T 3X8; Tel: (604)  876-6390  Violence and women  with disabilities  As a first step in a public awareness campaign, the BC Coalition of People with Disabihties (BCCPD) is distributing a special  edition of Transition, BCCPD's magazine.  The February-March edition, dedicated to  the issue of violence against women with  disabilities, is being distributed to women's  groups, disabihty groups and human rights  groups across the country, as well as to  provincial and federal pohticians and the  media.  "Statistics on the incidence of violence  and sexual abuse of women with disabihties indicate one out of two women with developmental disabihties are sexually abused.  In the general population of women, the  incidence is one in four. A recent DAWN  Canada study found six out of ten women  with psychiatric disabihties had been raped,  abused or assaulted, and women with mobility disabihties were similarly victimized,"  says Mary Williams of the BCCPD.  Copies of this issue of Transition: Violence and Women with Disabilities  can be ordered from: BCCPD, 204-456 W.  Broadway, Vancouver, BC, V5Y 1R3. Tel:  (604) 875-0188, Fax: (604) 875-9227.  Inside  Kinesis  Kinesis production this March was one  of transition, with hellos, goodbyes and  "who am I?"s abounding. Full of firsts and  lasts and missing exacto knives, a crazy time  was had by all.  Firsts first: introductions are in order. Hello to first-time writers for Kinesis—Corinne Bjorge, Signy Madden, Kelly  O'Brien, Janice Wong, Angela Page, Denise  Nadeau and Pearl Kirby.  As well, new women joined in production  chaos this month—Sophie Fernandez, Char-  maine Saulnier and Kathy March.  A big hello to Anne Jew, our new 'New,  Improved' Production Coordinator. Anne  has had all of 10 days to amaze us—she actually knows where that missing line-tape  went. Rumour has it she does cartwheels  and handstands—hey, we're into rumours.  A newcomer to Kinesis with a background  in paste-up, layout—and a great sense of  design—Anne has written for many publications and we're happy to have her on board.  No hellos seem to occur without goodbyes. Trisha Joel is leaving her post as Program Coordinator at the Vancouver Status  of Women (our publisher). As a staffer at  VSW, Trisha has had her finger in many  of the pohtical pies that concern Kinesis—  she's focused Kinesis on poverty issues and  family law—and she's always been a strong  supporter of the paper (not to mention oft-  quoted). Best wishes to Trisha as she sails  into less hectic waters.  And welcome to Cecilia Dioscon, the new  Programmer. Cecilia contributed to Kinesis as recently as the March issue— she's a  writer and organizer, and we're pleased to  have her just down the hall.  And now, for a very special news item.  Kinesis is happy to introduce our new editor, Fatima Jaffer. Fatima held the position  of Production Coordinator since November  but, as it turns out, she had her eye on The  Big Job. Well, we had our eye on her, too.  Fatima has worked on publications in  Montreal and Toronto and has a solid  grounding in advocacy journalism and feminist pohtics. (She's also kinda grounded in  smokes and coffee, but hey ... sounds news-  papery to us.) Her commitments to working  collectively and to accessibihty are strong,  and she'll be trolling the many women's  communities for writers and contributors of  all sorts. As a relative newcomer to Kinesis, Fatima brings fresh energy and will no  doubt move the paper in new directions.  We're looking forward to moving with her.  And last, but not least, fareweU to  ol'-what's-her-name, oops, Nancy Pollak—  Editrix. Nancy is leaving Kinesis to join  the "Wheat-free Liberation Army." Kinesis is losing a fearless leader, a tiresomely  tireless, hard-working editor, class clown,  and her oh-so-wonderful toy and chocolate-  wrapper collection.  But seriously, we're going to miss her awfully terribly. Nancy has been a dedicated  contributor to femimst journalism and a  mentor to many, many Kinesis volunteers.  She's been around so long, no one can remember when she first walked through our  doors. During three years as Editrix of  Kinesis, she has never shied away from  covering difficult, controversial issues. Her  commitment to the importance of women  receiving clear and updated information  on issues has on occasion been awesome.  Nancy's principled and sometimes feisty nature meant that, within both Kinesis and  the Vancouver Status of Women, she didn't  rest until a concern was dealt with. Kinesis has grown with Nancy and we will miss  her—and her back covers (check out this  month's pussy-cat).  Aha—but we still have her home phone  number, so it won't be that easy for her to  lose us. Bye Nancy. We love you verrry verry  much.  PS: No, Nancy, you can't edit this.  Our thanks also to Vancouver Status of Women members who support us year 'round  with memberships and donations. Our appreciation to the following supporters who became members, renewed their memberships or donated to VSW in March:  BC Council of the Confederation of Canadian Unions • Debbie Bryant • Ruth Bullock  • Rita Chudnovsky • V. Comensoli • Judith Doll • Catharine Esson • Brenda Felker  • Frances Friesen • Gossen and Dunnaway • Nora Grove • Nancy Hannum • Rosalie  Hawrylko • Health Sciences Association of BC • Lenna Jones • Dorothy Kidd • Heather  Leighton • Judith Lynne • C. McQuarrie • Monique Midgley • A. Nemesis • Janet Patterson • Neil Power • Gomathy Puri • Diane Thorne • Helen Todd • Karen Unger •  Katharine Young  Not Just Another Page  Collective  First Nations Women and Women of Colour  Kinesis means movement  Come, move with us...talk informally about  working for change in a feminist magazine  Next Meeting: Thurs, April 30, 7 pm.  Call 682-0080 for details,  (we share munchies, childcare subsidies available)  KINESIS    April 92 ////////////////////^^^^^  /////////////////M^^  News  Federal budget blows:  Child care, baby bonus lost  by Signy Madden  "Bouchard Breaks Eight-Year Promise of  National Daycare Program" ... "Canada's  Sacred Trust No Longer as Family Allowances Canned" ... "Poorest of the Poor  Left out of Tories Anti-Poverty Initiatives."  Deciding on a single headline for a story  on the federal government's latest budget  is difficult. Where does one begin when so  many hopes and promises have been betrayed?  Start with what the March federal budget  killed. First and foremost, the Conservatives  reneged on the national day care program.  And universal social assistance for families  is officially dead.  The non-refundable child tax credit and  the child credit are gone, as is universal access to the monthly family allowance cheque  (the baby bonus). In their place is a Child  Tax Benefit plan that critics are calling a  short-lived gain for the working poor and  no gain whatsoever for the very poor.  A national child care program was  promised in both 1984 and 1988 elections.  Health Minister Benoit Bouchard now says  the multi-billion dollar plan is being sacrificed to provide money for other social  programs, including a yet-to-be announced  campaign against child abuse.  This sudden shift in priorities is justified, say the Tories, by the results of a  government-conducted opinion poll in August which asked people to rank the priority of a national child care program alongside programs which dealt with issues hke  drugs and child abuse. Only 25 percent indicated support for the child care program.  Federal NDP child care critic Dawn Black  charged the questions forced people into  making comparisons which would only sup  port the government's rationalization for  scrapping their child care promise.  The government refuses to make the connection that parents without adequate child  care cannot work and that women on minimum wage are unable to afford what child  care is available, critics say. Or that poverty,  child care and abuse are interconnected.  "A comprehensive, high quahty child care  system must be a key part of a strategy  to fight child poverty," says Joanne Oberg,  president of the Canadian Day Care Advocacy Association (CDCAA).  "Pitting child care against other essential  children's programs is a shameful tactic. It's  hke asking whether it's more important to  treat a broken leg or smallpox."  Even some Tories recognize the hnk between access to day care and ending poverty.  The House of Commons sub-committee on  child poverty, chaired by Conservative MP  Barbara Greene, released a report in December calling for the establishment of a national child care system.  This same report recommended making  more funds available for subsidized housing,  raising the federal minimum wage, creating minimum standards for provincial welfare programs, and giving a monthly payment to pregnant women to ensure that  their babies are healthy. The government  acted on one recommendation—the expanding of child tax credits to replace family  allowances—but disregarded the others.  In 1984, the Tories inherited a child benefits system that was complex, unfair and  inadequate. Since that time, there have  been 11 further changes which have left  the system—complex, unfair and inadequate. The new Child Tax Benefit may be  marginally more responsive by making the  new benefit monthly, but it will do httle to  reduce child poverty.  At first blush, the plan looks hke it will  put more money into some people's pockets. In reality, the poorest parents get no increased benefits while the working poor receive some benefits which will decrease over  time due to inflation.  The wealthy, however, will be rewarded  by increased tax write-offs of child care  expenses (those with receipts and larger  incomes which can be taxed) and won't  lose much with the elimination of the nonrefundable tax credits.  "What they've done is shmy," says Vancouver's Jean Swanson, of End Legislated  Poverty, a coahtion of 28 groups. "There's  not one more cent of benefits for the poorest of the poor, the people hving at less than  half the poverty hne. This new plan is very  anti-women."  The increase in benefits for the working  poor is deceptive, as Suzanne Peters of The  Pohcy Research Centre for Children, Youth  and Families described in a recent CBC Radio interview. "There is going to be a de-  indexation of [child tax] benefits. The bene-  Province gushes:  Funding for centres,  access to abortion  by Jackie Brown  After years of lobbying, protests and general misbehaving, finally some real money.  Not a lot, mind you, but enough to provide  BC women's centres with a bit of stability  and ensure that women no longer have to  pay for an abortion at Vancouver's two freestanding abortion clinics.  Penny Priddy, Minister of Women's  Equahty announced that, as of April 1st,  28 women's centres will receive annual core  funding to the tune of $37,500 each. The  ministry will also pony up roughly $500,000  in interim "stabilization grants" (up to  $15,000 per centre) that can be used for  equipment, office supplies, training, and reimbursing paid and unpaid workers for out-  of-pocket expenses associated with 1991-  1992.  Minister of Health Elizabeth Cull announced in mid-March full funding for both  the Everywoman's Health Centre and the  Elizabeth Bagshaw abortion chnics—each  of which will get about $500,000 per year.  More significantly, the NDP government  has drawn up a hst of 33 regional hospitals now required by law to provide abortion  ;. The new regulations (Catholic-  affiliated hospitals are exempt) mean hospital boards can no longer refuse to do abortions as they have in the past. At present,  the Vernon Jubilee is the only institution  to object to this move—the board there is  pondering legal action.  The announcements represent key victories for the women's movement in BC, which  has fought long and hard for core funding  for feminist organizations and for full and  free access to abortion services. The most  recent round of battles began in 1983 following the Social Credit "restraint" program that cut core funding to a number of  women's groups. Then in 1990, women occupied Secretary of State offices when the  federal government abruptly cut core funding to women's centres.  The feds, who argued that funding centres was a provincial responsibihty, were  forced by protests and public outrage to  restore the money. Meanwhile, the BC  and Yukon Association of Women's Centres  (BCYAWC) forcefully lobbied the provincial NDP and the ruhng Socreds to fulfill their part of the funding obligation to  centres. The NDP said it would help if  elected and, since the party's victory in  October, feminists have reminded Victoria of its promise to provide core funding  to women's centres, rape crisis centres and  other organizations.  For women's centres, the core funding  provides much needed relief. Now rather  than constantly scrambhng for money to  stay alive, the centres can focus on providing programs and services. That, says  Trisha Joel of the Vancouver Status of  Women, is a good thing.  "We are pleased that Penny Priddy and  the NDP have fulfilled their promise to support women by supporting our centres,"  says Joel. "But we are also concerned that  the current criteria means women of colour  organizations hke the Phihppine Women's  Centre are not eligible for core funding.  Nor is the Vancouver Lesbian Connection.  And I also wonder what is going to happen to those groups that are not classified  as 'women's centres.'"  To qualify for core funding, a group must  be a non-profit, community based organization primarily serving women, registered  under the BC Societies Act and a member  of the BCYAWC.  Sunera Thobani of the South Asian  Women's Action Network (SAWAN), a  coahtion of South Asian women working on  fits will not keep pace with inflation. By the  year 2000, the new benefit will have fallen  and the threshold for accessibihty to the  benefit drops and therefore fewer and fewer  families will have access to benefits."  As for deductions, the child care expense  deduction will rise to a maximum of $5,000  for children six and under and increase to  $3,000 for children 7-14. But for the many  women who have informal day care arrangements that don't issue tax receipts, these  deductions are meaningless.  The Tories say they are fighting child  poverty with these measures. But child  poverty is a product of adult poverty and  without action to address the declining real  value of the minimum wage, the lack of  pay equity, the unfair tax system, and the  dearth of accessible child care, child poverty  will continue unabated.  The crisis in child care hasn't gone away.  A recent federal study shows that half of  all families with young children use or need  child care. According to Statistics Canada,  in 1990 there were more than 1.3 million  preschoolers and 1.7 million school-age children whose mothers were in the labour  force. That means as many as 3 million children may need alternate child care. In contrast there were only 321,000 hcensed spaces  available in 1990.  The CDCAA also took the Tories to task  for failing to address the particular needs  of Aboriginal families. "Nine provinces and  territories have no treaty or agreement for  the cost-sharing of child care expenditures  for Aboriginal children on reserve," said a  CDCAA report. "An initiative by the federal government... was expected."  In the absence of a national program, the  only federal vehicle for cost-sharing child  care expenses with the provinces rests with  the Canadian Assistance Plan (CAP) and,  since the Tories took power, CAP transfer  payments have steadily diminished.  Other budget measures have serious  repercussions for women. The federal government has refused to pay retroactive increases to its female employees for equal pay  for work of equal value done before November 1990. A $100-milhon cut from the Canadian Jobs Strategy, the training program for  welfare recipients and people who have exhausted their unemployment insurance, was  also announced.  The ehmination of co-operative housing  and the cap on increases to the provinces  for social housing is a huge blow to affordable, secure housing.  This budget has to be counted as one of  the final nails in the coffin for social welfare programs: it has taken the Tories eight  years to do it, but the deed now seems near  completed. Billions of dollars have been  trimmed, but the real human cost has yet  to be counted.   See FUNDING page 4  Signy Madden recently moved from  Toronto where she was a fundraiser for  the Elizabeth Fry Society.  KINESIS April 92 ssss^ss^ss^sss^^  NEWS  by Fatima Jaffer  BC legal aid under review:  Too little, then too fast  The NDP government is planning a  much-needed reform of legal services in BC  but so far, no one is talking to legal aid  chents, many of whom are women and poor,  to organizations that represent chent interests.  While the government has hired legal  consultant Tim Agg to consult with client-  based organizations and interested parties,  his apparent rush has left many worried  that the reform will be over before community groups have a chance to get organized.  I'm hopeful that we'll be into a fullblown consultation process by the latter  half of April," says Agg. "I'm planning to  give my first internal report to the Attorney  General way before the six-month deadhne,  possibly sometime in May."  "It's a ridiculous deadhne," says Jo-  hannah Pilot of the Vancouver Status of  Women (VSW). "Hardly any community  groups have any information. We want to be  consulted. The government needs to know  that we have to be part of the process."  Pilot says if government is serious about  allowing community participation in the review of legal aid, two things are needed: sufficient time to prepare, and financial and administrative resources. "To do anything less  than this would be to cut us out of the process," she adds, "given the complexities of  these issues and how they impact on chents  who are primarily women."  As Kinesis goes to press, an emergency  meeting with representatives of community-  based grassroots organizations is discussing  ways of accessing the consultation process.  A meeting with Agg is being scheduled for  early April to insist on the deadhne being  extended until a consultation process to enable concerned community groups full participation is agreed upon.  Agg's agenda is heavy. He is expected to  mesh the government's determination to cut  costs with the community's need for more  accessibihty and improved quality of ser  vices. Agg says he is confident the balance  can be achieved.  But many disagree. The issues are complicated and various.  At present, lawyers who take on legal aid  cases are paid on a tariff fee-per-case basis  by the Legal Services Society (LSS). (see  Kinesis February, 1991, page 5) The fee  is inadequate because lawyers are only entitled to bill the LSS for very few hours, which  can lead to substandard service.  Family and immigration law disputes are  often a drain of time, money and emotions  and few lawyers are willing to take them  on. Those who do are often inexperienced,  overburdened or unaware of the complexities of many family or immigration disputes.  Choice of counsel is rare. Women are usually given the first lawyer on the hst. Often,  it is too far in the case for the woman to  change counsel or there is insufficient time  for new counsel to adequately represent her  interests. In many parts of BC, there is no  access to legal aid representation and lack  and Staff Systems. This involves setting up government-funded chnics with staff  lawyers to handle legal service cases.  The report was unanimously rejected by  the Association of Legal Aid Lawyers of BC  (ALAL) in late February. ALAL found the  report gave no consideration to the "impact on Family and Immigration Law services [and that] fundamentally, the Comparison Report ignores the importance of the  chent's choice of counsel."  The ALAL rebuttal concluded that "a  chnic which expects staff lawyers to [deal  with] 130 cases per year, is going to put  pressure on lawyers to unduly compromise  their chents' interests ... [and] because  Family Legal Aid chents are predominantly  women, a 'Public Defender Model' will disproportionately affect women in this area."  Family lawyer Jessica Gossen says she is  angry that legal aid lawyers were not consulted about the chnic model before the report was released for their perusal.  The issues are complicated and varied.  of funds do not allow for effective services  from neighbouring centres.  Criminal law does not face the same crisis as family or immigration law. Such cases  tend to be less time-consuming or emotionally draining for lawyers. Most applicants-  for criminal legal aid tend to be men while  women are the main users of family law services.  To address some of these inadequacies, the government introduced a "pubhc defender model" early this year in a  new report A   Comparison of Judicial  "The government is not hstening to  women,"says Gossen. "They've made no attempt to hsten to women." She beheves the  chnic scenario will mean "women in this  province are served by government-hired  lawyers whose mandate is to cut costs."  Agg says he is aware that his review will  involve talking to both defenders of chnics  and defenders of tariffs but says that "this is  a wider issue than being an issue of choice.  There are good reasons to keep the tariff-  based system and good reasons to have a  public defender model. To quote a friend of  mine ... 'if one was doing it right, you'd  need to look at both.'  "One of the things I'm hopeful of in the  consultation process is that people will be  specific and clear about the kind of mix we  are looking at."  Immigration lawyer Camia S. Weaver  says she would hke to be optimistic about  the review. "Nobody knows for sure how  much is going to go [towards] community legal chnics [with staff lawyers] and there are  some ways in which chnics can be useful  it's a question of degree," says Weaver.  However, Weaver is concerned that the  government intends to reform legal services  by looking for ways to cut costs and that  may mean that "immigration law will be the  first to go." At present, immigration cases  receive about $3 million of the $90 million  doled out to legal services annually.  "We already know that legal services is  not going to get the money it needs [from  the forthcoming budget]," says Weaver.  "The way things have been going, the government has already decided this is how it's  going to be."  Agg admits that "the budget is going to  reflect the intent of the government and,  yes, there is some concern in government  about reduction of costs [but] the Attorney  General has said clearly that he is committed to better quality. I don't think we're seeing a reduction of services.  Agg also says if his review of legal services finds that more funds are needed for a  better legal service system, then he doesn't  doubt the government will dehver on more  funding.  Theresa Tate, director of the legal aid  Native Community Law Office in Vancouver, says that ultimately "the best thing  he [Agg] can do is make recommendations."  She said that, in particular, Native community law has very specific concerns about  what needs to be addressed in any review  of the legal aid system.  "But first, he needs to talk to someone  about how to go about getting that consultation process," says Tate.  FUNDING from page 3  different issues, welcomes the government's  decision to core fund centres but wants it to  go further.  "We need more centres for and controlled  by racial minority women in our community," says Thobani, whose group's top priority is funding for a South Asian Women's  centre in the lower mainland. "Without  that, women have to look for resources on  their own," she says. "There must be a place  where women can go and feel safe."  Cecilia Diocson of the Phihppine Women's Centre echoed Thobani's concerns.  "It's good that 28 women's centres got  funding. But we've been waiting so long for  money for staff and programs and we didn't  get it," Dioscon says.  "We want the government to look at  those who work for marginalized women  Fearless Girl Reporter 1  Scoops to       <  CONQUER  That's one way of looking at a  Kinesis writer's job. You could  also see it as a chance to learn  reporting skills, to review  books and movies and art,  or to express your politics.  We offer support and advice to  A  women who want to write, A  regardless of experience. A  Come to our Writers Meeting (see Bulletin    fy  Board for details) or call 255-5499 A  who will continue to not be heard if they're  not included." Diocson says her group will  attempt to meet the funding criteria so that  the centre can begin to do educational work  around a variety of issues, including reproductive health matters.  Since the ministry's program applies to  BCYAWC centres only, there is no core  funding for other women's organizations.  However, what's in the upcoming budget remains to be seen.  And, in an interview with Kinesis, minister Penny Priddy said there is grant  money available from Women's Programs  for those who want to start an organization  and/or work towards meeting the core funding criteria.  "Then they are also welcome to apply for  core funding," says Priddy. "I would hope  we will see those applications because we are  aware that women of colour and First Nations Women and women with disabihties  may want a different choice than a mainstream women's centre."  In terms of abortion funding, money for  the free-standing clinics is the culmination  of over 20 years of abortion rights activism  that began in 1970 with the abortion caravan to Ottawa (which started in Vancouver)  to protest Section 251 of the Criminal Code.  The section was tossed out by the Supreme  Court in January 1988 and a subsequent attempt by the government to recriminalize  abortion was narrowly defeated by the senate in 1991.  Hilda Thomas, president of the Every  woman's Health Centre Society says the  funding represents a tremendous victory for  the pro-choice movement.  "In 1991, the NDP made 'choice on  abortion' a prominent election platform  issue. We're pleased that they've moved  ahead quickly with this commitment," said  Thomas.  Gwen Brodsky, spokesperson for the Elizabeth Bagshaw chnic, is also happy with  the funding, which she says is the result of many women's determined efforts—  sometimes at personal risk—to ensure reproductive choice.  "The government's decision to fund chnics ... marks an important break in the  tradition of this province of denying women  equal access to health services," says Brodsky. "Choice on abortion is a matter of pubhc pohcy in Canada."  Both Thomas and Brodsky are also  pleased the NDP will take a closer look at  regional reproductive health care needs, although Thomas is concerned with the ministry's decision to strike a task force. Details  of the task force are not yet known.  "Our experience is that task forces are  expensive and usually make recommendations that end up on a shelf some-  where,"says Thomas. "What we [recommended] was an advisory council made up of  at least 50 percent women active in the pro-  choice movement and to hire a consultant  experienced in rural health needs and sympathetic to choice to work with the council."  Jackie Brown defies descriptio  KINESIS NEWS  ,#^^^^^*^^^^  Porn and violence against women:  Court rules on obscenity  by Corinne Bjorge  Linking hard-core pornography to violence against women, a February 27  Supreme Court ruhng upheld Canada's obscenity laws.  The court unanimously decided that Section 163 of the Criminal Code is a reasonable restriction on freedom of expression  and does not violate the Charter of Rights  and Freedoms. Section 163 outlaws as obscene "any pubhcation a dominant characteristic of which is the undue exploitation  of sex, or of sex and any one or more of...  crime, horror, cruelty and violence,"  The decision followed a court challenge  by Winnipeg video store owner Donald Butler, who claimed the law violated his Charter rights. Butler was charged in 1987 with  possession of hard-core video tapes and  magazines.  Jane ShackeU, a representative of the  Women's Legal Education and Action Fund  (LEAF), said the decision was significant  because this is the first time the courts have  ruled that pornography may harm women.  LEAF acted as an intervenor in the Butler case, arguing that violent and degrading pornography was a threat to women's  equality rights.  "No recognition of the impact of pornography on the status and treatment of  women was possible when the only harms of  pornography were thought to be harms to  the morals of consumers and infractions of  moral rules," said LEAF's factum. ShackeU said she thought the ruhng would now  provide clearer direction to law enforcement  agencies about the types of material they  should be seizing.  "In the past, these obscenity provisions  were found to be very vague. Often the accused didn't know what they were supposed  to seU. Judges tended to address themselves  to what was smutty or dirty, and what [the  judges often found] was smutty and dirty  was women's bodies," said ShackeU.  The ruhng, written by Mr. Justice John  Sopinka, has given the courts some guidance: "undue exploitation of sex" now  means portrayals of sex combined with violence; degrading and dehumanizing sex; and  sex with chUdren. The court partiaUy based  its decision on concerns about "the burgeoning pornography industry."  Some observers are concerned about the  court's faUure to define "degrading and dehumanizing." Author Becki Ross, a teacher  of lesbian history at the University of  Toronto, criticized the ruhng, saying it  would sweep up other forms of sexual depiction that were not necessarUy pornographic,  and would enshrine obscenity in the Criminal Code without any public debate about  what constitutes obscenity.  to put up with the bad ideas, so that the  good ideas can come to the surface."  Bryden said the CivU Liberties Association has no problem with the censorship of  cluld pornography or films and pictures, in  which violence is actuaUy committed during  the production. In these cases "society has  a legitimate interest in their protection," he  said.  LEAF's ShackeU said the hnk between  pornography and harm to women is strong  enough to warrant the court ruhng. "Circulation of [violent pornography] tends to  ...polarization of the pornography debate  split the feminist movement into various  factions in the early 80's  "It doesn't address the fact that all sorts  of material that is not about degradation  and harm is going to be trapped in the net,"  said Ross. Sex trade workers, lesbians and  gay men and men/boy lovers have aU been  lumped together by the mainstream as a  'sexual problem.'  "There should be more freedom and more  debate about what the community standard  is," said Ross. "I don't want to say that every sexual encounter is enriching but a representation of violence is not [in itself] violence ... Pornography is a symptom, not a  cause."  BC CivU Liberties Association president Phihp Bryden also criticized the  court's linking of pornography with harm to  women.  "We took the position in the Butler case  that the government shouldn't be trying to  protect us from the harm that flows from  bad ideas," said Bryden, who described  the BCCLA as "not pro-pornography, we're  pro-freedom of expression ... We think  that freedom of expression is special in a  democracy," and in a free society you "have  raise people's level of tolerance to certain  things that are detrimental to women," said  ShackeU.  "There are large numbers of reports by  women [who have been] forced [by the  rapist] to do something he has seen in some  piece of pornography."  LEAF's factum said that "as a result of  exposure [to violent pornography], a significant percentage of men, many not otherwise predisposed, as weU as the 25-35 percent who report some proclivity to rape  a woman, come to beheve that violence  against women is acceptable. Such materials  hence constitute direct threats of violence."  ShackeU pointed out the law only deals  with violent pornography. "Either society  is prepared to tolerate something, or we're  not," she said. "And if we're not prepared to  tolerate it, then we must outlaw it. Our laws  should be an expression of what is right."  Response from the women's community  has lacked the outrage and activity that surrounded the discussion of pornography in  the past.  Frances Wasserlein, a teacher of women's  studies at Simon Fraser University and Langara CoUege, attributes the subdued response to lack of energy and division within  the community. Wasserlein said the polarization of the pornography debate spUt the  feminist movement into various factions in  the early 80's.  "Sex debates got very vicious," said  Wasserlein, who dropped out of the debates  because "it's hard to be a target aU the  time. It got reaUy hard for me to defend  myself against the accusation of taking up  See OBSCENITY page 6  Bank workers at the Imperial Bank of Commerce in Powell River are on strike—  they've been that way since November last year—in a contract dispute involving  seniority, wage parity and harassment. Sounds like women's work, right? The  strikers are pictured above at a rally in mid-February that drew 250 supporters. The women, members of the BC Government Employees Union, are asking  supporters everywhere to no longer bank at the Commerce.  Court Challenges Program axed:  Rallying to save  a vital program  by Kelly O'Brien  Feminists and other activists are gearing  up to fight the federal government's sudden  termination of the Court Challenges Program in the recent federal budget.  Created by the federal government in  1978, the unique program financed over  300 legal test cases enabhng marginalized groups and individuals to defend their  equahty rights under the Canadian Charter  of Rights and Freedoms.  With the unexpected announcement in  February, the Tories stipulated that no new  cases would be reviewed for funding and  that support for those cases already receiving funding would be restricted to their current level within the court system.  The Court ChaUenges Program (CCP)  funded precedent-setting cases brought forward by equality-seeking groups that, for  example, established the right of people in  mental institutions to vote. The Butler case,  in which the Women's Legal Education and  Action Fund (LEAF) received CCP funding  to act as an intervenor (see above), ensured  an interpretation of obscenity laws that protects the rights of women and chUdren.  Gwen Brodsky, a lawyer with the BC  Pubhc Interest Advocacy Centre (PIAC), is  part of the fight to have the CCP restored.  She beheves the program's termination was  ideologically motivated.  "The cancellation is part of an effort  to sUence dissident, disempowered voices,"  says Brodsky, who is also co-author of  Canadian Charter Equality Rights for  Women: One Step Forward, Two Steps  Back?  The book documents the pattern of  women's under-representation in Charter  cases—cases dominated by men who can afford costly court battles. Without the benefit of funding from a source hke the CCP,  says Brodsky, the courts wiU remain a domain in which women and other disadvantaged groups have no chance to chaUenge  laws which offend their rights as guaranteed  in the Charter.  The Sharon Mclvor case is representative  of current CCP cases. LEAF is advocating  for Mclvor, a Native woman whose chUdren  are not entitled to Indian status because of  discriminatory provisions in the Indian Act.  When the act was revised in 1986 to restore  status to Native women, a second generation cut-off clause was included. As a result,  Mclvor and her mother regained their status, but her chUdren did not.  According to Christie Jefferson, executive director of LEAF, a successful ruhng  on the Mclvor case could effectively eradicate certain sexist and racist aspects of the  Indian Act. The case is in its preliminary  stages and, because CCP funding has been  discontinued, LEAF wUl be forced to find  other sources in order to continue. Charter cases are an immense financial burden  on non-profit organizations hke LEAF, and  their involvement wiU hkely be significantly  reduced.   See CCP page 6  KINESIS APCU92 5 j^^^^^^^  WHAT'S   NEWS?  Pandora wins  human rights case  by Fatima Jaffer  After almost two years and up to $15,000  in legal fees, Halifax's feminist newspaper,  Pandora, has won the human rights case  that chaUenged their right to a woman-only  publishing pohcy.  The decision, made on March 17 by  the Nova Scotia Human Rights Commission (NSHRC), came after lengthy hearings  where the man who filed the complaint of  sexual discrimination against Pandora accused the paper of disseminating hate literature. The man had filed the complaint with  the NSHRC in June 1990 because Pandora  refused to publish his letter responding to  a Pandora article on "lathers' rights" in  custody battles (see Kinesis, September  1991, page 3).  In the hearings, the man said Pandora  discriminated against him as a single father.  In dismissing the complaint, the NSHRC  found that Pandora refused to publish the  man's letter because he was a man, not because he was a divorced father. The commission accepted Pandora's right to restrict  access to its pages to women because women  "remain materially disadvantaged and unequal to men as a group by reason of sex, in  fact if not in law" and because "men have  adequate opportunity to express their views  and opinions in the mainstream media without entry into this women's place."  Pandora has had to direct its energy and  resources away from writing and publishing to fundraising the $12,000 to $16,000  needed to support their case. Even though  Pandora has 'won' the case, the paper wiU  not be receiving any compensation from the  NSHRC or the man filing the complaint.  This is a victory—of sorts—for all  women's papers: Pandora has refused to  be silenced and a human rights commission has been unable to establish editorial control over a feminist publication. It has, however, been a costly battle. Please send donations to Pandora,  PO Box 1209 North, Halifax, NS, BSK  5H4.  Native women want  Charter protection  The Native Women's Association of  Canada (NWAC) is taking the federal government to court to ensure that Aboriginal  women are given a seat at the constitutional  table. As Kinesis goes to press, NWAC is  demanding that Aboriginal women get their  share of $10 million in grants the government has aUoted four male-dominated Aboriginal groups.  The grants are to aUow the Assembly of  First Nations (AFN), the Native CouncU  of Canada, the Inuit Tapirisat of Canada,  and the Metis CouncU of Canada to effectively participate in constitutional hearings.  NWAC is concerned that women's rights  OBSCENITY from page 5  with right-wing fundamentalists, and that I  was pro-censorship.  "People were unwUhng to examine these  differences in any way."  She said the resulting drop in energy  has been damaging for women because "the  platform for debate gets left to the liberals,  [and those who] don't have problems with  the state that I and others have."  Wasserlein said decisions about women's  sexuahty should be taken away from the  state—the courts, pohce and legislators—  and put "in the hands of those who suffer."  One idea, she said, could be to encourage  women to launch class action suits, similar  to ones that are aUowed in the American legal system. "Then those who experience the  harm can take action, instead of leaving it  in the hands of the state," said Wasserlein.  "It's a matter of where the authority hes."  She suggested that, where necessary, the  government should provide support for people launching the suit. Wasserlein also put  forward the idea of creating an impartial  board to look at individual complaints of  harm arising from pornography. She said  women should put aside their differences to  search for new ways to fight pornography.  "There's no reason why some other  method of adjudicating these things couldn't be found."  Ross agreed that women should look for  alternatives to the government when searching for ways to deal with images that are  harmful to women.  "It really frustrates me that LEAF has  been so central to this campaign," Ross  said, adding there has been no other leadership in the women's movement to chaUenge  LEAF's approach to pornography.  "Radical feminists are [forced into a]  bhnd (sic) aUegiance to the state and trusting or enhsting the state to produce what  they want," said Ross.  One of the answers, she beheves, is education.  "We should launch a massive sexuality campaign and attack [the idea that]  sex is something mysterious." She said this  could be combined with attempts to increase funds for alternative productions.  "Have school boards make this a priority," Ross said. "I'm concerned that my kid  is getting his sexual education by going to  the corner store."  MediaWatch representative Shari Gray-  don agreed that education about the sexual representations of women was very important. "Most of us do not consume a lot  of pornography," said Graydon,"but we are  aU affected in much more subtle ways." The  obscenity law is significant because it sends  a message that violence against women is  unacceptable, she said.  MediaWatch was dehghted with the  Supreme Court judgement. "It reflects a  fundamental recognition of the capacity of  media products to be a harmful influence on  society," Graydon said. "We hve in a social  environment in which women are afraid to  walk down the street. Given this social context, the repeated linking of sexuahty with  violence [in films, videos] is simply unacceptable."  But BC CivU Liberties warns that often efforts to protect society end up hurting people outside the mainstream. "We beheve through experience that the kinds of  material being censored would be the kinds  of stuff at the margins, especially gay and  lesbian literature," said Bryden.  "It's their ground-breaking work about  sexuahty that's hkely to be penalized. It's  their fantasies that are being censored,"  The BCCLA is a co-plaintiff with Little Sisters, a Vancouver gay and lesbian bookstore, in a case involving the Canada Customs' seizure of over 190 titles since 1985—  including The Joy of Lesbian Sex.  Artists are also concerned the pornography law wiU affect their work. Ross suggested that artists may not be producing  certain art because they are unwUhng to go  through the difficulties of a court challenge.  "There's a way in which [a pornography law] chUls production and creates self-  policing. None of us feel we can take the risk  so that we can transgress boundaries," she  said.   Corinne Bjorge is a new Kinesis  writer.  wiU be ignored if self government negotiations are left in the hands of organizations  hke the AFN who, they say, have not supported or represented women's interests in  the past.  Central to NWAC's concern is ensuring that Native women continue to be protected by the Canadian Charter of Rights  and Freedoms, at least untU an Aboriginal  charter of rights is developed. In particular,  Native women beheve that, without Charter protections, they wiU be vulnerable to  exploitation and unequal treatment, on reserves and in cities. The AFN is opposed to  having the Charter apply to future Aboriginal self government.  In the past, NWAC fought, without support from the AFN, to remove aspects of  the Indian Act which sexuaUy discriminated against Aboriginal women who married non-Indians. NWAC considers it crucial  that constitutional talks on a model of self-  government include an Aboriginal charter  of rights that recognize Aboriginal women  Don't travel  to Ireland  by Liz O'Shea-Murray  Worldwide attention has recently focused  on Ireland because of the High Court injunction preventing a 14-year-old rape victim from traveUing to Britain to obtain an  abortion. The Supreme Court overturned  the injunction. While there was a victory  in this specific case, women's autonomy and  right to control our fertility is stiU threatened.  In 1983, the Irish Constitution was  amended in order to prevent legalized abortion from ever being introduced in Ireland.  The 1861 Offenses Against the Person Act  made any unlawful abortion a criminal offense; the Society for the Protection of the  Unborn ChUd (SPUC) wished to ensure this  act was not amended as it had been in  Britain, to aUow for abortion in certain circumstances.  IronicaUy, the wording they chose for this  amendment, that the mother and chUd have  an equal right to hfe, has led the Supreme  Court to rule that, because the raped 14-  year-old was threatening suicide, her right  outweighs the right of the fetus. However, in  their rulings, two of the five Supreme Court  justices said they would grant injunctions  against other women traveUing for abortions.  The Eighth Amendment has also been  used by SPUC to outlaw abortion information in Ireland. SPUC took Open Line  CounseUing, the WeU Woman Centre and  a number of Students' Unions to court because they were providing information on  abortion facUities in Britain. SPUC maintained that information on abortion violated a fetus' right to hfe. The court agreed.  Not only are these organizations gagged,  the new Our Bodies, Ourselves reference  book has been removed from the Central  Library and bookshops. Another women's  health book was removed because it contained the address of an abortion chnic in  Australia.  Irish pro-choice groups agree that the  Eighth Amendment must be repealed. The  government wants to avoid an amendment  referendum at ail costs. But women have  a right to information, to free travel, to  control of our own fertility. It is the business of neither SPUC nor the state. Outraged national and international opinion  was the force that made the Supreme Court  change their minds—the government pressured them to do so. It was no fine point  of law which got that girl to Britain; it was  our protest.  This worldwide outrage must not abate  if we are to accomplish change.  Please write to: An Taoiseach, Albert  Reynolds, Department of the Taoiseach,  Government BuUdings, Merrion Street,  Dubhn 2, Ireland. TeU him you are outraged  by this trespass on women's rights, freedom  and dignity. TeU him you wUl not travel to  Ireland and you wUl boycott Irish products  untU a referendum is held on repealing the  Eighth Amendment.  Please help us. This is a fight for some  very fundamental rights and wUl set a model  for other nations. It wiU cost you the price  of a stamp and stationery. It wUl cost Irish  women their freedom and hves.  The Dublin Abortion Information  Campaign may be contacted at P.O.  Box 3327, Dublin 8, Ireland. Tel:  011-353-1-535867. The campaign was  formed in November, 1991. Liz O'Shea-  Murray is an active member.  CCP from page 5  Jefferson describes the cancellation as a  "mean-spirited decision" and says the government's claim that the objectives of the  program have been accomplished is misleading.  "LEAF's and other advocacy groups'  cases are just starting to be heard in the  courts," says Jefferson. "There has yet to  be a racism or disabihty case brought to the  courts." She also doubts the program was  cut for financial reasons—$2.8 miUion dollars per year is a relatively smaU sum for  government.  It appears, Jefferson says, that the cancellation of the program was not a "conscious broad-based government decision."  More hkely, she says, the decision was made  by a few misinformed people who overlooked the fuU implications of the program  and beheved that it had outhved its usefulness. LEAF remains hopeful the decision  can be overturned.  Many women's and human rights organizations, however, view the decision as  a direct pohtical attack on marginalized  groups, rooted in governments' unwUhng-  ness to amend existing legislation that may  violate charter rights. Says Brodsky, there is  now the possibihty the protective laws that  groups hke PIAC and LEAF have fought  for, wUl be appealed by financiaUy-secure  groups and individuals. In Brodsky's opinion, the cancellation gives "... white, heterosexual men the power to challenge the  Charter and make the laws ... the CCP  was the one thing we had going for us."  The campaign to reinstate the CCP  is being led by the Advisory Committee  of Equality Seeking Groups to the CCP,  which includes reps from LEAF, Equality for Gays and Lesbians Everywhere,  the Native Women's Assoc, and others. The Advisory Cmtee. is calling for  a wide range of actions (letter-writing,  petitions, demonstrations ... ) To get  in touch, tel: (613) 564- 6707 or fax  (613) 564-9554.  You and/or your group could start by  writing the responsible minister: Gerry  Weiner, Minister of Multiculturalism  and Citizenship, House of Commons,  Ottawa ONT KlA 0A6. Or try phoning him (819) 997-9900; fax (819) 953-  6455. Remember, Mr. Weiner was the  man who backed down when women's  centres protested their funding cut in  1990.  Kelly ("warrior maiden") O'Brien is  a long-time Kinesis production worker  and a new-time Kinesis writer.  KINESIS  •April 92. ////////////////////^^^^^  ///////////////////^^^^  FEATURE  The constitution and First Nations:  Standing on principle  by Joan Crow  The theme of this year's International Women's Day in many parts of  North and Central America was "500  Years of Resistance" to European colonization. Joan Crow, who works with  the Taku River Tlingit in BC, spoke at  the Vancouver rally on March 7th.  Misko Pinashee Ikwe. Whenever I'm  called upon to speak, I have to first say my  name so that the Creator knows I'm standing here and knows that I need the help.  Secondly, I have to say in my language and  in my way that I'm happy to see each and  every one of you in this place today.  Each of us is important. That's fundamental to our teachings. It's often hard  when you've been asked to replace someone, because in mainstream culture that's  seen as a shght, as second best. I'm honoured that chief Wendy Grant [of the  Musqueam band, who was originaUy scheduled to speak] tricked me into doing this.  I didn't know there were going to be this  many people here. So I'm honoured that she  trusts me to carry this for her.  Before I begin, I'd hke to thank Gloria  Nicolson for sharing her eagle feather with  me. My partner's eagle feather was the one  I brought from the north, but I left it in  our hotel room. I didn't think I would need  it today. That's another way in which we  work together. Right away I looked around  and knew somebody would have an eagle  feather here. So I went and asked Gloria to  share that with me and I thank her in front  of aU of you.  When they asked me to speak, Maxine  Pape [of the IWD Committee] said: "Oh,  there are only two questions we want you  to answer." They are the most important  questions of my hfe. The first one was, how  does the current constitutional issue affect  First Nations people? The second question  was, what does the just settlement of Aboriginal claims mean to First Nations people  and what would happen if settlement didn't  happen?  Before We Look Forward  In relation to the current constitutional proposal, I must go back. We always have  to look back before we look forward. The  last time constitutional issues came up was  in the form of the Meech Lake [Accord].  Being from Manitoba myself, I got to be  involved with my friends Elijah [Harper],  Ovide [Mercredi], PhU [Fontaine] and all of  us who worked really hard to stop Meech  Lake.  The main reason we were fighting Meech  Lake was because it was a he. I don't know if  you agree with the particular he I'm speaking of, but the he was that this country was  founded by two people.  What about us? Without my ancestors  and the ancestors of other indigenous people  in this country, nobody would have made it.  It was a time when they needed us and we  were there.  I'd hke to tell you aU that we're here  again. They [the government] are coming  forward with another constitutional proposal which is ironically called 'shaping  Canada's future together.' I have a httle  problem with that. Within pohtical circles,  in the back rooms, this is being called the  Quebec round. Every time I hear that, it  upsets me again. This is supposed to be  everyone's country, not just any particular  group's.  Now I'm going to speak a httle bit about  their proposal in relation to us—what they  caU 'Aboriginal peoples' within their law.  I think you should also know that I walk  in both worlds: I know my traditions, I try  to hve by them; I've also gone through the  white education system. I hold a degree in  business education and I hold one of their  law degrees. So I'm able to look at their law  and see what I feel about it.  In this current round, they are proposing  to recognize our inherent right to self government. I'm glad that is happening—that  gle, you can put aU the parties: the state,  the plaintiff, the defendant. Everyone on  that triangle is fighting each other to protect their httle place.  FundamentaUy, people who espouse these  individual values do not accept that we are  inherently connected to each other. We  must first recognize that we are connected.  Then our place as an individual is ensured.  Because if I'm connected to you and I don't  treat you right, you wUl hold me accountable. H you don't treat me right, I can look  you right in the eye and say: "What's going  Joan Crow at Vancouver's IWD rally  is a given. I don't really need them to do  anything about that, because I have it. Either I have it, or I don't. But I'm thankful  they are going recognize it. That's a good  start.  The most important thing I'd hke to  speak about with you today is the application of the Charter [of Rights and Freedoms to Aboriginal self government]. That's  where it gets sensitive. Because that's where  we really have to learn to hsten to each  other first—then accept what the other is  saying, that their point of view is valid. The  next thing that will come is understanding.  Once you understand, then you can question. So please, I ask you to just hsten first.  The Charter I learned about in white law  school is about individual rights. My rights  as an individual. That is not how I and  many of my people look at ourselves. [We  have] another process, a different process.  I look at this in terms of a triangle. The  symbol of a triangle really helped me get  through law school because, on that trian-  on?" Because we're connected. That's what  is called coUective rights.  The only thing the Charter says about  collective rights is an afterthought. I say this  with aU respect for the courts, the judges  and all those people. Section I [of the proposal] goes: "Oops, we're a country. Let's  think about everybody as a group here."  The way I've been raised by my elders is  that first I must think of the group, the people, the nation. Then if what I'm doing is  okay as an individual, I can proceed. I must  never put my own self-interest above the interest of my people. Because it just doesn't  work for us.  I think that's the current problem the  Canadian state is having. We don't realize that we're aU connected. This is very  phUosophical. When I brought it up in  law school, people would say to me: "God,  you're naive." I'm not naive, I know who I  am and I know what I beheve in. For me  that's the right way.  [The government] wants me to say:  "Okay, I'U do it your way." But no, I can't  do it your way, because I'm not you. It's not  my law. I don't see myself in it. So forget it,  I don't want it. That's what it boils down  to. It's just more of the assimUation BS that  we put up with for 500 years.  "We Want To Get Along..."  The third thing in the proposal they  call "shaping Canada's future together" is  property rights. Now that you know I come  from a coUective phUosophy, the concept of  entrenching property rights within the highest law of Canada scares the shit out of me.  Because on that triangle, we're [each] going to fight even harder and more about our  own httle spot. It's no good—it's no good  for me. People who agree it's no good for  them should aU stand up and say to the  Canadian government: "We don't want to  fight each other anymore, we want to get  along."  From a legal perspective, it's another big  trick. Land claims have not been settled in  BC. Property rights are not going to give  each of you anything. It's going to give  McMUlan Bloedel [the forestry company]  something. You watch who gets to court  fighting for property rights. I've read the  cases from the Charter. Very rarely do you  see anything about Joe Citizen making it to  the Supreme Court of Canada. It's Safeway,  Boot's Drugs and all these people with big  money. The Charter is not for you either.  We don't have the money. And they just cut  off the money for Joe Blow to make it there  [see page 5], which makes me squirm even  more.  The last thing about the current proposal  I'd hke to share with you is the Canada  clause. There is where I have to go back and  start from who I am. I've been taught to focus on what I beheve in, the principles. If  I know what I beheve in, the process wiU  come.  The law is aU focused on process. Within  the current Canadian constitution, there  are two one-hners that speak to principle.  They say: "We recognize the supremacy of  god and the rule of law." I don't know if you  agree with that. But that's what it says in  there. They see that there's a problem with  that. They're trying to change that. I give  them credit for trying to improve that.  There are two samples of  Canada clauses in [the Beaudoin-Dobbie  parliamentary report on the constitution],  I've been to law school—one word in the English language in the white way can make  aU the difference. One of the words that  upset me as an Aboriginal woman-  Anishnabai—when I read that page, was  that they refer to this country as a "coUective experiment."  Now, I'm not a coUective experiment,  thank you very much. Maybe the Canadian state is, but I'm not. I don't hke that.  They're stiU not being brave enough for me.  There's still no historical reference to the  fact that my ancestors, our ancestors helped  settle this country. There is stiU nothing in  there.  The point is principle. We stand on principle. It doesn't say: "Thank you. Without  you Aboriginal people, we never would've  made it." This is our truth.  Now I'm going to try to answer the  second question which is even more ticklish. What does the just settlement of Aboriginal claims mean to First Nation People? And what would happen if settlement  See CROW page 8  KINESIS April 9 I. W. D.  Vancouver, March 7  International Women's Day  Ana Llao (centre) spoke on behalf of the  Mapuche Nation, Chile  International Women's Day found the sunny streets of downtown  Vancouver filled with hundreds of marching supporters. The rally  focused on the concerns of First Nations women, who spoke on  the theme: 500 Years of Resistance.  Gloria Nicolson, of the  Professional Native Women's  Association  CROW from page 7  didn't happen? Again I have to share with  you some of my understanding. To us, this  is about responsibihty. This is not about  rights. However, if we are going to join the  Canadian state, we have to talk the language of the Canadian state.  We see ourselves as responsible for our  traditional territories. It came from our  Creator. When we were created, we were  each given territories to look after forever  and ever. That's not going to change. We  are not going to go away. We wiU be here  forever.  What upsets me most as an Anishnabai  is when people say: 'Oh, weU I see drunk  Indians ... I see Indians Uttering ... I see  Indians abusing this land ... how can you  say you beheve in this thing of responsibU-  ity?" Excuse me, but we are just coming out  of 500 years of colonial oppression. HI happen to throw a can on the ground, I don't  mean to. I know it's wrong. But I'm just recovering. These 500 years are a bhp in our  history.  Now we get to the question of land  claims. I hear non-aboriginal people who  have hstened to me say they want to share  in the responsibihty of looking after this  great land. That's how I see land claims.  The Taku River Thngit people I work for  want to negotiate with the other parties  who happen to hve here how we are aU going to hold up that responsibihty. We want  to know with certainty what part we are  going to be responsible for during the next  bhp. It goes on forever. For the next few  hundred years or whatever, we want to negotiate a relationship and [talk about] how  we are going to carry this responsibihty together as people who have all chosen to hve  on this land.  It has nothing to do with saying, "I  want that buUding moved and I want this  land back." No Indian leader across this  country—even the most radical—have said  that third parties are going to be asked to  move. It's your own governments that are  trying to scare you. Stop hstening to them.  That's not what we're saying. This is about  learning to hve together with respect, honour and dignity, so that we can raise our  chUdren in a healthy good way. So for us it  has everything to do with responsibihty and  nothing to do with title or rights ...  The last thing I was asked to talk about  was what would happen if settlement didn't  happen? WeU, nothing. Life would go on.  We would just stay where we are and keep  hving. It's not us who are so anxious about  this setthng thing. We're not in a big rush,  because we want to do it right. It's big business that's in a rush. We just go back to our  land and our teachings and we keep hving  the best way we can. The next time it comes  up we'll be there again.  In closing I'd hke to say, you people have  made me reaUy happy. This morning I said  to my partner: "I can teU something big was  happening today." I got tricked. I thought  there would be 20 people here. I braided my  hair. I said: "Honey, I feel hke I'm ready to  go dance."  Thanks to Ria Bleumer for transcribing.  s I^NESIS w ggjii FEATURE  //////////////////////^^^^  Gloria Steinem and friends:  A lively evening, indeed...  by Heidi Walsh  I'd hke to think it was hke popping over  to Gloria's for some after-dinner conversation and cheerfuUy finding that others had  had the same idea: author Lee Maracle,  psychiatrist Ingrid Pacey, ecofeminist Judith Plant—oh, and a couple of hundred  other women who couldn't squeeze onto the  couch, but were happy to sit in the chairs  provided.  WeU, it wasn't really Gloria's—it was the  Heritage HaU on Main and 15th, but the  way things had been set up by the organizers, Ariel Books, with the four guests  on swivel chairs and the audience sitting in  some semblance of a circle, it was pretty  close.  And I hadn't just dropped in. Ever since  she published Revolution from Within,  her book on self-esteem, I'd had this nagging curiosity to see the quasi-icon of the  white feminist movement, Gloria Steinem,  and hsten to her talk about inward journeys  and healing processes. If she could do it in  a credible way, I thought, unhke so many  celebrities who feel compeUed to smother  the pubhc with every self-discovery they  stumble across, I would put away my nausea puis. I might even buy her book at the  end of the evening.  It was comforting to know she'd be sharing the stage with three other women—  a safeguard against potential self-indulgence—although it wasn't immediately obvious what would bring together women  from such seemingly diverse backgrounds.  The common hnk was the issue of self-  esteem, in relation to individuals, but also  to social movements, communities, even nations.  painful chUdhood memories, but childhood  behaviour patterns wUl repeat themselves  untU they are dealt with. In the case  of abuse survivors, and others in healing  groups, Steinem said learning to teU the  truth about painful issues in our own hves  can give us courage to teU other 'secrets'—  pohtical ones, work-related ones.  As we aU know, scores of factors can  lead to individual and communal lack of  self-esteem—abuse, patriarchal institutions,  racism, colonialism and homophobia, to  mention a few.  Ingrid Pacey, who works with adult  women survivors of chUd sexual abuse, observed: "The issue of self-esteem is what  walks through my door every hour of every  day I work." Referring to the vast number  of women who were abused as chUdren, and  who very often have no recoUection of the  abuse, Pacey said this should add to another  level of understanding of women's position  in the world. "What women carry in their  bodies is an actual physical assault, and we  need to realize that this is stamped on our  psyche before we even walk into school, before we even start meeting the challenges in  the world."  Steinem draws paraUels between the sexual abuse of chUdren and the almost total obliteration of indigenous cultures in  the Americas and Australia by outsiders.  "We're going to have to go back and face  [what we have done] before we can become  healthy cultures," she said. "We've cut off  [the memory], and therefore we've cut off  part of ourselves."  "I have seen the 'low self-esteem' phrase  attached to Indian people for about 20 years  now," said Lee Maracle, "and I sometimes  Gloria Steinem, on the tube  The evening was successful, in part because Steinem does know how to share a  stage. The dialogue among the guests flowed  easily, often spiUing into the relaxed and responsive audience.  These days, Steinem is frequently quoted  on the need to 'complete the circle' in order  for us to become our true selves. External  activists need to move inward, she said, and  those in self-healing groups need to move toward activism.  "I beheve we need both halves," she said,  attributing the unexpected success of her  book to "an enormous hunger to bring [activism and self-esteem] together."  Using herself as an example, she said  flat-out activism can be a way to escape  think I get real tired of hearing it. I did look  it up in the dictionary once, and it means  'with hfe', which means lively." She told the  audience of the difficulties of being a female activist with three chUdren in a male-  dominated 1960's Native movement, and of  "hving in a community under seige."  Of the 100 members who began in the  movement, 40 did not survive 10 years.  "You're beating back the colonizer at the  door aU the time, trying to get your land together, trying to beat back the racism, the  hunger," said Maracle. "And then you're  trying to write at midnight because," she  laughs, "you want to be a poet." Becoming  serious again, she continues, "If you don't  think a whole lot of yourself, you're not  going to be hvely. You're going to end up  burnt out, and that's a condition near to  death, a condition of total spiritual, mental,  physical and emotional exhaustion. That's  what happened to an awful lot of women  from 1968—me included."  Steinem experienced severe burnout, too,  and for this reason began the inward journey which resulted in her book.  Ecofeminist Judith Plant sees a strong  connection between people's lack of self-  esteem and mainstream culture's separation  from nature. "We have denied the most basic fact that we are part of hfe," Plant said,  "and as part of our healing process we have  [to recognize] that to have love for hfe means  to love ourselves as we are part of hfe."  Steinem views rehgion as part of the  problem. "Rehgion is just pohtics in the  sky," she said. "The withdrawal of God from  women and nature was the necessary accompaniment to conquering women and nature." She added, "In moments of sorrow  or celebration, when we're forced to go into  church, temple or mosque that doesn't honour nature and women, we denigrate ourselves."  ...flat-out activism  can be a way to  escape painful  childhood  memories...  As Steinem mentioned earlier in the  evening, the new women's movement, hke  many social justice movements, began  with self-esteem in the early consciousness-  raising groups. "In the quilting bees, the rap  groups, women's sewing and terrorist societies," she said, "we had the experience of  one woman saying an unsayable thing and  six other women saying 'I thought only I  felt hke that.' From that came the realization that we weren't crazy, the system was  crazy—and that 1 think is one of the births  of self-esteem."  ChUd sexual abuse—and ritual abuse—  are now being talked about she said, because of the "contagion of truth-telhng" and  the existence of safe places in our society  where survivors can risk remembering. "I do  think it's the cutting edge," Steinem said.  "Once we can tell the truth about that, see  where the fear's coming from, we can teU  the patriarchy's secrets, the power structure's secrets—and then there's no stopping  us."  When Maracle was trying to overcome  burnout, her mother told her that as a long  distance runner, she should know that hfe is  a jog, and not a series of sprints. "I think it's  the nature of sexism," Maracle said, "that  you're forced to be constantly sprinting on  his and your behalf, and this becomes a real  dUemma in a state of seige. What we're saying to men is, we're not sprinting anymore.  This body was given a 100 year promise,  and I'm going to make sure it looks good  for at least 99 of them."  There's a need to return to smaU-group  feminism, according to Steinem, in order to  buUd some support into our hves and main  tain a sense of self-authority. Otherwise, she  said, we tend to shy away from confronting  things that are theoretically sacred to the  patriarchy—"You know, hke how the Pope  is a disgrace to the skirt he wears."  Steinem sees self-authority as the most  subversive and dangerous force, because it  helps people to see through their own eyes  and be independent. "Stephen Biko was  murdered for teaching self-esteem to Black  South Africans," she said. "AU those hierarchies out there have as their goal, I beheve [the undermining] of our self-authority  so that we wUl obey them."  Plant agrees on the necessity of buUding feminist community, "Otherwise patriarchy's going to rebuUd hke the Socreds,"  she said. Although the issue of self-esteem is  relatively new to her, she sees links between  healthy individual self-esteem, healthy communities, and a respect for nature.  The panehsts also touched on the rediscovery of women's spirituality, alternative,  holistic therapy for abuse survivors, and  anger.  Pain left in the body to decay becomes  anger, said Maracle, and it connects to one  of her favourite words—'express'—which  means to force up and out.  "We did not put the anger there," Maracle said, "but we're the only people who can  get it out. And the first level of expunging  that pain is an anger level. I think we ought  to give it back to the authors who created  it."  With the evening drawing to an end,  Steinem declared us the Secret Society of  the Butterfly Wing. "Even the most hard-  nosed physicist wUl admit that the flap of  a butterfly's wing can change the weather  thousands of miles away," she said, and I  began to feel distinctly queasy. "So everything we do matters," she continued, rescuing the moment, "and that's the secret to  acting morally. It's the secret to being active."  She closed the session by having us meditate on an image of our future selves. Although my antennae were doing overtime  for signs of celebrity flakiness, she led the  meditation honestly, and it personalized the  evening. I left feehng I'd participated in a  good and often witty conversation with the  women at Gloria's house.  I did buy her book, by the way. I, er, even  stood in hne for 20 minutes to have her sign  Heidi Walsh is a member of the free  lance liberation army.  KINESIS i55^^^^^^^^^5^5^^  FEATURE  by Heidi Walsh  Breast implant scandal:  Dow ducks, Bouchard bides  A year ago, breast implant wearer Linda  WUson of Delta, BC was hard-pressed to  get anyone to hsten to her concerns about  the health hazards of sihcone-gel breast implants. But things have changed.  "The other day," Wilson says, "I had  palls from Maclean's, CTV, The Vancouver Sun, the Ottawa Citizen, and Canada  AM. This now happens every time there's a  new development in the breast implant is-  e."  And there have been many recent developments. In January, the US Food and Drug  Administration (FDA) announced a moratorium on the implants. Two days later,  Canada foUowed suit. Within a month, Dow  Corning Corporation, an American company and one of the world's largest sihcone-  gel breast implant manufacturers, released  hundreds of internal memos and documents,  admitting they had received numerous complaints about the implants over the last 20  years.  In late February, an expert panel advised  the FDA, which was holding hearings on the  [safety of the implants, that the implants be  used only for experiments and reconstructive surgery (ie. for mastectomy patients).  The panel did not, however, conclude a hnk  between leaking implants and health problems.  A few days later, Dow Corning made an  ominous move. It offered women free replacement implants and $600 if they signed  a release agreeing not to sue the company  or their plastic surgeons for health problems  from leaking implants.  On March 20, 1992 Dow Corning announced it was withdrawing from the manufacture and sale of breast implants for "business reasons." Breast implants account for  only 1 percent of its $1.8 billion annual revenue, but rumours abound that the implant  controversy has caused Dow stocks to plummet. The company, which denies the implants are a health concern, also announced  it would pay up to $1200 for women in the  US who could not finance the removal of  [problematic implants, and would set up a  $10 miUion fund for breast implant research.  WhUe extensive hearings before the FDA  have been conducted in the US, the Cana  dian government has been struck with a  severe bout of inertia regarding silicone  breast implants. Federal Health Minister  Benoit Bouchard, who frequently dismisses  concerns raised around the implants as  "anecdotal information," plans to conduct  a study of breast implant wearers, according to Joy Langan, NDP MP for Mission-  Coquitlam, an implant wearer herself. No  detaUs are avaUable as yet.  Says Langan, "We want to know who's  going to get the contract, what the mandate  is, the questions they'll be asking, and what  "He's from Quebec," she says, "and the  Quebec Plastic Surgeons' Association has  been vociferous and outspoken on [implants]." On March 17, the Association  called on the government to hit the moratorium untU the implants could be proven  harmful. Montreal is often referred to as  the breast implant capital of Canada.  Langan also suspects bureaucrats may  have a role in the inertia. "The minister inherited this issue [from previous health ministers] and is continuing to accept the same,  bad advice. He's refusing to take the infor-  > leaks much more fluent, panel told  -6fe  ^J#^SSa-%ne-gelmqratoriuminU.S. I  fc %%L^Rr0mPt<O>Hsame in Canada   j-  the government wiU do with the report."  Bouchard has formed a panel, headed  by University of Toronto medical professor  Cornelia Baines, to advise him on the implant controversy. Baines' objectivity was  caUed into question, however, during an interview at the FDA hearings in February.  "You cannot base decisions on those anecdotal reports [by women with breast implant complaints]," Baines told Canadian  Press, "because the squeaky wheel gets the  attention, but you don't know how many  other wheels are rolling along smoothly and  happUy." She also suggested breast implant  activists were motivated by the prospect of  launching lawsuits for financial gains. Her  panel wiU report to Bouchard sometime in  April.  Langan beheves Bouchard has been slow  to take action on breast implants for a few  reasons.  n  Eastside DataGraphics  1460 Commercial Drive  tel: 255-9559 fax: 253-3073  Computer Training  • Introduction to MS-DOS  • WordPerfect 5.1  • Desktop Publishing  • Lotus 1-2-3  3ecf  mation from anyone but the bureaucrats,  and they have a lot to hide," she says.  The NDP has been calling for a judicial  inquiry into the Health Protection Branch  for over a year.  Langan and WUson are concerned about  recent developments regarding both the  FDA hearings and Dow Corning. Although  the FDA's subcommittee wUl not publish  its final recommendations untU mid-AprU,  Langan is troubled by the proposal to ban  implants for cosmetic use, but not reconstruction.  "H they're not safe for cosmetic reasons,  what makes them safe for reconstruction?"  Langan asks. She adds that implants should  be avaUable to women, but that women have  the right to insist they are safe.  Wilson sees inconsistencies in Dow Coming's recent announcements. "H their products are safe," she says, "they shouldn't  need to offer money for their removal." This  aside, Wilson says: "I don't think we can  put a price tag on [this surgery], because untU a doctor gets in there, they won't know  what complications there are—whether [the  implant] is ruptured or not. And should  women reaUy be required to prove to Dow  Corning that they can't afford the surgery?"  Dow Coming's offer also raises questions about payments for implant removal  in Canada. WhUe the procedure is generaUy  covered under provincial health care plans,  Specializing in on-site training for small groups and customized  training schedules. Beginner and intermediate instruction available.  Please call for rates.  -Union Shop  WOMEN'* WORK fCRrfBAJ PRINT  261 e. Ursnsfisr. north Vancouver.   - (6Q9) 980-^235-   Langan and many others feel Dow Corning  should reimburse the provinces for removal  costs and other implant-related health problems.  She has questioned Bouchard on this.  "He's wishy-washy," Langan states. "He  says it's up to the provinces, but I think  the federal government should be providing  leadership."  Wilson cautions the ease with which implant removal is now being discussed in  some circles.  "It sounds so simple," Wilson says, "and  yet women I know who have had their implants removed have had to make some sacrifices." The aesthetic results can be disturbing, especiaUy if the implant has ruptured and significant amounts of breast  tissue must be removed. In severe cases,  women are losing their breasts entirely.  In addition, says Wilson, explanation (removal) of ruptured implants is a compli-  cated procedure and few surgeons have i  tered the technique.  And what wUl happen a few months  down the road now that Dow Corning has  withdrawn from the market? Wilson observes it has been almost a year since  the Meme, a polyurethane-coated silicone  breast implant, was puUed from American  and Canadian markets and the manufacturer Surgitek closed down its manufacturing plant.  "Nothing's happening," says WUson, who  once had Meme implants. "They've totaUy  faded out of the picture. I'm one of the  women who's still waiting to hear what the  effects of polyurethane are going to do to  me." She fears the controversy around Dow  Corning implants wiU also die down now  that they are no longer being manufactured.  Langan agrees.  "I'm worried because the women who've  had implants are reaUy left with a whole  host of unanswered questions," Langan  says—questions that go beyond the issue of whether the implants are safe or  not. "Women need to know which doctors know about [implant-related Ulnesses],  which tests they should be asking for to  check for silicone in their systems, what  symptoms to watch for, whether to go to a  plastic surgeon or a general surgeon for  planation." Most women aren't getting the  answers to these questions.  To help compensate for the dearth of  information, women hke WUson and Langan continue to raise awareness around the  breast implants. "I Know," a group they  originaUy founded as a support group for  implant wearers, is now a registered society.  In February, they sponsored a weU-atten-  ded pubhc information meeting in Vancouver and had among their guests Montreal  implant expert Pierre Blais, and a representative from the provincial health ministry.  The ministry has encouraged the association to apply for funding.  Wilson stresses the need for women to  work together for adequate information and  safe implants. "It's easy for [the government  and manufacturers] to ignore one woman,"  she says, "but if we work coUectively, they  have to acknowledge us and give us answers.  They can then no longer refer to us as the  'isolated few'."  The "I Know—Breast Information  Association" will be holding a meeting  on Vancouver Island after April 20. For,  more information, call Linda Wilson at  594-4048.  Heidi Walsh is at it again.  10 KINESIS      Apri.9 ////////////////////^^^^^  ////////////////////^^^^  International  N. American Free Trade:  Resistance times three  by Denise Nadeau  "We women are always the ones to  pay during any crisis."  This statement captured one of the key  messages of the first Tri-National Working  Women's Conference on Economic Integration and Free Trade. Held in Toluca, Mexico  February 5-9, 1992, the conference brought  together Mexican, Canadian and American  women, as weU as a few delegates from Central and South America. We gathered to examine the impact of economic restructuring  and "free trade" on women, to share forms  of resistance and organizing and to start the  process of developing tri-national links and  strategies.  Our agenda was ambitious, especially for  a group that had never met before. And  we came to the conference from different entry points: the Canadians have experienced three years of free trade with  the US, the Americans have felt the impact of Reaganomics for almost a decade,  and the Mexicans have endured 10 years  of so-caUed structural adjustment. While  the Canadian delegation was clear that the  Free Trade Agreement (FTA) was disastrous for women, some Mexican delegates  were still uncertain if a North American  FTA (NAFTA) would bring benefits for  them.  The conference designers had planned  an event that matched our sense of urgency. Workshops and plenaries went from  9 in the morning untU 9 at night. We  networked over breakfast, lunch and coffee and caucused late into the night. Besides doing simultaneous translations in English, French and Spanish during formal sessions, the translating coUective was avaUable during breaks to help with informal  meetings and exchanges. By the end of our  conference, many groups had managed to  meet informaUy: telephone workers, government workers, teachers, popular educators, maquiUa organizers, lesbians, women  in Central America and their allies, health  and safety workers, activists, church and  justice workers, and domestic workers. The  beautiful long swimming pool at our hotel  was always empty, a testimony to our dedication and to the one lesson many of us have  stiU not learned weU—the need for self-care  in this long-term struggle.  We Canadians returned home with our  analysis deepened and strengthened. It is  clear the changes taking place in our countries are more far-reaching than those represented by the free trade agreement on the  table. Reaganomics, Salinismo (after Mexico's president), and the Corporate Agenda  (as it is known in Canada) all represent almost 10 years of social spending cutbacks,  wage freezes, dismantling of national industries, de-regulation, privatization and the  opening of borders to international trade  and investment. As nation states give up  their regulatory and social welfare roles,  multi-nationals have emerged as the real  powers.  The conference became a medley of  voices and stories of how women are bearing the brunt of this restructuring. It was  these voices we brought back so we could  share these experiences of suffering and resistance with other Canadian women.  The Poverty of Restructuring  A key area of impact is the "maquilization"  of the Mexican work force—largely female,  but becoming more male in the border area.  "Things began to change in Matamoros in  the 60's, when the maquUadora industries  began to arrive," said Rosaura DasUa, from  a women's centre there. "Young women began to come in from other parts of Mexico  to seek work in our city. There are now 80  maquiladora plants in Matamoros, providing jobs for 32,000 women."  MaquUas—which combine low wages, no  benefits, appalling working conditions, httle or no environmental health and safety  standards—are spreading throughout Mexico and Central America. One result is job  loss in the US and Canada. Said Antonia  Flores of El Paso, Texas: "There are many  twin plants in El Paso, plants which divide  their work with plants in Ciudad Juarez.  The biggest are closing down now and moving to Mexico and Central America. Immigrant women are the hardest hit since they  don't qualify for government assistance."  In Canada and the US, immigrant women  and women of colour are greatly impacted  summed up by Quebec's Marie Pepin: "Every single coUective agreement I signed last  year was less than before, in salaries and  union rights. The employer says that he has  a shop in Miami or wherever and wiU move,  but you don't know, so you sign concessions."  Restructuring has also impacted on and  undermined culture and community in the  three countries. The concern about this  cultural and community impact was expressed strongly by Mexican teachers. "Indigenous communities are confronting an  even greater migration to the north," said  Gisela Salinas of the Mexican teachers'  union. "The chUdren are no longer learning their people's language. Even their parents are preferring that their chUdren receive a bUingual education in Enghsh and  Spanish, so their chUdren can't suffer discrimination."  by this restructuring. Restrictive immigration pohcies have caused miUions of workers to Uve and work in an underworld, without organization or legal protection. Immigrant workers serve as a critical labour  pool for highly volatile and competitive industries such as the garment industry—  conditions that include home work, chUd  labour, sweat shops and factory relocations.  Domestic workers are subject to particularly gross violations of their labour and  sexual rights. "Racism is a fundamental  motor of global restructuring," said Fely  ViUasin, a domestic workers' activist from  Toronto.  "Home workers are women who work at  home because they don't have chUdcare and  they often can't speak Enghsh. They buy  a machine, get work through a contractor  and work for less than minimum wage ...  They receive no benefits, no unemployment.  There isn't even any law to ensure they wUl  get paid," said Mary Said, of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union (ILGWU) in Toronto.  Changing labour markets and working  conditions are also affecting women in non-  industrial sectors. "With the privatization  and financial re-structuring, 80 Mexican  banks have closed, causing massive lay-offs.  Now they are using "apprentices" who have  no rights as workers," said Inez Gonzalez  Nicolas, a bankworker.  Estela Vazquez is with the Hospital  Workers Union in New York. "As we experience more cutbacks in hospitals and nursing homes, we have more work with sicker  people," said Vazquez. "Our numbers are  up, we are told to book more and more X-  rays, and charts are tagged and electronically monitored for productivity."  The loss of gains and the deterioration  in labour rights in aU three countries was  And teacher Maria Cruz Mateos said:  "We are very concerned about what wiU  happen to national identity after the  NAFTA is signed. Are we going to be standardized to US and Canadian norms? "  Mexican women are also concerned about  the "right to voluntary maternity," the right  to proper health, diet, nutrition and education for chUdren; and to conditions "where  maternity can happen." Mexico is being  pressured by both the US and International  Monetary Fund to reduce its population.  "We must hnk reproductive rights with  the neo-liberal agenda," said Cecelia Ta-  lamante, of a Mexican popular education  group. "We need to make these rights part  of the campaign of our coalitions and social  movements."  needs and issues would be adequately addressed. Some unions have developed strategies of organizing outside the factory: the  ILGWU in Los Angeles organized a Garment Workers' Justice Centre to unionize  people without unionizing their workplaces.  Many women spoke of broadening the scope  of the unions to address women's issues  both within and outside the factory, in their  homes and communities.  Mujer Obrera in El Paso is a 10-year-  old independent organization that formed  to respond to garment workers' needs. It  educates and trains factory workers, service workers and the unemployed around  their pohtical and economic rights, as weU  as their identity as workers and Chicanas.  SEDEPAC, a church-based community development and popular education group,  works with women in the maquila border towns. Like Mujer Obrera, SEDEPAC  works with women in their neighbourhoods  and with existing community and church organizations.  For SEDEPAC, effective strategies include focusing on sexuahty, women's health  and cultural identity. "The city itself and  the transformation of the cultural identity of women who have immigrated from  other parts of the countries are elements we  have to take very seriously as we develop  new forms of organizing, "said Gloria TeUo  (SEDEPAC).  Neighbourhood and issue organizing has  taken on various forms. Fuerza Unida in San  Antonio organized the 1,500 factory workers  laid off by Levi-Strauss, the clothing manufacturer. Levis closed its plant in 1990 and  moved to Costa Rica where workers make  $2.50 a day. In response, Feurza Unida initiated a class action suit and a national boycott of Levis.  The conference ended on an extremely  positive note. We produced the VaUe de  Bravo Declaration, a tool to use in our communities when demanding social and labour  rights for women in the context of globalization. We formed new links tri-nationaUy—  networks, coalitions, sectors, unionized and  non-unionized workers—and we have plans  for foUow-up tours, conferences, electronic  networking and further gatherings to define our new demands and joint action and  strategies. Critical issues were identified as  the basis for global strategies: the role of job  training, the issue of pay equity or "comparable worth," how we organize against  racism, upward harmonization of wages,  health and safety, and the social charter.  "Every single collective agreement I signed  last year was less than before..."  -Marie Pepin  Unions Need Democratizing  The conference did not just analyze restructuring and free trade. We also explored  how to resist these forces in our homes  and communities—and found many signs  of hope and possibihties in the new ways  women were organizing. The role and future of unions as a mechanism furthering  women's agenda was debated hotly.  "We Mexican women have httle or no  power within a [union movement] fuU of  problems," said Sara Lovera, whose words  were echoed by an American trade unionist:  "H unions continue to exclude women and  minorities, they're dead."  Most participants felt they would have  to democratize their unions before women's  We left this conference with a sense of  hope and a renewed faith in the power of  women. We also left convinced in the truth  of the words of a Mexican sister: "The internationalist movement is more and more necessary for the democratic movement, and  especially for women."  Denise Nadeau is a member of  Women to Women Global Strategies.  She and Lynn Bueckert attended the  conference from BC. On April 15, Lynn  and Denise will report on the conference and tri-national networking strategies. (See Bulletin Board for details.)  KINESIS  April 92  11 An interview with  <f^  Timeless and timed  as told to Lauri Nerman  Ferron—one of British Columbia's favourite daughters and one of the world's finest  singer/songwriters—is doing a solo tour of several Canadian and US cities this spring. In  February, Ferron talked to Lauri Nerman by phone from her home in Washington state.  Lauri: I'm interested in the theme of transformation in your songwriting, about  how your songs seem to take the personal to the political.  Ferron: I've been trying to comment on that for a reaUy long time. It seems scary to  think about being pohtical without it somehow being personal to you. Most things that  have any power stem from the personal. I probably have a transformation image inside of  me—it's hke, you actuaUy can be in one place and find yourself in another.  Lauri: Is the process of writing different for you each time ?  Ferron: I reaUy wish I knew what the process was, then I would be doing it every  minute of the day. Sometimes the process is simply persistence. It's not hke you don't  mind waiting or you mind waiting—you can't do anything else but try to be avaUable  when it starts to happen. H you're a photographer but you don't carry your camera  around, it's not going to work out. You have to have that camera ready.  So when I'm writing, I actually spend the largest portion of that time waiting for  something to write about that isn't just another form of news. There are a lot of things  to write about, but I need to get them inside of me and have it seem personal. I think  when you are young everything is personal. A lot of things are personal insult, but that  changes. It's kind of perplexing—lie you make a few mistakes yourself and then the  next person makes a mistake. It's kind of hard to have everybody else's mistake be a  personal affront. It takes longer to get underneath, where it's really personal.  Lauri: There appears to be an appreciation of your work that crosses many  boundaries. Do you have a sense of how your audience is so tuned into what you  write about?  Ferron: I don't know if they're tuned in or if I tuned in for a minute. Of course we  are all tuned in. There is nobody more attuned than someone else. H anything is happening, it is happening equaUy, all the way around. It's hke throwing rocks into a pond  and then you say, how close did you get to where you wanted to get? The truth is there,  everybody knows.  Sometimes it's hard for me to write or it takes longer because I am exasperated. I am  exasperated that there must have been some part of the dream or whatever that I reaUy didn't understand. It's worse than the United States military, it's worse than this  httle mini-war practice in Iraq a year ago when I was touring. What came out of that?  A lot of people are dead, a lot of babies are dead, a lot of needless death: Iraqis' death.  It's worse than the thought that we are a warring people—the way this is absorbed and  taken on. What is done, what we can settle for ...  Lauri: Is this because we don't question these issues?  Ferron: I think we do. I hold people in high regard. Maybe that's because of my  audience—they just seem so alive. They are so alive and I'm so alive and we don't know  what to do because it's zoomed out of our hands somehow. I'm pondering that stuff right  now, but I continue thinking that, once we understand what needs to be done, it won't  do to not have a personal power base. We need the strength to do it.  Lauri: You first recorded "White Wing Mercy" in 1977 [Ferron Backed Up, Lucy  Records] and then again on Phantom Centre. When you re-record songs, or when  you perform songs live, does your interpretation vary each time ?  Ferron: It's hke a second hand and a big hand. The big hand interpretation moves  a lot slower, and then I have this second hand interpretation that might land on a word  differently from night to night, or might land on an inside attitude of a phrase. And then  there is an overaU attitude change over time. Some of it is the songs and some of it is  me. Songs have personalities and I have a personality and sometimes there is conflict.  "White Wing Mercy" went away for quite a whUe. I was quite surprised when it came  back and wanted to be sung.  You asked me about feehng. When I would sing that song when I was 24 or 25 years  old, I felt I was stiU carrying a certain amount of social shame. I hadn't faced aU the  feehngs. When I recorded it for Phantom Centre, I was 39 years old. Add 15 more  years of setthng—I felt very powerful bringing out "White Wing Mercy" again and saying what it was and what it is.  Lauri: Most songwriting today seems quite disposable, with the advent of video  and the big music machine. Yet you defy this—/ am struck by the timelessness of  your words and music. What are your thoughts on this?  Ferron: There is so much pressure within the music system. If I had signed to a major label, then [my] record would come out and "do something." If it doesn't go, it's over  in a few months. You're in the studio for two or three months, then you go off and tour  for six months. Then they want another album 18 months later, which leaves you three  months to write and recover. What are the possibihties of a person going down into deep  water and finding stuff? Road hfe can make everything look hke a fast food restaurant.  Lauri: Do you enjoy touring or is it difficult?  Ferron: I don't think it's worth much complaint when I think of aU the other jobs  I've had or other people have. Everything has its limit and its demands. Parts of it are  almost intolerable. Sometimes the same things that are intolerable are also the things  you are going after, but you don't know it.  Sometimes I reaUy need to just have a httle bag of my clothes and my guitar and to  go into a neutral motel room day after day after day. I hate it, but it also seems to be  something that I have been doing for the last 13 or 14 years.  Sometimes a song comes. I wrote a song in Columbus, Ohio—a song that is very  beautiful and wistful, "Columbus in 1991." I initiaUy meant Columbus, Ohio but then  I thought, where is that? I'm out in an edge city situation with a strip maU and motel.  There was kind of a scary moment where it was hot and muggy. I was nowhere, waiting  to do a show—I could have been in some controlled environment on the moon. It really  wouldn't matter.  It was hke, 'oh no, this is what happens to a hfe.' On the other hand, I also wrote a  song. Then you think, 'whoa, I'd hke to go back to Columbus, Ohio.'  Some of the things you can't stand are also the things you need to get down deep to  go deeper. You know, that deep feehng that is pretty woo-woo. It's happy and it's sad,  it's big and it's smaU, it's timeless and it's timed. It's aU the contradictions that you can  think of aU at once. The fact that you can actuaUy survive in that moment and be alert  to it, without exploding into ten thousand httle pieces. You either write a song, paint a  picture, start a novel, cut your hair. You do something with that moment.  Lauri: Can you talk about the difference between touring solo versus being  backed by a band.  Ferron: The first thing the audience can expect is intimacy. It's easier on some levels  to be alone and it's also harder. Once in a whUe I just need to have that big band sound  to feed that musical part of me, to go the limit on a song.  When I am alone we go deep down root-wise into feehngs. When I sing the songs,  sometimes I go through the whole thing all over again, in some fashion. I don't know  what it is hke for an audience person. Let's say a song is hke a kid who has overalls and  sneakers, but they also have these really friUy dresses they want to wear. You just have  to give them an event so they can do that, otherwise they're unfulfiUed. Once in whUe it  has to be a big band thing.  I hke touring solo. It's hke a conversation, it's close, it's funny and intimate. And it's  intense.  Lauri: You 've gone through some pretty awful interviews with the mainstream  music world, like the one with Erica Ehm on MuchMusic. Why don't people ask  you intelligent questions? What is so difficult about that?  Ferron: It's just hke male rock culture to think that they invented women's music.  By the time whats-her-name Erica Ehm was asking me those inane questions, women's  music was over. I don't mean my kind of women's music—but what they thought was  women's music. They had already destroyed it. They destroyed Tracy Chapman—she  may spring back. They put it in a can and packaged it so fast, and then they said, 'We  don't want this.'  Lauri: Sinead O'Connor is another example.  Ferron: She really seemed hke a strong voice to me and I'm quite sad that she got  so pissed off she said she wasn't doing it again. Where else can you have such a hfe? I'm  sure she was totally insulted.  When guys [in the music business] talk about women hke Joni MitcheU or Rickie Lee  Jones, they call them bitches, for starters. I don't know what it is, hke there is only a  httle bit of room for the woman voice, so there is this myth that we're aU clawing and  carving each other to get somewhere. There is already so httle—like, who do you bother  clawing to get there?  Tracy Chapman and Toni ChUds came out around the same time, and there were the  interviews in major magazines. What they do is compare-and-contrast. Suzanne Vega:  compare-contrast with Joni MitcheU. Everybody that came out was compared and contrasted, only with other women. When Springsteen brings out his record, they don't  compare and contrast him with Dylan. They are both aUowed to be on the air. There is  nothing but room for them.  Lauri: I remember you being compared-contrasted to Dylan.  Ferron: I was compared-contrasted to a lot of people— there's never enough room,  so it's got to be one or the other. I was definitely compared-contrasted to Dylan and it  was hke, I don't why. He was important and I understand the compliment, but if you're  a cat, it's kind of a drag if you're compared to a dog.  Lauri: You've been involved with the women's movement for about two decades.  Do you have any reflections on the movement today?  Ferron: (long pause, deep sigh, followed by laughter): I have some young friends—  about 22 years old—and they and others were aU sitting around the table at Thanksgiving. Somebody [my age] mentioned HoUy Near and Cris WUliamson—for some reason the conversation got around to them. I remember the first time I went to a Cris  WUliamson concert in Vancouver at Kits House—we were aU fined up around the block  and we managed to get about 400 people in. One of my friends was talking about going  to HoUy Near, and our younger friends looked up from their plates and said, 'Who are  they?'  These are young women hke ourselves, and they don't have [that history]—that's aU I  can say.  We tried really hard. For almost a decade there was culture. There stiU is the Michigan Women's Music Festival. I was just there last year and it was a wonderful time.  Michigan hasn't always been wonderful—there were some hard years, but it seems to be  wonderful to me again.  Like everything else, there is something big that has to be done and we are digesting  how to do it. H you don't beheve in war, you don't go to war. H you don't beheve in war,  then you don't go into conflict. Maybe we are trying to experience peace inside of ourselves so we know what the heU it is. And so when it comes around, we don't have to be  afraid of it.  There is hard work being done and there are also the coven women, the more quiet,  private environments women are growing in. It seems to me they gave up fighting with  men (snorts)—who wants to do that when you can be at the beach or learn to play the  drums or paint your face or find your guides or your angels. All the real important stuff.  My sense of the community is that it stiU exists—aU my friends are in it. They're doing and I'm doing a lot of internal work. You're not going to spend your time preparing  to look good for government officials. There is a whole other thing, the whole spiritual  hfe. I better prepare for the facts of my hfe which are that I was bom asleep and have  a whole bunch of things to learn about. Everything I am learning or that I hope I am  learning or I'm not learning are aU part of what I am going to take with me for my big  debut, in both my next scene and also my next hfe. It's a lot (laughs).  We refine our bodies and we refine our diets, we refine our habits and our impulses—  then the next time you end up in a violent conversation or a hostUe situation, your body  gets sick. It's totally unpleasant and you just can't do it. I've heard myself say on many  occasions, 'I can't do this.' And when I do, I usuaUy am pretty sick. I get sick in my  stomach and sick in my body. Maybe that's what happens after a certain age—it's hke,  'oh, Big Surprise. We have bodies!' (laughs). And they run at a completely different  speed than everything else. It's a shock.  Lauri: At this stage in my life, I find that even if my head doesn't agree with my  feelings, my body does not lie. And trusting my gut feelings also means liking myself a lot more.  Ferron: Maybe it sounds narcissistic, but it has to start somewhere because you can't  even perceive other people liking you if you are not present. When I get compliments in  my daily hfe (not in my Ferron hfe), the first thing I want to say is, 'oh, that's not always true.' You push it back. That's what we are trying to learn here. It's hke omitting  certain things from our language, omitting certain things from our mind and putting new  things in—it's hke a complete rewiring. I think that's what is going on in women's culture. We are rewiring and some of us are rewired, never to return.  Return to what? It's hke you learned how to play bridge and somebody keeps trying  to get you to play checkers. You can't do it. You can, but it's your hfe.  I am looking forward to coming out and seeing people again—being connected in that  way. I've been off for a couple of months, trying to break through into some songs, break  through into the self I haven't been near when I'm out in airports and stuff. It's hke anything: you have a whole bunch of people trying to make a big dinner, but if you only focus on the person peeling carrots, you think you are having carrots. At what point do  your attempts, your experiences, your memories and your longings all come together and  look hke a fuU course meal. I don't know. AU of the sudden it's just there, hke Thanksgiving dinner. Look how many hours it takes to make that stupid meal and it's over in  40 minutes.  WeU, that's what it is hke writing songs or preparing to go on stage or gathering up  your courage to fly in another DC-9. It takes double the time to get it together and the  next thing you know, it's over—and you hope it went pretty weU (laughs).  Three of Ferron's works— Testimony, Shadows on a Dime, and Phantom Centre—  may be ordered directly by writing to: Cherrywood Station, PO Box 871, Vashon  Island, WA 98070, USA.   Lauri Nerman is a music fiend living in Victoria.  i2 KINESIS  April9  KINESIS April 92 5SS^^^^^^^^5^^,  FEATURE  Women in trades, technologies:  National network, at last  by Ellen Dixon  Women in Trades and Technologies  (WITT) is definitely past its infancy.  WITT's first conference in Winnipeg, in the  early 1980's, consisted mainly of women apprenticing in the trades, sharing their tribulations and successes, and dreaming of creating a national network for support and  promotion.  The 1988 Surviving and Thriving conference in Naramata, BC gathered together women who were now journeyed  tradeswomen, as weU as apprentices, educators, smaU-business owners and government  representatives. WhUe many issues surfaced  in the 80's for WITT women, forging a national network remained a primary focus.  How that network would be structured, how  it would function between national conferences and how it would remain responsive  to its grassroots were key concerns.  Surviving and Thriving II—The Sequel-  opened early this February at Ottawa's  Conference Centre where, as one speaker  pointed out, Meech Lake died. By contrast, the veteran tradeswomen would  pull together a document of far-reaching  consequences—a structure for a national  network by which women would "invade the  trades."  Advocating & Representing  A varied and demanding agenda was put  together by the conference planning committee. The conference was divided into  two parts: the first two days, women in  trades, technologies and operations choose  from among 86 workshops on issues such as  harassment, self-esteem, role modelling and  union involvement. For many tradeswomen,  this was their first opportunity to swap coping tactics and success stories.  Plenary gatherings focused on scrutinizing and eventuaUy adopting the WITT  structure document, and on electing a national co-ordinator and her advisory committee, consisting of representatives from all  regions of the country.  The last two days of the conference were  open to unions, educators, government and  business representatives—stake holders, as  they are called now. These sessions explored  problems such as recruitment and retention  of women in trades—an issue for aU parties.  The fact that Surviving and Thriving II  had two distinct parts is a symptom of a  concern voiced by several WITT women  at the conference. The first person to air  the matter was a WITT Manitoba founding  member, Allison Nutt. In her remarks during the opening ceremonies, Nutt cautioned  WITT about giving the power to describe  and define the needs of women in trades  over to other groups or individuals.  I later asked Allison to elaborate on this  issue. For Nutt, the question is, can front  hne workers—the women whose daUy work  is in a trade—also be responsible for the  work of the national network? The network,  through the activities of its national coordinator: "is committed to significantly increasing the numbers and enhancing the experience of women entering and working in  the fields of trades, technology, operations,  of a national advisory committee, a collectively organized body.  In her opening remarks, Nutt also  broached other aspects of the question, who  is WITT for? She referred to homophobia  and racism as issues demanding immediate attention by aU WITT groups. Manitoba WITT has struggled directly with homophobia, says Nutt, and was now much  stronger for having acknowledged its destructive potential.  The conference offered a workshop,  "What does anyone's sexuahty have to do  with the workplace?" to begin the process  at the national level. WeU-attended and experiential in structure, the workshop offered lesbians an opportunity to reveal how  painful and limiting homophobia is, and offered heterosexual and bi-sexual women the  chance to explore how heterosexism hm-  Nutt cautioned about giving the power to  describe and define the needs of women in  trades over to other[s]...  wax***************  and blue coUar work." In short, there is a  tremendous amount of lobbying and advocacy work to be done.  WITT must remember its grass roots  foundation, says Nutt, and adhere conscientiously to a consensus buUding process.  "Over the past 10 years, we've gotten better  at saying what we want," says Nutt, and at  recognizing the pitfalls of working with advocates for women in trades. For example, a  company which sends its Employment Equity Coordinator to a meeting yet refuses  to send its tradeswomen is demonstrating  a limited value as an advocate or partner  in change. Says Nutt, we must remember  the difference between advocating and representing.  The WITT structure document, a monumental achievement, attempts to address  these points by limiting the participation of  associate members (business, government,  etc) and by describing the national coordinator's role as being under the supervision  its their understanding of lesbian experience. It was a smaU step. The other workshops I attended all mentioned lesbians  along with other groups whose experiences  differed from the mainstream.  A look around the conference centre  in Ottawa confirmed that of the nearly  200 tradeswomen present, there were few  women of colour. However, members of  the organizing committee expressed satisfaction with their efforts to include Aboriginal women as guest speakers and in a workshop.  At this workshop, the three presenters offered practical and challenging information,  suggesting that Aboriginal women are tired  of always being advisors and that WITT  might demonstrate its genuine interest in diversity by holding two seats on the national  advisory committee for Aboriginal women.  How to Rekindle the Intensity?  Is it possible to retain or rekindle the  intensity of the original WITT conference? One participant remarked on missing  that quahty—the intensity associated with  grassroots organizing, focused on immediate, tangible struggles.  At the moment, part of the national  WITT energy and certainly the energy of  the re-elected coordinator, Marcia Braundy,  is on the National Data Bank Inventory  program—an inventory of WITT women  willing to be role models, and a referral service for employers and individual women  looking for work.  Braundy, based in Winlaw, BC, is recognized and appreciated for her organizing skiUs and for the connections she has  made over the last 10 years with business  and government. The coordinator's position  was contested by Manitoba's Janis McK-  eag in an extremely decorous and apparently noncontentious election. In fact, McK-  eag refused to be drawn into explaining  how her leadership would differ from that  of Braundy's.  Nevertheless, a tension exists between  two visions of the organization: WITT as  a national support network for working  tradeswomen, and WITT as a respected  player in the field of government bureaucracies, technical schools, coUeges, unions and  corporations, with a role in designing training programs, drafting standards, etc.  These are very different arenas. Beneath  this difference may be the difference of class.  Some women expressed distress about the  apparent insensitivity to that issue, which  sharpened with the arrival of the employers,  educators, and government representatives.  Workshops were not the dialogues they were  meant to be, and some women found themselves sUenced, their input discounted.  As carpenter and poet Kate Braid said  in her keynote address, women in trades  "aren't crossing any ordinary threshold. It's  more hke an Alice in Wonderland kind of  step into a culture as different from our  female one, as if we had stepped across  an ocean." Braid admonished each one to  tell her story—to write or sing it, because  therein hes our power.  Ellen Dixon is a working potter, and  a member of a marketing cooperative in  Mission, BC.  UPRISING BREADS  5AKERY  Makers of Vancouvers Finest Wholegrain Breads.  Hot Cross Buns,  with Whole Wheat Flour and Honey  til April 17th  Try our lunches  All vegetarian soups/salads,  great sandwiches, vegetarian or meat  Mon.-Fri. 8:30 am - 5:40 pm • Sat. 9:00 am - 5:30 pm  1697 Venables Street Vancouver 254-5635  A part of CRS Workers' Co-op  RECLAIMING WOMEN'S HISTORY  POSTER SERIES  Qm  Agnes McPhail  The first woman  elected to  parliament.  The Famous Five  who won for  woman the right  to be persons.  Nellie McClung  who, with her sister  suffragists, won  the vote for women.  These women deserve their place in the schools, offices, homes and official  corridors of the nation. An ideal gift. Posters are 16 x 20, in sepia tones,  particularly attractive when framed.  $10.00 each or package of all three for $25.00,  plus $3.00 (postage/packaging) for 1 poster ($0.50 for each additional poster).  Laminated copies are an additional $6.00 each.  Women of Vision Series, Box 1402, Station C, St. John's Nfld. A1C 5N5  14 KINESIS    April 92 /////////////////////^^^^^  //////////////////^^^^  Arts  Eleven women of culture:  Memory and Desire  MEMORY AND DESIRE:  Eleven Women of Culture  Vancouver Art Gallery, March 7-April 11  Memory and Desire, an exhibition at  the Vancouver Art Gallery (VAG), features visual art presentations by eleven  women artists, ten of whom work in  Vancouver: Ana Chang, Sherida Levy,  Alexis MacDonald-Seto, Shani Mootoo,  Marianne Nicholson, Linda Ohama,  Haruko Okano, Sandra Semchuk, Alfre-  da Steindl and Kiki Yee. The eleventh  artist, Sutapa Biswas, is a UK-based  South Asian artist who was a key figure  in developing the show.  by Janice Wong  Prior to seeing Memory and Desire:  Eleven Women of Culture, my expectations were based on my knowledge of  the show's chosen medium—that the work  would make use of photos and text, and  that there would be an implied emphasis on  the conceptual. I hoped to see a treatment  of this medium that would transcend what  can too often be an intellectual weightiness.  Would the work be accessible?  I was both excited and relieved to find  that it was exceptionally so. The title,  Memory and Desire itself suggests strong  emotions and, to this end, I beheve anyone  who gets a chance to see the exhibition wil"  not be disappointed.  'E-motions' are motions that move outward and this is how people, upon viewing the exhibition, seem to be reacting to  the art. Vancouver writer, Anne Jew, is one  viewer who said she finds it hard "to be critical and analytical [of the art] because of its  personal and emotional aspects.  "AU my schoohng has involved looking at  western art by white men. You're taught not  to react emotionally to art, I feel I'm supposed to push the emotion aside and be objective and critical and I'm not able to do  that here."  In all, the exhibition consists of 22 pieces  by the 11 women artists which fall into  two sections: collaborative work made up of  one piece by each artist, and individual—  more personal—works. The exhibition is  arranged in three adjoining rooms. The  largest holds all but one of the artists' personal pieces. The eleventh is held in a small  second room, while the third room houses  the collaborative work.  The individual pieces are meant to complement the collaborative work and they do  just that, amplifying what we begin to learn  about each artist: her process, her expression.  However, the collaborative work tends to  draw the strongest reactions from viewers.  The concept of collaboration using similar media evolved out of a workshop as  part of Fabled Territories (see story, this  page). As a result, the artists did their collaborative works within a set of fairly strict  parameters regarding size, medium and presentation: each piece consists of a photo-  transparency pressed between two sheets of  plexiglass and a small shelf upon which objects have been placed. The room is arranged in a uniform and consistent fashion:  the transparencies hang directly in front of  the small shelves fastened to a wall.  I was initially struck by the formality of  this room. It seemed quiet and intimate,  both from the arrangement of the room itself and from the parts of the whole, the  pieces in the room. I felt that the uniformity  of the medium and the presentation doubly  reinforced the individuality of each piece —  a sheet of plexiglass, a shelf. The result: a  broad, intriguing and very personal array of  interpretation, expression and experience.  The power of each piece hes with the  idea that, through the personal, one can  experience the universal. Each piece asks  of the viewer that you become intimate  with it. Had the pieces been hung in a  larger room, the relationship between art  and viewer may have been even more intense. The artists originally intended that  the viewer be able to walk between transparency and shelf. This would have emphasized the idea of the "space between" with  both its physical impUcations and the inherent implications of time and sensation—of  past and present, of a foot in two cultures.  The coUaborative pieces are titled in  a clockwise manner, indicating that the  viewer see or 'read' the pieces from left to  right. FoUowing that order, the tone is immediately set by the first piece by Sherida  Levy. Levy's transparency—a photograph  of two young girls, seated and smiling—  hangs in front of a shelf of chUdhood mementos.  as told to Zara Suleman  M&ls Girl's Dream by Alexis  MacDonald-Seto  Vancouverite Barbara Binns recaUs the  piece. "What stuck in my mind were the  shoes ... the shoes and a ball and a photo  of two chUdren on the transparency," she  said. "It just brought me back to my chUdhood. It was so explicit. It's funny how this  whole memory of my chUdhood came back  to me."  Even as the first piece sets up the underlying themes of loss, sadness, longing and  innocence, so too does Memory and Desire's use of photographs, aU of which originate from the artists' personal histories.  Photographs, as evidence of the irretrievable past, capture that frozen moment in  time. As Binns puts it: "The collaborative  pieces are hke having a window into peoples' experiences, hke sharing those experiences."  A lot of the work carries these themes of  loss, dreaming and sadness, from Levy's and  Nicholson's pieces of chUdhood, Steindl's  and MacDonald-Seto's memories of their  mothers, to Okano's sadly sweet flower-girl.  Memory and Desire came together out  of the controversy surrounding Fabled Territories, a visual art show at the VAG  in November, 1991, featuring South Asian  artists from London, England. (See Kinesis, Dec./Jan. 1992, page 22 ).  The Artists Coalition for Local Colour,  an ad hoc group of local artists of colour,  supported Fabled Territories but questioned VAG administrators as to why works  by artists are being imported from other  countries when local artists of colour are  excluded from exhibiting at spaces hke the  VAG, the pubhc gaUery.  The foUowing comes out of an interview  with artist Haruko Okano on how Memory and Desire came to show at the  VAG. Okano was a key negotiator in talks  with gallery administrators on behalf of the  artists.  Haruko Okano: It began before I met  Sutapa Biswas, [artist-in-residence at the  VAG and a part of Fabled Territories]. She  encouraged us to submit shdes and resumes  to the gaUery after she had seen our work  and was puzzled as to why most of us had  not had any major exhibitions or pubhc exposure.  Sutapa helped set the idea of media, that  of the transparency and the shelf unit on  the waU. She also set the theme of "memory and desire." As we formulated the ideas  and structure of the coUaborative piece, we  knew that we would make individual pieces  as weU, to offset the homogeneous tendency  of the collaborative format. We aimed to  complete 22 pieces that would be shown as  a whole.  When we approached the VAG through  [VAG Liaison] Judith Mastai, she told us  that it wasn't normal procedure for a workshop to be taken into an exhibition, but she  offered the ChUdren's GaUery for the month  of February.  We voted against it. Judith toured us  through the entire gallery and informed us  that most of the exhibition space was a permanent coUection or booked a year or so  ahead but sometimes space came up.  The space it now occupies was our first  choice in the gaUery. We emphasized that  the work was to be shown as a whole, since  Detail from Alfreda Steindl's  piece in Memory and Desire  collaborative  the personal pieces were intentionaUy created to complement our coUaborative piece.  Turns out, the space is not big enough, but  that's because we didn't know how big the  personal pieces would be.  While the workshop was on, Local Colour  was picketing the gaUery, protesting its exclusivity, lack of access, outreach and accountability. The absence of a formal opening night for Fabled Territories was challenged as an example of the VAG's lack of  sensitivity to community needs.  Local Colour held its own opening for Fabled Territories, a public meeting to challenge the VAG on these issues and a paper  —letters, articles—campaign at the end of  January. Shortly after, Memory and Desire got their contract, complete with arrangements for talks by the artists, a round  table discussion, and a smaU formal opening.  We had a grand opening with 200 guests,  despite the fact that the invitations were  sent out quite late and publicity was not  great. Budget concerns seemed to be the  VAG's rationale, yet they now claim they  had been talking about this show since 1990.  I beheve this exhibition would not have  happened if it wasn't for three factors:  VanCity Credit Union funding it, on condition that the VAG fund two more community venues in the Greater Vancouver  area; the Local Colour's constant external  pressure; and most importantly, the commitment of the artists to produce so many  pieces in such a short period.  It was chaUenging to try and get everybody together in one space aU at one time  but I trusted aU of their abilities to do this  show. I'm proud to have been a part of this.  It wUl take pubhc pressure combined  with groups hke the Local Colour and the  commitment of local artists to change the  mandate of the VAG. I would love to see  local artists barrage the place with proposals and resumes in groups or individuaUy,  and document it on paper so the pubhc can  watch to see what its response is. Whether  it's hp service or action.  Zara Suleman is a Vancouver freelance writer, cultural activist and member of Local Colour.  There is also evidence of a movement  away from the past, taking the artist and  the viewer more obviously to the here and  now. This appears most strongly in the work  of Mootoo, Ohama, Chang and Yee.  WhUe the work is intended to be seen  as a complementary whole—the collaborative works and the individual pieces  go together—the collaborative works easily  stand on their own. The strength of the col  laborative piece says a great deal about the  strength of each of the artists.  Whether seen in whole or in part, Memory and Desire is rather hke a stone cast  into water—it has enough emotional charge  and heart in its intent to work a ripple effect.  Janice Wong is a visual artist living  and working in Vancouver.  KINESIS •SSSKSSSSSSSS^^  Arts  Women in film:  Espresso with hot short shots  by Jillian M. Hull  Watching ten short films in a row is about  the same as shooting back as many double  espressos over the course of a few hours.  The heart races. Realities accelerate. Images pound behind the eyehds. Leave the  theatre: pupils squeeze back to daylight.  Brain saturated. Body drained. That's the  end of one sweU buzz.  As part of the Vancouver Free Press  Festival, Heana Pietrobruno of Cineworks,  a Vancouver-based independent filmmakers  society, has curated two screenings of shorts  by local directors to be shown at the Pacific Cinematheque on AprU 25th. From the  first screening, some of the films are okay,  some are good and those reviewed here are  just plain astonishing. Linked by the broad  theme of sexual oppression, seven of the ten  shorts are made by women.  The world of work is the common arena  for gender oppression in several of these  films.  Women are always coming after men  and cleaning up their messes," says the narrator of Rubble Women, Gamma Bak's 16-  minute-long film on the clean-up and reconstruction of German cities after World  War II. But it's about more than that:  it's about recuperating and (re)valuing the  history of women's work; it's about longstanding pay equity discrepancies; and it's  emphaticaUy not about making heroes out  of these women, but simply recognizing the  work they have done.  'It was an experience that was pushed  into the unconscious of most of these  women," the narrator tells us, "because  they didn't want to remember, and besides  that, they didn't have a hstener because  men didn't want to hear that." Rubble  Women pieces together archival footage of  post-war reconstruction of Berlin with re-  enacted scenes shot in black and white. A  voice-over in German and Enghsh narrates  as women emerge from bomb shelters, hft  giant wheelbarrows, shovel pUes of rubble,  cut and lay bricks.  The camera rests on images of women's  bodies: passing bricks from hand to hand,-  hoisting a huge drUl, or peehng potatoes with the raw, cold-bitten fingers of a  labourer. A woman's traditional role as food  preparer is freighted with the load of food  provider, as about 63 percent of the workforce in post-war Berlin was female. This,  despite the fact that through the 50s, a  woman's work, even heavy labour, was paid  at just over half that of a man.  Twenty-nine-year-old Lisa Doyle has also  taken up the neglected domain of women's  Still from the film Rubble Women by Gamma Bak  work in her hUarious short rant, Did You  Do The Napkin Tops?, a film about the  endless cycle of shit work. It never ends.  It's always there. And it always stinks. But  if this film is any indication, Doyle wUl be  quitting her day jobs in short order.  Shot in one day and for less than 50  bucks, Did You Do The Napkin Tops has  already won a slew of awards, including Best  Film at the New York Short Film Expo and  the Yorkton Film Festival.  The focus is on the hands and backs  of headless bodies working, working, working in endless, repetitive motions preparing food, doling out food and cleaning up  messes, as Doyle's voice intones the virtues  of a kitchen job on a ferry. "I serve food, I  serve food, I serve food to customers, customers, high paying customers. The pressure to be sweet and friendly is so great.  Sweet and friendly I can't stand it. I develop  a rash, a rash. I'm aUergic to customers. I'm  aUergic to friendly people." Lisa Doyle can  always be a stand-up poet if she ever decides to leave filmmaking.  "Wow, pictures don't teU you anything,"  says the narrator of Ann Marie Fleming's  short, You Take Care Now. Like Doyle,  Fleming is another Vancouver filmmaker  who uses language to chaUenge the abso- .  lute authority of visual images in most films.  The effect is at once visceral and brainy in  this coUage of spoken word, written word  and film footage, with the language often in  conflict with the picture represented.  And the numbed, disembodied voice of a  second person narration is positively chUl-  ing in a film about being raped and run over  by a car in one hfetime. "You get the idea,  don't you? You get raped," the 'you' pointing in aU directions at the same time: at the  film's narrator and at me, the viewer, and  at you, sitting next to me.  But just because Fleming raises language  to a par with the film's visual imagery—  supposedly a cinematic no-no—does not  mean that You Take Care Now is visu-  aUy impoverished. Quite the contrary. This  is a stunning film which manages to harmonize a hterary background with some fabulous animation skiUs.  Bird imagery, for example, a standard  symbol for rape in Western literature, forges  the hnk between the story of being raped  and the story of being struck by a car.  Men who tell her, "You take care now,"  whether a rapist or an ambulance driver or  a boyfriend, are connected with the image  of a bird, white and twitching, eyes tiny and  far away at the end of a long beak.  The two stories don't come together  completely—the first part, the story of being 22 years old and being raped far from  home, was what emerged as THE story, discrete in itself—but this is a brUhant film  nonetheless. The degree of this imperfec  tion marks the extent of the risk: Fleming'  attempt to realize larger social concerns of  how women can take care of themselves '  a world which does not take care of women  has already re-emerged with greater clarity  in subsequent work. Her first feature, New  Shoes, screens at the Pacific Cinematheque  in early AprU.  One more home girl to watch is Mina  Shum, director of Shortchanged. In this  15-minute short about Angel, a tough-  talking prostitute transformed into the star  of a TV series based on her own hfe in the  streets, Shum interrogates the homogenizing impulse of memory and history making.  After her metamorphosis into a successful  actor, Angel rewrites the script of her hfe  on the streets, casting herself not as victim  but as a powerful agent against the "criminal element."  Though more mainstream in form than  most of the other shorts on this program-  Shortchanged dehberately mimics a TV  series, complete with hokey music, identifiable story hne and accessible characters  and dialogue—the film's content agitates  against mainstream values, disrupting our  simplistic, A-to-B readings of TV images.  No, the world is not as it appears, and  hke Fleming and Doyle, it is language that  Shum places between image and audience,  constantly punning on the word change.  Ripped off by a man (a John, a pimp, a  boyfriend?) and scavenging for a quarter to  call home, it is at this point that Angel  is "discovered". A woman's transformation,  her "change" from smaU town girl, to prostitute, to successful actress hinges on how  her body can be commodified or her hfe  ex-changed into a devalued TV currency.  Shum engages aU our Dickensian fantasies  of the picaresque rising to a higher "station" in hfe, even as she steadily exposes  and ironizes that process. Success costs as  much as a thin coat of whitewash and lasts  about as long.  Take in one or both of the screenings  of short films at the Pacific Cinematheque  on AprU 25. The first show, at 12:30 pm,  includes these films on sexual oppression.  The second show at 3:30 pm features seven  avant-garde shorts.  You'U step out of a dark theatre knees  weak, stomach rumbhng, head full. Too full,  maybe. But the pale hght of day lacks the  lustre, the intensity, the pure pungency of  the world condensed and layered into 12  minute, 23 minute, or 7 minute chunks. This  could be the start of a whole new addiction,  Jillian M. Hull agonized over this  sentence more than the whole damned  article.  1146 Commercial § Phone: 253-0913  A new release from the Women's Research Centre  in conjunction with the Trade Union Research Bureau  JUST WAGES  A BULLETIN ON WAGE DISCRIMINATION AND PAY EQUITY  As    the    only    popular     The bulletin will be issued 4 times  publication focusing  exclusively on this issue from  a national perspective, this  bulletin is a valuable  resource for everyone  concerned with this  important issue.  in 1991 -- a preview "mini-issue"  in March and 3 full issues in  June, September and December.  It will include news items and  analysis, reports on resources  and coming events, and a forum  for discussion and debate.  Subscriptions to JUST WAGES (on a calendar year basis) are available  from the Women's Research Centre, 101-2245 W. Broadway, Vancouver,  B.C. V6K 2E4. The cost is $10 for individuals, community based women's  groups and unions; $15 for institutions; $18 for US & International orders.  s KINESIS Arts  /////////////////////^^^^^  Portraits of women:  Facing faces  of feminism  by Angela Page  Nine years ago, Judy Chicago's The  Dinner Party was shown at Calgary's  Glenbow Museum. It was an unforgettable,  moving experience to go there and discover so many women through the ages  who had preceded the women's movement  but shared some of its ideals. Every woman  commemorated there, famous or forgotten,  had risen above the conventions of her time  and shown that women are much more than  izations to beliefs going back to chUdhood.  All are different, yet seem similar.  There are portraits of women of aU ages,  races and hfestyles—midwives, farmers, poets, lawyers, single parents, transition house  workers, collectives. Some are famihar to us  in BC: Dorothy Livesay, Persimmon Black-  bridge, Jillian Riddington (with a strong  statement against pornography). Several include chUdren, dispeUing the myth that  feminism and motherhood have no connection.  "We need to see what we have done and  what we can do."  wives and mothers. Sadly, Chicago's massive instaUation never came to Vancouver,  but it was partly documented in a book and  so is stiU accessible to us as a resource and  inspiration.  This year, in Calgary again, I found an  exhibition of photographs by Pamela Harris called Faces of Feminism at the Glenbow Museum. Pamela Harris, a photographer and writer, has mixed photography  and pohtical commitment for over 20 years  and spent six of those years researching  and recording the Canadian women's movement. The result is not quite another Dinner Party, which covered many centuries  of women's history. But Faces of Feminism by Pamela Harris is a reminder and  a revelation of many women across Canada  who are committed to those same ideals, to  working to make the world a better place  for aU of us.  The show consists of 75 black-and-white  photographs of women, individuaUy or in  groups, with accompanying text. In prose  and poetry—regrettably only one is in  French—many women write about their experiences of becoming feminists. They range  from overnight conversions to gradual real-  WOMEN ARTISTS'  MONOGRAPHS  Contemporary women  artists discuss their work  and ideas ina beautiful  series of small chapbooks.  H  Subscribe!  $24.00 for 2 years- 8 issue  Single issues: $5.00 eac  order from  Gallerie Publications  2901 Panorama Drive  North Vancouver, BC  Canada V7G 2A4  »  Between them, these women share the  concerns we know so weU: violence, abuse,  discrimination, racism, the need for emergency shelter, health care, education, equal  pay, concerns for peace and the environment.  Several pictures stand out. Kate Braid,  carpenter and poet, is shown working at her  bench. In writing beside the photograph is  her experience of men taunting her into taking off her t-shirt as she worked. The seven  Raging Grannies are pictured on stage in  full song wearing flowery dresses and hats.  Trisha Mifflin, a single parent from Antigonish, Nova Scotia, stands facing us in her  hving room, with a blur of chUdren around  her feet.  Walking around Faces of Feminism, I  had some of the same responses that I had  to The Dinner Party. Then it had been almost hke being in church—you could practically smeU the incense. At Faces of Feminism there was the same quiet concentration and respect for these women who are  hke so many of us. We need to see what we  have done and what we can do. We forget  our own strength and achievements and we  need to be reminded. Often.  There appear to be no plans to bring the  show to BC, though Pamela Harris told me  she would hke that very much. She submitted the show to the Burnaby Art GaUery,  having already had it turned down by the  Vancouver Art GaUery and by Presentation House in North Vancouver. I would hke  to see a campaign organized to help bring  Faces of Feminism to Vancouver. I would  also hke to see us support Second Story  Press in its campaign to publish Faces of  Feminism in a book, so that we can aU "go  home and ruminate over it," as one viewer  of the show wrote.  If you want to support Faces of Feminism by Pamela Harris, either by tax-  deductible donation or by ordering the  special first edition which will be available in the fall of 1992 at $50 a copy,  write to: Pamela Harris: Faces of Feminism, c/o Second Story Press, 760  Bathurst Street, Toronto, ONT., M5S  2R6. Those who pre-order will be honoured on a special page acknowledging  the publication sponsors.  Faces of Feminism by Pamela Harris  wUl be at the Art GaUery of Windsor in late  1992.   Angela Page is a longtime feminist, social worker and would-be writer,  who helped found the Port Coquitlam  Women's Centre.  I  From Faces of Feminism by Pamela Harris: Actor/Playwright  Cathy Jones as Love Murphy, St. John's, Newfoundland  PAqiNq Women|  by Gabrielle Chew  Looking for a new read? We've compiled a diverse hst of recent pubUcations to keep you  informed and to satisfy any bookworms with healthy appetites. Besides giving you a brief  low-down on these titles, we are hoping to entice some budding (or established) book reviewers to contact us. The foUowing books merit further attention, so caU 255-5499 if you  want to review one.  Despite the Odds: Essays on Canadian Women and Science ed. by Marianne  Gosztonyi Ainley. This anthology addresses the status of Canadian women in the  sciences from both historical and contemporary perspectives. Essays reflect a broad  view of science, encompassing medicine, mathematics, social and applied science,  technology and innovation—and attempt to redress the lack of attention paid to  Canadian women's contributions in these areas. (Vehicule Press, Montreal 1990)  Green Business: Hope or Hoax? ed. by Christopher Plant and Judith Plant. This compact anthology provides a well-researched critique of "shallow green " consumerism  and superficial corporate changes, and challenges us to make room for new concepts about restoring the earth. Contains essays from a diverse list of contributors,  female and male. (New Society Pubhshers, Gabriola Island 1991)  Hawkwings by Karen Lee Osborne. This tale of grief, recovery, love and lust is a  first novel for Osborne. A host of friends—lesbian, heterosexual, Black, white and  Hispanic—touch the life of 35-year old Emily Hawk, as she works through the loss  of her best friend to AIDS and the breakup with her lover Bonnie. (Third Side Press,  Chicago 1991)  The Mothers of Plaza de Mayo by Marjorie Agosin and translated from the Spanish by  Janice MaUoy. Dedicated to Renee Epelbaum, one of the founders of the Mother of  the Disappeared in Argentina. Agosin writes a moving account of Epelbaum's life  and the loss of her three children under the Argentinean junta. (Williams-WaUace  Pubhshers, Stratford 1989)  Dry Land Tourist and Other Stories by Dianne Maguire. This collection of short  stories evokes nostalgia for rural life in Jamaica in the 1950's and explores a spectrum of experiences of a girl growing up in a "Jamaica white" family. (Sister Vision Press, Toronto 1991)  No Burden to Carry by Dionne Brand, with the assistance of Lois De Shield and the  Immigrant Women's Job Placement Centre. Through oral histories, Brand documents  the lives of Black women in Ontario in the 1920's—50's, bringing to life a previously excluded historical record. (Women's Press, Toronto 1992)  The Edge of the World by Carol Malyon. Malyon's short stories have been described  as graphic accounts of human relationships filled with humour, sadness, and the  hungers and pleasures of living. Lovers, parents, neighbours and friends make up  some of the characters in these relationships. (The Mercury Press, Stratford 1991)  KINESIS Apr,. 92 SSSSSSSS**SSSSS^^  ARTS  Youth and sexuality:  Fresh talk on sex  FRESH TALK:  Youth and Sexuality  directed by Teresa MarshaU  and Craig Berggold  Start Productions, 1991  by Pearl Kirby  Fresh Talk: Youth and Sexuality is a  controversial new video which presents the  issue of teenage sexuahty in an honest, unbiased way. It's the first realistic video about  sex I've ever seen. I remember the films we  saw in high school: they were at least 15  years old and the characters were always in  their early 30s, making it impossible for me,  as a teenager, to identify with them. Fresh  Talk is frank and direct—no phony, stiff  dialogue. Young people talk openly about  their sexuahty. They talk about everything  you could imagine, and even some things  you wouldn't imagine. You can't get more  real than that.  The video has four parts: Image, Responsibihty, Power and Pleasure, with room for  discussion in between. As directors Teresa  MarshaU and Craig Berggold explained at  the premiere, the video wasn't made to  give answers, but to promote discussions—  and that hopefuUy from discussions, people  would find their own answers. Or learn from  other people's stories.  Theatre. Twenty-five young people, aged  15-24 years old, used role-playing games  to examine their experiences. Each person  was then asked to identify the issues she/he  thought most important to speak about personaUy on video."  Fresh Talk reaUy is a light-hearted  video. It warns us about the dangers of  AIDS, STDs and unwanted pregnancies,  but it never preaches and it never judges.  The video goes even deeper with its underlying message that sexuahty is normal: it's  something we aU have; our bodies are nothing to be ashamed of, and sex is fine as long  as we aU take responsibihty emotionaUy and  physicaUy. The film also has a grim side, discussing sexual abuse, prostitution and rape.  My favourite part was Pleasure, where  people were asked to describe what gives  them pleasure. There was talk about JeUo,  fruit and the usual stuff. (One woman in  the audience wanted to know how they got  enough jeUo to fiU a bathtub.) There were  two things in particular about this final segment that I hked. The first was the way females were shown as sexual (at last!), having urges, initiating sex, enjoying sex. The  young women told their sexual fantasies  and they didn't come off as sleazy, but as  healthy, happy, desiring women. The other  thing I hked was the destruction of the idea  k*/*V*A**^  Mechelle and Manuen: still  from Fresh Talk: Youth &  Sexuality  "I was 24 when I first started thinking  about this project," said MarshaU. "With  the BC system of education and the Socreds  running the government and banning commercials about condoms, I didn't see where  youth were having a say in what they were  getting in education. We're either told by  the government or schools or a priest what  we can or can't talk about.  "Our motive was to get the youth involved. It began with an eight-day empowerment workshop presented by Headlines  that the man's orgasm is important and the  woman's is not. One woman told us her  fantasy: "A man that wUl eat pussy untU  my fingernails go through the headboard."  All the women in the audience clapped and  cheered. The men sat stiU. I don't think  they understood why we were laughing. A  lot of men don't want to give oral sex, yet  they expect women to perform it on them.  Also, most men expect to have an orgasm  during sex but if the woman doesn't have  an orgasm, it's no big deal. Since when are  -| A   I     Consignment  Clothing  "Clothes Shouldn't Hurt"  * Specializing in size plus fashions  * Recycle your wardrobe for cash  4235 Dunbar Street  Vancouver, BC  222-1895  Ask about our " home shopping" service  True Inversions  Kiss & Tell, the lesbian art collective that produced the Drawing the Line interactive photo show, will perform their new erotic work in Vancouver on April 11th  (9 pm) at the York Theatre, 639 Commercial Drive.  True Inversions is a multi-media performance, using video, slides, music and live  performance to explore the complexities of lesbian sexual pleasure and the factors  that shape it. "True Inversions challenges women politically and personally, but  we also hope it's a good sexual experience," say artists Persimmon Blackbridge,  Lizard Jones and Susan Stewart. "Our sexuality is shaped by both our histories  and our desires. In True Inversions we acknowledge that these things can be  difficult to separate or reconcile in one person."  Throughout the performance, lesbian sex and feminist politics interact, blending  and colliding. Against a background of many levels of censorship, the women  in the video explore pleasure and vulnerability, while the women on stage voice  fantasies that are both seductive and challenging. A central theme is the pressure  on lesbians to position themselves on a sexual and political continuum and find  personal pleasure in a homophobic world.  Tickets are $5-$10, and are available at Josephine's, Book Mantel, Little Sister's  and at the door.  men's sexual desires more important than  women's?  I think Fresh Talk hits its mark.  Teenagers wiU hke this video and wUl be  able to identify with it—and hopefuUy learn  from it. The United Church of Canada and  the Ontario Ministry of Education have purchased Fresh Talk but wiU be cutting out  sections and editing words. I also fear that  certain groups may try to ban parts of the  video because of its gay content. H you want  to see the complete four-part video, I suggest you hurry before it gets destroyed by  editing.  To order Fresh Talk write to: STARTl  Productions, 1876 Garden Dr., Vancouver BC, V6N 4W7. Tel 251-4923.  Pearl Kirby is a student at Langara\  Community College working towards a\  diploma in Women's Studies.  Healthsharing  Healthsharing's special issue on Immigrant  and Refugee Women's Health is now  available! Eagerly awaited, it contains  articles about the impact of the new  reproductive technologies on immigrant  women, their experiences with the health  care system, wife assault in the immigrant  community and profiles of four women's  health organizations working for change, a  special resource section and more.  Single issue price $3.50 + $1 ( postage & handling)  Special bulk order rates:  • 10 copies for $30+ $10 p + h • 20 copies for $50 + $15 p +h  • 50 copies for $112 + $20 p+h • 100 copies for $200 + $25 p+h  Please add 7% GST to your order.  Payable to: Healthsharing  14 Skey Lane, Toronto, ON, M6J 3S4  is KINESIS Arts  ,*^m2m^%m%m%^2  Women and cancer:  Energy, strength, resiliance  by Betsy Nuse  AprU—which in this part of the world  is the leafy and flowery culmination of  our beautiful and gradual spring—is Cancer Month. In one way this means no more  than other advertising slogans: AprU is the  month when the Canadian Cancer Society  distributes daffodUs whUe soliciting donations to fund the medical research and patient services it supports.  The statistics you wiU read and hear in  other media during this month wiU highlight the rate at which cancer disables and  kUls people in Canada each year. That rate  is increasing dramatically. It's statisticaUy  hkely that every reader of Kinesis has been  or wiU be touched by cancer. Can you think  of the co-worker, lover, acquaintance or relative you know who has been diagnosed, operated on, treated with chemicals or radiation? Maybe that person is even you.  I am a Kinesis reader and, so far, a  Uving statistic. Two years ago this month  I survived a modified radical mastectomy  which removed my left breast as weU as the  malignant lump which was discovered there  so unexpectedly. Having cancer changed my  Ufe and continues to affect me profoundly.  But my feminism seems to have been immune to cancer, and now that two years  have passed since my major crisis I am trying to better analyze and understand the  effects of cancer on women in particular  (the personal) and the implications of those  effects on the Uves of aU of us (the poUtical). Of course, I have discovered what  we usuaUy find when we set out into the  unknown: other women have preceded us.  Feminists are responding to cancer statistics and the reahties behind them as constructively and energetically as feminists  seem always to respond to pressing issues  Uke incest, racism or violence. The bouquet  of recently-published books I describe has  helped me better understand the personal  and pohtical dimensions of cancer. I trust  these publications wUl help more of us see  Cancer Month from feminist perspectives.  ART AND HEALING:  An Artist's Journey Through Cancer  by Jan Crawford  North Vancouver: GaUerie, 1991  Vancouver artist Jan Crawford and Gallerie PubUcations have coUaborated in the  simple but attractive monograph caUed  Art and Healing: An Artist's Journey  Through Cancer. The booklet reproduced  a series of 13 drawings Crawford worked on  during and after a course of chemotherapy  treatment for Hodgkin's disease (a cancer of  the lymphatic system). The full-colour reproductions of her fine and powerful drawings are the centerpiece of Art and Healing, but they are enriched immeasurably by  Crawford's analysis of her own images and  wonderfully frank commentary on her physical and emotional condition at the time  each picture was made.  Chemotherapy is notoriously devastating  and toxic; its routine side-effects include  nausea, hair loss, sores and fatigue. Crawford describes how artistic vision was able  to encompass and transmute these experiences. She pays particular tribute to her  twin sister, Lee, who encouraged her to  draw the first picture after her first treatment. What Crawford has created offers  anyone facing a similar situation the reassurance that "you—even in depression and  despair—are not alone, and you can survive."  CANCER IN TWO VOICES  by Sandra Butler and Barbara Rosenblum  San Francisco: Spinsters, 1991  Cancer in Two Voices is a moving,  deeply personal dialogue between its two  authors, Sandra Butler and Barbara Rosenblum. They decided to write the book in  February, 1985, when Rosenblum's diagnosis of advanced breast cancer was confirmed. She survived a full spectrum of extensive and radical treatments for breast  cancer (chemotherapy, radical surgery, radiation and more, experimental chemotherapy) untU she died of metastasis (spreading  of the original cancer) to her Uver in February, 1988.  By publishing selected letters, journal entries and previously published essays which  describe and react to the events of Rosenblum's last three years of hfe, the authors  share with us two different views of the ways  cancer can affect lesbians' Uves, their relationship with each other and their relationships with the friends and family who are  their circle of support.  The voice which sets the tone of this dialogue is Rosenblum's, and, despite periods  of great anger and bleak despair, it shows  remarkable strength and resUience. Faced  with treatment consequences which weakened her body and curtaUed pleasures as  famiUar as eating and making love, Rosenblum could stiU claim: "It is so incredibly  wonderful to be alive." Her journey through  fear and anger, through resolution and the  abandonment of plans, dreams and hopes to  a contemplative and peaceful solitude facing death are set out in these pages.  Barbara Rosenblum  and Sandra Butler  Complementing her account are Butler's  reflections on attachment and lonehness,  helping and helplessness, closeness and distance. Consequently, this is in spirit very  much "a book about hving expansively,  openheartedly, joyfuUy in the face of our inevitable death."  CHALLENGING CANCER:  From Chaos to Control  by Nira Kfir and Maurice Slevin  London: Routledge 1991  Nira Kfir is an Israeh psychotherapist  specializing in crisis intervention and Maurice Slevin a British physician specializing in  cancer. Together they elaborate strategies  for helping those with cancer and their supporters (professional and otherwise) cope  with the anxiety, lonehness, confusion and  helplessness which can be so overwhelming. Their approach, set out in Challenging Cancer: From Chaos to Control,  is not explicitly feminist but to me represents the best of current "establishment"  thinking about the benefit clear attitudes  and feehngs can bring to cancer treatment,  and the changes a cancer crisis makes on  the Uves of those with cancer and those  around them. Kfir and Slevin have fa-  cUitated patient/supporter weekend workshops rather hke those organized by the  cancer patient self-help group in Vancouver  (HOPE) and transcripts from such a weekend comprise one section of the book.  The final section—and the main reason I include this book in this review—  is a tribute/biography of Vicky Clement  Jones, a medical researcher who founded  the U.K. national patient information and  support group called BACUP (British Association of Cancer United Patients). Jones  was a free-thinking, rebeUious patient of  Slevin's and her assertive attitude clearly  made a lasting impression on her doctor.  Like Terese Lasser, who began the at-the-  time controversial Reach for Recovery program for breast cancer patients in the US  in 1952 or Rose Kushner, whose journalistic investigation of breast cancer in 1975 became the best-selling resource book Why  Me?, Jones was an exceptional patient who  expanded her personal experience into the  sphere of pohtical action to the benefit  of many women who foUow after her. We  should not forget these pioneers.  CANCER AS A WOMEN'S ISSUE:  Scratching the Surface  edited by Midge Stocker  Chicago: Third Side, 1991  UN 3:  Women   with    Cancer    Confront    an  Epidemic  edited by Judith Brady  Pittsburgh/San Francisco: Cleis, 1991  For me, the most exciting, current feminist discussion about cancer combining  the personal with the pohtical has been  gathered in Third Side and Cleis Presses'  extraordinary anthologies Cancer as a  Women's Issue and 1 in 3. Good, old-  fashioned femimst activism animates both  coUections. In the spirit of Susan Shapiro's  militant and provocative article "Cancer  as a feminist issue" which appeared in  the September 1989 issue of Boston's Sojourner newspaper and seems to have signalled a fresh wave of cancer activism in  the US feminist community, the editors of  both anthologies refuse to accept the growing incidence of cancer among women without fighting for a requisite increase in research into female cancers and the establishment of networks for the care and support of women surviving cancer.  The wUder, less ordered, but perhapsl  more dramatically compelling anthology is  Cancer as a Women's Issue, which sets  out personal accounts, issue-focussed es-|  says, fiction and poetry by a range of  dinary women" of varying ages and back  grounds. There are unique and remark  able pieces hke "Fighting Spirit" in whichj  martial arts instructor Nancy Lanoue describes the attitudes and imagery which en  hanced her recovery; "Legacy", Nicky Mor  ris' reflections on her mother who was so  convinced she would die when diagnosed  with cancer that she placed Nicky and heri  brother in an orphanage; and "Air Born", al  haunting short story about caregiving someone with cancer by Portia CorneU.  This fine coUection is described as thel  first in the "Women/Cancer/Fear/Power"  series. Editor Midge Stocker calls for more  published contributions, discussion and local activism. "Perhaps you can start a group  in your area," she writes at the end of her  introduction, "Do what you can. Start by  talking."  1 in 3 is a larger collection, attempting  through thematic organization to present  a more orderly, comprehensive documentation of current attitudes and issues. There  is, for example, a section caUed "Nor Even  as Safe as Mother's Milk: The Environmental Connection" which includes accounts by  cancer survivors who hved near the Han-  ford Nuclear Plant not far across the British  Columbian border in Washington. Other  sections concern struggles with the medical  establishment and women brought closer to  cancer by scary symptoms which turned out  to be benign. This coUection also includes  an exciting mix of genres (poetry, essay,  personal account), and attempts to address  racial and class difference through the sh  number and variety of its contributions.  Both anthologies, by including so much  personal narrative, honour personal experience. But they also address larger pohtica  and social issues which these experiences reveal. They are a caU to awareness and activism, and recommending them both enthusiastically seems the best possible place  to conclude this review.  Betsy Nuse, granddaughter of Flora  who died of breast cancer and daughter of Florence who survived breast cancer, is a founding member of the Cancer Survivors' Group of Galiano Island.  KINESIS April 92 Letters  Dear Reader,  Kinesis loves receiving mail. Please get  your letter to us by the 18 th of th  month.  If you can, keep the length to about 500  words (if you go way over, we might  edit for space).  Hope to hear from you soon.  love.  Kinesis  WIF apologizes to  Invisible Colours  Kinesis:  The board and the membership of the  Vancouver Women in Focus Society wish  to apologize for the pain, financial difficulty  and disrespect shown to the women of the  Invisible Colours Society by our organization in the past.  On February 19, 1992, the membership  acclaimed a new board: JacqueUn Lev-  itin, Jill Baird, Lorna Boschman, Fumiko  Kiyooka, Candace Parker, Haruko Okano,  Gwethalyn Gauvreau, AU Mcllwaine and  Cornelia Wyngaarden.  The gaUery committee has been re-  instituted. The women/artists/women of  colour/feminist communities of Vancouver  have spoken very clearly and have indicated  that they demand a cultural representation. The Women in Focus society wiU now  be committed to the dual responsibiUty of  the artist and the pubUc to interpret each  other and the social conditions (diversity)  in which this interpretation takes place.  Within aU of that, the problems of representation of race/gender/sexuality /class /difference/power/authority/and famUy will be  specificaUy addressed.  We would be grateful for any assistance  in carrying out this social conversation and  invite the participation of any women who  wish to be involved in rebuilding this cultural space.  The Board of the  Vancouver Women in Focus Society  Vancouver, BC  aim,  fire...  Kinesis:  I'm not renewing my subscription to Kinesis. I do this regretfuUy because I want to  support women's visions and perspectives in  the press.  However, I have become disappointed  and angered by the shoddy "journalism"  and very biased reporting the paper has allowed to be published.  The boys love to see women attacking  each other and breaking into factions. Your  "reporters" are giving them lots of ammunition.  Sylvia Spring  Ottawa, ONT.  Thanks for  IWD cop-out  ri=jf=jp=Ji=jf=Jr=Jr=Jr=ir=Jr=Jr=ir=ir=ir=Jr  ROBIN QOLDFARB rut  Registered   Massage   Therapist  Kinesis:  On behalf of the 1992 International  Women's Day Committee, we wanted to  make a special thank you through the pages  of your paper to aU the women who did marshalling for the march and raUy on March  7th.  The IWD committee agreed to file a permit with the city and get traffic poUce to  assist with intersections for our march because of past problems around security that  different groups in the committee had experienced in their events. We understand that  this has been an issue of hot debate in the  women's movement for many years, but for  several reasons, including the feehngs of the  First Nations women, we agreed to go this  route.  After negotiating with the City Fest  Committee, we found that on March 7th,  as we were preparing to start our very wonderful parade, there was not a traffic cop to  be found.  The women who did the marshalling,  over half of which had not marshaUed before, did a wonderful job and only encountered a few problems that were, thankfuUy,  minor.  We congratulate you all on a job weU  done. Once again women took the responsibiUty, gave the direction, and came through  with flying colors.  Take care, and see you aU at next year's  event.  In Sisterhood,  Kim C. Zander  Marshalling Ctte.  IWD Committee,  Vancouver, BC  How about  community action?  Kinesis:  In February's issue of Kinesis there was  a letter recounting an incident in which a  lesbian of colour and single mother (Burcu  Ozdemir) was beaten repeatedly by a group  of white lesbians at a New Year's Eve party  in Vancouver. What on earth is going on  in the lesbian community when the only  response one sees in the March issue of  Kinesis is advice to the beaten women  about the value of self-preservation, ie., that  when people become drunk and violent, one  should simply leave and consider pressing  charges. I can't figure out which is more  outrageous, the general lack of supportive  response from the lesbian community for  a victim of lesbian violence, or this single  'blame the victim' response which seems to  spring from the same voice which warns us  to be careful about how we dress, where we  walk at night, and with whom.  As a white lesbian I feel sickened by this  incident. As lesbians we naively look to the  lesbian community as a safe refuge in a sea  of violence against women only to find that  "safety for lesbians" actuaUy means "safety  for white lesbians." Oh, and it's also a Uttle more dangerous if you happen to be disabled, or not of the middle-class, or non-  Christian, etc. This leaves about three safe  lesbians in the world.  WhUe I would encourage B. Ozdemir to  take legal action, I would also Uke to see  some community action. As lesbians, we  need to be accountable to each other for  incidents which occur in our own communities. Why isn't anyone asking questions  about what happened? Why aren't these  women being held accountable for their actions, if only in the pages of Kinesis? Hopefully, support for this woman wUl arrive in  forthcoming issues. I'd hke to take this opportunity to offer mine.  Sincerely,  Susan Shea,  Toronto, ONT.  The dangers  of hepatitis B  Kinesis:  I think it's great that you address such  problems as ADDS, HIV and violence. I  would hke to speak out about another abuse  and disease.  A friend of mine recently died of suicide.  She broke off an engagement with a man a  couple of years ago. They met again, got it  on and out of spite he wUlfuUy gave her the  virus, hepatitis B.  Please let us not forget this issue. Hepatitis B is very contagious, deadly, incurable  and not widely known. There are different  types of hepatitis and there is a preventar  tive vaccine which is not 100 percent guaranteed. This disease attacks the liver. It is  spread by blood, sexual contact and needle  users.  My friend was not a drug user. I view this  incident as a form of sexual assault and attempted murder. I would hke to hear from  people who have contracted the disease and  how they got it.  N. MuUer  Box 86250  North Vancouver, BC  V7L 4J8  ILW says  thanks, eh?  Kinesis:  I am writing on behalf of the International Lesbian Week Committee to thank  you for your advance coverage of ILW,  It was especiaUy helpful for us that you  printed a brief version of the ILW program.  As a smaU group with Umited funds we depend on community resources such as Kinesis to help us with our publicity.  ILW was a big success this year. All  events were weU attended and we received  lots of good feedback.  Thanks again for your support. Best of  luck with Kinesis.  In soUdarity,  Karen X. Tulchinsky  International Lesbian Week  Vancouver, BC.  new and  gently used books  Feu  Philosophy - Poetry  Native - General  Open daily 11am-7pm  Coffee Bar  1020 Commercial Drive  Vancouver BC V5L 3W9  (604) 253-1099  Bonnie Murray  Cynthia Brooke  e^T  vu*  .Cl.01   xft...  5766 Fraser    Street  Vancouver, B.C.  V5W 2Z5  Sarah-Jane  f604J  322-0107  20 KINESIS     Aprll92 'SSSS/S//SS/SS/SS/S///SSSSSSS/.  ////////////////////^^^^^  y////////////////////^^^^  bulletin Board  READ THIS  AU Ustings must be received no later than  the 18th of the month preceding publication. Listings are limited to 50 words and  should include a contact name and telephone number for any clarification that may  be required. Listings should be typed or  neatly handwritten, double-spaced on 8 1/2  by 11 paper. Listings wiU not be accepted  over the telephone. Groups, organizations  and individuals eligible for free space in the  BuUetin Board must be, or have, non-profit  objectives. Other free notices wiU be items  of general pubhc interest and wUl appear at  the discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $8 (plus $0.56 GST) for  the first 50 words or portion thereof, $4  (plus $0.28 GST) for each additional 25  words or portion thereof. Deadhne for classifieds is the 18th of the month preceding  pubUcation. Kinesis wUl not, accept classifieds over the telephone. AU classifieds must  be prepaid.  For Bulletin Board submissions send  copy to Kinesis Attn: BuUetin Board,  #301-1720 Grant Street, Vancouver, B.C.  V5L 2Y6. For more information call 255-  5499.  EVENT SiE V E N T^TE VENTS  E N T S  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis? We want to get involved  with you too. Help plan our next issues.  Come to the Writers' Meetings on Tues.,  April 7 (for the May issue) and Tues.,  May 5 (for the June issue) at 7 pm at our  office, #301-1720 Grant St. If you can't  make the meeting, call 255-5499. No experience necessary, all women welcome  NOT JUST ANOTHER PAGE  The Not Just Another Page Collective  welcomes all First Nations women and  women of colour who are past, present  and possibly future Kinesis volunteers to  our next meeting on Thurs., April 30 at  7:30 pm. For info on location and to arrange childcare subsidies, please contact  Fatima Jaffer at 682-0080  VSW WANTS YOU!  Want to get more involved but not sure  where to begin? Join us ... become a volunteer at Vancouver Status of Women.  VSW volunteers plan events, lead groups,  raise funds, answer the phone lines and  help to connect women with the community resources they need, organize the library and other exciting tasks! The next  volunteer orientation will be on Thurs.,  April 16, 7 pm at VSW #301-1720 Grant  Street. For more info call Jennifer at 255-  5511  VSW RESOURCE CENTRE  Starting April 6, Vancouver Status of  Women's Resource Centre will be open  Mondays 10 am to 8 pm and Tues. to  Thurs., 10 am to 5pm. Volunteers are  needed to help catalogue the library. Contact Christine 255-5511 for info  AFTERNOON ENTERTAINMENT  Sun., April 12,1:30 pm at Neville Books,  7793 Royal Oak, South Burnaby. Colleen  Anderson, Casey Arnott, Clelie Rich and  fantasy artist Chilam present Dangling  On The Edge—an afternoon of art, performance and poetry. Free. Info: 435-  6500  DOT TUER  Tracing Memory/Framing History: An  evening of Technology and Auto biography in contemporary video with Dot Tuer  at the Video In, 1102 Homer St.. Van.,  Fri., April 3 at 9 pm. $3 members, $4  non-mbrs. For info call 688-4336  WALK FOR PEACE  End the Arms  Race invites you to the  11th annual Walk for Peace, Sat., April  25, 1992. Assemble at 11:00 am at Kits  Beach Park and walk to Sunset Beach.  For info contact Miranda Holmes or Peter Coombes at 736-2366  GLOBAL STRATEGIES  On April 15, 8 pm at Britannia (Rm.  L4), Denise Nadeau and Lynn Bueckert  will report on the first Tri-National Working Women's Conference, held in Mexico  last February. (See pg. 11 for details). Call  430-0458 for more info  ROCK CLIMBING  The Federation of Mountain Clubs of BC  presents a new rock climbing course for  women only, taught by women instructors. Utilizing climbing to focus on personal challenges, you learn technical skills  and safety. Equipment provided. $160 +  GST. May 7, 9, & 10; June 18, 20, &  21; July 16, 18 & 19; Aug. 20, 22 &  23. Call 737-3053 for info  WOMEN AND THERAPY  Women and Therapy: Healing and Social Change, a continuing education conference. Sponsored by Women's Studies  Program, U. of Guelph and Faculty of Social Work. May 7-9. To register call (519)  767-5000 or fax (519) 767-0758  BREAST CANCER LECTURE  The Canadian Breast Cancer Foundation founder and past president Nancy  Paul, and Bette Johnston, National Administrative Director, will speak on "The  Impact Of Breast Cancer On Canadian  Women: How To Make A Difference."  Mon., April 13, 7 to 9 pm, BC Cancer Research Centre Lecture Theatre, 601  West 10th Ave. Limited Seating. Registration: 731-4723 or 263-5440  TWO SPIRITED GATHERING  1992, 5th Annual First Nations Two Spirited Gathering will be hosted on Aug. 6-  10 by the Two Spirited People of Van.,  BC. An alcohol and drug-free gay and lesbian event. All Native two spirited, families, non-Native lovers and their friends  are welcome. For info contact: Vancouver  Two Spirits, P.O. Box 598, Stn. A, West  Van., BC, V6C 2N3, or call Michelle at  (604) 687-4100  KOKORO DANCE  A special performance/art auction/gourmet food and beverage party, on April 18  at 7:30 pm. $40 single, $70 couple. Featuring: Stacked and Rage. For info call  the Firehall Arts Centre at 689-0926  CO-OP RADIO 102.7 FM  Co-op Radio presents its 17-day, all  live Spring Marathon starting March 20  through to April 5. For more info call Virginia at 684-8494  EQUALITY DAY  West Coast Women's Legal Education  and Action Fund (LEAF) and Women in  Music present an evening of music to celebrate Equality Day, the anniversary of  the equality provisions in the Canadian  Charter of Rights and Freedoms Wed.,  April 15 at the Discovery Theatre in the  Plaza of Nations. Doors open at 6:30 pm,  concert at 7:30 pm, reception at 9:30 pm.  Cost: reception only $15. Concert and reception $30. Contact LEAF 684-8772 or  Women in Music at 520-3395  LIVING WITH THE ENEMY  Photographs by Donna Ferrato, March  13-April 26, Presentation House Gallery,  333 Chesterfield Ave., N. Van., 986-1351.  Discussion group with Donna Ferrato  and others regarding male violence Sat.,  April 11, 2 pm. Limited seating. Call for  reservations  HOLLY ROBERTS EXHIBIT  Holly Roberts exhibit "Woman Listening  To Herself is showing at Presentation  House Gallery March 13-April 26. 986-  1351. Artist's talk April 3 at 12:15 pm  at The Emily Carr College of Art and Design. Free  JACQUELINE LARSON TALKS  The Kootenay School of Writing presents  Jacqueline Larson on H.D., April 24 at  8 pm, 152 W. Hastings, third floor. Cost  $4/$3. Call 688-6001 for info  RITA McKEOUGH PRESENTS:  In Bocca Al Lupo/ln The Mouth Of The  Wolf, installation and performance—"a  mutant rock opera." Call Presentation  House at 986-1351 for location and dates  FOOL'S DAY PARADE  Don't miss this year's Eleventh Annual  Fool's Day Parade on Sun., April 5  at the English Bay Seawall. The parade  musters at 11:30 am, beside the Vancouver Aquatic Centre (1050 Beach Ave.).  The parade is a free community event  with music, dancing, ridiculous costumes,  giant puppets, surprise events and more.  For info call Nancy at 255-5977  HELP TO ORGANIZE  OutRights/Les Droits Visibles needs you!  Be part of organizing the 2nd Pan-  Canadian Conference on Lesbian and Gay  Rights to be held in Van., Oct. 9-11,  1992. Interested in programming, translation, publicity, entertainment, administration, etc.? Give Rose-Marie Kennedy a  call at 879-0095  DOS FOLLOPIA  Dos Follopia, Seattle's musical comedy  duo, will be at The Lotus 455 Abbott St.,  Sun., May 3 8 pm. Special guest Maureen Field. Tix sliding scale $6-$8. Available at Little Sisters, Book Mantel and  The Lotus  CCEC Credit Union  L.OCMS available for...  ' a well-deserved  vacation        ^  1 spring v   >c  home renovations ^  or..  • a car  or recreational vehicle  1 reasonable rates  flexible terms  automatic deductions  free life insurance on loans  no pre-payment penalty  Try us first  Let's talk about it... call us at 254-4100  CCEC Credit Union  nmercial Drive, Vancouver, B.C. V5N 5P9  LEGAL CLINIC  Battered Women's Support Services and  the UBC Students Legal Advice Program  are co-sponsoring a series of free legal  clinics for women on Tuesdays from 6:30-  8:30 pm. For more info call 822-5791  REPETITIVE STRAIN  Women and Work sponsors a conference on repetitive strain injuries, April  10 and 11 at the Maritime Labour Ctr.,  Ill Victoria Dr., Vancouver. Delegates  will hear from injured workers, health and  safety activists, government and WCB  reps. Workshops include: ergonomics, collective bargaining, treatment, rehabilitation and filing compensation claims. The  cost is $25, includes lunch. Call 430-0458  to register  MEMORY AND DESIRE  A collaborative installation work opens at  The Vancouver Art Gallery on March 7  til April 12. This installation is part of an  exhibition which includes 11 artists. All  events are free with a gallery admission.  Sunday Afternoon at the Gallery Apr. 5,  2:30 pm a discussion with Linda Ohama  and Alexis MacDonald Seto. Evening  Talk Thurs. Apr. 9, 7:30 pm and screening of the award-winning film History and  Desire by Rea Tajiri will be followed by a  discussion tour of the exhibition  BATTERED LESBIANS  A free 10-week peer support group for lesbians who have been in or are in a battering or abusive relationship starts Wed.,  April 8, 7-9 pm. If you miss the first  night, come for the second week. Inclusive and confidential, open to all lesbians  who identify as victims of relationship violence. Location confidentiality. For more  info phone the VLC at 254-8458  WOMEN'S WRITERS' RETREAT  North Pacific Women Writers' Retreat  May 22-29, 1992, Rockwood Centre,  Sechelt, BC. A unique creative writing retreat for women. For details call 734-9816  (weekdays) or 876-6299 (weeknights) or  continued next page  aws/of  Canadian Woman Studies  The Best in Feminist Publishing  SUBSCRIPTIONS (4 issues per year):  CANADA  Individual $30 + CST $32.10  Institution $40 + CST $42.80  Single copy $8 + CST + postage   $956  FOREIGN  Individual $30 + $6 postage $36.00  Institution $40 + $6 postage $46.00  Single copy $8 + $2 postage $10.00  CWS/cf —packed with current issues, advocacy, action and theory — subscribe nowl  All orders must be prepaid. Please enclose  cheque or money order and send to: CWS/cf,  212 Founders College, York University,  4700 Keele St., Downsview, ON   M3J 1P3.  KINESIS April 92 ^sss*s*sss*^^^^^  BULLETIN BOARD  VT^IM T SIG ROUP SMG ROUPS  from previous page  write c/o 3091 West 15th Ave., Van., BC,  V6K 3A5. Application deadline: April  15/92  SUMMER WRITING SCHOOL  West Coast Women and Words Society will hold its 8th annual summer  school/writing retreat for women, Aug.  9-22 at the Canadian International College in North Van. This is a 2 week  residential school. For a brochure write:  West Coast Women and Words, #210-  640 W. Broadway, Van., BC V5Z 1G4  or call (604) 872-8014. Application deadline: May 8, 1992  GROUPS  RECEPTIONIST NEEDED  Vancouver Rape Relief and Women's  Shelter is in need of volunteer receptionists. The hours that are available are from  9 am to 5 pm, Monday to Friday. If you  are a woman looking to brush up your  WordPerfect 5.1 and switchboard skills  this is the perfect way to do it. Lunch  provided. Call 872-8212, ask for Anne  WOMEN VOLUNTEERS NEEDED  The information/crisis line of the Gay and  Lesbian centre needs women volunteers  to provide a balanced service for women  callers. The next volunteer training program begins in May. Applications at the  GLC switchboard office. #2-1170 Bute  St. Call 684-6869 7-10 pm, Mon.-Fri.  THE SEED WORKSHOPS  Battered Women's Support Services is offering four workshops for women who are  or have been in abusive relationships but  are not in crisis and want to stay focussed,  problem solve and move on. All workshops take place on Monday eves., 6:45-  9 pm in downtown Van. Dates: April 13,  April 27, May 11 and May 25. Fee: $5  per session. Space is limited, registration  is required. Call 687-1867  VOLUNTEERS NEEDED  The Downtown Eastside Women's Centre needs women to help. From answering phones to using any skills you would  like to share. Contact Pam at 681-8480  or go down to 44 E. Cordova St., Van.  WOMEN AND HIV/AIDS  Support network holds its annual general  meeting on Mon., April 27, 7 pm at 938  Howe St., Van. New members and volunteers welcome  WOMEN'S SUPPORT GROUP  Based on loving acceptance of self and  others. 8 week commitment $10-15 sliding scale. 7-9 pm. "Circle of Love"—a  safe space to give and receive love and  nurturance. Fridays $5-15 sliding scale.  Also anger work for women. Please call  Susan Elek. Transformational therapist  983-3056  SURVIVOR'S GROUP  Vancouver Incest and Sexual Abuse Centre (VISAC) will run a sexual abuse survivors group for adult women who are survivors of childhood or adolescent sexual  abuse/incest. This group is specifically for  visible minority women. The group will  start in late April and run for 10 weeks,  meeting one evening or afternoon a week.  Cost is $150 with a sliding scale available.  For info call VISAC at 874-2938  BREAST IMPLANTS:  If you are having or have had any difficulties with these devices or you are  contemplating breast implant surgery and  would like more information, I Know/Je  Sais support and information network  wants to hear from you. Support is our  biggest weapon, together we can help  each other through this devastating controversy. For more info call Linda at 594-  4048 or Joanne at 462-0299  JOB SKILLS DIRECTORY  Vancouver Society on Immigrant Women  is updating their Job Skills Directory. It  is a chance for immigrant women to find  work and potential employers to advertise  at no charge to either group. For more  information about the directory call Carolina Wong at 731-9108  WOMEN'S CHORUS  Do you enjoy singing with other women?  Come and rehearse with a Vancouver  Women's Chorus on Thursday evenings.  A challenging opportunity and lots of  fun. No auditions. We will perform for  the Gazebo Connection in May and plan  other performances later this year. Do  join us! Call 438-5442  SELF-HEALING CIRCLE  The Indian Homemakers' Assoc, is sponsoring a weekly Eagle Women's Self-  Healing Circle on Thursdays from 3:30  pm-5:30 pm, Suite 201-640 W. Broadway. Elders will share their traditional  ways. Please contact Florence Hackett at  876-0944 or 876-1468.  SELF ESTEEM  May 22-24. An intensive weekend for  women. An opportunity to explore the  roots of our self esteem in a supportive environment with experienced therapists. You will be invited to reconnect  with your own liveliness, spontaneity and  strengths. We will be using gestalt/exper-  iential work, visualization, dream work  and psychodrama to heighten and enhance self awareness. For info phone Delyse 873-4495 or Russel (Ms.) 737-3326  ART THERAPY  Groups for women only, no art experience  necessary, all materials provided. $200 for  10 sessions, sliding scale available, West  Side Art Therapy, Monica Thwaites. 732-  3220  VLC SERVES YOU  You're not only wanted, you're needed  at the Vancouver Lesbian Connection.  Help keep the centre open, put on events  or workshops, update resources, organize  the library or clean up the filing system.  Call Ginger 11 am-4 pm, Wed., and Fri.,  at 254-8458 for details. Group meetings  at the VLC now include: a support group  for lesbians who have been involved in  psychiatry; a group for lesbians who want  casual social contact and discussion; a  women of colour support group; legal advice; free massage and counselling; a Sex,  Love and Addiction support group, and  Coming Out groups for women exploring  their sexuality and trying to accept themselves as lesbians. Call 254-8458 to sign  up for these or to find out about other  lesbian groups and events.  FIRST NATIONS  An anthology by Two Spirited people of  the First Nations. Work can be typed  or handwritten, on any style or topic to  a max of 4,000 words. Send copies of  work (not originals), a brief bio and a self  addressed stamped envelope to: Queer  Press, P.O. Box 485, Stn. P, Toronto,  Ont., M5S 2T1. Deadline May 15, 1992  LESBIAN EROTIC FANTASIES  A mixed media collection of visual art, fiction, poetry, Haiku, creative non-fiction,  performance art, interviews, recipes. The  anthology will explore ways women of  colour create, think and act on erotic fantasies. Send double spaced, copies of work  to: Graphic Detail, Attn: Makeda Silvera  or Leleti Tamu, Sister Vision Press, P.O.  Box 217, Stn. E, Toronto, Ont., M6H  4E2. Deadline Sept. 30, 1992  WOMEN OF COLOUR  Contributions sought for a collection of  theoretical work by women of colour living in Canada. Work is to speak to and  analyze the political and social lives of  women of colour from a feminist perspective. Submissions to be typed, double spaced copy (no originals). Queries to:  Sister Vision (see address above). Deadline May 30, 1992  MIXED RACE WOMEN  An anthology of stories, poetry, interviews, photographs, essays, graphics,  journalism, oral stories, and letters. Sub-  lliJ:lM*H<fliM:  missions to specify bi- or multi-racial heritage, and be typed, double spaced copies  (not originals). Send to: Carol Camper,  Sister Vision Press (see address above).  Deadline Oct. 31, 1992  WOMEN IN VIEW  Is accepting applications for the 1993  festival from emerging and established  artists. Festival dates Jan. 24-31, 1993.  For info contact Women In View, 314  Powell St., Van., BC, V6A 1G4. Phone  (604) 685-6684, fax (604) 683-6649.  Deadline April 15, 1992  CALL FOR ABSTRACTS  Abstracts wanted: 2-3 pages in length on  special relationships between women (sisters, literary mentors, proteges, romantic friendships or other friendships). Papers to be presented at a conference in  Nanaimo on Vane. Isle Oct. 16-18, 1992.  Contact: Kathryn Barnwell/Liza Potvin,  Dept. of English, Malaspina College, 900  Fifth St., Nanaimo, BC, V9R 5S5. Deadline April 21, 1992  WESTERN FRONT SOCIETY  The Western Front Society is calling for  submissions from groups and individuals involved in performance art and music. Contact Haruko Okano, c/o Western  Front Society, 303 E. 8th Ave., Van., BC,  V5T 1S1, Call 876-9343 or 872-3570  MIXED BLOOD WOMEN  And multi-racial women are invited to  send writings of fiction, poetry and essays in any language, but must include an  English translation. Send typed, double  spaced or printed work. Send two copies  of all work. Up to five pieces may be  submitted. Priority given to unpublished  work. Include a bio and self addressed  stamped envelope to Kate Miller, 224 Minor Ave., N #A, Seattle, WA, 98109 or  Jamie Lee Evans 482 44th St., Oakland,  CA 94609. Deadline June 30, 1992  FILMS/VIDEOS WANTED  Women's Reel Vision and Atlantic Film  Festival are calling for submissions of new  films and videos for this year's film and  video festival. Entry forms available. Call  (902) 422-3456, Fax (902) 492-2900. Atlantic Film Festival, 2015 Gottingen St.,  Halifax, NS, B3K 3B1. Deadline May 15,  1992  Q&»&.&  GAZEBO CONNECTION  A lesbian organization that provides  monthly events that include: dinner/dances, guest speakers, potlucks and get-a-'  ways for lesbians. For membership or info  call our Newsline at 438-5442  2 KINESIS Bulletin Board  mm  //////////////////////^^^^^  a^fftraBB W^fflHBB  MEDIATOR SOUGHT  Feminist organization seeks evaluators  experienced in cross cultural conflict and  mediation to facilitate a participatory,  consensus building restructuring process.  Fee to be negotiated. For more info call  255-4767 (mess.) By April 15, 1992  RUSTIC CABINS  Tiny cabins in Coombs (Vancouver Island) for rent. $5 a nite or $125 a month.  Rustic and peaceful by the creek. More  time than money? Ask about work exchange. Call, write Spinstervale, Box 429,  Coombs, BC, VOR 1M0, (604) 248-8809  COZY CULTUS LAKE COTTAGE  Two bedroom plus private hot tub, fenced  in yard, fireplace, modern kitchen, laundry facilities, totally furnished, linen provided. One minute walk to lake and  wharfs. Close to golf, tennis courts, water  slides, go-carts, boat rentals, walking and  cycling trails. $600 weekly. For your reservation please call Norma at 858-7847  HOUSEMATE WANTED  Are you looking for something between  living communally and living alone? I am  looking for a housemate for around May  1, 1992 (responsible, non-smoker, pet-  less and probably female), with whom to  share my 2 person house. It's a lovely  ted home in East Van. with lots of extras (garage, garden, fireplace, etc.). Rent  for the whole house is $900 plus utilities,  split two ways. If interested, call Gail at  253-5404  FOR RENT  Four bedroom, 3 bathroom house for rent  to 4 N/S women. Cambie/Oak area on  W. 18th, across from park. $350 per  bedroom ground floor; $400 per bedroom on main. Close to shopping, transit. Owner is a feminist, interested in  providing longterm affordable housing for  women. Available May 1. 222-4491  COUNSELLING NOW  Experiencing difficulties? Feminist counselling in a supportive, confidential atmosphere. For crises, personal growth, parent/teen issues, gay and lesbian issues,  coming out and life passages. Individuals, couples, families. Sliding scale fees.  For free consultation call Eleanor Brock-  enshire, BHEC, MSW., 876-9475  SAILING FOR WOMEN  Herizen (TM) New Age Sailing For  Women. Personalized sailing and self-  awareness immersion courses for women,  in B.C. and Mexico. Herizen (TM) is  about sailing and about women's reality,  self-confidence, self-esteem, and belief in  ourselves in a concrete way that is transferable to all parts of our lives. Call Trish  662-8016  HOUSE SWAP  Non-smoking woman and well-trained  labrador retriever looking for place to stay  in Greater Vancouver area approx. 2-4  days/month. Willing to swap Salt Spring  Island home. Call Julie 1-537-1117  'Independent  Publishers' Fair  'Literary Cafe  'Labelling the Jam  'Local Folk Music  • Video & Film Screenings  'Literary Olympics  •On Its Feet  'Drive-Thru Poetry  Blast-Off  'Planetary Poetry Bash  'Atomik House of Poetry  'World's Biggest Book  'Children's Literature  in Colour  •Native Perspective  in Publishing  'Silences? But We  Gotta Write!  We need volunteers!  Phone 876-8746  VANCOUVER,  FESTIVAL  fi®B@  Thursday, April 23  Friday, April 24  Saturday, April 25  Sunday, April 26  at the W.I.S.E. Club Hall, Britannia  Community Centre, La Quena, Cruel  Elephant, Vancouver East Cultural Centre  3505 Commercial St., Vancouver, B.C. V5N 4E8  Tel: 876-8746    Fax:  875-1403"=^'  nremairfi=i»)  ACUPRESSURE  Jin Shin Do Acupressure. A gentle, mindful, non-violent therapeutic touch. The  art of energy balancing. Release and  body/mind/spirit centering. Allow yourself the gift of enhancing relaxation and  continue to discover self care. 90 minute  sessions. Sliding scale. Call Lisa 685-7714  SURROGACY RESEARCH  I am a female researcher interested in the  question of surrogacy. I am interested in  contacting women who have been or who  are surrogate mothers. Please contact:  Fiona Green, Women's Studies, University of Winnipeg, Winnipeg, Man., R3B  2E9. (204) 786-9295  THE SACRED FEMININE  Concern for our planet has led many of  us to reconsider our relationships with  the natural world and one another. Where  can we personally choose to address some  of the lifestyle changes called for and  truly become "part of the solution"?  How, in our culturally diverse, contemporary reality can we collectively celebrate ancestral wisdom that reveres the  interconnectedness of all life? Awareness  that "the personal is political is spiritual"  awakens us to our ecological selves ...  eight-week circles include guest presenters, film, group discussion, creative exploration indoors and out! Sliding scale  $70-$100. Please call Women and the  Earth at 737-4302  A WOMAN'S PLACE  Emotional Fitness Centre: New counselling, educational and consulting service on the North Shore. Offers feminist and lesbian affirmative counselling,  workshops, support groups and information. Areas of specialization: low self-  esteem, depression, anxiety, communication, relationship difficulties, addiction,  sexual abuse recovery, coming out. Call  Lou Moreau, Registered counsellor, 922-  7930  BED & BREAKFAST  Rocking Horse Inn, Seattle: Unique bed  and breakfast on Capitol Hill. Great  views, hot tub, warm hospitality. (206)  322-0206  BODY THERAPY  The Trager Approach gently encourages  relaxation, self-acceptance and respectful change. Chris Bruels will share the  theory supporting this non-intrusive approach, Mentastics and samples of tablework. No charge. For women. Wed., Apr.  15th, 7:30 pm at Women's Counselling  Services of Vancouver, 1662 W. 8th Ave.,  738-4298  HOUSING  How much do you need to buy your own?  What will your monthly payments be?  How much of a downpayment is necessary? Where can you afford to buy? Today interest rates are the lowest they have  been in 25 years. Variable rates are about  8 percent. If you are thinking about buying or selling, let me put 14 years experience to work for you: Linda McNeill (298-  0795); Seasons Realty Ltd., (435-8893)  FREE THE SINGER WITHIN!  Singers of all levels can increase range,  tone and power while developing confidence to sing out and speak up! Expert  vocal coaching in a supportive, accepting environment. A holistic and effective  method for personal empowerment, joyful creative expression and a great voice!  On Commercial Drive. $30/session or 6  sessions/ $150. Penny Sidor 251-4715  VILLA DE HERMANAS  All women's Caribbean Beachfront Guesthouse: Beautiful spacious L/F owned  guesthouse on long, secluded beach in the  Dominican Republic. Tropical gardens,  pool, large, private guestrooms, sumptuous meals, massages, and crystal healings. Room rates: $330 single; $440 double per week. Call our Toronto friend, Susan, at (416) 463-6138 between 9 am and  10 pm  1988 W 4th & Maple  Vancouver, B.C.  V6J 1M5  733-3511  lout; c  k   Hours:  -21  VANCOUVER  WOMEN'S  BOOKSTORE  315 Cambie Street  Vancouver, B.C. V6B 2N4  (604) 684-0523  Monday - Saturday  .00-5:30 pm  7\  J  |   AFTON MANAGEMENT LTD.  X ACCOUNTING, ADMINISTRATION & MANAGEMENT  X CONSULTANTS  - BUSINESS & BANK PROPOSALS - CORPORATE TAX RETURNS  - START UPS & BUSINESS ACQUISITIONS - FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  - GOVERNMENT GRANTS & LOAN APPLICATIONS  INITIAL CONSULTATION WITHOUT OBLIGATION  BY APPOINTMENT ONLY  KINESIS Apri.92 LIB1Z8G  LIBRARY PROCESSING CTR - SERIALS  tm EAST MALL, U.B.C.  VANCOUVER, BC V&T 1ZB  SUe^Uoj^l^^