 ,jMARCHJ989  Complete Info, on IWD Events  SpecigLCollections Serial  cppa $1.75  News About Women That's Not In The Dallies Kinesis welcomes volunteers  to work on all aspects of  the paper. Call us at 255-  5499. Our next News Group  is Thurs. March 9, at 1:30 pm  at Kinesis, #301-1720 Grant  St. All women welcome even if  you don't have experience.  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE:  Shelley Anderson, Marsha Arbour, Colette Beaulieu, Gwen  Bird, Donna Butorac, Andrea Lowe, Sonia Marino, Allisa McDonald, Joni Miller,  Lucy Moreira, Sarah Orlowski,  Nancy Pollak, Susan Prosser,  Morgan Rea, Noreen Shanahan, Esther Shannon, Yvonne  Van Ruskenveld, Bonnie Wa-  terstone.  FRONT COVER: Graphic by  Debbie Bryant  EDITORIAL BOARD: Marsha Arbour, Gwen Bird, Allisa  McDonald, Nancy Pollak, Noreen Shanahan, Esther Shannon, Michele Valiquette.  CIRCULATION AND DISTRIBUTION: Gwen Bird, Susan  Lash, Cat L'Hirondelle.  ADVERTISING: Marsha Arbour.  OFFICE: Cat L'Hirondelle.  Kinesis Is published 10 times  a year by the Vancouver Status of Women. Its objectives  are to be a non-sectarian feminist voice for women and  to work actively for social  change, specifically combatting sexism, racism, homophobia and imperialism.  Views expressed in Kinesis  are those of the writer and  do not necessarily reflect VSW  policy. All unsigned material Is  the responsibility of the Kinesis Editorial Board.  SUBSCRIPTIONS: Individual  subscriptions to Kinesis are  $17.50 per year or what you  can afford. Membership in the  Vancouver Status of Women  is $25.50 or what you can afford, includes subscription to  Kinesis.  SUBMISSIONS: All submissions are welcome. We reserve  the right to edit and submission does not guarantee publication. All submissions should  be typed double spaced and  must be signed and include  an address and phone number.  Please note Kinesis does not  accept poetry or fiction contributions. For material to be  returned, a SASE must be included. Editorial guidelines are  available on request.  ADVERTISING: For information about display advertising  rates, please contact Kinesis.  For information abou^ classifieds, please see the classified  page in this issue.  DEADLINE: For features and  reviews the 10th of the month  preceding publication; news  copy, 15th; letters and Bulletin  Board listings 18th. Display  advertising: camera ready,  18th; design required, 12th.  Kinesis is a member of the  Canadian Periodical Publishers Association and is indexed  in the Alternative Press Index.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status of  Women, 301-1720 Grant St.,  Vancouver, B.C. V5L 2Y6  Kinesis is produced on an  IBM PC using PC TeX and  an in-house laser printer. Additional laser printing by East-  side Data Graphics. Camera  work by Northwest Graphics.  0t0X  Reproductive technology: what demand is being supplied  INSIDE  Clinic: protestors jailed; supporters meet 3  Developers target Drive 4  Women's health fund launched 5  Union cites sabotage^ affirmative action 7  \FL  v  trie* waste from what we want 8  by Shelley Anderson  Contraband children: snared by profit 10  by Cyndl Mellon  Youth: rallying with imagination and vitality 12  by Susan Prosser  Ban reproductive and gene technology 14  by Susan Strega  Child abduction: a world of undefended borders.... 16  Sharbati: surviving by side stepping tradition 17  by Jyotl Sangara  No canons on children's creativity 18  by Jill Pollack  Making a racket about reality 19  by Dorothy Kidd  LEAF: Revving it up at the 20  by Joni Miller  REqCKMS  Movement Matters 2  What's News? 6  by Donna Butorac  In Other Worlds 23  by Melanie Conn  Commentary 24  by Joanne P.  Letters 25  Bulletin Board 25  compiled by Sonia Marino  Printing by Web Press Graph-  Second class mail #6426  ISSN 0317-9095  KINESIS Movement Matters  {Movement  matters listings  information  Movement Matters is designed to be a |  network of news, updates and information of special interest to the women's  movement. Submissions to Movement Matters should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double-spaced on eight and a half by  eleven paper. Submissions may be edited for  length. Deadline is the 18th of the month  preceding publication.  Equality  watch  West Coast LEAF (Women's Legal Education and Action Fund) is presenting a  conference entitled "Equality Four Years  Later"on Friday evening, April 14 and all  day Saturday, April 15, at Vancouver's Robson Square Media Centre. The conference  will review how the equahty provisions in  the Canadian Charter of Rights and  Freedoms have been interpreted by the  courts, responded to by government and  used by equahty seeking groups in the four  years since the Charter came into force  in April, 1985. The focus will be on issues of particular concern to women, including family law, the criminal justice system, native women's rights, employment  and health.  The conference will feature resource persons and speakers from across Canada including representatives of LEAF, the Court  Challenges Program, Women Against Violence Against Women (WAVAW), DisAbled  Women's Network (DAWN), among others.  Conference registration is $10 for students,  seniors and unemployed people, $25 for others. For additional information call Janet  Kee at LEAF, 684-8772 or Linda Raymond,  Conference Coordinator, 224-2568.  In Visible  Colours  In Visible Colours will be the first major Canadian tribute to films and videos by  women of colour and Third World Women  and will take place in Vancouver, November 15-19, 1989. The festival will showcase  the vital and exciting work by women of  diverse cultures and perspectives. Accompanying forums and workshops will address  the production, distribution, economic and  aesthetic concerns of festival participants,  who will include film and video makers.  In Visible Colours urgently requests submissions of films and videos directed, written or produced by women of colour or  CROSSLAND CONSULTING  Personal Management  Services for Artists  Arts Organizations Caroer Counsefling  Grant and Proposal Writing Bookkeeping Services  * FIRST CONSULTATION FREE*  Jackie Crossland  j   By Appointment Or  KINESIS  Third World women. The festival is looking for the most recent productions, of  any length and in all catagories: documentary, narrative, experimental, animation,  etc. There is no entry fee and artist fees  will be paid. Submission deadline is May 30,  1989.  For more information or entry forms,  please contact: Lorraine Chan or Zainub  Verjee, Festival Coordinators, c/o National  Film Board of Canada, 300 -1045 Howe St.,  Vancouver, B.C. Canada, V6Z 2B1 o- ^U  (604) 666-3838, Fax (604) 666-1569. In Visible Colours is sponsored by the National  Film Board and Vancouver's Women in Fo-  Media  directory  The newest edition of the Directory of  Women's Media, published by the Women's  Institute for Freedom of the Press (WIFP),  is now available. The directory has 1,873 entries which describe over 702 women's periodicals from around the world, 111 women's  presses and publishers, as well as women's  news services, radio and television groups,  film groups, bookstores, and a directory  of over 500 individual women active in  both the alternative and mainstream media.  A special 30-page section "Women Working Toward a Radical Restructuring of the  Communications System" is now a special  feature of the directory.  The WIFP has been publishing the directory annually since 1975. Founded in 1972,  WIFP is a non-profit, tax-exempt research  and publishing organization of women who  are concerned with the expansion and restructuring of the communications system  in order for media to be in the hands of  all people. To order a copy of the directory send $15. (low-income women, $11) to  WIFP, 3306 Ross Place, N.W., Washington,  D.C. 20008, USA or call (202) 966-7783.  N.F.B  resources  sexuahty, etc. The resources depict women  in strong, positive roles and reflect women's  concerns and perspectives. They also emphasize that if attitudes to women and  equahty are o change, young men must also  address roles, rights and values in an evolving society. Women Breaking Through  was designed to complement the growing  initiatives on the parts of Ministries of Education and local school boards to integrate  women's concerns into all aspects of the curriculum. Copies are available by contacting JoAnn Harrison, Education Coordinator, National Film Board, D-5, P.O. Box  6100, Montreal, P.Q. H3C 3H5  Equity in the Classroom: Using Film  to Transform the Learning Environment is a workshop offered by the NFB for  educators, other professionals and community groups who wish to integrate women's  changing image into educational settings,  the workplace, and the world. It offers  an opportunity to view the sexist myths  historically reinforced by film, and to rewrite the script to transform limiting myths  into positive images. The workshop can  be designed to meet the specific needs of  the group requesting it. Other NFB workshops include Media Literacy: Empowering our students and ourselves, and Career Planning for the 1990's. To book,  or to find out more about these workshops,  contact Marian Dobbs, #4-31 West 11th,  Vancouver, B.C., V5Y 1S6, (604) 874-7893  (Western Canada) or Rosemary Sullivan,  1965 St, Armand Rd., Pigeon Hill, P.Q. J0J  1Y0, (514) 248-2524 (Eastern Canada)  Shining for  Everyone  Quebec's Le Theatre Parminou, one of  Canada's foremost adult touring companies,  has developed a new theatrical work Equality Shining for Everyone which will be  touring Ontario and Western Canada in the  fall of 1989 and is looking for sponsoring organizations in communities in these regions.  Equality Shining for Everyone helps  an audience identify discriminatory attitudes and practices in the workplace, and  then goes on to encourage them to imagine  Women Breaking Through, a guide to  the National Film Board audio-visual resources for women's studies across the secondary school curriculum, provides access  to the wealth of NFB audio-visual resources  for the classroom. Resources in this collection encompass a wide range of topics:  women's historical struggles and victories;  pohtical feminism today; the arts; human  rights; peace; the environment; health and  Maureen McEvoy ba ma (Cand.)  Counselling  Psychology  732-3227  Areas of expertise:  sexual abuse, relationships,  sexuality, depression, ACOA  255-9559 FAX 253-3073  1460 Commercial Drive  Eastside DataGraphics  to- Sv&iq<M& <**t tfc& Special Ocaz&iwt  DESKTOP l»OBLI$HlNa-STATIONERY ■ ARTISTS MATERIALS » COPIES - FACSIMILE  ways of changing the rules of the game. The  company relies on direct audience participation to first raise, and then discuss these  issues—all in a friendly, warm, and humorous atmosphere.  If your community group is interested in  hosting a production of Equality Shining  for Everyone, contact Le Theatre Parminou, 312, Oliver, Victoriaville, P.Q., G6P  6S8 or call (819) 758-0577.  Stories  on film  DEC Films announces the release of three  new women's films and videos. The Struggle for Choice is a five-part Canadian  video series that chronicles the movement  and strategies of abortion groups since 1969.  One segment documents Quebec's own specific struggles in the abortion rights movement (Five 30 min. parts, video. Purchase:  one part $325; series: $ 1195. Rental $30-  50 per part. Just Because of Who We  Are is a powerful video documentary concerned with the issue of violence against  lesbians. (28 min., video. Purchase: $395;  Rental: $30-50.) The Passion of Remembrance focuses on the Black experience in  Britain and raises issues around gender, sexuality, race and intergenerational conflict  between Black British youth, and their immigrant parents. (80 min. 16mm or video.  Rental: $75-110, video, $150-175, 16mm;  Purchase—enquire.) DEC Films distributes  many other women's films and videos and a  catalogue is available. For more information  contact DEC Films, 394 Euclid Ave., Toronto, Ontario, M6G 2S9 or call (416) 925-  9338.  PERESTROIKA:  SOVIET WOMEN  IN CHANGE  Libby Griffin, recently  returned from a tour  of the Soviet Unibn  will speak about her  experiences and  observations of the  changes taking place  in socialist society and  how they affect Soviet  women.  All comments and  questions are  welcome in a  discussion period to  follow.  EVERYONE  WELCOME  Sponsored by the Women's  Committee and Vancouver East Club  of the Communist Party of Canada  Tues., March 14  7:30 p.m.  La Quena  1111 Commercial ////////////////////^^^^  //////////////////^^^^^  news  Court jails  anti-choice  protestors  by Noreen Shanahan  Asked to comment on his experience in prison, Rev. Vincent  Hawkswell told the Vancouver  Sun, "it wasn't too bad ... I think  it's safer in there than it is in the  womb."  Right to Life Society president  Betty Green, meanwhile, compared her "very nice" days at  Lakeside to a student residence  "... with couches and a colour  TV and a kitchen with a coffee pot  on."  With the February B.C. Supreme Court decision to change the  civil offense charge to a criminal  offense, Green, Hawkswell and the  other anti-choice protestors could  soon be back in prison, safely sipping.  In spite of reluctance from the  B.C. Attorney General's office,  Mr. Justice Josiah Wood ruled  that the charges would be turned  into criminal proceedings, possibly resulting in harsher penalties  to those arrested during an illegal  blockade of Everywoman's Health  Centre in early February.  "It's clear this decision isn't  to protect the chnic, but because  the integrity of the courts has  been attacked," said B.C. Coalition for Abortion Chnic (BCCAC)  spokesperson Hilda Thomas.  Conscious of the vigilantly anti-  choice attitude of the Attorney  General's office, BCCAC is nervous of the new charges.  Defendants plan to use the 'defense of necessity' argument, saying their actions stemmed from an  interest in 'rescuing' a third party,  namely the fetus.  This argument was one of several used by Dr. Henry Morgentaler in his 1988 Supreme Court  acquittal. In his defense, the third  party was the pregnant woman  choosing an abortion.  Meanwhile, Thomas said protestors continue to picket the  clinic but without blocking the entrances.  "A few nasty individual pick-  eters lounge in the doorway, but  because the injunction has no enforcement order attached, we need  pohce to observe the person and  that's virtually impossible."  In other abortion news, the  Law Reform Commission recently  released a Report recommending abortion restrictions after 22  weeks, which many feel adds fuel  to the fire around fetal rights.  The Report recommends abortions be allowed up to the 22nd  week if the woman and her doctor  agree her physical or mental health  are endangered.  After 22 weeks, a second doctor's opinion would be required  and an abortion allowed only if  her hfe or physical health were  severely threatened.  These recommendations, now  before the federal Justice Ministry,  could  undermine  last  January's  Rape victims  at risk  by Kinesis Staff Writer  Rape victims in Alberta will not  have the same protection in court  as sexual assault victims elsewhere  in Canada, if an Alberta Court of  Appeal ruhng is allowed to stand  unchallenged.  The Alberta court, the province's highest court, ruled in late  February that a woman's sexual  background can be brought into  evidence in sexual assault cases  saying that the prohibition using  such evidence is unconstitutional  because it may violate the accused's right to a fair trial  The prohibition against the defense use of a woman's past sexual history in rape cases was established in the reform of the Criminal Code's section regarding rape  in 1983. Feminists finally won the  reform after arguing for over a  decade that defense attorney's in  rape cases put the victim on trial  by bringing up her sexual background in an attempt to undermine her credibility. The reform  was seen as an important step  in encouraging women to press  charges against their attackers.  Commenting on the case, Jane  Karstaedt, of Edmonton's sexual  assault centre, characterized the  decision as "a major blow and really a step back into the Middle  Ages."  Currently a case regarding the  admissibility of the victim's past  sexual history in rape trials is  before the Supreme Court of  Canada. In that case, two accused  rapists have appealed their conviction by an Ontario court and  are trying to have evidence allowed  which deals with the victim's past  sexual history. The Women's Legal Education and Action Fund  (LEAF) is intervening in that case,  arguing that the Criminal Code  section should stand.  The Canadian Civil Liberties  Association has been lobbying the  federal government to change the  section, which it beheves does not  strike a fair balance between the  rights of the accused and the rights  of the victim.  In the Alberta ruhng, the court  found that evidence that the victim has previously consented to  similar sexual activity should be  allowed when the accused is arguing that he had an honest but mistaken behef that the victim consented. The Alberta government  has not decided whether it will appeal the Court of Appeal ruhng.  Clinic supporters  meet  Another Operation Rescue (OR) protest at Everywoman's Health Centre in late February brought out the  Vancouver police video unit in full force. Over 100 OR protestors blocked the clinic doors but dispersed  before arrests could be made.  Supreme Court abortion victory if  they're implemented in law.  "[The Report] makes your hair  stand on end," said Thomas. "The  bottom hne is they don't trust  women to act as responsible moral  agents."  Less than one percent of abortions are performed after 22 weeks,  ,she said, and reform should be  happening in terms of making  early abortions more accessible.  "It's insulting to women; as if  they'd go through a pregnancy for  22 weeks and then, on a whim,  rush out and have an abortion,"  said Thomas.  Of the 30 working papers produced by the Law Reform Commission since 1971, 12 have been  at least partly enacted by Parliament, including recommendations  on the 1985 Divorce Act.  Hon. Doug Lewis, identified as  supporting choice on abortion,  says the Report is under consideration by his Justice Ministry but  won't push the government into  making a new abortion law.  The government, meanwhile, is  awaiting the Supreme Court of  Canada decision on the Borowski/  rights of the fetus case, which is  expected soon, before considering  a new abortion law.  Thomas says by waiting, they're  trying to create a climate more  favourable to fetal rights, thereby  easing the passage of legislation  allowing a 'compromise' between  pro-choice and anti-choice positions.  In Vancouver, women are encouraged to attend a "March for  Choice," on March 4. In celebration of International Women's  Day, speakers include: Alderman  Libby Davies, Linda Irvin, Ramin-  der Rosanjh and a speaker from  BCCAC.  "It's vitally important we demonstrate to the government, Attorney General, and the Health  Ministry that B.C. is pro-choice,"  said Thomas.  "And that this group (of anti-  choice protestors) is a tiny minority within a majority. And women  of B.C. won't tolerate attacks on  our personal hves and choices."  For more info, on "March  for Choice" see Bulletin Board.  by Noreen Shanahan  "We don't want to hide the  fact the clinic is operating in very  stressful times."  So said Joy Thompson who  spoke at a mid-February general membership meeting of the  B.C. Coalition for Abortion Chnics (BCCAC).  Thompson voiced a shared sentiment with other members that  a strong united coalition will help  overcome the difficulties.  In its third month, the Everywoman's Health Centre has performed over a hundred abortions,  responds to seventy calls a day  and works on a restricted and inadequate budget. And clinic staff  must too often step over 'pious'  bodies on their way through the  door.  But the calls continue to be  answered and the clinic hasn't  been shut down once. Victory was  recognized and applauded at the  meeting, as was the determination  to survive.  Inexperience in running a medical facility of this kind, however,  coupled with immense external  pressure has predictably caused  the stress to move inside.  Discussion at the general meeting dealt with concerns around difficulty in establishing a non hierarchical, feminist controlled work-  place.  Also discussed was the clinic's  relationship with medical professionals. Hilda Thomas stressed  that the coalition recognizes the  need to maintain good working relationships.  "We're not anti-doctor," said  Thomas. "Without the support of  doctors there is no clinic."  She reminded members of it's  original objective to be a community based model supported on feminist principles of accountability.  This, she said, will be refined with  time, experience, and the support  and active participation of coalition members.  "Express your original commitment to the clinic and our basis oi  unity," she urged.  Dr. Bob Makaroff of Physicians for Choice reaffirmed his  group's support for the clinic.  Calling doctors "technicians (who)  want to avoid pohtical situations,"  and who must be encouraged to  help, Makaroff sees the role of  Physicians for Choice to 'assist'  other doctors wanting to work for  Choice.  To that end, he requested the  clinic provide on-going, accurate  financial and operational information, saying such information  "brings people to join."  Joy Thompson supported this  request and spoke about the improving relations between professional and non-professional clinic  staff.  With a general agreement that  Physicians for Choice and BCCAC  are moving toward common goals,  the newly-elected steering committee was mandated to meet with  the doctors and "get down to the  business of running the clinic."  Physicians for Choice officially  joined BCCAC for the first time at  this meeting, and accepted a position on the steering committee.  The new BCCAC steering committee, elected at this meeting and  beginning a six month term, is as  Mows:  GROUPS: Concerned Citizens  for Choice on Abortion (1), NDP  (2), Physicians for Choice (1),  Fraser Valley CARAL (1), Conference of Canadian Women (1),  United Fisherman and Allied  Workers (1), Communist Party of  Canada (1), Rape Relief (1), Vancouver Lesbian Connection (1).  INDIVIDUALS: Hilda Thomas,  Ann Hamilton, Janet Vesterback,  Jackie Ainsworth, Jackie Brown,  Betty Sheffer, Jean Rands, Kyong-  Ae-Kim, Pat Brjghouse.   KINESIS Across B.C.  City recycling plan a hasty hazard  by Shelley Anderson  Vancouver City Council voted  in late February to call for tenders  on the controversial Station St Resource Recovery Plant and to implement a multi-material curbside  recycling program. Council also  raised the minimum target for residential recycling from 21 to 51 percent.  The Resources Recovery Plant  (RRP) was pushed through over  the objections of alderman Davies,  Rankin, and Eriksen, and the majority of the twenty four delegations speaking to council that  night. Even the city engineer recommended that Council defer the  decision for another year to see  how the Coquitlam RRP, now in  its first of operation, works out.  An RRP takes in unseparated  waste, preferably from the commercial sector, and "high-grades"  out the recyclables such as metals,  paper and plastics. Any left over  combustibles are compressed into  pellets called refuse-derived fuel  or RDF, which is then sold to companies requiring low-grade fuel.  There are many objections to  this high-tech, capital intensive  project (excluding the cost of the  land, the plant will cost an estimated $6 million to build). Waste  that is not source- separated is  inevitably contaminated, be it by  heavy metals as in batteries or  by hazardous chemicals. This not  only lowers the quality of the recovered materials but also poses a  health hazard through the RDF.  Although the RDF will not be  burned at the plant, this fuel, sold  to other companies may be contaminated. The materials making  up the RDF itself, plastics and paper products mostly , are known to  produce dioxins and furans when  burned at insufficient temperatures. Although there are government regulations controlling emissions, these will be difficult to  enforce if the RDF is dispersed  through the province. Even the  GVRD waste incinerator in Burnaby, with the "best emission controls in the world" does not routinely test for dioxins, furans or  heavy metals.  Although the city claims the  plant will reduce the commercial  waste stream by 40 percent, it may  actually become a disincentive to  further recycling and source separation efforts in the commercial  sector. It is the act of source separation that educates people in  the ideas of waste reduction, reuse  and recychng and personal and  corporate responsibility for waste  in general. And hke our current  methods of waste in general. And  hke our current methods of waste  disposal, an RRP perpetuates the  "out of sight, out of mind" mentality.  Although funding was approved for the high-profile curb-side  program—$1.9 million to start and  $1.1 million per year to operate—  decisions on the details of what  to pick up and how were deferred, pending further reports.  Delegations called for public input meetings to share information  on recycling with city officials, as  many delegates criticized the Engineer's recommendations as either not comprehensive enough or  not as cost effective as possible.  These suggestions were ignored by  council and no input meeting were  set up. However, with the new target of 50 percent residential recycling, the city engineer will have  to substantially revise the type of  service originally proposed.  The RRP, to be located on  city owned land at 1660 Station St., will have a major impact on the Downtown Eastside  and the surrounding communities  of Mount Pleasant, Grandview-  Woodland, with the increased vol-  Developers target Drive  by Nancy Pollak  Residents of Vancouver's Commercial Drive area are in for a  shock if a proposed high-rise complex at the Broadway intersection  is approved.  The development consists of a  two storey structure spanning the  railway cut, topped by a 16 storey  residential tower and a six storey  commercial tower.  While the Vancouver fire department has raised grave concerns about building over a railway  corridor where hazardous goods  are routinely transported, area  residents are even more distressed  by the impact such a mammoth  E  development will have on their  neighbourhood.  "Something this big is not  meant to fit in, but to change the  area," says John Shayler of the  Grandview Woodland Area Council (GWAC), an independent community watchdog.  The changes foreseen are worthy of distress: threats to existing housing, massive traffic problems, increased property taxes,  and pressures on renters.  With local property values  likely to rise, housing for the  neighbourhood's 'traditional' residents—working class people, immigrant families, single parents  and, more recently, housing co  operatives—will become less affordable.  "We're not opposed to development," says Michele Valiquette of  GWAC. "But we want something  that will fit into the existing neighbourhood."  The developer, Intercon, and architects Waisman, Dewar, Grout,  Carter appear to have httle sense  of the neighbourhood, having originally proposed a three-towered  complex, the tallest rising to 22  storeys.  "Their scaling-down [of the  development]," says Valiquette,  "draws attention away from the  fact that it's still massive...They're  predicting 240 cars an hour exiting  from the complex."  ume  of garbage   trucks passing  through their neighborhoods.  When services such as waste  processing, traditionally in the  public sphere, are farmed out to  the private sector, it becomes  very difficult to ensure that public  needs will be met. This resource  recovery plant, as one delegate  pointed out, will become a machine demanding to be fed. Once  a project hke this is built, the city  will have an obligation to provide  it with waste, even if more envi  ronmentally sound methods of disposal are found.  The RRP, may also be the first  step towards the privatization of  garbage collection in the city. Although the city engineer recommends collection of recyclables by  public employees, it is projects  such as the RRP which threaten  our public service by creaming the  most valuable goods our of the  waste stream and making city run  collection less economically viable.  Campaign  criticized  by Terrie Hamazaki  There goes the neighbourhood  Those cars are unlikely to be  driven by Kinesis readers. The 70  residential units planned for the  tower will be condominiums with  a selling price, according to the architect's office, of whatever "the  market condition" will bear.  The city of Vancouver planning  department supports the proposed  development and the rezoning application of the developer. The  site is presently zoned RS^l (single  family) and C-2 (commercial). The  developer is applying for a CD-I  (comprehensive development district) zoning.  According to city planner Rick  Scobie, the Commercial/Broadway  intersection is a suitable location  for a "more prominent development form" due to the ALRT station. Scobie noted the project was  not inconsistent with the Broadway Station area plan recently approved by council. He added the  planners did not wish this project  to signify a shift towards major office development in the area.  As word of the development  spreads, local residents are "generally appalled," says Valiquette. In  April, the rezoning application will  be subjected to a mandatory pub-  he hearing.  Area residents can address  their concerns to the mayor  and members of city council by  writing c/o C}ty Hall, 453 W.  12th Avenue, Vancouver V5Y  1V4, or calling mayor Campbell at 873-7621. For information about the public meeting or to get involved, contact  the Grandview Woodlands Area  Council at 255-8682.  Real Men Don't Buy Kids.  Intended to grab people's attention and make them uncomfortable, this slogan was seen recently on billboards, in transit  shelters, and inside buses during  a local poster campaign, launched  by Family Services of Greater Vancouver.  "The campaign came about  from some real concerns for street  children, that these kids were  forgotten merchandise," said Ian  Mass of Family Services. According to pohce statistics, it is estimated that in any one year, at  least 300 children are being bought  for sex in Vancouver.  This is child sexual abuse, not  juvenile prostitution. We have to  start changing our vocabulary,  said street worker Mary Franklin.  "These are children who have a  right to be protected by our society."  "But it's an inherent contradiction," said Colleen Smith of  Woman Against Violence Against  Women (WAVAW). She went on  to explain that social services and  the government are in fact part of  the society that most of these children feel they should be protected  from, not by.  "These posters give the illusion  that they care, yet they're part of  the problem. Sure it's educational  and raises public awareness, but  it's not the solution," said Smith.  A takeoff on 'Real Men Don't  Eat Quiche,' the slogan caught  people's attention. But it did not  target the right group, according  to Kairn Mladenovic of Prostitutes and Other Women for Equal  Rights (POWER). "A more effective slogan would've been 'Relatives don't assault their kids,' since  most of these kids are running  away from incest or physical assault," she said.  Added Smith, "Real men do  buy kids, and that's our problem." The $8,000 campaign advanced the issue, but there was no  real vision of what to do after this,  according to Mass.  "You've gotta offer the kids  something to keep them off the  streets, something hke safe housing. The money could've been better spent," said Mladenovic.  A KINESIS Across B.C.  Women9s health fund launched  by Jackie Brown  In the spring of 1987, Barbara Hayman, a long-time activist within Vancouver's women's  movement, was diagnosed with  cancer. The illness forced her  to leave her job at Women  Against Violence Against Women  (WAVAW). Unfortunately, she had  not been with WAVAW long  enough to qualify for disabihty  benefits.  As if her painful, emotionally  draining struggle with a deadly  disease wasn't enough, Hayman  now had to contend with a severe financial crisis. Her costs were  enormous. Besides normal hving  expenses such as food and rent,  she was faced with a drug bill that  topped $200 a month. It was an  impossible situation. Fortunately  for Barb, a group of her friends  pooled their own resources and  also started a fund raising drive to  help her meet monthly expenses.  Barb Hayman died last spring.  But the work of the women who  came to her assistance did not  end with her death. Recognizing  that many other women diagnosed  with a serious illness or disabihty  face the same dilemma as Hayman,  they struck a task force to consider the possibility of establishing a permanent health fund, the  Women's Health Fund Society.  Task force members Jan Barnsley and Lisa Price say there has  never been more of a need for  a permanent health fund. "When  you start to think about what  women do in society and how httle money we have and the fact  that we're getting older and facing  diseases we never thought about  before, you realize that there are  many women who, if they became  sick, would have httle access to  help," says Barnsley. Adds Price:  "There's an expectation that when  you're sick, you go to your family. But many of us are finding  out either the family doesn't have  money or we don't have access to  it."  Even those women who do have  disabihty plans are not necessarily protected, says Price, who describes most schemes as "awful."  "They might sound good ... but  it comes down to how they define  whether or not you are employable. For most it's a case of if you  can do anything, you're employable."  Accordingly, the task force has  also been researching existing disabihty plans for women and is now  preparing a report on its recommendations for the society. After  the report is submitted, the task  force will disband.  The Womens' Health Fund Society will be officially launched at  a gala event to be held at the end  of March. The event will serve as a  Unite for funding  by Esther Shannon  Provincial women's groups are  launching a campaign to press  for more government funding for  women's services. At the South  Central B.C. Regional Conference  of the National Action Council on  the Status of Women conference,  held last November, groups met to  discuss their work and agreed that  a major priority in the future must  be "to take a stronger, more united  stand on government funding pohcies."  At the meeting, representatives  from the Okanagan/Cariboo, Vancouver Island, the Kootenays, the  Lower Mainland and Vancouver,  as well as women from provincial and national women's organizations identified four broad areas  of concern to women: inadequate  support systems, education, isolation and money.  According to Putting Women  on the Map, a recently published report on the meeting, "A  particular difficulty in sustaining  our work is the lack of adequate, secure operational funding for groups. Many groups are  forced to rely primarily or entirely on limited-term project  funding or restricted programmes  hke the Canadian Jobs Strategy  (the federal government's job creation program) to keep their doors  open."  The report notes that funding  has been in increasingly short supply and that funders have imposed tighter restrictions on what  issues they will fund. Groups who  work on "controversial" issues are  more likely to face threats and  cutbacks from funders. Another  major problem is that "women's  groups feel forced to pay inadequate wages, and can offer few  benefits and virtually no job security" to their workers.  -JB  V t  ,u  Arguing that, "women's groups  have a right to enough money to  carry on our work without pohtical or bureaucratic interference,"  the meeting decided that the first  step in organizing around funding will be "to document the current state of funding for women's  groups in B.C." A questionnaire  on funding will be distributed  early in 1989 to women's groups  across the province. Using this information, a unified campaign to  pressure funders will be launched.  Copies of Putting Women on  the Map can be obtained from  the Women's Research Centre,  101 - 2245 W. Broadway, Vancouver, B.C. V6K2E4.  celebration and as a way for interested women to become involved  in society activities.  In the meantime, the task force  has applied to Ottawa for charitable status and is mapping out  its fundraising strategy. "We know  it's possible to start with next to  nothing, but more realistically, if  this is to be a permanent fund  we need a base of $500,000," says  Price, adding that the Fund needs  a minimum of $25,000 to get off  the ground.  Fund-raising options include:  approaching philanthropic foundations, direct solicitation and casinos. "Like all women's groups we  have to consider the problems  around fund-raising," says Price.  "As women we want to support  each other but because we are  women, we don't have the money.  Therefore we have to consider options outside of the traditional  women's movement."  Although the task force envisions the fund being as broadly  available as possible, Price says  until a major financial base is acquired, women who work for feminist organizations will be the first  funding priority. "These women  are in high stress jobs and are  more vulnerable to disease. There  is nothing out there for them."  The gala launching of the  Women Health Fund Society  will be held March 31, between  6 pm and 8 pm at Gordon  House, 1019 Broughton. For  further information call 784-  0485.  Food  co-ops  foster  links  by Jill Pollack  "The urge to buy terrorizes  you " (graffiti on wall at Fraser  and Broadway, 1983)  There's always too httle: time,  money, compassion, sane pohtics  ... endless it sometimes seems  and often overwhelming. But there  are alternatives, ways to exist  within an extended community  that has all the right components.  Vancouver has two food co-ops,  Agora Food Co-op and East End  Storefront Co-op, that are based  on pohtical activism and more  control over who gets our money.  Both were started over ten years  ago as contrasts to what has come  to be termed 'the Safeway system.' They were places where you  could buy your groceries, learn  more about the food you eat, and  contribute to an organization that  had as one of its priorities quality  of hfe.  People joined food co-ops for  many different reasons—saving  money, the product hne, pohtical  commitment, gaining more control  over one's hfe. Shopping at a food  co-op was a social interaction as  well as an economic exchange.  As we approach the end of  the 20th century, food co-ops are  still proving themselves to be viable economic and pohtical alternatives. And with the increase  in food irradiation, environmental damage and presence of chemicals and dioxins, co-ops are looking better to a sector of the population who previously considered  food co-ops as a hotbed of radical  left-wing pohtical activity.  As the constituency served by  food co-ops changed, so too has  the way they are run. Reliance on  volunteer labour has become an  option at Agora Food Co-op and  an obsolete system at East End  Storefront Co-op. They still do not  operate hke other food stores, but  they have recognized that most  people have less time to volunteer.  You still buy a share in the co-op,  and there are many ways to become involved, if you want. The  philosophy that food co-ops provide people with an economic option has been extended to include  to include other options as well.  At Agora Food Co-op on West  Broadway, volunteering two hours  a month on a committee or in  the store allows you to buy your  food at a lower price (10 percent)  than if you choose not to volunteer. At East End Storefront Coop on Commercial Drive, there is  no required work committment.  At both, you can buy food in  bulk, get milk in glass bottles and  choose between organic or nonorganic fruits and vegetables. The  two stores each have a play area  for children, you bag your own groceries and you can special order  just about anything.  In other words, food co-ops  are organized from a perspective  which is quite different from other  food stores. Rather than arranging the physical space, product  hne and structure of the store  around maximizing profits, Agora  and East End are set up by and for  the people who shop there. Users  are taken into consideration, not  in terms of how they can be manipulated but in terms of how they  can best be served. That's a deep,  powerful difference. We don't have  to adapt to an existing system, the  system adapts to us. Our input, be  it solely financial or active, has an  impact.  Every time someone shops in  a food co-op, that is (obviously)  less money going into the mega-  food industry. It is support for the  smaller producers and an encouragement for better eating.  But that's only part of how food  co-ops operate. There's an intangible, emotional side to them. Becoming a member of either Agora  or East End means that you will  be buying your groceries within an  environment that puts the individual (user and supplier) before the  profit margin, within a structure  that has lasted over a decade. You  have more control over an important area in your hfe. It's a way to  maintain or foster ties to a community of caring people, without  much effort on your part.  Some pohtical organizations,  because of the nature of what  they do, demand time and energy.  Many of us feel a sense of frustration and urgency because hving in the world today with any  kind of sensitivity means that it's  often difficult to choose which issue, cause or outrage we're going  to address. Food co-ops don't take  away from that, but offer an accessible, pleasant counterpoint.  Agora Food Co-op, 8420  West Broadway, is open to the  public for shopping. If you decide to become a member, there  is a share requirement of $75,  which can be paid in installments over a year. Store hours  are: Monday to Friday 10 am-7  pm, Saturday 10 am-6 pm, and  Sunday 12 pm-5 pm. For more  information, call 733-3505.  East End Storefront Co-op,  1084 Commercial Drive has an  open shopping policy; you do  not have to become a member. If you decide to join, the  share requirement is $80, which  can be paid in $10 installments.  Store hours are: open every  day, 10 am-7:30 pm. For more  information, call 254-5044-  KINESIS Across Canada  WHAT* S NEWS?  The fight  to bowl  An eleven year old girl who suffers  from cerebral palsy has been awarded the  right to enter bowling tournaments. After a  three year battle between the girl, Tammy  McLeod, and the Youth Bowling Council of  Ontario, the Divisional Court ruled in her  favour, ordering the council to let Tammy  compete, and awarding her family $2,000 in  The dispute arises from Tammy's use of  a two metre ramp to roll the ball from her  wheelchair down the lane. The council believes that this ramp gives her an unfair advantage over able-bodied bowlers. Although  no grievance has ever been received against  the use of her ramp, the council beheves  that if Tammy does compete and win, other  people will complain. The court decision in  [Tammy's favour is only a temporary order,  since the bowling council has filed an appeal. Globe and Mail  Premature  births  in Quebec  In some lower income areas of Montreal  and Quebec City the number of underweight babies at birth is at about the same  level as in underdeveloped countries. According to the Quebec Corp. of Physicians,  the percentages of underweight births in  areas such as St-Henri, Centre South and  Point-St-Charles in Montreal, are comparable to those in Africa where the World  Health Organization puts the rate of premature and underweight babies at 10 to 16  percent of all births. In Lower Town, Quebec City, the rate is 10 to 12 percent. Globe  and Mail  Compensation  to thalidomide  victims  A report prepared recently by the War  Amputations of Canada group claims that  the Canadian government has a obligation  to compensate the 109 identified victims  of Thalidomide, who suffered birth defects  after their mothers took the drug while  pregnant in the early 60's. According to  the report, Thalidomide victims face enormous difficulties in many aspects of their  hves and need to be compensated. It proposes that Ottawa provide about $10 million to the Thalidomide Victims Foundation of Canada, to administer a program  of grants to victims for housing, education,  training, transportation and other needs.  Thalidomide was developed in West Germany in 1953, and later sold commercially  as a drug to fight nausea and insomnia  When taken by pregnant women, it resulted in the congenital malformation of  their baby's limbs. Although Canadian doctors were warned of these harmful side effects as early as December 1961, the Food  and Drug Directorate did not recommend  the removal of Thalidomide from sale in  Canada until March 1962. Globe and Mail  Jailed for  poverty  In a decision hailed by poverty rights  groups and jurists, a Nova Scotia Supreme  Court judge recently freed a woman who  was serving a 30 day jail term because she  could not afford to pay a $500 fine. The  woman, who was receiving welfare, incurred  the fine for shoplifting a pack of cigarettes.  According to Havi Echenberg of the National Anti-Poverty Organization, it is a  really common occurrence. "Fines are imposed on people regardless of their level of  income, and that clearly means poor people  have to go to jail while rich people don't."  This, she says, constitutes discrimination on  the basis of income, in contravention of the  Charter of Rights.  In handing down his decision, Judge  Kelly of the Nova Scotia Supreme Court  said that jailing people who are too poor  to pay their fines is both unconstitutional  and offensive. Legal aid lawyers who presented the case to the Supreme Court said  that their research had found that some 40  percent of people entering provincial jails  in Canada were sentenced for failing to pay  fines.  Commenting on the case, a Saskatchewan  judge said that he believed the real answer  was to impose community work as an alternative to paying fines. Saskatchewan, New  Brunswick, Manitoba, Alberta and Quebec  all have such fine option programs for people who cannot afford to pay and do not  wish to go to jail. Globe and Mail  Fight for  spousal benefits  Ontario library worker Karen Andrews  has decided to continue her lengthy struggle to obtain workplace spousal benefits for  her lesbian lover and their children, under  the Ontario Health Insurance Plan. Despite  a Supreme Court ruhng against her case,  in which the judge stated that in his opinion the term "spouse" did not cover same-  sex couples, Andrews has vowed to carry on  and appeal the decision. The legal costs of  this appeal will be approximately $10,000,  $2,000 of which has already been pledged  by EGALE. H you would hke to help Karen  in her fight for justice, please send donations to: Harvey Hamburg in Trust, Karen  Andrew Access to OHIP Fund, 97 Maitland  St., Toronto, Ont. M4Y 1E3. Rites  Women  in combat  Heather Erxleben, from Vancouver, made  history last month when she became the  first woman to graduate as a combat soldier  in the Canadian Forces. Of the 16 women  who commenced training in Ypres platoon  at Wainwright Base, Alberta, four months  previously, Erxleben was the only one to  graduate.  In related news, a special tribunal of the  Canadian Human Rights Commission ruled  in late February that women must be integrated into combat units of the Canadian  armed forces. Vancouver Sun  Making up  for denied  access  A controversial bill (124) currently before the Ontario legislature allows judges to  order "make-up time" for divorced parents  who have been denied access to their children on court-ordered visits. The legislation  outlines eight different grounds for the legal refusal of visiting rights; for instance,  if the custodial parent reasonably beheves  the child risks physical or emotional harm.  However, the court will also have the power,  if it is not satisfied with the reason for denying the visit, to order additional visits to  make up for times when access was denied.  Bill 124 has drawn sharp criticism from  many family lawyers. "It's lunacy," said  Toronto lawyer Ruth Mesbur. "The legislation will polarize families and has nothing to  do with what's best for kids." She beheves  the bill gives estranged spouses more ammunition and greater incentive to htigate.  Toronto Star  Women's rights  in P.E.I.  Late last year the P.E.I. Advisory Council on the Status of Women made a lengthy  presentation to a special committee set up  to review the province's Human Rights Act.  The recommendations they made for revision to the Act include the following areas:  pregnancy and childbirth—the Act should  prohibit discrimination based on pregnancy  and childbirth; source or level of income—  discrimination based on level of income  or source of income (eg. welfare) should be!  prohibited; family status—greater protec  tion should be provided by the Act for people with children being refused rental  commodation.  Protection should also be extended to bar]  discrimination on the basis of marital sta  tus, sexual orientation and gender, as sep-[  arate from sex. The Council recommends  clear definitions of harassment, discrimi  nation and systemic discrimination be in  eluded in the revised act. Other suggestions!  include that the number of Human Rights  Commissioners be increased from three to|  five, at least two of which should be women  Common Ground  Ontario  calls violence  'stable'  An Ontario woman recently lost custody  of her nine year old son after a provin  cial Supreme Court judge ruled that the  emergency shelter where she was hving die  not constitute stable, permanent shelter.  Interim custody has been granted to the  child's father until such shelter can be obtained. Shelter workers in Ontario are outraged at the judge's decision, and his suggestion that emergency shelters do not provide a stable environment for children.  "This is a very dangerous and very frightening decision," said Lee Gold, a counsellor at the North York Women's Shelter. "It  gives the message to women that it's not  safe to leave the home, that they and their  children should stay and suffer abuse." The  purpose of the shelters is to provide a temporary safe home for women and their children until suitable housing can be found.  Globe and Mail  Lesbian and gay  rights in N.S.  Lesbians and gays in Nova Scotia are  currently trying to lobby their government  to include sexual orientation in a revision  of the Human Rights Code. The government originally rejected a recommendation  to include sexual orientation, after the Human Rights Commission voted against its  inclusion, in an 8-6 split. Controversy surrounding some of the homophobic comments made to the Commission led to a nationwide flood of protests, and has reflected  poorly on the governments commitment to  human rights. Since P.E.I, has recently recommended the inclusion of sexual orientation in its Human Rights Act, Nova Scotia is  now the only province in Canada which does  not have such a recommendation. Members  of Lesbian and Gay Rights Nova Scotia are  mounting a strong campaign in defense of  the inclusion of sexual orientation in the  Human Rights Code. Their current focus  is to organize a province-wide letter writing campaign to all MLAs in the months  preceding the opening of the legislature in  March. Rites  KINESIS Across Canada  by Noreen Shanahan  The federal government's earliest attempt at affirmative action created a 'sexual  warfare' inside Canadian prisons and poisoned people's minds against further equality attempts, said Janet Routledge of the  Pubhc Service Alliance of Canada.  'Certain levels of the union think this  was a deliberate plan on the part of the government and it was sabotage," she said.  'Affirmative action has always been controversial and not very well understood; it  seemed a funny place to start a program—in  a male-dominated department where there  were hfe and death situations."  She said pubhc funds were initially sunk  into publicity around the 1983 hiring of  women into Correctional Services, but no  attempts were made to sensitize workers.  It was unnecessarily painful ... there  wasn't any consciousness training for the  men there or for the women coming in and  no recognition of how difficult the transition  would be."  One woman initially hired under the program told horror stories of harassment from  male co-workers (In order to protect her job,  the woman requests anonymity.)  So many women who joined in those  early days have since left; it was impossible for them. H I hadn't been older, with  a 'they're not gonna beat me' attitude, I  would've left too."  Hired in 1984, along with several other  women, she has worked at Drumheller  medium security prison in Alberta, and  more recently at Kent maximum security  prison in B.C.  Affirmative action sabotaged  She works as a 'living-in officer'—  combination security guard and counsellor  —meaning she spends more time working  directly with the (male) inmates.  Speaking about her co-workers she said,  "They're a bunch of men who don't see  women as equals ... they think if you were  Go sour on Nestles  by Susan Prosser  Action for Corporate Accountability (Action) has called for a renewed boycott  against Nestle for dangerous promotion  of infant formula in developing countries.  Products on the boycott hst include Nestles, American Home Products' Anacin, and  Taster's Choice.  In 1984, Nestle buckled under a seven  year long international boycott and signed  the International Baby Milk Marketing  Code with the World Health Assembly  (WHA). (It is interesting to note that of  the 118 WHA members, only the U.S. voted  against accepting the code.) Even though  Nestle signed the agreement, they argued  that the clauses surrounding the provision  of promotional samples of baby formula  were ambiguous and it wasn't until 1986  that the code was amended to unequivocally condemn free promotionals. The major terms of the code are no free samples or  supplies, no promotion in hospitals, no unscientific promotion to health workers, no  direct consumer promotion and no promotional labelling.  Action, and other international grassroots organizations, continued to monitor  the baby formula situation worldwide and  found that in developing nations as well as  in countries hke Canada and the U.S., companies were in violation of the code and in  some cases, national law.  Last June, Action threatened Nestle and  AHP (a wholly owned subsidiary of Nestle) with a boycott if they didn't discontinue their promotional practices. In October, when there was no immediate response,  the boycott went into effect.  There are two major reasons why the use  of infant formula should be discouraged: for  the majority of women it is unaffordable and  in many situations it causes Baby Bottle  Disease. For a woman able to breast feed,  formula feeding is not a healthy alternative,  especially if sanitary water sources are not  available. Formula feeding deprives the infant of vital nutrients as well as natural immunities which can lead to diarrhea, vomiting, malnutrition and eventually death, if  medical attention is not available. This is  termed Baby Bottle Disease.  Amy Dalgleish, one of three coordinators of Vancouver's Infact Canada, says that  in parts of Canada such as northern and  Native communities, the situation with infant formula is no better than in developing countries. Many women use infant formula and amongst those babies the inci-  a 'lady', hke their wives or girlfriends, you  wouldn't be working here.  She says they're critical of affirmative action, calling it reverse discrimination, and'  are.particularly wary of sharing the workload with women when [they feel] it could  cost them their hves.  "The fear was that 'incidents' would happen when more women were on shift but  this never happened; it happened when staff  who wasn't hked [by inmates] was on."  Therefore male/female [guard] partnerships were the norm, although she found  it strange to, "sometimes, during the day,  be on by yourself but, by evening, you'd  be partnered up with a male guard. They  didn't trust two women to run a unit at  night."  She gained most of her support from inmates who, she said, would go out of their  way to protect her. But good relations with  the men on one side of the prison bars  caused problems in her relations with men  on the other side.  "Comments were made like, 'why are you  calling [the inmates] by their first names?'  Or 'Why is so and so hanging around in  here?"' They always thought I'd fall in  love with one of the inmates and run off  with him. They think—'she's a woman, and  that'8 what women do.' "  She was also threatened with the fate of  Mary Steinhauser, a B.C. Penitentiary social worker killed in 1975 by five guards,  who claimed they were rescuing her from  being held hostage by inmates.  Our informant said that after developing  good communications with 'solid cons' (inmates with a lot of clout), which she clearly  saw as part of her job, her co-workers increased their harassment to such an extent  that she complained to the warden.  Her isolation increased when she discovered the union local, dominated by the male  guards, also wasn't interested in supporting  her.  "When it was time to put in a harassment  complaint our local president asked me why  I didn't come to him first. He said it was his  'duty' to defend me, but I knew he didn't  relate to women, and he also considered me  a security risk."  Although she's not critical of this affirmative action program in theory, the implementation "just won't do."  She says it's crucially important that the  parties concerned—particularly women-  realize what they're up against, and that increased effort be put into training.  Back at the union office, Janet Routledge  says PSAC—representing 180,000 pubhc  servants—is too often left frustrated by ineffective government affirmative action programs.  "Our direct role is limited by the nature  of collective bargaining. Anything that has  to do with staffing (such as these programs)  is non-bargainable."  She's also skeptical about future, well-  publicized attempts at promoting women's  equahty in the labour force saying, "Until  the union's hands are free in terms of fighting affirmative action grievances, until the  issues are open to bargaining and striking  over, I don't see much to be encouraged  about."  For a look at the federal government's role in affirmative action, past  and present, see "Report slams government games,", Kinesis, February 1989.  Disabled people  ignored  by Kinesis Staff Writer  dence of rickets, respiratory tract infection,  middle ear infection, diarrhea, and death  is much higher than that of breast fed babies. Canada, as a signatory of the code, has  not implemented its guidelines, and Infact  continues a dialogue with Jake Epp stressing Canada's responsibility to hve up to the  code.  A recent report by the Canadian Association for Community Living (CACL), a national disabled rights advocacy association,  has slammed Canada's social service system  and the business sector for perpetuating the  poverty of disabled people.  The report, Income Security: the Disability Income System in Canada, charges that  disabled people are locked out of the job  market and forced to rely on confusing and  inadequate social assistance programs.  According to the report's author, Sherri  Resin Torjman, "The bottom hne message  is that disabled people are poor because  they are poorly treated. Disabled people  want real jobs and real wages, and they have  the ability to carry out most jobs. There's  a whole potential and productivity that is  not being tapped and business should open  their eyes to that."  Of the 1.8 million disabled people of  working age hving in private households in  Canada, fewer than 40 percent are working.  In a 1986 survey by the Secretary of State,  it was found that five percent of disabled  Canadians had an annual income of more  than $30,000, while 63 percent had annual  incomes of less than $10,000. The income  disparity disabled people face is made worse  because most need to spend a higher portion of their incomes on goods and services.  The report examined both federal and  provincial income programs and services  and found that disabled people, "must depend upon a fragmentary system that is discretionary and that has few national standards regarding adequacy.  The report compares welfare income for  a single disabled person on a province-by-  province basis and found that, in 1988, income ranged from a low of $6,830 annually  in the Yukon to a high of $10,815 in Ontario.  No jurisdiction provided income assistance  above the poverty hne.  The report also severely criticized the  business community for its unwillingness to  give disabled people opportunities in the  labour force and for their consistent lobbies  against progressive reform of Canada's social welfare system.  KINESIS Environment  Conservation is costly. This is what many  industries and governments would have us  beheve.  Costly to whom? Costly to the consumer  who uses less, spends less on packaging and  polluting products, who breathes cleaner  air, drinks cleaner water, eats poison free  food? Or costly to big business who sells  fewer wasteful and polluting products, who  must pump profits into emission controls  or redesigned environmentally safe technology?  For many of us it may be hard to find the  time for turning our concern for the environment into action. We may be struggling  to empower ourselves or others who suffer from discrimination. Yet we are locked  The waste from what we want  by Shelley Anderson  need, how much is unnecessary? How much  is reusable? How much is one-shot packaging? How much is toxic or harmful? Do you  know how this garbage is disposed of or  how this disposal method affects the environment?  Dumping Garbage  Waste is something that has usually been  kept out of sight and hopefully out of  smelling range by our throw-away, garbage-  phobic society. Yet the more we throw away  the more difficult it becomes to keep our  garbage hidden.  Landfills, the traditional method of hiding our garbage, have produced toxic  leachate which has contaminated ground  water and rivers where heavy metals and  other substances accumulate in the food  chain.  into a society which discriminates against  our very life-support systems on the planet.  Acid rain, deforestation of the rain-forests,  pollution of our coastal waters, oil spills,  toxic waste, the hst goes on and on. Fright-  eningly. And there are so many other issues  to be addressed.  However, one needn't become an environmental activist, or spend one's time lobbying government (although these are important also) in order to effect some change.  By changing how we do two things we do  every day, we can make a positive change  to the environment. We need to be conscious of how we consume goods and produce garbage.  A rise in our "standard of hving" results in a rise in garbage volumes. Packaging comprises 40 percent of the household waste stream in North America. Think  about this the next time you go shopping.  Of the packaging which holds the goods you  311 W. HASTINGS ST.  Vancouver    6886138  Incineration, the recently touted panacea  > the problems of diminishing space in  landfills, is known to cause even more serious environmental degradation. H the waste  fed into the incinerators is not separated,  when it is burned new chemical conditions  take place.  The burning of batteries, common in  household garbage, introduces heavy metals  such as lead and cadmium into the air. Plastics can produce dioxins and furans when  burned, both linked to cancer. Although the  technology used to scrub emissions from incinerators has improved substantially, it is  not able to ehminate all hazardous emissions. The residue from the scrubbers and  the ash from the incinerator is considered  toxic and must be disposed of in a special  landfill.  Incinerators are usually combined with  waste to energy faculties, where electricity  is produced from steam heated by the incinerator. However, when waste is incinerated valuable resources are lost forever. The  carbon dioxide and particulate matter introduced into the atmosphere contribute to  the greenhouse effect.  In hght of the disastrous consequences of  the above methods of waste disposal, the recycling of our waste seems to be the only  sane option. However, many municipalities  and other levels of government are slow to  adopt large scale recycling operations until  they are convinced they will pay for themselves, or at least prove cheaper than existing methods.  Governments must do a true cost accounting when comparing methods of waste  disposal. U landfills and incinerators cause  more problems in the long term, then perhaps the cost of clean up and health care  outweighs their initial economy.  Recycle the Manufacturers  Often when governments consider reduction of the volume of waste produced, emphasis is on household recycling. However  the real producers of the bulk of our waste  stream are the manufacturers of products  and packaging which are difficult to recycle. These manufacturers should be made  more responsible for the garbage they introduce into the waste stream. The consumer,  in many respects, has been coerced into accepting over packaged and environmentally  unsafe products. This trend can be reversed  through the use of consumer pressure, government incentives and regulations encouraging manufacture of products designed to  be reused or recycled.  Plastic comprises seven percent of our  waste stream but it is one of the most insidious and ubiquitous elements of our garbage.  Because of the diversity of the polymers  used to make it, plastic poses the greatest  challenge to the recycling effort. Some kinds  of plastic resins cannot be recycled successfully if they are mixed. The manufacturers  of plastics should standardize their product  to facilitate recycling. In Ontario, the plastics industry will soon be coding products  to indicate the type of resin they contain.  Photo and bio-degradable plastics threaten the burgeoning plastic recycling industry.  Recyclers fear that degradables mixed in  with other plastic will weaken the new products. Also, there are fears that the plastic  particles resulting from the degraded plastic will be a health hazard, contaminating  ground water through landfills. A moratorium should be placed on degradables until they are proved safe, or their application should be limited to items such as six-  pack collars, which commonly end up as litter and endanger wildlife.  Recycling requires the efforts and determination of every household, individual and  manufacturer. It also needs government attention to set up collection, pubhc education and also to aid in the development of  stable markets for recycled goods. The current glut of recycled newspapers, for example, occurred when existing markets (mostly  overseas) reached full capacity. There are  very few domestic markets for recycled materials. However, government could set minimum requirements for use of secondary materials in industry and even change procurement pohcies to provide guaranteed markets for products made with recycled materials.  KINESIS  Activism In The Home  • Don't buy over packaged products or those in unrecyclable containers.  • Return excess packaging to either the manufacturer or the retailer explaining why yon  don't like it.  • If you can afford it, choose products that will last  • Avoid disposable items like paper plates, napkins, etc Bring your own cup to the cafeteria.  • Use a diaper service rather than disposable diapers.  Reuse:  • Bring old clothes, furniture, appliances, etc to a second hand store or charity-run thrift  store.  • Buy products in reusable containers; milk and beer in bottles, for example.  • Bring your own bags to the supermarket or take them to your local food co-op or thrift  store.  • Reuse in your own home. Buy in bulk and store in reused tubs or jars.  Recycle:  • Choose products made or packaged with recycled materials.  • Separate your garbage and take it to one of the region's two recycling depots. Call the  GVRD/Recycle Hotline, 736-8636 for more information.  • Lk Weis, 253-4380, does paper pick-up—newspaper, ledger and computer paper—in  regular routes around Commercial Drive.  • 22 Environmental Group (Bd Moore) 668-2228 picks up most recyclables including plastic in many parts of the lower mainland.  Separating Your Garbage  • Paper: must be free of grease, wax, food, plastic, glues  • newspaper  • computer paper  • ledger paper  • corrugated cardboard  • press board (cereal boxes, etc)  • magazines and glossy inserts  • mixed waste paper (any other clean paper)  • Glass: (container glass only, no plate glass or china). Remove lids and rinse away food  residue and dirt. Sort according to colour (clear, brown, green).  • Tin Cans: (tin cans have seams) Clean and remove labels. Flattening is not necessary  but will save you space.  • Aluminum: (beverage cans without seam, press molded) No special treatment.  • Plastic: (not many depots accept plastic but 22 Environmental Group does) Sort out  know degradables (Safeway uses biodegradable shopping bags) and styrofoam. Rinse  away food particles.  • Compost: Free information on how to compost is available from the Recycle Hotline,  736-8636. Compost all vegetable matter. Meat and cheese are best left ont as they break  down slowly and attract animals. If yon can't set up a compost pile yourself, save your  scraps for a friend who has a garden or for a community earden in the cit?.  If you are interested in getting involved in the movement towards responsible  waste management contact Citizen's Action Network Bonnie Soon, 432-9398, or  the Lower Mainland Watte Management Coalition, Hilda Bechler, $21-8052. For  more information on recycling call GVRD/Recycle Hotline, 736-8636; the Society Promoting Environmental Conservation, 786-778%; or the Recycling CouncU  of B.C., 781-7222. CANADIAN  FARMWORKERS  UNION  Executive and Staff  wish all women  Happy International Women's Day  1989  FARMWORKER'S ZINDABAD  2936 W. 4th Ave., Vancouver, B.C. V6K 1R2, Phone 734-2828  JAZZ * FOLK * BLUES  ETHNIC * BIG BAND  JAZZ VOCALS * SOUL  R&B * CAJUN * GOSPEL  TICKET OUTLET  LP'S CASSETTES COMPACT DISCS  OPEN 7 DAYS A WEEK  HOURS : MON.- TH' IRS.  & SATURDAY 10-6  FRIDAY      10-8  SUNDAY      12-5  'A VANCOUVER TRADITION'  The B.C. Government Employees' Union  orkingfor:  Pay Equity  Child Care  Choice  omen  joins with women throughout B.C. to celebrate  International Women's Day, 1989  Joanne Fox  Chairperson  BCGEU Women's Committee  Diane Wood  Secretary-Treasurer  BCGEU  KINESIS Jnternational  Contraband children: snared by profit  by Cyndi Mellon  Guatemalan children are being stolen—  at times right out of their parents' arms—to  feed a lucrative international business dealing in the traffick of children.  FoUowing an investigative visit to Central America, which took place in August  1988, the European Parliament reported incidents in which abducted children were  held in "fattening houses" while false documents which would allow them to be removed from the country were being prepared. There is evidence that lawyers, children's court workers and other government  employees are involved in a network that  has only begun to surface.  The business is nothing new in Guatemala, It is beheved that authorities have known  about it for years. However, the problem is  now drawing more attention due to a series  of events which have taken place in other  Latin American countries, including a case  in which a Brazilian child was returned to  her parents by the Israeli government after  having been adopted in that country.  Information coming from numerous reports of stolen children indicates that behind the adoptions there exists an organization that includes nurseries, lawyers, medical personnel and a network of "hunters"  who seek out poverty-stricken pregnant  women, as well as thieves who steal unguarded children.  How do the captors acquire their prey?  In some cases the children are forcibly  taken from their parents' arms or kidnapped from hospitals shortly after birth.  In other scenarios, "hunters" stalk pregnant women—prostitutes or other very poor  women who might not want to continue  their pregnancies are most often targeted.  A woman is approached and persuaded not  to seek an abortion in exchange for financial support before and after giving birth.  In one case reported by the Guatemalan  women's organization Nuestra Voz, a pregnant woman was kidnapped a few days before she was to give birth, Mowing which  her child was stolen.  After a capture has been made, lawyers  go to work to obtain a false birth certificate  from a country birth registrar. The false  documentation is presented in the Children's Court where, with the complicity of  some staff, it is used to acquire an adoption  certificate.  While this process is being carried out,  the children are held in nurseries, sometimes  clandestine establishments known as "fattening houses"—a name that behes the reality.  A number of these nurseries have been  uncovered and some arrests have been  made. The children found in them were in  bad shape. They were malnourished and  the country's second largest city, a number  of pages were discovered missing from the  civil birth registry books. These had been  made into false birth certificates that were  later used to obtain passports and visas so  that children could leave the country with  people posing as their parents. A municipal  employee was arrested and immediately released on bail.  Using this well-structured mechanism the  traffickers are able to bring about apparently legal adoptions. The small children  they deal in are sold in Europe, Israel, the  U.S. and Canada for 20 or 30 thousand dollars.  "Children are forcibly taken from their parents'  arms or kidnapped from hospitals shortly  after birth."  suffering from diarrhea as a result of being fed in unhygienic conditions. They had  advanced cases of diaper rash, since plastic  bags had been used in place of diapers.  As a result of the government's "no questions asked" pohcy, stolen children are also  housed in licenced nurseries, 109 of which  exist in the country. They are registered as  non-profit organizations. There are few regulations regarding their management, and  it appears that no attempt is made to document the background or destination of the  children lodged in them.  What is certain is that such an efficient  network could not function without inside  help. Carlos Escoto, a spokesperson for the  National Pohce, is reported to have said  that the pubhc would be "very alarmed" if  they knew the names of the officials implicated in the crime.  In one incident, a woman whose 18-  month-old daughter had been stolen from  the doorway of her house identified a social  worker employed by the Supreme Court as  one of the persons implicated. In another  case, which took place in Quetzaltenango,  According to information revealed by  the International Association of Democratic  Lawyers, "mafias" from different countries  buy children, preferably Central American  children, to use their organs in transplant  operations that take place in private clinics in North America and Europe. This information was published in a report dated  April 5, 1988, which was presented before  the U.N. Commission for Human Rights.  The Costa Rica based Commission for Human Rights in Central America (CODE-  HUCA) has charged that in some cases the  children's organs are sold for 75 thousand  dollars.  In spite of the fact that there are no official figures, it is estimated that some 700  children leave Guatemala every year in a  business that could represent up to 10 million dollars annually.  During the past 18 months, the Guatemalan Congress has looked at a number  of proposals aimed at tightening up existing adoption laws, but has so far failed to  come to an agreement. In the face of this  problem, organizations such as the United  Nations Fund for Children (UNICEF), as  well as the European Parliament have demanded that the governments of industrialized countries suspend adoptions by their  citizens from countries where corrupt adoption practices are known to be in use. Little control is possible with the present lack  of standards. A call to a Canadian immigration lawyer revealed that in order to bring  an adopted child into Canada, a couple need  only apply for an entry visa for a family  member after the adoption has been completed outside the country. The Guatemalan  government does no Mow-up on children  who leave the country as a result of adoption.  Although the European community of  nations seems to be responding to the situation far more readily than is being done  on this continent, U.S. embassy staff in  Guatemala did halt the proceedings on one  adoption because they beheved that the  child about to be adopted by a Minnesota  couple was stolen. An article published in  the Mexico City paper "Excelsior" reported  that the embassy went on to criticize adoptions in which 10 Guatemalan lawyers were  involved, privately accusing them of dealing  in stolen children.  In a document condemning the traffick  in children, the European Parliament asked  that the governments of its 12 member nations simultaneously launch an investigation  to discover a possible extension of this traffick in children into Europe. Italy was congratulated for being the first country to take  such  Without stricter guidelines it is easy to  see how children can fall between the cracks,  disappearing into a vacuum in which they  have no human rights whatsoever. With  this in mind, the Christian Task Force on  Central America, a Vancouver-based group  that lobbies the Canadian government on  Central American issues, is demanding that  adoptions from Guatemala to Canada and  other industrialized countries be halted until the situation can be brought under control.  Sources: Articles published in the  Mexico City dailies El Dia and Excelsior.  Guatmemalan children living in  El Nuevo Jardin refugee camp in  Mexico re-enact the burning of  their village by the Guatemalan  army. The army regularly destroys  villages in regions sympathetic to  Guatemalan resistance fighters. The  people are forced to flee to refugee  camps in neighbouring countries. International  ////////////////y.  Sharon Kowalski  Slowly winning dignity  by Kinesis Staff Writer  Sharon Kowalski is a few steps closer to  freedom after a team of Minnesota doctors  agreed that she is capable of communicating and is able to understand the communication of others. As a result of the doctor's  report, a state judge ordered, in January,  that Sharon is entitled to full rehabilitation treatment at a special facility for brain  damaged people in Duluth. Judge Robert  V. Campbell also took away the right of  Sharon's father to dictate the type of treatment she will receive and who will be allowed to visit her.  Sharon Kowalski's harrowing story began  in 1983 when she was in a car accident which  left her severely injured. Since 1984, she has  been under the legal guardianship of her father, Donald Kowalski, who placed her in a  nursing home in 1985, defying court judgments which ordered that she receive rehabilitation treatment.  The struggle to free Sharon from her father's control has been led by her lover,  Karen Thompson, who has been prevented  from seeing Sharon since 1984. Karen has  criss-crossed  the  country organizing  on  Sharon's behalf- speaking to lesbians, gays  and disabled people and launching numerous legal appeals which cumulated in  Sharon undergoing court ordered competency testing last September. It is these test  results which have finally cleared the way  for Sharon to receive rehabilitation.  According to Judge Campbell's ruhng,  Sharon will receive communication and  other therapy for at least 60 days. During that time, her medical evaluators will  also make recommendations about visitation, taking into account the regulations of  the facility and Sharon's wishes. At the end  of 60 days, the medical evaluators will submit a report to CampbeU, who will then issue a further ruhng as to Sharon's care and  guardianship. At some point, Campbell is  expected to outline where Sharon will stay,  who can visit her, and what role she will  play in deciding her future.  For Karen Thompson, the struggle to free  her lover and participate in her care is not  over and while she is ecstatic with the latest advance in the case, she is also angry at  what the delay in treatment may mean to  Sharon's recovery.  "The medical report is very exciting,"  Karen told supporters, "because Sharon is  still communicating and indicating what she  wants. But I was probably angrier than Fve  ever been when I read the report and heard  what type of physical condition she is in."  The report says that the muscles in  Sharon's left hand have clenched up to the  point where her fingers are cutting into her  palm. Although in 1984 Sharon was making good progress with that hand and was  learning to hold things, groom herself and  to type, Karen now beheves that hand —  the better of the two — will never be useful  again. Sharon's leg muscles are also severely  atrophied and probably beyond repair.  "Physically Sharon has been condemned  to a hfe of much lesser quality because of  what's been done to her," said Karen. "I  think the system should be held accountable for this."  Karen is also angry that Sharon's parents have been able to separate them for  over three years. "While we have been fighting for Sharon's rights, the Kowalskis have  had their rights as parents upheld and their  hands held every step of the way." The  Namibia  Apartheid and  misogyny flourish  by Susan Strega  According to Dessa Onesmus, Namibian health worker, Namibia is Africa's last  colony. And she beheves it will continue as  a colonized land long after Western engineered "independence" is in place, so long  as white South Africans control Namibia's  economy and, most importantly, its harbour.  Namibia was colonized by Germany from  1885 to 1915. In this 30 year period more  than 100,000 Namibians were massacred by  German troops. Namibia was "given" to  South Africa by mandate in 1915, and South  Africa has continued to impose its rule despite many International Court rulings that  South Africa's presence is illegal. After the  1967 ruhng, the United Nations was to  take "responsibility" for Namibia but South  Africa simply ignored the ruhng and continued to occupy Namibia. To support the  South African presence, Britain "gave" the  Namibia harbour to South Africa, robbing  Namibians of their only deep water port.  In 1978 the United Nations, Western  countries, South Africa and Namibia itself through the South-West Africa Peoples' Organization accepted U.N. resolution  415 to institute free elections in Namibia.  (SWAPO is the internal pohtical wing of the  Namibian rebel movement which commands  an overwhelming loyalty among Namibians.) South Africa has been allowed to  block elections by insisting that new conditions (for example, that Cuban soldiers  must leave Angola) be added to the resolution. South Africa has also served notice that it will not allow an independent  Namibia to have use of its only harbour.  South Africa has divided Namibia into  11 different governments, each with a complete ministerial and administrative structure. (This structure is similar to the "Bantustan" divisions in South Africa itself.) Division is by ethnic group, South Africa's  "tribal" definitions, and the white group  retains all the economic and pohtical control. Namibia's population of 1.5 million is  93 percent Black, yet the 7 percent that is  white own 80 percent of the land. Onesmus  says, "There are two Namibians, one is rich,  white and healthy. The other is poor, Black  and hungry."  The racist, apartheid machinery that  controls Namibia practices two levels of  population control. One is the genocide created by inadequate food, contaminated water, the destruction of traditional tribal  healing and the removal of grazing and crop  lands. The second is directed specifically  at women and involves birth control, either by sterilization or by provision of long  acting contraceptives such as Depo-Provera  and Nur Esterate (Net-En). Women who  are sterilized are led to believe the procedure is reversible. Depo-Provera and Net-  En are often administered immediately after a woman gives birth and often women  "Organizing is a Black j  phenomena. White \  women are too f  comfortable."  are not informed they have been given a  contraceptive drug. These drugs are given  in such high dosage that women are unable  to conceive, and if they do conceive their female children are infertile.  Although there is as yet no national  women's organization in Namibia, there are  women's organizations, such as Namibia's  Women's Voice, working for change. Most  women's organizations are also members  of the National Liberation Movement.  Women's Voice is a non-governmental organization of Black women who work on  health projects such as the digging of  pit latrines and on encouraging traditional women's work such as gardening and  sewing. Onesmus hopes that future projects  will include a return to more traditional  methods of birth control and family planning.  Onesmus is a government health worker,  one of many working towards a health care  model based in traditional tribal medicine  using some information from "scientific"  medicine. For example, midwives are encouraged to expand their information about  "high risk" pregnancies. Men are being educated about condom use. Although much  organization has an urban base, there is  some expansion into rural areas, especially  in the northwest. Organizing women is a  Black phenomena—Onesmus beheves that  as yet "white women are too comfortable"  The Namibian Women's Voice, and other  women's organizations, need donations of  money and information. Unbehevably, it is  not safe to send either type of support by  mail. Donations and information can only  be brought into Namibia by trustworthy  travellers.  Kowalski's virulent homophobia was the  factor in their efforts to bar visits between  the lovers.  At press time, Karen still did not know  whether she would be able to see Sharon  during the testing period. Karen and her  lawyers have sent a letter to Sharon's doctors saying Karen wants to cooperate in  the evaluation and rehabilitation process as  soon as possible.  "I don't know if the doctor's are going  to call me in a couple of days, or a couple  of weeks or what. It's frustrating because  [giving the doctor's the power to grant visitation] still keeps Sharon a prisoner. She  should be able to have people drop in and  see her anytime, just hke other people in  that kind of institution."  International  spotlights  South Africa Over 300 prisoners  around the country resumed eating in mid-  February after a 24-day hunger strike was  ended because of government promises to  release almost 1,000 people who have been  detained without trial, some for as long  as a year. The hunger strike had spread  from prison to prison, gathering support  and putting intense pressure on the South  African government. The government, however, has given no indication that it will end  its pohcy of detention without trial. An estimated 30,000 people, most of them Black  activists, have been imprisoned for varying  periods since a national state of emergency  was declared by South Africa's apartheid  government in 1986. Info from the Globe  and Mail  Philippines A growing number of disappeared cases has put President Corazon Aquino's government under increasing  pressure from local and international human rights organizations. As with the situation in Latin American countries, there  is deep suspicion that the disappearances  and killings, over 200 in the three years  of Aquino's government, are the work of  death squads. The Aquino government has  been unable to launch a single prosecution in these cases. More than half of the  known disappearances occurred over the  past year, mostly involving left wing activists, trade union organizers and human  rights workers, many of whom are women.  In a recent report documenting the continuing use of torture by Philippine military intelligence units, Amnesty International also  cited cases of alleged killings by government  troops or paramilitary forces suspected of  operating "with official supervision or sanction." Info from the Globe and Mail  Afghanistan Afghan women who fought  as rebel soldiers, or worked as nurses and  camp cooks during the nine year war against  the Russian occupation of Afghanistan will  have no say in deciding the future of their  country. The women, some of whom have  hved through horrifying torture and imprisonment for their role in the Afghan  resistance, offend powerful fundamentalist  leaders in the Afghan Rebel Council, the  decision-making coalition of the Afghan resistance. Several prominent Afghan women  have been sent death threats by the fundamentalist Hezb-i-Mami party, because they  are considered to be too westernized to  be good Mushm women. Tajwar Kakar, an  outspoken advocate of women's rights who  spent a year in prison for the rebel cause and  has received death threats, says "These men  (the fundamentalists) want to keep women  down and tell them their own version of Islam. Our women are illiterate, so they can  not read the Koran. They don't know their  rights under Islam. But I read and I am a  good Moslem and I know the truth." Info  from the Globe and Mail  KINESIS International  'ñ†i  Youth:  Rallying with imagination and vitality  by Susan Prosser  The Mowing is an interview with three  Vancouver women who have organized as  youth and are involved in different forms of  solidarity work with international youth.  Susanne Hrybko is involved with Endless Struggle, an anarchist/punk publication, Ecomedia, an anti-authoritarian news  network, with literature distribution, and  with organizing gigs. She has been a writer  and activist for several years and initially  got involved through the punk scene, which  she says is open to anyone regardless of age.  Perminder Bran is a grade 11 student at  Tupper High School who organized a chapter of Amnesty International at her school.  She began the group by speaking at assemblies. The group meets week to write letters  urging the release of prisoners and to organize in support of other local activities.  Tarda Trepania moved to Vancouver two  years ago after hving in Malawi for five  years and Trinidad and the West Indies  for two years. Tarda is in the International Baccalaureate program at Churchill  High. When she moved here she began a  group called the Action Coordinating Team  (ACT) which is an umbrella group which  acts on issues such as human rights, and  anti-apartheid. ACT groups organize letter-  writing and assemblies, bring in speakers  and work with other community groups on  demonstrations and other activities.  Kinesis: Do you think youth organizing is an issue here or in the countries  with which you work in solidarity?  Perminder: In the countries Amnesty  works with, youth in most places aren't ever  allowed to organize. A lot of people who  have been put in prison are about our age,  and the reason they have been put in is they  were expressing their beliefs or banding together in groups to do so, we try to deal with  that in our letter writing. Here it doesn't really make as big a difference as it does in say  South America where it's considered a big  deal if youth start to organize, the government starts to worry. With Amnesty writing  to youth is an issue but starting your own  group at your own school is much more con-  the human rights demonstration we had to  pound and pound at the principal to get  permission. So we tend to do a lot of independent things using the school just as  a meeting place. We're working on a book  of children's stories dealing with environmental issues and stereotyping. We have to  tread very carefully, to make sure it's neutral, not too pohtical. So, it's that diplomacy you've got to maintain.  Perminder: At my school they're quite  supportive about the whole thing. They get  quite excited. They try to encourage you in  any way they can. But then we're not too  pohtical. We're just kind of level with everything. If we stay pretty normal, but at  the same time we express our opinions, then  everything's all right.  Kinesis: How do you see your work  as youth differing from that of other  groups who organize around the same  issues ?  Perminder: With youth there's a lot  more energy and vitality in the whole thing.  They're willing to put more into it. They  ...for the human rights demonstration we  had to pound and pound at the principal  to get permission.  venient because you're working with your  own peers and even if you're only working  with small numbers at least everyone in the  school becomes aware of Amnesty whereas  before they weren't.  Susanne: In terms of groups I know in  North America, the more mainstream the  group is, the harder it is for youth to be involved with it because it's always seen as  a splinter of the main group, just the kids  group. It's hard to get funding or be taken  seriously. Or if they have new ideas, the  main group doesn't want to take it seriously  because it could be a threat to that group.  In the less mainstream groups I find people  are more open to new ideas; there's more  variance in the people so it's a lot easier  working with them.  Tania: ACT is a youth group. All our  members are youths. We've taken other  sources of information and organization and  used those for our group. For example,  we've used Red Cross literature and we've  done things in conjunction with Oxfam.  We're the core group and we use these other  sources of adult information.  Susanne: Do you find it harder with the  Amnesty group giving you funds? How do  they treat you?  Perminder: We don't get anything from  Amnesty. We work on it ourselves. It's not  that difficult in high school to raise funds:  a bake sale, student council, but you are on  your own in the financial aspect of it.  Susanne: In terms of what you were  saying about governments worrying when  youth start to organize, a lot of the demos  hke against apartheid in Canada, or against  the IMF (International Monetary Fund) in  Europe, tend to be youth because of more  energy and not having to deal with the same  thing for five or 10 years, spirits don't get  down because of nothing happening for a  long time. A lot of stuff happening is not  specificaUy youth, but a lot of youth are involved because they're the ones who have  the energy.  Kinesis: In school do you face any  particular resistance from adults ?  Tania: We tend to be rather a pohtical group. A lot of the time teachers and  even the principal are very careful; even for  or Barricada International  have fresh ideas, a lot of creativity, different ways to make people aware. With the  youths who are imprisoned, it is a lot easier for us to understand how they're feehng  than it would be for someone who's a lot  older.  Tania: The issues we deal with are very  relevant to the world we're going to grow up  in. I take these things very seriously.  Susanne: A lot of the other anarchist  publications tend not to have so much on  music and tend to be more theoretical  rather than report on action that's happening. I would say many older groups are not  so much into action, more into theory.  Kinesis: Do you feel you have a voice  or an effect? How is that felt?  Susanne: Yes we definitely have a voice  with the zine (magazine) and with ecomedia. We're constantly getting letters from  all over the world: Australia, South Africa  ... Newfoundland. It's really amazing how  many people are in contact, you don't realize until they write. Writing letters is a  really big part of communications. With a  lot of publications we trade zines: we send  10 copies or whatever and they send 10 of  theirs: that way theirs get out here, ours get  out there and we don't have to deal with  money at alL  Perminder: Our voice is mostly within  the school. More people are aware now.  They stop and ask you questions. With our  displays it attracts attention. You're asked  your opinion more on universal matters. Although where you write they get thousands  of letters, yours is just one in a pile, to you,  it means a lot.  Tania: With ACT we write letters too.  The most recent was concerning the oil spill.  Just being able to voice an opinion I think  counts for a lot. And within the community at school, people hear through speakers, posters and announcements, even if it's  only with the corner of their ears. Maybe  that will make them connect. I think we  do some significant stuff, at least with the  school, hopefully that will reach out into the  community.  Kinesis: How do you draw new people in or how do you think youth are affected?  A'NESIS International.  Tania: We put up fancy posters, make  announcements, hold assemblies, then we  tell them how they can become involved.  We try and recruit from the lower grades.  When I was that age I found that I wasn't  really secure enough to get involved, or have  a voice, or else people wouldn't take me seriously. So, we try to encourage the younger  itudents and you find out there are a lot of  people who want to get involved and who  just don't have the courage, are too shy to  come up and say something.  Perminder: It's the zany, outrageous  P.A. announcements that really get people to look up. When I first started people would say, "Amnesty, what's Amnesty?"  But now people say, "Oh, Amnesty!" This  girl transferred from Tupper to another  school. She called me and got another one  started there. Another girl who was a member started another club. It sort of gets people thinking, well I can do that too.  Susanne: In terms of putting out a magazine, once you put it out you get a lot of  phone calls saying we want to do that too.  Seeing it is very low tech and low budget  makes people realize they don't need all this  special equipment to put one out. I've noticed lately there are a lot of zines out there.  People say, "Just teach us how to do this or  help us to do that and we'll put one out."  We get several every day in the mail. It's  the big means of communication; everyone  puts out their own thing then sends them  out to everyone else.  Kinesis: How are your issues the  same or different from the people you  work with in solidarity?  Tania: In the program I'm in there are  refugees and immigrants and Canadians  who have hved abroad for some time. These  same people are in ACT. We get a world  wide perspective. The girl from Guatemala  tells stories about how she got here; that  really hits home. It makes work with, say,  Amnesty, much more significant. Even when  I hved in Malawi there was very httle you  could do in terms of spreading awareness or  trying to form a group or anything. Malawi  is run by a hfetime monarch. No one speaks  out against the government. You realize how  lucky we are here to have that freedom: freedom of speech. You can write to your MP  and complain, say what you think, attend  demos and meetings.  Perminder: In other countries youth are  busy trying to save the skin on their own  letting people know what's going on, people send us their newspapers then we put  them out. The same with animal hberation  groups: often times it's people our own age  who are just working out their ideas. It's  as you work out your ideas, start realizing  what's going on that you really want to do  something about it.  Kinesis: Is being a woman an issue? Is there a gender balance in your  group?  Susanne: No, there's not a gender balance at all. In terms of putting out the  zines, most of it's done by men. We have a  friend in England who puts out a zine which  deals with feminist stuff and in her last issue  she comments that of all the people who've  written her she's only had one reply from a  woman. She offered different explanations:  either women aren't involved in writing and  communicating or it's a scene mostly dominated by men. I was thinking maybe a lot  of the established women's groups consider  her doing something as a youth and don't  want to take the time to write to her.  Almost all the people who set up distribution services are anti-sexist and anti-  racist and it's a really strong reason for  distribution whether it's men or women,  though there may be an imbalance of material. We try to do women's stuff.  Perminder: Our group's mostly female.  I think they have more time, they're more  willing to commit to a group. In high school  males are mostly into running around in  their groups. We're totally open. It's not a  female movement.  Susanne: In the countries Amnesty reports on, most of the prisoners are men.  Perminder: Yeah, which is strange.  You'd think more of them would get involved.  Tania: It's the same at our school.  It's mostly female. The guys are off doing  sports.  Perminder: It's their macho image or  something.  Tania: That's right. But when you get  out of the high school setting there always  seem to be more males in pohtics.  Perminder: It's an age thing, I think.  Females in high school are more active.  Once they graduate they get into their own  thing and the males step into the prestigious  places.  In high school you've got to convince people  there's more to life than hairspray.  backs, they've got their own groups, they're  concerned with themselves and trying to express their own feehngs on their own hves.  They're getting in trouble doing that, getting imprisoned and stuff. They're trying  to get other people to see their point of  view, so we're just trying to help them out.  We don't think they should be punished for  that.  Susanne: We were over in England last  year. We were squatting there and squatting is something which, it's not just youth,  but it's basically youth who do it because  they're just finishing school, moving out of  home. The housing situation there is really  bad, it's basically a privilege to rent. Most  people squat because it's basically legal.  The only way you can rush getting a rent is  if you get married and have a kid, otherwise  you have to wait a long time. When we were  there, there was one whole estate where 100  squats were being evicted at once. People  hving there were mostly youth. They resisted and kept the cops off for three days.  They're dealing with their own homes. You  hear about resists going on, you spread information. We don't do solidarity work in  writing to these people because you can't  really do that. It's much more of an action,  more of a militant thing. But in terms of  Tania: That's an old problem of trying  to balance raising a family and having jobs.  That's a problem that still exists but I think  those attitudes are changing a lot. I know  a lot of women who are going to go out  there and really change things, who have  big plans. I know there are a few guys who  feel threatened by that.  Susanne: When we were in England,  there were a lot of men's groups setting  up anti-sexist groups and groups working  on men's attitudes especially problems of  power. There is a lot of challenging of typical roles.  Kinesis:... And work in the future?  Perminder: In high school it will be carried on by the juniors. I'm planning on going  to university and they've got a lot of groups.  Tania: I know I want to continue to be  involved after I leave high school. There are  lots of different groups that need volunteers.  Susanne: Or set up your own. A lot of  times with groups being established, if you  have new ideas it's hke breaking the boundaries that have been set. There's hardly ever  anything in the paper after any demo. It's a  lot easier for them to say something's happening over in that country but not in this  country. It's really important working with  your own group, getting your own info out.  No matter how small it may be. It's encouraging finding out something's going on. It's  a lot easier networking, doing stuff when  you realize other people are doing it too.  Basically you have to set up your own complete news network.  Tania: Also I think something that's really important is to continue to support children and teenagers who should be aware of  these issues, who should grow up with this  awareness. H kids grow up in the direction  we're heading now, then we're not doing too  well.  Susanne: I once gave a presentation  for VISAC (Vancouver Incest and Sexual  Abuse Centre) for grade seven students, and  there were parents phoning up complaining,  "How can you tell these kids ..."  Perminder: In high sch'ool you've got to  convince people there's more to hfe than  hairspray. In other countries there's not as  much of a distinction between youth and  adults organizing because it's the youth in  colleges trying to make the difference, who  are rebelling, who are into getting freedom.  Whereas here we've got it all: TV set, everything. There's a bigger gap.  Tania: My friend from Guatemala began, at a very young age, to be aware of  these things because she was affected by  them, but here, at that age, you're still sheltered.  Perminder: We cover up reality too  much here.  KINESIS International conference  Ban reproductive  and gene technology  As the foUowing article describes,  many women worldwide are organizing  against gene and reproductive technology, which they see as dangerous new  methods for the increased social control of women, particularly women of  colour. In Canada, recent events have  underlined the fact that old ideas about  genetic superiority and new technologies and practices around fertility are  pressing issues for Canadian feminists.  Across Canada, Ontario university  professor Phillippe Rushton's racist  "'theories" that rank intelligence, parenting skills and criminality on the basis of racial origin have raised a storm  of controversy. Rushton's ideas, which  place Orientals on the top rung of the  evolutionary ladder, Caucasians somewhere in the middle and Blacks at the  bottom, are certainly not new ideas,  versions of which have been widely promoted since the time of Charles Darin.  While Rushton's racism and his misrepresentation of genetic research have  been condemned by academics, politicians, the media and scientists, he is  still able to promote his views under  the stamp of academic freedom, a pursuit which is funded by the Pioneer  Fund, a right wing American foundation that supports research into "racial  betterment." Largely ignored in the  debate over Rushton's beliefs is what  value research into racial differences  holds for our society and what control  society has over its dissemination and  impact. In Nazi Germany, such "research" was used to buttress an ideology that led to the extermination of  millions of Jews and others.  Fertility control, in aU its manifestations, has also been much in the  news, most recently with the establishment of Ontario's first anonymous  egg donor program for infertile couples. The Chedoke-McMaster Hospital,^ Hamilton, allows women to donate their surplus eggs to women who  are unable to have children because  they have stopped producing eggs. In  related news, an unpublished report by  the Law Reform Commission of Canada  has found that at least 118 surrogate  births have involved Canadians either  as the surrogate mother or the couples  which contracted with a woman willing to act as a surrogate. The study  found that a surrogate mother, and her  family, are more likely to be working  class, while the couple who contract for  child are more likely to have middle  and upper-middle class backgrounds.  To date, no comprehensive legal  framework exists in Canada to clarify the many legal, medical, ethical  and social questions that must be addressed around fertility issues and reproductive technology. In 1988, a group  of feminists formed the Coalition for  a Royal Commission on Reproductive  Technologies to press for a royal commission on these issues. The Coalition's  statement argues that it is "imperative  that we begin to explore the issues surrounding these new technologies and  initiate a public debate over what limits we want to place on them..."  This approach has gained some support amongst Canadian feminists, but  others are wary of such a strategy.  Women's Healthsharing, a widely respected Canadian feminist health journal, has not endorsed the call for a royal  commission believing that "royal commissions require vast amounts of time  and energy and rarely result in positive  by Susan Strega  The Second Federal Congress of Women  Against Gene and Reproductive Technology took place in Frankfurt, West Germany  last November. More than 2,500 women attended, including women from Africa, Asia,  Central America, South America, Europe  and North America. The Congress was organized by representatives from many West  German women's groups partly in response  to the pohce raids, arrests and prosecutions  of German women working against gene and  reproductive technology.  West Germany has recently passed a  statute (S129a) that has allowed the state  to define these women as engaging in acts  of terrorism against the state. Hundreds  of West German women have been questioned by pohce, had their homes and offices  searched, and at least two (Ulla Pensehn  and Ingrid Strobl) have been jailed for  months without trial (see Kinesis, Sept.  '87, Apr. '88). "Suspicion of membership  in Rote Zora" (a women's direct action  group) is considered reasonable grounds for  search and seizure. After months in jail,  Ulla Pensehn was released just prior to the  Congress, but Ingrid Strobl remained in jail,  in isolation, where she has been for almost a  year. The conference concluded with a solidarity march to the Frankfurt jail where  Strobl is imprisoned. (At press time Strobl's  trial was just beginning.)  It was the intention of the conference organizers to avoid taking their own views,  which they saw as originating in a "privileged reality" as criteria of women's experiences with this technology. The conference made a special effort (and I think succeeded) to seek out the views and experiences of "Third World" women. At this second conference (the first took place in Bonn  in 1985), the focus was on the social controlling functions of these technologies, and on  strategies for resistance.  German femimsts feel a special concern  for action on gene and reproductive tech  nologies, believing themselves to have been  witness to the origin of these technologies. From 1933-45 Germany carried out a  massive eugenics program. Believing that  Aryans were more fit to hve than other  races, the Nazis attempted to exterminate  Jewish and other non-Aryan races.  Nazi racial ideology insisted that the  "pure" Aryan embodied all the finest physical and mental qualities. Deformities and  disabilities were seen as genetic contamination from non-Aryans, especially Jews,  and the Nazis passed laws to prohibit sexual contact between Jews and non-Jews.  Mentally or physically different adults were  sterilized en masse. A special children's euthanasia program killed thousands of deaf,  blind and otherwise different children. Nazi  doctors conducted thousands of experiments on women in an effort to gain control  over ovulation and conception.  In the United States, there were many  laws against mixed marriages, some not repealed until the 1950's. Almost all early reproductive research was carried out against  Black women. Many of them died, most of  them were made sterile. By 1945 U.S. doctors had performed three times as many  sterilizations as were ever performed in Nazi  Germany—almost all of them on women of  colour.  So, it is not surprising that most of the  Nazi "researchers" found a welcome home in  American, British and Canadian laboratories. Eugenic thinking—the idea that some  e fit to hve than others—is behind  the development of all gene and reproductive t<  4 KINESIS  lations of third world women are sterilized  while white, first world women are encouraged to have amniocentesis and practice sex  preselection. Workshops encouraged women  to turn their focus to the "background" of  gene and reproductive technologies, to the  white, patriarchal, forced-heterosexual, economic and medical domination of women.  When feminists encourage the development  of "femimst" versions of patriarchal constructs (eg. self-determined artificial insemination) they thwart fundamental critiques  of these ideas.  Also considered as part of reproductive  technologies were amniocentesis and other  forms of prenatal diagnosis that are widely  accepted and practiced in North America.  There was much discussion (a large part  of it stimulated by the Crippled Women's  Group, Bremen) about eugenic abortion,  and the message given to differently abled  women when women practice prenatal diagnosis as a matter of course. What does  it mean to move towards a society without  differently abled people?  Lesbians Opposed to Population  Politics  There are two visible places for lesbians  in reproductive technology—both are bad.  The spectre of lesbians having children is  offered as rationale for strict regulation of  access to technologies. (More usually lesbians are lumped together with all single  women, all of whom must be screened to establish if they are "fit.") Geneticists sometimes cite lesbianism— usuaUy lumped under "homosexuality"—as socially undesirable behaviour with a genetic or hormonal  cause that can be eradicated with advanced  gene technology.  North American women who have written about gene and reproductive technology have focussed either on how lesbians can  use these technologies (particularly artificial  insemination) or on the discrimination lesbians face in gaining access to these technologies. The more fundamental question:  "Should lesbians (or any women) use these  technologies at all?" has yet to be asked in  North America, possibly because it seems a  kind of feminist heresy to do so.  European lesbians and feminists have  been asking just this question for a number of years. Radical opposition to all use  of these technologies, and to their development, is not a consensus position among European lesbians but it seems to be a majority opinion. Lesbians at this congress raised  the question of what it means for lesbians  to have children, or even want to have children, at this time, in this patriarchal society. There are many eugenic ideas in lesbian thinking about having children. Even  lesbians who use low technology approaches  engage in donor selection for certain characteristics. The same lesbians who might insist on disabled access at women's events  seem to be prepared to have amniocentesis  so that they can abort a differently abled  fetus.  vador, Norway, Germany and Canada, Very  few British feminists are opposed to gene  and reproductive technology, and there is  at least one feminist guidebook to them.  Steinberg's concern, shared by all the  other women in the workshop, is how the debate and questions are set and arranged by  the patriarchal scientific community so that  women respond in very limited ways. For  example, it is always assumed that at least  some of the technology is acceptable to all  women. Women are encouraged to choose  from the technologies those "best suited to  their needs;" the underlying assumption is  that all women need some kind of technological "help" somewhere in the birth process.  Legislation is limited to "protective" legislation to prevent "abuse" of science and  technology. Definitions of abuse are, of  course, not made by women. It is possible in  Spain, for example, for women to go to jail  for having had an abortion while research  on fertilized eggs is allowed for the first 14  days. Spain recently passed an Embryo Protection Law while concurrently liberalizing  laws around gene and reproductive technology.  These embryo protection laws (which exist in other European countries and may  soon exist in the U.S.) are part of a growing  insistence on "father right," referring to the  fetus as "he" while referring to women only  in relation to their function for the fetus. In  most countries women who oppose gene and  reproductive technologies are called "anti-  choice" and accused of restricting women's  right to seK-determination. Many of these  accusations come from feminists.  Population Politics  "First World" white women who wish to argue with each other about the relative merits of various technologies should do so with  the consciousness that they have been developed by thoughtless experimentation on  Jewish women and women of colour in the  "Third World" and elsewhere. That experimentation often results in sterilization—a  result that, in the scheme of global population pohtics, is seen as positive. While white  middle class women are trying to boost their  fertility, "Third World" women are still being sterilized en masse.  In 1986 the World Health Organization (WHO) minimized already lax guidelines on safety requirements for contraceptive steroid research that is carried out in  "developing" countries. Ana Regina Gomes  s Reis from Recife, Brazil cited the case  of Norplant implants in Brazilian women.  A Norplant implant prevents contraception  for five years. Removal of the implant (five  hormone releasing pellets) requires surgery.  During testing, women who requested removal of the implants were refused by doctors who told them the side effects were  "normal."  Recently, in Chile, Brazil and other countries, an agent that actually immunized  against pregnancy has been tested. This  anti-pregnancy "vaccine" causes a woman's  own immune system to attack the trophoblastic hormone HCG, her signal for  conception. In addition to side effects such  as immune complex disease, the action of  the vaccine may not be reversible, so that a  woman once vaccinated may never be able  to conceive.  Dessa Onesmus, a Namibian health  worker, questioned the whole concept of  "Third World overpopulation." Namibia,  with a population of 1.5 million in an  i four times the size of Britain and  France put together, is a major target for  a massive "family planmng" campaign, as  are other African countries. South Africa  supplies injectable ovulation control drugs  (Depo Provera, banned in Canada, and Net-  En) free to Namibia. Cash and food in-  , centives are sometimes offered to encour-  len to take the drug, which is administered to women as young as 12 years  old. Dosages are often three times the ac-  y ceptable limit, and permanent infertility is  a common result.  In a workshop entitled "Sex Determination and Sex Preselection Tests in India—  Recent Techniques for Femicide," Dr. Vib-  huti Patel and a colleague presented a chilling picture of the status of women in India. Prior to the introduction of amniocentesis for sex determination, the female  population of India was already in dangerous decline due to widespread killing of  baby girls, female children dying from malnutrition while their brothers ate, dowry  deaths, and suicide among teenage women.  Where "cause of death" statistics are kept,  murder is the leading cause of death for  women between 18-29 years old—women  dying of beatings, strangulation, burns, poison. The number of registered dowry deaths  has tripled in the last few years (1418 in  1987); it is estimated that only one in ten  such deaths is registered. The sex ratio (total number of women per 1000 men) has  declined from 972 in 1901 to 933 in 1981—  before the current widespread use of amniocentesis and subsequent aborting of female  fetuses.  In Bombay alone, 78,000 female fetuses  were aborted in a five year period, almost  100 percent after amniocentesis. (Fetuses  are then used for gene and reproductive  technology experiments and in the manufacture of medicines.) A common argument  for amniocentesis is that it is better to abort  a female fetus than to give birth to an unwanted female child who will probably be  ill-treated or starved.  Speaking to a predominantly white audience, these women reminded us that there  is a world wide preference for male children and that we make a racist mistake if  we do not understand that femicide is a  world wide phenomena. Lesbians and other  women grateful for access to low technology  artificial msemination were reminded that  80 percent of Al babies are male, and were  encouraged to question their use of such  technology.  The Industrialization of Reproduction  Gena Corea (author of The Mother Machine) began her presentation with the  question, "WiU new reproductive technologies enable women to exercise greater control over their reproductive hves?" She  hsted the technologies now avaUable for  sale: sex predetermination, embryo flushing,  sex preselection, franchised in vitro fertilization clinics and surrogate mothers. Af  ter giving a brief overview of the industrialization of the birth process (more induced labour and caesarean sections to facilitate doctors' schedules) she detaUed how  aU phases, including conception, are now  being industrialized and made "more efficient."  With the use of a special hormonal injection, women's ovaries wUl ripen eggs on demand. That may not be enough to satisfy  the technodocs, so a system is being developed whereby eggs wUl ripen in the laboratory rather than in the ovary. Once this system is perfected, eggs can be mined continuously.  Related research wUl soon make it possible to harvest eggs from ovaries already removed from women's bodies. Once ovaries  can be kept in cultures in the laboratory, then women's bodies wUl no longer  be needed as a source of eggs and  bryos. Eggs and ovaries for this research are  routinely supplied by women without their  knowledge and consent. Eggs and tissues removed are quick frozen and then shipped to  research laboratories or used in a hospital's  own research programs.  Other steps in the industrialization of  reproduction include in vitro fertilization  (there are thousands of IVF clinics worldwide, including more than 200 in Canada)  and embryo culture. Technology has recently been developed to aUow embryos  of undesired sex or quality to be discovered and discarded before implantation. Sex  preselection, involving the splitting of the  sperm, is also offered world wide. (At least  one Canadian clinic offers this service.) Dr  Ronald Ericsson, who operates a chain of  sex selection clinics, reports a 95 percent  preference for male chUdren.  Surrogacy, women selling their breeding capacity, has also been investigated by  Corea. She gave details of a number of  rogacy "businesses," aU owned and run by  men selling women's services. John Stehura  runs a large surrogacy business in California, and supplies potential chents with catalogues featuring pictures of breeders and  giving statistics on their previous reproductive performances. Stehura specializes in  supplying young Mexican women to grow  white embryos. Other surrogacy businesses  arrange meetings between chents and breeders' offspring, so that chents can assess the  potential product.  Corea described the present situation in  much of the "First World" as one in which  "we hne women up and superovulate them,  shoot them up with powerful hormones so  their ovaries produce more efficiently. Then  we lay them on tables and inseminate them  with split, male-engendering sperm, and  later, during pregnancy, get them up on the  table again to poke a needle in their bellies  to do the quality control test on the fetus."  Given the research described by Corea, this  picture is about to become even more horrifying. Soon women wUl at best be carriers.  If white women don't want to co-operate  in carrying white babies, "Third World"  other poor women wiU be found.  Corea ended by restating her question:  "When women are fuUy reduced to reproductive meat, wUl we be in control of  our hves? When women are interchangeable  parts in the birth machinery, wUl we be liberated? No."  This conference of women against gene  and reproductive technology is the first to  have a more international perspective. In  workshop after workshop the need for aU  women, "First" or "Third World," to actively oppose this technology was stated  over and over again. Women were especiaUy encouraged to contrast their experience with abortion, which is nowhere in the  world avaUable free, safe and on demand, to  their experience with this technology, which  women are often "encouraged" to use. That  contrast itself should be enough clue to the  dangers of gene and reproductive technology.  KINESIS International  by Kim Irving  June, 1987: Surrey nurse Mary Zoladz  waits patiently for her chUdren, Edward,  age nine and Sophia, age 11, to return from  school. By evening they are stiU not home  and Zoladz begins a frantic search. She  learns they have been abducted and there  is one obvious suspect: Eduard Kawas, the  children's father.  Zoladz, a native ChUean, married Honduran Kawas by arrangement through their  families. The marriage eventuaUy feU apart;  Kawas was coming home drunk and battering Zoladz. She fled the marriage and filed  for separation in 1980. She received custody  of the chUdren—Kawas received visitation  rights.  Child abduction  A world of undefended borders  strangers, don't get in strange cars, don't  hitch hike. Important messages, but they  do not necessarUy reflect the truth about  chUd abduction. Not that stranger abduction doesn't happen—it does, and the results are often tragic—but the most hkely  person to kidnap a chUd is one of the parents.  Fear and anger are hidden in the misinformation the pubhc receives about missing chUdren. As we stare at missing chUdren  posters, fuU of photos and brief personal descriptions, we are not told how the chUdren  went missing. Due to media and television  reports, many assume it was "the stranger."  In fact, most missing chUdren are runaways—chUdren fleeing abusive families to  hve an equally hard hfe on the street. The  ERIC LARSFOLK  NICOLE LOUISE MORIN CAROLYN PRUYSER  M«t  1IIJ APPELEP/CALLi Paaca RWtr R.C  Photos such as these are commonly seen on milk cartons and buses.  These  photos appear in Missing: An Awareness Newspaper for Teachers and Parents.  On that June day Kawas had apprehended the chUdren from their school, luring them with promises of shopping and instead taking them across the border to the  United States. Once in the U.S., he told the  chUdren their mother was dead. He had already obtained Honduran birth certificates  and passports for the chUdren, even though  both were born in Canada.  Upon learning of their abduction, Zoladz  contacted the local pohce who in turn contacted the RCMP—who contacted Interpol.  Kawas was traced on his jaunt through the  U.S., Europe, the Middle East and finaUy  to San Pedro Sula, Honduras—the home of  his wealthy and influential farrdly.  April, 1988: Zoladz obtained a loan from  her credit union. But it wasn't enough to  hire an attorney nor a private investigator. However, it was enough to get Zoladz  to Honduras. She left on the next avaUable  flight.  In Honduras, Zoladz carefuUy questions  local school authorities, showing them pictures of her missing children. One teacher  recognized the chUdren and directs Zoladz  to their school. Her chUdren are shocked to  see her alive.  On her first attempt to rescue the chUdren, Zoladz is arrested. Fortunately, before  her arrest, she had some time with her chUdren to make rendezvous plans. They meet  that night; a sympathetic teacher drives the  three to the Guatemalan border. Fearing  Honduran pohce, they trek 12 km across the  mountainous border. Once in Guatemala, a  friend bribes an immigration officer into giving them exit visas. They fly to Los Angeles  and the home to Vancouver. Zoladz and her  chUdren stUl hve in Surrey and wonder if her  ex-husband wUl try to abduct again. Kawas  is wanted in Canada on abduction charges.  Who Steals Children  Often news of missing chUdren focusses  on stranger abduction. After aU, it has  been what we were taught: don't talk to  second largest category in missing chUdren  is famUy abduction—the third: stranger abduction.  FamUy abduction can occur by either  parent, although most experts agree it is the  fathers who have the economic advantages  that more often enable them to successfuUy  abduct. Media accounts often focus on the  rise in divorces and separations as the reason for abductions. Some reports argue that  if mothers weren't given sole custody, fathers would not have to resort to such actions. These same reports faU to note the  rise in violence towards women and chUdren  by fathers which often results in the divorce  in the first place.  International abduction is more hkely to  occur if at least one of the parents is from  another country. Once outside of Canada,  tracing the abductor can be virtuaUy impossible unless vital farmly or personal information is known about him. It is only  through searching the abductor's network  that pohce agencies wUl be able to locate  the chUdren. The offender cannot be extradited, but in many cases the chUdren can be  apprehended and returned.  Effective Action Difficult  In 1983, the Hague Convention on the CivU  Aspects of International ChUd Abduction  Agreement was signed by several countries,  including Canada. The convention recognizes parental custodial rights in each of the  signing countries.  For example, if a Canadian mother had  won custody of her chUdren, and they  were abducted by the father to Australia,  the mother could file a complaint under  the Hague Agreement. Australian courts  would be obliged to recognize the Canadian mother's custodial rights, apprehend  the chUdren and return them to Canada.  IdeaUy, the whole process would take less  than two weeks.  As simple as this process seems, there are  a few snags—the major one being that few  countries outside of the Commonwealth and  the United States have ratified the Hague  Agreement. If a country is not part of the  agreement, there is httle a parent can do  beyond reporting the abduction to international pohce agencies or hiring their own  investigation team. As weU, the convention  can only be applied when the parent can  prove she has custodial rights.  Allison Burnet, of B.C.'s Attorney General's office explained that a major concern in abduction cases is that the abductor wUl move on before legal papers can be  filed. Once a complaint has been filed with  Burnet, she immediately contacts the Central Authority of the Hague Agreement, the  convention's enforcing body, in the country where the abductor is living and the  court process can get underway. However,  Burnet emphasized she would much rather  cases be settled through mediation rather  than court. Burnet has settled 22 cases since  1984, when the service was established in  B.C.  Other snags can occur right here in  Canada, explained Rita Markland of the  Ottawa based International Social Services  (ISS), a non-governmental organization.  Markland stressed that more cooperation is  needed between lawyers and social services.  She points out that "the biggest problem for  women is when they turn to Canadian institutions for help, they're not given any."  What You Can Do  International Child Abduction Prevention  If your chUdren are vulnerable to international child abduction there are some protective  measures you can take:  • Teach your chUdren how to make long distance calls by using direct dialing and operator assistance.  • Know every available fact about your partner, including his famUy, work partners, and  social contacts especiaUy in his country of birth.  • Ensure that yon have up-to-date photos of your chUdren, and personal statistics such  as: height, weight, colour of eyes, birthmarks. (Hair samples and fingerprints are only  useful in identifying someone who is deceased.)  • If your chUd is abducted, immediately contact External Affairs in Ottawa, who upon  proof of your custodial rights can put a flag' on the father's or your chUdren's passports.  • Enquire if you can register your chUdren under your passport and/or obtain their own  passport.  • If yon beheve the chUdren's father may attempt an abduction, inform your chUdren,  schools and social groups of the possible intent.  Referrals for International Child Abduction  RCMP Missing ChUdren's Registry (613) 993-7860  International Social Services (613) 728-1226  Ms. Allison Burnet, Attorney General's Office, B.C. (604) 660-3093  ChUdfind B.C. (604) 251-3463 .   k  In order to receive assistance from ISS,  the abduction case must be reported to the  pohce and referred to ISS by a province's social services ministry. Markland commented  that these services may dismiss the woman's  story as a famUy or custody dispute. "H  this occurs," continued Markland, "women  can phone us directly and we can put pressure on those agencies to take the abduction more seriously."  In 1987, ChUdfind Alberta, the provincial  wing of the national organization, ChUdfind  Canada, reported 126 cases of parental abduction. In the same report, ChUdfind Alberta speculated that some 1,000 parental  abductions occur in Canada each year.  Richard Achtem, of ChUdfind B.C. explained that statistics are not always accurate as many incidents of abductions are  not reported. "Pohce just treat missing kids  as any other offence," commented Achtem,  "and missing kids may be the lowest priority in their work."  Daily More Are Missing  In 1987, after two years of planning, Canada  opened its first Missing ChUdren's Registry based on U.S. models. Connected to  the RCMP information hne, this registry  l—MICHELLE LYNN C'.IKAUI) '  ...tracing an abduction  can be virtually  impossible  is meant to keep a more accurate account  of missing chUdren. The RCMP are able  to communicate information on missing and  abducted chUdren to law enforcement agencies around the world. In a recent interview  with the Registry's Ottawa office, Sergeant  John Oliver explained that over 1,500 complaints can be registered at the office at any  given time. Taking a "snapshot view" of just  one day, February 4, 1989, there were 73  parental kidnappings reported to the Registry.  Oliver beheves the majority of international kidnappings occurred between the  U.S. and Canada. Currently, abductors fleeing to the U.S. cannot be extradited, but a  revision which would include abductors in  the Canada-U.S. extradition treaty has recently been accepted by Canada and is being considered by the U.S.  It seems difficult to comprehend the full  impact of chUd abduction on Canadian society. Some agencies suggest some 10,000 chUdren a year are missing. Even conservative  estimates range from 4 to 5,000 chUdren a  year. It seems incredible that it isn't known  exactly how many chUdren run away or are  abducted. What is known is there are plenty  of misconceptions about this growing problem.  6 KINESIS yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy/yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy  //////////////////^^^^^  /////////////////M^^  Arts  Sharbati  Surviving by side stepping tradition  by Jyoti Sanghera  In mid-January, under the banner of  Damandeep Productions, Bombay, a fuU  length Punjabi play was staged at the Gateway theatre in Richmond. On that freezing,  wintry Sunday afternoon, almost everybody  who is anybody in the Indo-Canadian community of Vancouver had themselves ushered into the theatre haU. The hall was  packed. WhUe the wind howled and the  skies broke asunder outside, inside the theatre a mesmerized audience was captured  by the outburst of an emotional storm. The  play Sharbati was in progress.  Sharbati takes its title from the name of  the principal character, Sharbati, a young  woman, a new bride, a cursed daughter-in-  law, a lonely wife. While seeking a positive release from the barren and tormenting forces which suffuse her days and nights,  she finds herself sinking deeper and deeper  into an abyss. Sharbati is a deeply tragic  portrayal of the trials of a woman caught in  the relentless grip of economic want, feudal  brutahty, social obscurantism and phUistine  opaqueness. This is the story of a woman  trapped in a no-win situation. But, this is  also the story of a woman who takes the ultimate step in order to repudiate her denigration, to ratify her existence.  Set in the rural, rustic environs of the  Punjab, Sharbati depicts the economic  struggle and consequent social adaptations  and manipulations forced upon a poor peasant famUy. It also highlights one of those  practices of the Punjabi peasant culture  wherein accepted family norms and relationships are twisted to fit material exigencies.  While this practice is stiU extant, untU a  few decades it was very common for a peasant famUy with more than one son to arrange the marriage of only the eldest son.  The rest of the brothers remained spouseless and consequently chUdless. The fundamental objective of this custom was to prevent the fragmentation of smaU or medium  land holdings on account of inheritance by  subsequent family units. With only the eldest son sanctioned to have a family, the law  of primogeniture was applied, and the rest  of the brothers hved and worked under the  wings of this patriarch. But this was not aU.  The woman who entered such a household  as a bride of the eldest brother was sociaUy  enjoined, through an unspoken moral code,  of course, to provide aU services, including sexual services, to the other brothers,  should they so desire. All chUdren borne by  her and sired by any of the brothers would  be legaUy fathered by the man whose law-  fuUy wedded wife she was.  This practice, whUe almost extinct in  many regions of the Punjab, is stiU mini-  maUy prevalent in those parts where land  does no yield much and conditions of cultivation are tough. The other significant  aspect of peasant culture which this play  brings into focus is that of intimate emotional liaisons formed out of wedlock. Even  in situations where the custom described  above was not practiced, extra-marital relationships between the daughter-in-law of  the house and a brother-in-law closer to her  age were not very uncommon. The folk lore  and folk song traditions of many peasant  communities in India are replete with songs  and stories alluding to such liaisons.  Against the backdrop of deeply entrenched patriarchal and feudal values,  when a young woman barely into pubescence came into strange surroundings as a  new bride, she would naturally gravitate towards a younger brother-in-law, closer to  her in years and thinking, than the older,  mature, distant man she had been wedded  to. Such closeness invariably cmminated in  deep friendship, and not rarely in intimate  relationships of romantic love.  Darshan Mann as Sharbati; Amarjit Josh as the mother-in-law.  Against this background then, Sharbati,  the young bride, finds herself married to  an unresponsive, placid husband, who incidentally is impotent. Notwithstanding his  condition, she cares for him and pleads for  an emotional closeness with him, which he  is unable to provide. Her mother-in-law, a  woman with a ferocious temper and voracious verbosity curses her incessantly for her  'chUdless state.' "Barren field," "deserted  yard," "whore incapable of fruit," are the  abuses constantly hurled upon Sharbati as  she struggles to make ends meet under the  reeling onslaught of economic deprivation  and indigence.  With deep sorrow and pain in her heart,  Sharbati snuffs the flame of love which has  begun to glow between her younger sister  and her only brother-in-law, just so that the  paltry landholding of the farmly may not be  further divided, should the brother-in-law  marry and start a famUy of his own. For she  knows that in that event the whole famUy  wiU starve.  However, the brother-in-law, a strapping  young man with raging passions and Uttle  prudence or wisdom, lends ear to the scheming machinations of an old viUage crone acting as tout for a wUy, Machiavellian mystic.  As is customary in many peasant cultures,  such mystics or god-men draw their livelihood and sustenance by preying upon the  desperation, misery, unescapable oppression  and superstition of the simple viUage folk.  Women in particular are abused for financial and sexual gain.  Upon the instigation and manipulations  of the old crone, the incensed brother-in-  law persuades his already angry and disenchanted mother to set up a separate household. This, of course, implies division of  the family land holding. When Sharbati  beseeches her mother-in-law to show some  compassion she is confronted with such un-  expurgated venom that even Sharbati, the  suffering, sacrificing, uncomplaining woman  is aroused.  Her raison d'etre as a woman in this narrow, incarcerating peasant culture with stifling social norms is seen as hinged upon her  ability to produce an offspring. Her aUeged  'barren-ness,' which we know is on account  of her husband's impotence, hangs around  her neck hke a mUestone. Challenged by  her mother-in-law's unrelenting wrath, obdurate stubbornness to her pleas for compassion, and flood of accusations, Sharbati  finaUy declares, "I wUl show you. I am not a  barren field and I wUl find a seed from this  very house."  Seething under bitter denial and accusations of being un-woman, seething under  the prospects of acute economic want and  despair, Sharbati becomes the woman who  takes matters into her own hands. She seduces her brother-in-law in the darkness  of a desperate night in order to reclaim  that phony status and establish herself on  that fragUe pedestal of motherhood. This  woman, whose act of adultery was a negation of her socialization, her ethical code,  also makes her final bid for affirmation  through this taboo.  But peace and happiness are not for  this hapless woman. For even though she  does conceive, the tension between the two  brothers in the family has escalated to such  a point that Shaibati's husband acciden-  taUy ends up slaying his younger brother,  the father of his wife's unborn child. The  woman is trapped once again in the no-win  situation and there are no pay-offs, whatso-  ©  Press Gang  Printers  603 Powell Street  Vancouver, B.C.  V6A 1H2  253-1224  SUPPORT YOUR LOCAL WOMEN'S PRESS  Sharbati truly portrays a very tragic reality. And yet it is not a play about passivity or quiet acceptance. Set against stifling feudal norms, intractable superstition  and deep economic indigence, this play is  about the survival strategies that women  knit for themselves in the narrow, suffocating confines of their families. This play is  about alternatives that women hke Sharbati  seek, and it is about side-stepping traditions  and norms to find more breathing space and  sunshine.  Every oppressed group fashions its own  survival kit, when established social patterns are thrown to the wind or ingeniously  bent to serve the survivor, the fighter. In  the absence of a strong collective movement  for self-determination in the outlying areas  of peasant societies, people, and especiaUy  women, devise their own individual methods to seek respite. Sharbati does it and realizes her strength—we aU do it.  In the context of our situation as immigrants and visible minorities in Canada,  and as women of that group, we know the  bizarre and often grotesque experiences we  go through in order to survive, to make  things better. This play is about Sharbati,  but perhaps it is about aU women, aU underdogs planning on how best to beat the  stifling system.  Some people voiced their discomfort over  the lack of positive alternatives and coUective struggle in the story. Yes, it is true that  Sharbati is a very tragic story, but then  it also portrays the grim and tragic reality of many of our sisters struggling, yet  only at the stage of individual resistance.  It is nice to expect every bleak situation  to be resolved in a progressive and politi-  caUy positive (and therefore correct) manner. However, in some instances that expectation may be tantamount to pohtical romanticism. Besides, absence of a concrete  solution and mere portrayal of reality may  a be more fruitful, though taxing mental exercise.  The play, which was prepared in only  three weeks, was superbly acted and professionally choreographed. It was directed  by Mohan Baggan, an up and coming theatre person and director from India. He also  played the principal male character. Sharbati was played by Darshan Mann, a local  Vancouver actress. AU the other performers were local actors, and aU in aU the performance was a treat. It wiU be a great asset to translate a play of such social relevance into Enghsh for the general Canadian  theatregoing pubhc. It would certainly enhance the process of cultural understanding  and appreciation.  Specializing  in:  Labour, Liberation  Movements, Canadiana,  Philosophy, Economics,  Progressive Literature,  Imported Publications  from the USSR. -  1391 COMMERCIAL DRIVE  VAN., B.C. V5L 3X5/253-6442  KINESIS iSSSSSSSSS*^**^^^^  Arts  by Jill Pollack  When I was six or seven years old,  my grandmother used to get me and my  sister to write stories. Every weekend  we would open the bottom drawer of her  dresser and pull out the scribblers that  had our names on it. Inside were the  stories we had written and waiting were  the fresh, clean pages where we would  write new ones. Making up stories was  pleasurable, and it was accompanied by  feelings of pride and satisfaction.  There are numerous theories about chUdren and creativity. In fact, it has become,  in part, an institutionalized activity which  literally costs millions of doUars each year  in North America alone. Most museums and  art gaUeries have a separate department  whose primary focus is on school-age chUdren. Educational institutions 'teach' art,  as do community centres. Psychologists and  teachers discuss chUdren and creativity; galleries host exhibitions by and for chUdren,  along with workshops and tours.  No canons on  children's creativity  Yet despite aU the time, intelligence and  money that is poured into various aspects  of chUdren and creativity, it is stiU beyond  definition. Why chUdren create is as amorphous a question as why anyone chooses to  render, write, perform or compose anything.  It's possible to discuss individual chUdren's art; even to make some correlations  between one chUd and another. Yet ah we  can do is assume, form ideas, and then prove  them wrong only to start the whole process  over again. Each time we get a httle closer  to understanding, if only because some possibilities are discarded.  There's an element of mystery in creativity, also a lot of hard work. When someone creates, they bring to bear their experience, skiU and interpretation of something.  Adults and chUdren alike do this.  I don't remember what my stories  were about, but my vague memory of it  tells me that they dealt with the same  kinds of things as the stories I read. I  thought the stories were mine but really  they were versions of something else,  written by someone else. In my innocence I knew no differently and so it  didn't matter.  Kaya Richards is now 12 years old and  she has been making drawings for about  eight years. She uses paper and coloured  pencils, or crayons or felt pens. She loves  bright colours. Some of the things that make  Kaya's drawings so unusual are their detaUed accounting of what is going on in her  hfe, and their unique style.  These two factors are important, because  Kaya has developed on her own and has not  had a lot of institutional intervention into  her creativity. Often due to the popularity  of a particular chUd, other chUdren in the  same class imitate a certain style of theme.  Kaya has always retained a strong identity  in her drawings, and she primarily creates  at home, in isolation.  As she has grown, so too has her art.  Early drawings are about famUy. Everyone  is smiling, facing front and standing outdoors dressed in clothing appropriate to the  season. From about the age of nine on, however, her figures moved indoors and exhibited a broader range of gestures and expressions. She went through a period where the  majority of figures had animal heads atop  human bodies. And she began to work with  perspective, albeit a skewed one. As she  learned to print and speU, more and more  words appeared in the drawings. One piece  uses the letters themselves as the image.  Kaya tried cartooning, briefly, and then  abandoned it but continued to incorporate humour in the pieces. Like some adult  artists, she vicariously dealt with problems  in her hfe in her drawings, such as fighting with her older brother. She developed  a pattern of not only reflecting her hfe in  her art, but imagining a solution which she  could control.  PRIMARY   HEALTH   CARE   IN  ACTION   PROJECTS  YOUR CONTRIBUTION CAN MAKETHE DIFFERENCE  :OXFAM-CANADA  C^wiSt, Vancouver V6J  tHere Is my donation of $_  She had begun to respond to her hfe in  a broader way. In her drawings, she set up  sophisticated scenarios with odd juxtaposi-  tionings. For instance, when she heard that  I had a mouse problem in my home, she  sent me a drawing about "Mouse City." In  it, she created a world where mice had their  own social structure, including stores, transportation systems, leisure activities, etc.,  but were also chained, as pets, by humans.  Kaya does not arbitrarily make a drawing, it is considered and planned. It acts as  a gauge of her thoughts. Her process mirrors that of any artist.  So it seems that when some chUdren create, their work can be viewed and assessed  using criteria simUar to that applied to art  made by adults. Nevertheless, the art sys-  we consider children's contributions. Kaya  Richards has the support of her famUy and  a few outsiders; but she is stiU subject to the  institutionalized formatting of art. Other  chUdren do not get the encouragement she  does.  It turns out that this is not a story about  Kaya's drawings, or even chUdren and creativity after aU; it's about the larger issue  of priorities and values. And as we aU know,  this means once again things are going to  change very slowly, if at aU, and there are  going to be many victims. Here, this translates into many chUdren who wUl never be  given the opportunity to express themselves  in a way that is important to them; creativity wUl be stifled; and the option of spending their hfe as an artist is choosing poverty  tern does not yet acknowledge art-made-by-  children as a serious endeavour. No art history of chUdrens' art exists. And more attention is stUl being focussed on encouraging chUdren to enjoy art rather than making it.  There is no argument that creativity is  necessary to the weU-being of any society.  What is stiU in question, though, is how society can foster and support creativity. The  role of chUdren in this process must be addressed, and we have to change the way  over financial security. Kaya Richards is  only a symbol or a metaphor in so far as  the odds are that her talent, skiU and vision  may weU go unnoticed beyond this article.  I stopped writing fiction in my teens,  and except for when I had to in university, I never wrote, not even letters. Only in my adult life when work  demanded I write, did I even remember those early stories. They don't exist anymore, of course, but I keep all of  Kaya's drawings.  Champlain Realty Ltd.  Bus. (604)438-7117  Nancy Steele  Res. (604) 254-0941  L^L  REALTY WORLD-  Marlene Holt  Res. (604) 255-5027  We'll help you make a good move.  CCEC Credit Union  The Credit Union for  Cooperatives, Community businesses  and the non-profit sector.  • Preferred Rate Loans for  societies and cooperatives.  • Operating Loans  • Mortgages.  • Term Deposits.  • Chequing Accounts.  • and other banking services.  33 EAST BROADWAY  VANCOUVER, B.C. V5T 1V4  MON. & WED. 11 am-5 pm  FRIDAY 1 pm-7 pm  876-2123  "Keeping our money  working in our  community"  .KINESIS Arts  JtfS000^fmmf0m0fm(0f0!  Making a racket about reality  by Dorothy Kidd  This is a story about coming home to  culture shock although you don't have to  go away and come back to be affected by  it. I'm sure you've had the experience of  not fitting into the "totality of ideas, beliefs  and institutions ... characteristic of this  community"—this culture. Has that ever  felt hke being hit as if by a blow, a shock?  That's what it has felt hke to me since I  returned last month from three months in  India. It was not the most obvious differences: the shift from a landscape of warm  sun colours to one of cold and grey, nor even  my renewed sense of anonymity here where  my white face is stiU the norm and where  the streets seem so new and empty of people and activity.  Those physical differences affected me.  But the blow that signaUed to me that I  had reaUy returned home, was hearing some  very old and painful beliefs. Beliefs about  women in India in particular and "other"  women in general that are central to western culture. As I tried to make sense of that  shock, I was aided by some Indian women  who helped me realize those beliefs are part  of a common colonial heritage which they  are part of shaking up.  New Delhi, India  October, 1988  It takes me a whUe to find the offices of  Manushi, the journal about women in society that is celebrating their tenth anniversary. As a Canadian, I am unfamiliar with  getting around in older cities. But when I  finaUy reach that top of the stairs, I recognize the space.  Two smaU rooms are fiUed with files,  stacks of magazines and women's books. At  one long table, two women work on accounts  and writing letters, whUe co-editor Ruth  Vanita comes in from her day job at the university to talk to me. Manushi, meaning  humankind in the feminine, has over 10,000  subscribers in India, the other countries of  south Asia and abroad. Like many other  women's publications, it survives through  the dedication of a small core staff, a large  group of volunteers and a number of loyal  readers.  The words Ruth uses to describe the  magazine are familiar too. "We focus (on)  ... those women who are invisible, or not  much visible in the national media—rural  and poor women ... The role that we saw  in the beginning was to try and bring some  of these struggles to the notice of the reading pubhc and also to connect them in a  sense that (groups) become aware of each  other and learn of each other's experience.  "There have been some (groups) which  took up issues that no other struggles at  that point had taken up, say such as sharing of housework or wife beating or drunkenness ... or land rights for women. We  could see the visible effects in that other  groups or other readers wrote in afterwards  and said they learned from the (documentation of that struggle) ... then took them  up."  WhUe Ruth would not caU these struggles a movement, I learn from her and several others in the next three months that  there are hundreds of groups, some led by  women, some by men, who are taking up aU  kinds of issues of relevance to women. The  diversity is amazing and so too is the committment to document each one from the  experience of the women involved.  Vancouver  January, 1989  A university showing of No Longer Silent,  an Indo-Canadian co-production which  presents several women activists who take  us around northern India as they campaign  against inequality and violence against  women. Ruth is there in the background at  a rally for more legal action against bride  burning where her co-editor Madhu Kishwar is speaking out. We foUow Madhu on  her motorcycle around Delhi to an interview  with a woman doctor who condones using  amniosynthesis as the first step in the abortion of female fetuses, and to a street theatre performance for International Women's  ■ Day.  The film depicts the harsh struggle for  survival of Indian women at every age:  against modern methods of female infanticide, such as amniosynthesis, or older methods such as the practice of girls and women  getting less to eat and httle or no health  care when they are sick; and against bride  and widow burning. Just back from India,  the film feels 'like old home week' as I see  several of the activists whose work I have  been reading or whom I met.  Lights up, a discussion starts and I get  another jolt of recognition, this one much  more painful. A number of questioners ask  for explanations: is it their arranged marriages, their religion, their caste system, or  their men? A number respond too, both  Indo- and Euro-Canadians, drawing the  connection with violence against women  here, but I stUl feel very uncomfortable.  What is it that makes me feel so shocked?  It isn't the questions in themselves that  bother me: there are obviously a lot of differences between hfe in India and Canada  that we can learn about. What strikes me  though is the sameness of the questions.  How often have I (or you) heard people here  looking for the answer to inequality or violence in other parts of the community or  the world in "their otherness" or their separation from "us"? I drive home recognizing the ordinariness of these ideas that form  the boundaries of my culture.  Back to my apartment to search for something else Ruth Vanita said, when I asked  her about Manushi's readership. As the  journal is published in Enghsh, the readership is mostly the middle and upper  class, "those who have formal education.  There are a whole lot of myths and stereotypes that this section of the population  has absorbed and internalized ... Part of  Manushi's work is to examine these myths  and try to unravel them and compare them  with the reality and show what the real-  Vancouver photo &  hobby supplies ltd.  JoAnne McLaughlin  president  1588  Commercial Drive  Vancouver, B.C.  V5L 3Y2  Phone  253-7501 or 7502  Area Code 604  ity reaUy is, hke for example, is oppression  caused by tradition, is it caused by religion  ... ?  "This is just one example, there are so  many others, that (oppression) is aU due to  the Hindu religion or that it's aU due to arranged marriages ... The implicit model  is the West, that everything that happens  in the West is necessarily modern, liberating and so on and that that's the direction  we have to go in. That's one kind of myth  that we've gotten from our western education and which we have to re-examine."  The uncanny simUarity is not reaUy surprising if you consider that we share a western culture as part of our colonial past. Part  of that heritage too is looking for easy answers, before we've reaUy hstened or examined the situation, as I notice I did in the interview: "Would you describe Manushi as  a Third World feminist publication?"  "We've never used any such term, feminist, socialist. We've never used any 'ist'  term. We caU it a journal about women in  society. This whole Third World business,  this terminology comes from the west. The  idea that something is first, something second and third. I don't think so. H we're talking about relations of oppression, relations  of oppression exist in all societies ... We  have readers abroad and I think that shows  that what we are saying, though it's about  the Indian situation, is not totaUy inapplicable to any other situation. So we don't feel  the need for such categories, it's more important to describe reality as we see it and  what attempts are being made to change  that reality ..."  Manushi is doing just that. In individual  issues and their collection from their first  five years, In Search of Answers, they include detailed accounts of women's hves and  struggles from the many different regions,  castes, classes and creeds of India. They also  include poetry, lots of letters and some short  stories to round oiit the pictures. There are  no quick and ready solutions but their work  of patiently documenting women's hves and  struggles has won them a large foUowing  among social activists and opinion leaders  in India and abroad. It won't cure culture  shock, but I'd recommend Manushi as a  preparation for aU the shakin' goin' on by  women around the world.  Subscriptions in Canada are available by writing to: Manushi Distributors (Canada), P.O. Box 5022, Stn. E,  Hamilton, Ontario L8S 4K9  The interview with Ruth Vanita and  other Indian women is part of an International Women's Day special on Vancouver Co-operative Radio, 5:30-7:30  pm on Sunday, March 5th. Call 684-  8494 for more details.  UPRI&ING  BREADS  BAKERY  Honey Sweetened  Hot Cross Buns  available thru  March 31st  IWD cookies  available  1697 Venables Street  Vancouver 254-5635  A part of CRS Workers' Co-op  KINESIS ss**s^^s*****^****^^  Arts  Arab women  In transition with their community  by Kim Irving  WOMANPOWER  The Arab debate on women at work  by Nadia Hijab  Cambridge University Press, 1988  North American stereotypes of Arab  women often focus on veUs and the circumcision of girls, criticized Lebanese author  Nadia Hijab in a recent interview.  "It's the worst stereotype," commented  Hijab, "when people only see appearances—  without seeing what's behind those appear-  Hijab, a London based journalist specializing in Middle East pohtics, has compUed  her research on Arab women into her first  book: Womanpower: The Arab debate  on women at work.  Hijab examines Arab traditions and how  current transitions of Arab culture and reh-  gion are affecting women. It's Arab women's  advancement into the workforce and their  chaUenging of famUy law that is shaking  fundamentalists to their roots. Yet, Hijab warns, one cannot "blame Islam" for  women's oppression, as Arab women face  similar oppression as women worldwide.  TraditionaUy, Arab women's primary role  has been as a mother. It is a role that offers women power and influence. It is the  Arab mother who is responsible for passing  on traditions and culture to her chUdren.  And in a culture where the Arab farroly can  define the status of individuals within the  community, the mother is pivotal to that  family's success. With this understanding,  Hijab argues one must make distinctions be  tween the rights given to women and the  respect they receive.  As weU, most Arab families survive  through famUy owned and operated businesses. Therefore, mothers shoulder the responsibility of ensuring future generations  by establishing famUy size and continuity.  Islam was introduced in the 7th century during a period that some scholars say  was matriarchal. The main source for Islamic law is the Quran, which is considered  by Moslems to be the word of God. Like  other religious documents, interpretations  of the Quran differ. Liberal interpreters usuaUy recognize women's equahty rights which  they say are written in the Quran.  The interpretations of conservative fundamentalists include some of the most oppressive attitudes towards women. It is effective in divorce laws where, in some states,  men may divorce by simply stating: "I divorce thee" three times. Whereas, women  must petition the courts and can expect  to lose custody of their chUdren and, in  some cases, be declared legal minors. One  of the more restrictive states is Bahrain,  where women must appeal to the religious  courts for a divorce. If granted, women wUl  often be asked to re-pay her husband for  the costs he incurred during their marriage.  In essence, writes Hijab "women buy their  freedom."  In progressive Arab states such as Democratic Yemen and Tunisia, women have won  most rights, except in inheritance. They  have equal access to divorce and receive custody of their chUdren untU adolescence.  "In the debate in family law people are  turning to the Quran," commented Hijab.  "Some say the Quran gives women equal  rights to men. Others say no, women cannot be equal to men. Most of this debate is  not heard outside the Arab states."  WhUe the famUy debates rage on, traditional Arab society is shifting. Caught between the modernism of North America and  Author, Nadia Hijab  the Far East, many Arabs are paying the  consequences. Fundamentalists are lashing  out and the result has been more restrictions.  Yet, many of these protective measures  which ensure cultural loyalty stem from  years of colonization by the French and  British when Arab culture and language  was suppressed. As weU, the oU boom of  the early 70's brought in an influx foreign  workers whose values often conflicted with  Arab traditions. Hijab questions whether  this current invasion of modernization is  nothing more than "reverse colonialism."  "Women's roles are linked to the role of  rehgion in society," writes Hijab. "Both are  tied to the quest for national, pohtical and  economic independence and development."  Arab feminists must carefully weigh the  debates between cultural loyalty and rehgion. They must present their arguments  within the Islamic framework, or otherwise  they wUl be outcast for adopting North  American ideals.  However, the recession of the 80's has  meant many families have had to search  for a second income. This, and the desire  to have less imported labour, has propeUed  women into the workforce. And this has  given Arab feminists a base for argument—  whether it is about ensuring education  rights or ending sexual harassment. Subtle  changes are occurring amongst Arab women  as Hijab notes when she comments on studies that indicate women are spending more  time in school and are marrying at a later  age.  Feminist organizing varies widely among  Arab states—from the women's legal clinics in Egypt to the grassroots networks of  Palestinian women. However, one thing becomes clear when reading Hijab's book, as  she summarizes: "Arab society can only be  truly hberated politically and economicaUy  when it is hberated sociaUy—which wUl include equal rights for women."  National Office  Film Board     national du  of Canada     du Canada  Evening Film Benefit  Proceeds to IN VISIBLE COLOURS  (Suggested donation $5)  The National Film Board and YWCA  present films celebrating  INTERNATIONAL  WOMEN'S DAY  Wednesday, March 8th .  at The Cinematheque,  1131 Howe St., Vancouver  7:30 p.m.1  GIFT OF LOVE Canadian Premiere  r HOLDING OUR GROUND Vancouver Premiere  o KINESIS     March89  Free childcare for daytime screenings.  Register with YWCA 683-2531  Free Admission  Info: NFB 666-3838  Daytime Screenings  10:30 a.m.  11:00 a.m.  12 noon  1:30 p.m.  2:00 p.m.  3:00 p.m.  3:20 p.m.  PORTRAIT OF THE ARTIST-- AS AN OLD LADY  A TIME TO RISE  DONNA  HOW THEY SAW US: WOMEN'S ARCHIVAL FILMS  ABORTION : STORIES FROM NORTH AND SOUTH  AUGUSTA  WHEN THE MOUNTAINS TREMBLE ARtS  Womynly Way  Producing  the show  /////////////////////^^^^^  H  by Judy Lynne  Womynly Way Productions is a  non-profit arts production organization based in Toronto. Ruth Dworin  is the artistic director for Womynly  Way and was recently in Vancouver  touring as the producer of the LEAF  (Women's Legal Education and Action  Fund) Road Show. I interviewed her  about Womynly Way and the LEAF  Road Show.  Kinesis: What exactly is Womynly  Way Productions?  Dworin: Womynly Way Productions is  a non-profit organization with a three-fold  mandate. The first is to produce primar-  Uy women performers, the second is to provide training for women in aU areas of the  arts and the third is to provide accessibihty  to cultural events for the disabled. All our  shows are in wheelchair accessible spaces,  and they're always interpreted for the hearing impaired. We were probably the first organization in Canada to do that on any kind  of regular basis.  Kinesis: Can you talk about Womynly Way's beginnings?  Dworin: WeU, I guess I'd been doing  some freelance production stuff for a couple of years. People would caU me up and  ask me to help them with a show and I'd  go and help them out. ActuaUy, interestingly enough, the thing that made up my  mind about getting it started was sitting in  the 'Fly By Night' (a Toronto women's bar)  with two friends in 1981. "WeU, Rita (MacNeU) wants to come to town in January.  Do you want to get involved in doing something?" one asked. And this was after about  five other people had said to me, "I want to  come to town—wUl you produce the show?"  And I thought this is it—this pattern is happening too much. I can't do this just as me.  I don't have the financial resources to do it.  So that's how Womynly Way got started, by  producing a Rita MacNeU concert.  Kinesis: Could you tell us where it  gets its funding ?  In terms of funding, it's been a real rough  road because we faU between the cracks, in  terms of arts funding. For a whUe we had  a great deal of struggle with some funding  organizations because the arts sector would  say, "You're a social service because you  provide job training," and the social service  sector would say, "No,-you're an arts organization because you produce concerts."  And so neither of them wanted to fund us.  We've worked very hard and graduaUy over  the years have gained much more credibility in the arts sector and so we're now getting very smaU amounts of arts funding.  Kinesis: How has Womynly Way  Productions changed over the years?  Dworin: WeU, certainly we've gotten  better at what we do. The fact is we've  gotten a reputation for discovering artists;  performers who might not have been visible to the mainstream, but who were doing just amazing things artisticaUy and who  were deserving of that kind of recognition,  and we've gotten our own recognition. I remember as we were trying to get pubhc  awareness in Toronto, we had a bit of an  image difficulty in that people would get  real flipped out about the way we speU our  name. There was some land of perception  that it meant we were a separatist group,  or that we were manhaters, that we wanted  to take the 'man' out of 'woman.' And  there was some concern at the time that  maybe we should change the name because  we wanted to reach a broader audience. I  was reaUy strongly against that. I felt we  just needed to turn our image around—we  needed to do better P.R. for the organization, but we didn't want to lose the name.  And it's worked.  Kinesis: Do you have any priorities  in promoting Canadian women artists ?  Dworin: Yes, we have a strong committment to helping develop and promote Canadian artists. That's one of the main reasons  why the festival "Crossing Cultures" came  to be. It's an annual festival which, up untU now, has featured exclusively Canadian  artists. It's a cross cultural festival and it  reflects the kind of thing that excites me  the most doing production these days. And  that has to do with bringing together people from diverse backgrounds, and genres;  people who perceive their art in different  ways and mixing them together in a show  where they get exposed to each other's art  and where that starts to spark new ideas  among them.  One other way that we provide exposure  for Canadian artists is that I've been involved in the women's music network. For  a lot of years I've been going down to the  States to conferences and they must think  I sound hke a broken record because I'm  always saying, "You've gotta hear Heather  Bishop, you've gotta hear Ferron, you've  gotta hear Rita MacNeU," and aU these  Canadian artists I was crazy about. And finally the U.S. seems to have decided that  Canadian performers are where it's at and  aU these people are coming back to me and  saying, "Ruth, you told me about Heather  Bishop five years ago. I wish I'd hstened to  you then because she's so wonderful."  Kinesis: Are there other organizations that do the same kind of work  that Womynly Way does, particularly  in British Columbia?  Dworin: I'm involved in two organizations right now that exist for the purpose  of providing support for women who are involved in the performing arts, as performers, as producers, as technicians, as managers, as bookers, festival organizers, or  whatever.  The more established of the two is an  organization that started out of the States  that has been developing in Canada, and  that's called AWMAC—the Association of  Women, Music and Culture.  Ruth Dworin, artistic director of Womynly  The much newer organization, and one  which I think has a lot of room for growth is  the Alliance for the Production of Women's  Performing Arts. It came out of a meeting  at the Winnipeg Women's Festival three or  four years ago because of a strong need to  create a Canadian network to address the  questions and issues that we have in supporting a femimst culture. We're hoping to  hold a conference sometime in October and  what we hope to do is provide an opportunity for networking and support for those  of us who are already active and involved in  cultural work.  Kinesis: You produced the recent  LEAF National Roadshow that was held  in Vancouver and in three other large  Canadian cities. Can you talk about  how your goals and visions coincided  with LEAF'S?  Dworin: I reaUy hke LEAF's pohtical attitude. I hke the cases they choose to support and the incredible level of respect they  have for women who are brave enough to  aUow their experience to be used to set a  precedent for aU Canadian women. Most of  the plaintiffs are poor, working-class women  who, without LEAF, would never be able to  buy into the legal system to get their cases  supported.  Kinesis: TeU us about the LEAF  tour.  Way.  Dworin: I thought it was reaUy exciting.  A lot of these performers had never seen  each other before and they were aU blown  away by each other's work. And they were  the most incredibly cooperative, wonderful  to work with group of workers that I've  ever worked with in my hfe. The interrelationship of support between the production  crew and the performers was fabulous.  The thing that's reaUy special about  what we did with this show was that I knew  we were marketing the show not to people who go to the Vancouver Folk Festival  or to people who go to Womynly Way concerts. We were marketing it to the middle  class, the corporate sector, to lawyers, business people, and to pohticians. And those  people came and they were aU completely  blown away.  Also, nobody made any compromises po-  hticaUy in terms of what they said on stage.  We made that clear from the beginning  when we were looking at corporate sponsors and we were asked, "What are these  performers going to be saying?" and I said,  "They're going to talk about South Africa,  they're going to talk about the environment, these are pohtical performers and  they are going to talk about what they beheve in." And that was okay. LEAF wanted  that to happen.  1146 Commercial * 253-0913  Helen Cash Smith  &  LeolaCWorsfold  are pleased to announce the opening of their  registered massage therapy clinic  Vancouver Massage Therapy Centre  Suite 201 -8041 Granville Street  Vancouver, British Columbia V6P 4Z5  Telephone266-7109  KINESIS .-ss*ssss**s***s^s*s^^  ARTS  Revving it up at the Road Show  by Joni Miller  The LEAF (Women's Legal Education  and Action Fund) Road Show in early  February at Vancouver's Orpheum Theatre  was the kind of event that convinces me  I don't own any dress-up clothes. Gloria  Steinem and Buffy Ste. Marie were headline  acts. Ticket prices ranged from $30-$75, and  fur coats were spotted in the Une-up.  LEAF is an organization formed after  the Canadian Charter of Rights became  law. Their aim is to implement constitutional rights for women. LEAF has already  claimed some victories. They successfuUy  fought an attempt by Canadian Newspapers  to lift the ban on printing the names of sexual assault victims; gained battered women  What this event lacked was the kind of  spirit that makes you feel closer to your  friends and warm towards strangers because we're-aU-in-this-together-on-the-side-  of-truth-and-justice. That aside, it was good  entertainment. The show started off with  Katari Taiko, a group that combines a  Japanese tradition of energetic drumming  with performance poetry. Katari Taiko  members, who are predominantly women,  leap around the stage in a marvelously athletic manner, wave their drum sticks and  whoop. It's powerful stuff. This group has  been around Vancouver for some years now,  and continues to get better.  Short speeches by LEAF supporters  foUowed every performance. MC Connie  Kaldor frequently reminded us to pitch in  lmum wage, an anonymous voice was applauded for yelling out, "And can't afford  to be here!" If they'd known where to go,  I think those waitresses could have found a  free ticket. I had a hard time finding anyone who actuaUy paid to get in. It was a  less than capacity crowd, and plenty of the  seats seemed to have been papered.  The "Chchettes" from Toronto—three  women bUled as the 1984 Lip Synch  Champions—were hUarious. They appeared  twice, in fuU male drag, smoking cigarettes  and miming to songs hke Paul Anka's "Having My Baby."  A group from Montreal, "Hart Rouge,"  was a pleasant surprise, and another reminder of how separate Anglophone and  Francophone culture is in this country.  These three women and three men perform  lyrical vocal harmonies (sometimes in English, sometimes in French) over rhythmic  rock music. I hear they'U be booked into the  RaUway Club later this year, and they're  worth a trip downtown.  Lillian Allen and her Revolutionary Tea  Party Band were also a treat. AUen has  blossomed since the days she performed her  dub poetry solo. While she doesn't actuaUy sing, sometimes you forget that. Her  stage presence is relaxed and confident. The  word to sum up her reggae-inspired band  is cool. My only complaint is that despite  a recently released second album, she performed mostly old material.  Thousands of women have been inspired  by Ms. magazine and Gloria Steinem.  can't say I've been one of them. For those  with expectations, however, Ms. Steinem  was a disappointment. Her speech was a  cross between stand-up comedy and a fund-  raising pitch and not inspiring on either  count. Although lacking in fire, she was imminently quotable. Canada was described  as a "beacon of hope," and she thanked  LEAF for attempting to combine justice  and law. She apologized for a recent American import—the Operation Rescue zealots  who have been interfering with Everywoman's Health Centre, B.C.'s first freestanding abortion clinic. Their actions were  described as a misuse of civU disobedience,  a tactic which was "supposed to extend civU  rights—not infringe on them."  The last act, Buffy Ste. Marie, declared  the LEAF tour as "one of the nicest  things that ever happened to me." She was  a spunky and upbeat presence. Whether  singing or talking, Buffy is a clear and articulate spokesperson for the struggles of Native people on this continent.  A special mention goes to Marie Clark,  the tireless sign language interpreter. Ms.  Clark not only translated every word uttered on stage, but frequently danced along  with the music. This three and a half hour  extravaganza ended with one of those ritual finales where everyone reappears on  stage. The performers sang and the speakers swayed uncomfortably. For those with  the expensive tickets, there was a reception  afterwards.  Clichette's fertile humour goes to work on Paul Anka's "Having My Baby."  the right to sue their husbands for personal  injuries; changed a B.C. ruhng prohibiting  parents from giving their chUdren combination last names; and intervened in the case  of a pregnant woman who was physicaUy  apprehended for the protection of her fetus.  Decisions pending include human rights legislation to prohibit pregnancy discrimination and sexual harassment, and a supreme  court definition of equahty.  A trial involving a Charter of Rights argument can cost up to a million dollars,  which is why LEAF has been touring the  country trying to raise a lot of money.  and donate money. We also heard LEAF  members Judith Finlayson and Liz Kaldor,  alderwoman Carol Taylor, Victoria Good-  ist (a local heart transplant doctor) and  entertainer Ann Mortifee. In other parts  of the country, speakers included Margaret  Atwood and Aritha Van Herk. "AU white  women," as a heckler noted.  Hecklers (from the cheap seats, I suspect) kept up a running commentary on the  event. When Connie Kaldor dedicated her  "Husky Truck Stop Song" to "aU those waitresses who know the true meaning of min-  The Vancouver Folk Music Festival presents  BEATH£ft  Celebrating Che release of  "Walk That Edge"  "An energetic personality behind  an enchanting voice!"  Monday,      8 pm $12  Apnil   3  Greetings  and  Solidarity  for I.W.D.1989  COPE: Working for  peace and justice  for women.  L  VANCOUVER  WOMEN'S  BOOKSTORE  315 Cambie Street  Vancouver, B.C. V6B 2N4  (604) 684-0523  Hours: Monday - Saturday  11:00-5:30 pm  "UgffT  • WorteN'* WORK SCUtU PRINT •  2 KINESIS  ROY  BAILEY  A master of traditional and  contemporary songs, Roy returns  forks almost yearly visit.  Sunday,      8 pm $10  Apnil   9  Both shows at  The Vancouver East Cultural Cent]  1895 Venables at Victoria  Tickets available at Black Swan, Highlife, and the'  VFMF office, or by reserving at 254-9578. Arts  /////////////////////^^^^  /N^O>V\££  in the family  by Melanie Conn  H you read a lot of women's science fiction, you wUl have noticed that certain  themes appear with some regularity. Given  the variety of exotic and—let's face it-  bizarre backgrounds in SF, it's always interesting to see how an author treats a familiar issue.  The most obvious example of a recurring  topic is the exploration of gender roles. Another favourite theme of women authors is  the affirmation of women-in-community as a  powerful force in shaping a planet's destiny.  The books reviewed this month represent  the most familiar SF theme of aU: the struggle to define the meaning of "alien." What's  special—the woman's touch—is that aU  three are also about families, particularly  the relationship between mothers and their  chUdren.  HELLSPARK  by Janet Kagan  TOR Books, 1988  $4.95  I'm tempted to skip over the major plot  of this book because I found the mothering theme so dehghtful! But just to set the  context ... Hellspark is the story of To-  cohl Susomo, an interplanetary trader and  ethnologist whose assignment brings her to  the newly-discovered planet, Lassti, to help  a survey team establish whether the native  sprookjes are sentient or not.  Tocohl is a glossi—a language expert. But her HeUspark training has  also sensitized her to the teU-tale—and  aU-important—signs that distinguish one  group from one another. Her precise observation and imitation of body-language, table manners, dress codes and pronunciation  aUows her to hteraUy shift from culture to  culture.  The sprookjes present Tocohl with a  major chaUenge. They are humanoid, ex-  oticaUy beautiful creatures with luxuriant, feathered bodies and beaked faces. To  the consternation of the survey team, the  sprookjes' only vocalization is to parrot human speech almost simultaneously with the  speaker. Unless they are shown to be sentient, that is to have language, art and artifacts, Lassti wUl become a resource for other  planets to plunder.  Tocohl's considerable talent is augmented by her hnk with Maggy, and extrap-  olative computer housed in her spaceship in  the skies above Lassti. Tocohl wears a remarkable "2nd skin" which Maggy can adjust to make her invincible in a street fight  or to help her conform to the local customs.  A member of the survey team is offended by  bare feet? Tocohl subvocalizes her request  for boots to Maggy and  "From the soles of her feet to the top  of her calves, her 2nd skin turned a  dark red, with stitching in all the appropriate places and a darkening of  shadows to suggest thickness."  Early on in  the book we learn  that  this computer also has a personality and  that it resembles nothing so much as a  curious, often prim seven-year old chUd.  The image is even stronger because Tocohl  "takes" Maggy with her down to Lassti in  an arachne, a smaU robot-like contraption  with a fat, round body.  Many of the interactions between Tocohl  and Maggy provide a kind of comic rehef:  the arachne stamping its feet to get attention, needing to have jokes explained, innocently commenting on a sexual attraction  between two embarrassed adults. The unexpected element is that Maggy slowly begins  to evolve in a decidedly unmechanical way.  The result is a touching perspective on the  impact of mothering as weU as an expanded  interpretation of sentience.  DREAMS OF DAWN  by Marti Steussy  BaUantine Books, 1988  $5.50  The author of Dreams of Dawn plunges  bravely into alien cultures without fanfare.  Disa is a 15-year old whose parents are two  of the human members of Dawn Circle, an  intergalactic "First-In" team that clears the  way for a new planet's colonization. Another of the group partners is Calypso, a  bright anemone form with chitin scales covering her four-foot-high, one-and-a-half-foot  thick stalk. Two more "circle-mates" are  Kargans whose crab-like bodies grace the  cover of the book.  The plot revolves around the team's return to Karg 20 years after the original  settlement and after they receive an urgent message from the Kargans that the human colonists have violated the settlement  treaty. Suddenly Disa finds herself on her  mother's home-planet, but in circumstances  that threaten the team where she has felt  comfortable aU her hfe.  If you can get past the sheer strangeness  of the various characters, this book is a good  study of an adolescent learning to balance  her own sense of self with the pressure of her  peer group. There are also some vivid descriptions of caving as Disa pursues the secret of the Kargans in the caverns beneath  the surface of the planet.  [TJbig sisters  I.e. Lower Mainland  For more Information on volunteering  please call  873-4525  THE SILENT CITY  by Elisabeth Vonarburg  translated by Jane Brierley  Porcepic Books, 1981  I have to admit I was ready to be enthusiastic about this book before I read it.  OriginaUy published in French in 1981 as  Le silence de la cite, it is the first novel  of a writer who Uves in Chicoutimi, Quebec.  New author, local publisher (Victoria) and  less than 10 doUars!  I was not disappointed. The Silent City  is an absorbing and richly-layered book with  images that make a powerful impression.  The near-to-last human survivors of a destroyed Earth have hved for centuries in underground Cities, using genetic technology  Elisa embarks on her own Project, but  her goal is to bring positive change to the  world, not to control it. She is a loving caretaker to her expanding brood of children—  hke her, products of genetic technology—  teaching them agriculture and carpentry  and taking time to snuggle the httle ones:  "Basking in the contented peaceful-  ness of the child ... She, too, closes  her eyes, aware of the child's breathing, the warmth of the flames, the  now subdued voices of others. It feels  good."  With their special abilities to heal themselves and to change gender, the chUdren  are being equipped for their role to infiltrate  the brutal world Outside.  The turn-around, when it comes, is  much a surprise to the reader as to Elisa,  Her best-laid plans begin to crumble and  for  the oldest  of reasons:  the  first  set  to re-populate the world with a more resilient strain of people. The progress of the  new breed Outside is monitored and manipulated by humanoid robots—ommachs—  who are controUed from within the City.  Initially, the book tells the story of Paul  and Elisa. Paul is the classic SF scientist  whose dual goals of immortality and power  lead him into madness. His finest test-tube  creation, Elisa, ultimately revolts against  him and flees Outside to find her own destiny.  of chUdren reach adolescence. Suddenly,  the book becomes much more an exploration of the power struggle between parents and children than a scientific thriller.  The strangeness of the setting melts away  as Elisa becomes involved in a moving and  dramatic discovery of the meaning of personal freedom.  Before I finished the first page of The  Silent City, I forgot I was reading a translation. Jane Brierley has done a beautiful job of bringing this book to English-  speaking readers.  ARIEL BOOKS FOR WOMEN  8th ANNUAL  IWD SALE  20% off books with  "woman" or "women"  in the title  MARCH 6 - MARCH 11  Don't forget to enter the  WORLDWOMEN CONTEST  for gift certificate prizes  USED & OLD  BOOKS  -BoUu-HT St SOLD  HAPPY  INTERNATIONAL  WOMEN'S  +55 WEST PENDER  VANCOUVER  PHONE 681-7654  KINESIS Commentary ^  Dyke disillusioned with community  by JoAnn P.  It was around mid-December when my  dreams were shattered; when I first heard  about the striptease night at a local Vancouver gay club, Talk of the Town. I was  shocked, not wanting to beheve that lesbians would support such an event, which is  an exploitation of women. How can lesbians  behave hke the men they have so openly  criticized for such behaviour?  When I asked that question to my lesbian  co-worker, who seemed excited about the  event and asked me to come down there to  see it, she rephed that a woman doesn't have  the dirty, perverse mind of men, when she  watches the woman strip. WeU, I don't know  about that; I actuaUy doubt very much that  she doesn't get sexuaUy aroused, if she enjoys the strip- tease. My friend also made a  strong point of the fact that the strippers  were law or medical students, they made  good money stripping, to help pay their  school fees, and "Boy, they had gorgeous  bodies, they had class ..."  First, I don't beheve every woman doctor  or lawyer chose to strip their clothes off to  'pay their tuition fees in order to be in their  professions. And do I have to understand,  from her comments, that because (and if)  they are law of medical students, they are  more respectable than the strippers or prostitutes who do it to feed their kids or drug  habits? And because of that, women should  go ahead and exploit them, so they can get  sexuaUy aroused, guilt freel Where do we  draw the Une? Is there a hne to be drawn?  And for whose benefit?  My comments here are not about the  strippers or prostitutes' behaviour, don't  get me wrong. As far as I am concerned, if  a woman is willing to strip her clothes off,  for whatever reasons, I respect her choice,  which doesn't mean I encourage or support that choice. I'm speaking about lesbian  women exploiting other women, to kUl their  Thursday night's blues.  Every time I would meet a lesbian who  would ask me if I was going to see the show  on Thursday, I felt very sad, seeing that  more and more lesbians were going to see it.  I would teU them that I boycotted the event  because of my beliefs and values, hoping I  could change their minds.  I reluctantly walked into the Talk of the  Town in mid-January, since I had decided  to write my comments in a women's paper about the event so I could reach more  women. I felt I should go and see at least  one show.  Before the show started, I had a chat  with the DJ who told me about an event  the club was planning to have on Sunday  nights. They would have art shows, weU  known artists invited, etc. The whole idea  was to have people relating on a different  level in bars, since AIDS is spreading more  and more. Not wanting people to go to the  bars to be picked up or to pick up someone,  a "classy, artsy" kind of atmosphere.  Once again, I couldn't beheve what my  ears were hearing. Come on now, do they  mean that they won't encourage people to  relate sexuaUy on Sundays, but it's okay to .  do so on Thursdays, or what? I guess they  want to accommodate every woman's taste,  which any commercial establishment should  do, if they want to make money. It appears  to me that they wiU go to any lengths to fiU  up their bar. Even encourage lesbian women  to exploit other women, which doesn't make  me feel hke walking into that bar again.  How can lesbians  behave like men...  The show was about to start so I left  the DJ's booth, and chose a spot where I  could see the audience as weU as the strippers. And what I had to witness was even  worse than what I had expected. The strippers weren't the artistic type, they were  giving a strip-tease. A few women in the  audience acted, in my opinion, hke wUd  women who hadn't seen a naked woman in  a long time. There might have been 50 to  60 women there; some of them would smUe,  a shy smUe, and watch, maybe not knowing  what else to do. Curiosity probably brought  them there; they didn't seem comfortable,  or impressed with the show or the behavior of some of the women in the audience. I  was reheved to see that. Only a smaU minority was enjoying the show, maybe ten percent at the most. These women kept putting  dollar bills in their mouths for the strip-  strippers to remove so they could feel the  stripper's breasts on their faces. One of  them laid down on the dance floor with a  doUar bUl in her mouth at least three times.  And on one of these times, she held it real  tight, so that the stripper would have to  bend over longer with her breasts over her  face.  I was very disappointed, very sad, to see  that there were lesbians behaving that way,  and the bar staff encouraging them to do  so. With an insatiable thirst for the strippers' breasts, the women traded lousy dollar bills, to have their desires fiUed, again  and again. Frankly, I was appaUed. Is that  exploitation or not?  When I got clean and sober seven months  ago, I knew I would have to accept hfe on  life's terms, and face reality. I had no idea  reality could be so harsh. I guess I hved in  a fantasy world, where I beheved that our  lesbian community was one of love, care and  respect for other women. I don't know how  other lesbians feel about this, but I've been  disUlusioned about our community.  I feel I should end my comments with  an excerpt from Out From Under, a book  of stories by sober lesbians, edited by Jean  SwaUow, since the event I'm commenting on  always takes place around alcohol and/or  drugs. "Clean and sober community? We  would have clearer eyes—from the changes  inside. The feehngs we drank over to avoid  would be our guides. They'd guide us to  know ourselves, to respect our selves and  each other. We could show the world what  it means to be true to one's self despite the  obstacles that fear put in our way."  In solidarity, with best wishes for  International Womens1 Day 1989  Anne Harvey  President  AINESIS /y/////yy//yyyyyyy/y^//y//J'///y^yy^yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy  //////////////////^^^^^  ///////////////////^^^^^  LETTERS  (f.)Lip  talk  Kinesis:  Because the issues raised by Karen Her-  land in the February issue of Kinesis are  important to us as weU, (f.)Lip would hke  to respond. In an attempt to be as succinct  as possible, we wUl reply in point form (not  in order of importance).  • We publish work in translation because  of cost. We would much prefer to publish  work in both the original language and  enghsh, but since we are basically an underground mag with no grant monies or  free support services, we simply can't.  • We also publish work in translation because our writers feel the necessity of  broadening their readership by having  their work appear in english. We also provide the translation, which is usuaUy the  block to reaching a wider audience.  • (f.)Lip uses the term "ecriture feminine"  very broadly (no pun intended). We are  not solely interested in the French feminist sensibilities and theory. We are interested in women who are writing consciously out of their marginalization/  oppression. This marginalization includes  class, race, physical disabihty, sexual  identity, etc. These writers are intention-  aUy stepping outside the male defined use  of language, forms and valourized sense  of content (which hfe material is worthy  of the page).  • (f.)Lip was generated because unlike  Quebec, or the U.S., there was no alternative feminist magazine which focussed on innovation. The publishing being done by feminist journals is excellent,  but these journals do have a strong preference for realism and "accessibihty."  • Language is one of the most powerful  embodiments of patriarchal values. Laws  can be changed, but if our chUdren grow  up learning that nearly aU meanings of  the word "white" are good, and nearly  aU meanings of the word "black" are  negative—racism wUl rage on.  We have been working hard on the coast  to develop an understanding and appreciation for francophone feminist writers'  work. Vancouver women organized Women  and Words/les femmes et les mots—the  first cross-country, bi-lingual conference for  women working with aU aspects of the written word; of Tessera's five Editors (a bilingual journal of feminist hterary theory),  three are from the coast;-and West Coast  Women and Words' summer school West  Word, has done a lot for buUding a strong  network of exchange between Quebec writers and writers from aU parts of Canada.  AU this activity has occurred since 1981.  (f.)Lip wUl soon celebrate our 3rd birthday, and we see ourselves as a committed  and vital part of breaking down dominance  and ethnocentricity. Although Karen Her-  land sees this activity in different terms, we  share the vision.  Sincerely,  Betsy Warland  Angela Hryniuk  Jean Yoon  for (f.)Lip  Billet  needed  Kinesis:  Thank you for your wonderful publication, I appreciate the work involved!  I am writing with a request for networking assistance to arrange a bUlet near  Brookswood, in Langley, B.C.  I am a single mother who lost custody of  my youngest chUd two years ago. He now  hves with his father in Langley, and I see  him for five weeks of the year. He is eight  years old.  I'd hke to mention here that it was largely  through the wonderful emotional and financial support of women in Winnipeg that  I was "granted" custody of my daughter.  Their generosity of spirit helped pay legal  costs, a psychological assessment and witness costs so that I was able to defend myself  against charges of being an "unfit mother"  who placed her chUdren at risk by attending "violent" demonstrations and associating with "social deviants." Choice rallies,  anti-american intervention demos and Take  Back the Night marches are activities I take  part in to show my desire for peace and justice. I consider not being active would put  my chUdren at greater risk!  I highly value my time with my chUdren.  My son spent 12 days with me the end of  December and our next legal visit is not untU July.  My daughter is scheduled to be with her  father for spring break, the last week of  March. My ex-partner does not take time  off work when she visits and hires a sitter  to be with the chUdren. Rather than go six  months without seeing my son, I have offered to travel to Langley and be with the  chUdren during the day while he works. He  would spend the evenings with them.  This trip wUl tax my budget and emotions, but not making every effort to go  would be unacceptable to my peace of mind.  I would very much hke to stay with someone of simUar values in Langley, as opposed  to staying in a motel  H you know of someone in that area who  would consider opening their home to me  from the 25th to the 31st of March, 1989,  have them write or caU me. Please publish  or post this letter.  Thanks for your support and caring.  Blessed Be.  Janine Gibson  202 Maryland St.,  Winnipeg, Manitoba  R3G 1L5  (204) 772-7958  ////////////////m  /////////////////^^^^^  BULLETIN BOARD  Read this  AUhstings must be received no later than  the 18th of the month preceding publication. Listings are limited to 75 words and  should include a contact name and telephone number for any clarification that may  be required. Listings should be typed or  neatly handwritten, double-spaced on 8 ^  by 11 paper. Listings wUl not be accepted  over the telephone. Groups, organizations  and individuals eligible for free space in the  BuUetin Board must be, or have, non-profit  objectives. Other free notices wUl be items  of general pubhc interest and wUl appear at  the discretion of Kinesis.  Classified are $6 for the first 75 words or  portion thereof, $2 for each additional 25  words or portion thereoi Deadline for classifieds is the 18th of the month preceding  pubhcation. Kinesis wiU not accept classifieds over the telephone. AU classifieds must  be prepaid.  For BuUetin Board submissions send  copy to Kinesis Attn: BuUetin Board, 301-  1720 Grant Street, Vancouver, B.C. V5L  2Y6. For more information caU 255-5499.  EVENTS  VLC COFFEEHOUSE  Last coffeehouse before Sage's opens,  Mar. 12, 8-11 pm, VLC 876 Commercial  Dr. Come enjoy talents of local women  artists. Tix are $2-4. Children welcome,  wheelchair accessible. More details at  254-8458.  EVENT S1EV ENT SI EVENTS  MATURE WOMEN AND WORK  YWCA conference: Mature Women and  Work—Myths and  Realities. Sat.  Mar.  18, 9-4:30 pm, 580 Burrard St. Workshops on Native Women, Financial Survival, Immigrant Women, Job Re-entry,  etc. Panel on "Mature Women: Employment Realities." Sliding scale $15-40,  lunch included. Register by Mar. 8 for  signer or attendant. For info call 683-  2531, local 212.  WAVAW BENEFIT  Celebrate WAVAW Rape Crisis Centre's  7th Birthday and IWD on Sun, Mar.  12, from 7:30 pm with Faith Nolan  and Special Guests at the W.I.S.E. Club,  1882 Adanac St. Women only, food  and refreshments. Childcare fund available, partially wheelchair accessible. Door  prizes. Tix $6-12 sliding scale, includes  food. Available at the door and in advance at Ariel Books, Little Sister's, Octopus Books, Women's Bookstore and  WAVAW. For info call 875-1328.  PROMISES MADE IN BED  A play by Bonnie Worthington and Sylvia  Almerling, now running until Mar. 11  at the Heritage Hall, corner of Main St.  and 15th Ave. Reserve early for this Vancouver Little Theatre production: 876-  4165.  BEYOND SURVIVAL  National conference Mar. 31-Apr. 3  in Toronto to explore intersecting dimensions of early childhood trauma,  violence against women and addictive  coping mechanisms. Conference presenters include Ellen Bass, Sandra Butler  and  Clarissa Chandler.  For registration  info write Ani Arnott, Registration Coordinator, Community Resources and Initiatives, 150A Winona Dr., Toronto, Ont.  M5G 3S9, or call (416) 658-1752.  SPONTANEOUS COMBUSTION  Denise Fujiwara of Toronto Independent  Dance Enterprise presents a dynamic  evening of solo dance at the VECC, 1895  Venables St., Mar 17-18, 8 pm. Tix are  $10. Reserve by calling VECC at 254-  9578.  DELUDING DOCUMENTARY  Mar. 28-Apr. 2 Video In brings together  video artists, critics and producers from  England, India, U.S.A and Canada. Mar.  31, 8 pm: videos include Born to be Sold  by Martha Rosier (U.S.A.) on the marketing of children, and Whose Children?  by Meera Dewan (India) on child labour;  Apr. 1, 2:30 pm: Meera Dewan discusses feminist documentary production;  Apr. 2, 1 pm: Claire Aguilar (U.S.A.)  presents excerpts from In Living Colour—  Representation of Race and Civil Rights.  Video In, 1102 Homer St. Cost $3-4. For  complete schedule, call 688-4336.  IN VISIBLE COLOURS BENEFIT  Women in Focus and the NFB co-sponsor  a benefit to raise funds for IN VISIBLE  COLOURS, an Int'l Women of Colour  and Third World Film/Video Festival and  Symposium on Mar. 25, 8 pm at VECC.  Entertainment includes Katari Taiko, India Mahila Dancers and other women of  colour performers. Tix are $5-8. For more  info call 872-2250 or 666-3838.  DAWN CONFERENCE  The DisAbled Women's Network's 4tli  Annual Conference, Mar. 16-19  Squamish, B.C. Focus is on FAMILY  LIFE, including peer counselling for chil  dren. Transportation and accommodation  free and fully accessible. Registration fee  $35, sliding scale. Deadline for registrations from Vancouver area Mar. 13. Cal  589-4088, 534-1358 or 584-4449.  WRITING RETREAT FOR WOMEN  West Coast Women and Words WEST  WORD V SUMMER SCHOOL is now ac  cepting applications. A residential program running from Aug. 13-26, at Van  couver School of Theology, UBC campus  For brochure and application info write:  #210-640 W. Broadway. Vancouver V5Z  1G4, or call 872-8014.  7SANCTUARY?  Headlines Theatre presents TSanctu-  ary?—a forum theatre production with  the Refugee Community in various locations throughout Lower Mainland. Last  run: Mar. 15-19 at Fringe Club, 185 E  11th Ave., 8 pm. Tix are $6 at the door  For other locations, call 738-2283.  LAST TANGO ON BROADWAY  An open viewing of Women In Focus'film  and video library, Mar. 8-10, noon to 7  pm, #204-456 W. Broadway. The gallery  moves to Yaletown soon. For info cal  Janet or Kellie at 872-2250.  CONTINUED NEXT PAGE  KINESIS Bulletin Board  EVENTS  ATTENTION: LESBIAN COUPLES  A meeting will be held Mar. 20 at La  Quena, 1111 Commercial Dr., 7:30 pm,  to discuss equal benefits for lesbian and  gay couples. Those interested in 'spousal'  benefits, and those who have succeeded  in getting negotiated benefits as a gay  'couple,' are invited. Bring documents.  For info contact Carolyn at 877-1287 or  Diana 876-1465.  HUMAN RIGHTS  AND THE DISAPPEARED  Conference, Apr. 26 - 28 on the disappeared with representatives from 13 Latin  American countries including Argentina's  Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo at SFU.  Organizers are requesting financial donations, sponsoring organizations and conference delegates. Fee $125. (assistance  may be available). For info: Conference  Services Continuing Studies, SFU, Burnaby, B.C., V5A 1S6 or call (604) 291-  3854.  EQUALITY—4 YEARS LATER  The West Coast Women's Legal Education Fund is holding a conference on  Women and Equality under the Charter  of Rights, Apr. 14-15, at the Media Centre, Robson Square. Registration fees are  $25/$10. Childcare and travel subsidies  available if requested by Mar. 10. For  info call Lynda at 224-2568 or see Movement Matters, p. 2.  Benefit  Bit by Bit Benefit presents Linda Macdonald, brainwash victim from Alan  Memorial Institute. Music, dance, comedy, 50/50 draws, Mar. 17 , at Ms T's,  339 Pender St., Tix $5 - 7.  Mll:MIMHMflH  CALLING ALL ASIAN WOMEN  Fireweed guest collective is planning an  issue on Asian women. Will reflect diversity of Asian experience: race, age, disability, class, culture, sexuality and defy  all stereotypes. Send your poetry, stories, histories, theory, photographs, etc.  to Fireweed, P.O. Box 279. Stn. B. Toronto, Ont. M5T 2W2. Deadline: Apr. 10.  IN VISIBLE COLOURS  Urgently need films and videos directed,  written or produced by women of colour  or Third World women. Looking for most  recent productions, any length or category. No entry fee, artist fees will be paid.  Submission deadline: May 30. For entry  forms, please contact Lorraine or Zainub  at NFB, 666-3838.  I.W.D. EVENTS  PERFORMANCE NIGHT  Women's Cabaret, Mar.6. Poetry, music  and performance. Benefit for Downtown  Eastside Women's Centre. Pitt Gallery,  36 Powell St., 8 pm tix $2 or pay what  you can.  MARCH AND RALLY  Show your support for Vancouver's first  free-standing abortion clinic, the Everywoman's Health Centre. On Mar. 4,  gather at 11:30 to march at noon from  Queen Elizabeth Theatre Plaza to a rally  at Georgia St. side of Art Gallery.  IWD FILM FESTIVAL  On Mar. 8 the NFB and YWCA co-  sponsor a day of films celebrating Int'l  Women's Day, at the Cinematheque,  1131 Howe St. 10:30-5 pm. Admission  free, childcare available. Register with  YWCA at 683-2531. Evening film benefit at 7:30 pm. Proceeds to IN VISIBLE COLOURS (see Movement Matters,  p. 2). Featuring Canadian premiere of  Gift of Love,, about India's dowry deaths;  and Vancouver premiere of Holding Our  Ground, about Filipino women fighting  for land reform, shelters, etc. Suggested  donation $5. For info call 666-3838 or see  ad this issue.  CO-OP RADIO  The women of Co-op Radio invite you to  ring in IWD, Tues. Mar. 7 with Two  Floors of Fun featuring Co-op Radio's  Women D.J.'s and live entertainment.  Women only at The Heritage House Hotel, 455 Abbot St. Tix at the door. $4-7.  Limited disabled access. Childcare available. For info call 873-3403. Also tune  in to Co-op Radio for a full 24 hours of  women's programming in celebration of  IWD.  INTERNAT'L WOMEN'S EVENING  Let's celebrate IWD together. Music, entertainment and international cuisine on  Mar. 8 at La Quena, 1111 Commercial Dr., doors open at 6:30, come early  for food. Co-sponsored by India Mahila,  Aquelarre and VSW. Tix $2, childcare  funds available. Info 255-5511.  IWD DANCE AND INFO NIGHT  Celebrate IWD at the Maritime Labour  Centre, 1880 Triumph St. (at Victoria  Dr.), Mar. 10, 7:30 pm. Women only,  entertainment by members of Over Our  Heads San Fran comedy troupe and lots  of dancing. Women's groups invited to  set up info tables and displays. Sponsored  by VLC. Info 254-8548.  CONCERT SOUND  Mar. 17-18 an introductory workshop  covering theory, hands- on instruction  and practical on-the-job experience for  women who want to learn skills involved  in producing concert "sound." Cost is  $65. On Sun. Mar. 19 a rented hall and  stage time will be provided for women  performers. For more info or to book  stage time, call 738-3605.  WORKSHOPS FOR WOMEN  Series of workshops sponsored by Douglas  College Women's Centre. Thurs. Mar. 1,  1-4 pm: Understanding Anger. Fee $35.  Instructors Sandy Berman and Maggie  Ziegler; Tues. Apr. 4, 11, &18, 7-10 pm:  Confidence Building. Fee $25. Instructor  Lucy Alderson; Thurs. Apr. 6, 7:30-9:30  pm and Sat. Apr. 8, 9 am-4 pm: Women  in Worker Co-ops. Instructors Lucy Aider-  son and Melanie Conn. For info call 520-  5479.  ACCUPRESSURE WORKSHOPS  Learn accupressure points, stretches and  meditation for relief of menstrual discomforts. Mar. 16, 7-10 pm, Family Activities Room, Britannia Community Centre.  Sliding scale $10-20. Phone for info or to  register. Astarte 251-5409.  UNLEARNING RACISM  Geared towards women attending a weekend workshop for the first time. Will take  place June 9-11. Sliding scale. Registration: May 1-21. More info next month.  M   I    S   C  FAMILY POLITICS  The Family Politics Group, a working  committee of the Vancouver Status of  Women, is concerned with policy around  child custody, divorce, sexual abuse, etc.  and the impact of the feminist backlash.  Meets twice a month. Call Lea afternoons  at VSW for further info: 255-5511.  LESBIAN SOCIALS  A social group for lesbians meets Tues  nights at VLC. 876 Commercial Dr. at  6:30 pm. Group is open to all lesbians and  plans social activities, etc. Call 254-8458  for more info.  SURVIVORS' SUPPORT  I am interested in setting up a support  system for female survivors of childhood  sexual abuse; a group of women, like  myself, who would be willing to talk to  women in crisis over the phone or perhaps  pay a visit. If there are other survivors interested, I would like to share our ideas.  For referral, please call Kinesis 255-5499.  Mainland. If you can help with distribution or wish to complete the survey, call  683-2531, ext. 21120.  SINGLE PARENTS SURVEY  The Van. YWCA, in cooperation with  Single Parents Task Force, is currently  distributing a Single Parents' Profile and  Needs Assessment survey within  Lower  gPCAU&p *0P£F/niDN i^Scue"-  £/   WHERE Tri^i flftENOT.  TRANSSEXUAL RESEARCH  Participants wanted for a book on passing women and female-to-male transsexuals. Your participation would include two  interviews or a questionnaire about your  life and two fill-in-the-blanks tests. Please  help me to get the truth about your lives.  Complete confidentiality assured. For further info, please write to Holly Devor,  Women's Studies Dept., Simon Fraser  University. Burnaby, B.C. V5A 1S6, or  phone (604) 874-1387.  DIRECTORY OF WOMEN'S MEDIA  Published by the Women's Institute for  Freedom of the Press, the directory lists  1,873 entries, including 702 women's periodicals worldwide. Other entries include  women's presses, film groups, news services, radio and television groups etc. To  order send $15 (low income women $11)  to WIFP, 3306 Ross Place N.W., Washington, D.C, 20008, U.S.A.  GRAPHIC ARTISTS NEEDED  Vancouver Status of Women has an urgent need for experienced graphic designers who would occasionally be willing to  volunteer their skills to design posters,  handbills and newspaper ads. Not a big  time committment. We will supply materials and a workspace for the job. Call Lea  at 255-6554.  7e,aclt> our  ~J)ida//ed' iend> ateefaia} cmd \  Jfane*'* ^QumhA> - £8^.  'e tiHt^ tA&m, - and' /Aett> cAc/cdten  <£=  ■*  254-JJ8J 38S-4088  873-0/88  .KINESIS yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy  //////////////////^^^^^  /////////////////^^^  BULLETIN BOARD  CLASSIF ED  SITKA HOUSING CO-OP  Sitka Housing Co-op, a 2-year old, 26  suite complex for women and children,  is creating a waiting pool for future vacancies (1-4 bedroom suites and town-  houses). Priority will be given to sole-  support women, single mothers, women  with environmental allergies. Call Belle  255-0046 for info.  HOUSEMATE WANTED  We are looking for a compatible woman  to share a friendly, quiet home with 3 others. Garden, laundry facilities, fireplace.  We are non-smoking and mostly vegetarian. Cat in residence. $270/month plus  utilities. Vacant March 1st. 14th & Dunbar. Call 732-8927.  DANCE CLASS  Women's contact improvisation dance  class. Ongoing Thursdays 6-7:30 pm. 185  E. 11th, Van. Low cost. Drop in O.K. For  info call 251-6360.  PAINTER NEEDED  Looking for a person with 2 or 3 years  commercial painting experience part-time  in winter, full-time in summer, who is  committed to this trade as a career. Willing to train if you are highly motivated  and a quick learner. Wallpaper experience  helpful but not essential. Must be able  to work alongside men. Wage negotiable  from $8 to $20 per hour for fully qualified. Call Arlene 327-3244.  INT'L GAY AND LESBIAN  AQUATIC MEET  The English Bay Swim Club is looking for  people to house out-of-town participants  for the IGLA meet (swimming, diving, water polo). Mar. 24, 25, 26. Also volunteers urgently needed to work at the meet  on the above days. Please call Bert 684-  4141 or Emma 873-6905.  Faith Nolan appears at the WAVAW benefit, March, 12, capping a week of IWD events. On the right, entertainers Teresa Chandler  and Karen Ripley of San Francisco's Over Our Heads comedy troupe headline the VLC's IWD dance on March 10. (See Bulletin  Board for times and places.)  CLASS IFIED1CLASSIFIEDICLASSIFIED  SUMMER TENANTS WANTED  In Kitsilano: a sunny, comfortable side-  by-side duplex, 6 blocks from the beach,  with large garden, sun deck; feminist  neighbours; two bedrooms, study, large  kitchen, living room; fully furnished, $900  per month including utilities. Available  May through July, possibly August. Ask  for Daphne at 731-0744.  ALCHERINGA  Springtime comes to Salt Spring Island  where that special hide-a-way cabin for  women awaits you. Isn't it time you  treated yourself and took a break from  regular life? Rates are $30 single, $40  double through May. Call Phyllis at 537-  4315 for information and reservations  (evenings are best).  CANADIAN WOMEN'S  MOVEMENT ARCHIVES  The Canadian Women's Movement Archives is putting some of its periodical collections on microfiche. We are  missing the following issues of Kinesis/  SWACC Newsletter/Status of Women  Council Newsletter/Vancouver Status of  Women Newsletter: Vol.1, #1; Vol.1 after #3; Vol.2, #3; Vol.2 #8-13. Anyone  willing to lend these issues to the CWMA,  or who knows their whereabouts, contact:  Canadian Women's Movement Archives,  P.O. Box 128. Stn. P, Toronto, Ont. M5S  2S7, Attn: Pat Baker. (416) 597-8865.  ; OFFICE FOR RENT  Office for rent with the Van. Women's  Health Collective. Quiet, non-smoking.  Use of office equipment including computer and printer negotiable. Short term  rental okay. $200/month or negotiable.  Phone Leah at 255-8284 or drop by. Suite  302-1720 Grant St.  PROVINCE OF  BRITISH COLUMBIA  "NAME ACT" (Section 5 (1))  NOTICE OF APPLICATION  FOR CHANGE OF NAME  NOTICE is hereby given that an application will be made to the Director of Vital  Statistics for a change of name, pursuant  to the provisions of the "Name Act" by  me, Linda Brown Wallace, of 2148 Kitchener in the City of Vancouver, British Columbia V5L 2X1, as follows:—  To change my name from Linda Brown  Wallace to Micah Ruth Waskow. Dated  this fourteenth day of February, 1989.  LINDA BROWN WALLACE  DOG NEEDS A GOOD HOME  Spayed female Shepherd/Malamute cross  is looking for a new home. Toby has the  characteristics of the malamute—she is  intelligent and seldom barks when inside.  She has high energy and loves hiking and  camping. A great companion. Toby has  always lived with the same family and has  been the only pet. Phone 273-7239.  OCEANFRONT RETREAT  On Gabriola Island. $330 per week or  $50 per night. Sleeps six. Available year  round. Lots of space and privacy. Phone  248-5742 evenings for reservations and  information.  WOMEN'S COUNSELLING  My specializations include depression,  sexuality, sexual and emotional abuse,  adult women survivors of childhood sexual abuse, identity issues, self-awareness,  relationship issues, decision-making and  career explorations. I work using verbal and expressive therapies, gestalt and  guided imagery. Sliding fee scale. Janet  Lichty. B.A., M.Ed. Counselling Psychology. 874-2593.  HAWAIIAN BED AND BREAKFAST  Currently the only Bed and Breakfast in  the islands exclusively for women. Comfortable, healing environment with steam  house, hot tub, crystal energy and licensed massage therapist on call. Near  Hilo and Volcano National Park on the  Big Island of Hawaii. Where magica  times await you. The Butterfly Inn, P.O  Box J, Kurtistown, Hawaii, 96760. (808)  966-7936.  GOLDEN THREADS  A contact publication for lesbians over  50 and women who love older women  Canada and U.S. Confidential, warm, reliable. For free info send self-addressed envelope (U.S. residents please stamp it).  Sample copy mailed discreetly. $5 (U.S.)  Golden Threads, PO Box 3177, Burlington VT, 05401.  WMW/Qape Crisis Centre  wishes all women  International "Women's Day!  24 HOUR CRISIS LINE    875-6011  ft  MCkWOMANS  STOREFRONT AKT 5TVOJ0-GIFT6  AS fOVEO./li  across -#ie Street To  I31U- COMMERCIAL D^  IN SOLIDARITY WITH OUR SISTERS [  HAPPY INTERNATIONAL  WOMEN'S DAY  from the  Downtown Eastside  Residents Association  682-0931  KINESIS LIBRARY PROCESSING CENTRE-SERIALS  2206 EAST MALL, U.B.C.  VANCOUVER , B.C.  V6T 1Z8        INV-E 8904  Gaps in your reading?  Could be you need a subscription.  f—  ■'  Published 10 times a year  by Vancouver Status of Women  #301-172(TGrant St., Vancouver, B.C. V5L 2Y6  □ VSW Membership-$25.50 (or what you can afford))-includes Kinesis subscription  D Kinesis subscription only - $17.50       D Sustainers - $75  D Institutions - $45                                  D New  □ Here's my cheque                                 □ Renewal  D Bill me                                               D Gift subscription for a friend  1  Postal Tod*                                                                  Phone  I **■»■        n                                          ■■■■■•■.■■■■-■■••■.*■■■■J  (i