  Salvation Army and Act II  Transition services slated to open Oct.9  by Esther Shannon  The Salvation Army and Act II  will be ready to open Vancouver's new transition house  services as of Oct. 9th, according to Captain Christine  MacMillan of the Salvation  Army.  "The only thing," said Captain MacMillan, "which could  delay the start up, is if the  phones are not hooked up by  then, but we're working to  October 9th."  The two groups' contracts  with the Ministry of Human  Resources call for a two-stage  service. The Salvation Army  will operate a 12-bed hostel  with a maximum stay of two  weeks. Act II, a private company, will operate a series  of residences for follow-up  work with women who have left  battering situations. Both  groups will operate with their  own staff.  Vancouver Transition House was  officially closed on June 28th.  Although the Ministry of Human  Resources promised to have the  House re-opened within four to  six weeks, it has taken twice  that time for the f  be re-established.  Since June 28th ,a group of  Vancouver women, many of whom  have worked with battered women, occupied Transition House-  in a bid to keep the house  open. When asked whether the  occupation would end now that  the new service will soon be  operational, Jan Barnsley,  spokesperson for the occupiers,  told Kinesis  the occupation  will continue.  "Last week," Barnsley said,  "the house was 90% full. We  are still getting referrals  from all over, including MHR  social workers. We cannot  close the house while we still  have no idea of how the new  service will operate.  "The continuing problem,"  Barnsley said, •" is that we  can't get any information from  the groups about the service  they will offer. Both groups  have refused to meet with a  delegation of Vancouver women's  groups.  "Certainly we will continue to  re-evaluate the situation over  the next while. We are pleased  that City Council has set in  motion plans to monitor both  the Salvation Army and Act II  service. We hope this will  provide us with some inJEorma-  Quesnel Pro-Lifers defeated  by Esther Shannon  When it all started Gina Hepp  didn't have a position on abortion. When she was asked to sit  on the Board of Quesnel's Transition House she didn't think it  mattered to her.  "I was ambivalent," Hepp said.  "I probably would never have taken a serious look at the issue  unless I had to have an abortion.'  But last February, in Quesnel  when the transition house amended its constitution to prevent  women and teenage girls who were  'considering '  abortion from being accepted at the house, Hepp  had a reason to take a stand.  "Now, after all this," Hepp said,  "I'm pro-choice."  ; Hepp, a vice-president at the  ! transition house at the time,  wasn't informed of the meeting  where the amendment was passed.  She disagreed with the amendment,  I which the Board had made unalterable.  She believed women had the right  to be opposed to abortion, but  found it offensive that they  were determined to prevent others  . from having a free choice.  Despite our society's conventions  of fair play and free thought,  it is never easy to take a stand  on a matter of principle. In a  small town like Quesnel, it's  even harder. According to Hepp,  65% of the 300 members of the  Quesnel Transition House are pro-  life.  "There are people," Hepp said,  "who used to like me, and now  they won't speak to me on the  street. I feel sad that people  act like that, they won't allow  people to make up their own mind."  Filing suit was the only way the  amendment could be quashed, as  under the Societies Act, constitutional amendments made by extraordinary amendment can only be  rescinded by the court. So Gina  Hepp sued the Board of Transition House.  Months later, in September, the  Board backed down and agreed to  have the amendment withdrawn. Because the Board passed the amendment illegally, they would have  lost the suit.  Hepp is convinced the Board won't  try to do legally what it did illegally.  "The Board," Hepp said," has become cognizant of the division  such an attempt would cause in  the community. They would need  75% of the membership to legally  pass such an amendment and that  support just isn't there."  According to Hepp, one of the  real problems associated with the  controversy was that the house,  which can hold up to 20 women arid  children, stood empty for almost  a month.  "Women," said Hepp,"simply didn't  know if they were welcome."  Hepp noted that she received  enormous support from all over  the province, both from other  transistion houses and individual  "My legal bills," said Hepp,  "amounted to over $3100, and  over $2500 of that came from  donations."  tion we can make future decisions on."  Captain MacMillan, pointing  out that monitoring provisions  such as the City will arrange  are fairly standard, says the  Salvation Army will meet with  the City this week to discuss  monitoring.  "We have absolutely no problem  with being monitored by the  Social Planning Committee at  Transition House continued on page 4  Charter dumps girl  The Supreme Court of Ontario  ruled this month that Justine  Blainey, a member of the Metro  Toronto Hockey League's Olympics, will not be permitted to>  play hockey with her team.  Blainey, whose case was supported by the Women's Legal Education and Action Fund (LEAF),  told a press conference following the decision that she was  "very sad" for herself and "extremely sad" for her team.  The hockey league's regulation  barring females was upheld by  Mr. Justice Donald Steele who  cited the override section in  the Charter of Rights which  states that although a law may  violate the Charter, it is valid if it can be shown to be  "demonstrably justified in a  free and democratic society."  Shelagh Day, president of LEAF,  said the judge's emphasis on  the override section of the  Charter bodes ill for all .  groups fighting discrimination.  1 According to Day, Justice  Steele's position that, "the  override clause is the protection of the society as a whole  from, the individual rights  granted in Section 15" (the  We sang, we yelled, we spraypainted sidewalks, we danced with giant goddess puppets, and,  for a few brief moments we reclaimed the night. This year Vancouver's Take Back the Night  march was the biggest, most colourful yet as hundreds of us women celebrated our  anti-discrimination clause of  the charter) means that, "we  have an interpretation here  which is the same old stuff."  Blainey's mother, Caroline,  said, "I cannot accept that she  has been told she is not good  enough to compete with males,  that her brother has the sex-  given right to play more and  play better."  Ontario's Attorney General, Ian  Scott, has promised to introduce legislation repealing the  section of the Ontario Human  Rights Act that was at issue in  the Blainey case. Lawyers acting for Blainey said the repeal  would only be a partial solution  as Blainey would still have to  challenge the hockey league's  regulation in the courts.  While many prominent athletes  supported Blainey, the Ontario  Women's Hockey Association opposed her, fearing the erosion  of women's leagues by an influx  of iiierii if €he ease succeeded;  Justine Blainey may be one of  the best 12-year-old hockey  players in Toronto. Unfor-  • tunately, when her team takes  to the ice this fall, Blainey  will not be skating with  collective power and made the night our own. IMSIDW  Movement matters 3  Across B.C 4  Across Canada 6  International    7  Wages for Housework 8  Eaton's boycott 10  Slade and Stewart strike 11  Food Supplement  Nicaraguan self sufficiency 12  Women as food producers 13  Organising around food 14  Third World women  and food production 15  Candida 16  Eating disorders 18  Fat oppression 19  Cannery workers 20  Health food workers 21  Restaurant review 22  Arts  Fed Up Co-op show 23  Voice Over 24  Women's Festival 25  Paula Levine 26  Healthsharing review 27  Judy Small 28  Small press poetry 29  Commentary: poor women 30  Letters 31  Bulletin board 33  Kinesis welcomes volunteers to work on all  I aspects of the paper. Call us at 873-5925. Our  next story meetings are Thurs. Oct. 3rd and  Wed. Nov. 6th at 7:30 at the VSW offices,  400A West 5th. All women welcome, even if  you don't have any experience.  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE: Libby Barlow,  Kim Irving, Emma Kivisild, Barbara Kuhne,  Sharon Knapp, Leather Harris, Gina Horrucks,  Wendy Solloway, Adriana Acconci, (bulletin  board editor), Noreen Howe, Maura Volante,  Rosemarie Rupps, Barb Kuhne, Aletta, Diana  Bell, Sharon Hounsell, Gretchen, Mona Clark,  Elizabeth Shefrin, Ann Hepper, Liz Clark,  Esther Shannon, Francie Queyras, Judy  Hopkins, Claire Murgatroyd, Claire Kujundzic,  COVER: by Elizabeth Shefrin and Claire  Kujundzic; artwork detail from lithograph  "At the Market" by Claire Kujundzic.  EDITORIAL GROUP: Libby Barlow, Kim Irving,  Emma Kivisild (editor), Esther Shannon  (editor), Isis (production co-ordinator),  Barbara Kuhne, Maura Volante, Sharon  Knapp, Janie Newton-Moss, Cy-Thea Sand,  Connie Smith, Leather Harris, Rosemarie  Rupps.  EDITORIAL BOARD: Carol Bierenga, Jan  DeGrass, Patty Gibson, -Punam Khosla,  Emma Kivisild, Michele Wollstonecroft.  CIRCULATION/DISTRIBUTION: Judy Rose,  Joey Schibild, Vicky Donaldson, Margaret  McHugh, Cy-Thea Sand, Cat L'Hirondell,  Kim Irving.  ADVERTISING: Jill Pollack, Emma Kivisild,  Heather Harris, Vicky Donaldson, Isis.  OFFICE: Cat L'Hirondelle, Kim Irving.  Kinesis is published ten times a year by the  Vancouver Status of Women. Its objectives  are to be a non-sectarian feminist voice for  women and to work actively for social  change, specifically by combatting sexism,  racism, homophobia and imperialism.  Views expressed in Kinesis are those of the  writer and do not necessarily reflect VSW policy.  All unsigned material is the responsibility of the  Kinesis editorial group.  I CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status  ' of Women, 400 A West 5th Ave., Vancouver, B.C.  V5Y1J8.  . MEMBERSHIP in Vancouver Status of Women is  $23/year (or what you can afford). This includes a  subscription to Kinesis. Individual subscriptions  to Kinesis are $15/year.  SUBMISSIONS are welcome. We reserve the  right to edit, and submission does not guarantee  publication.  Typesetting and camera work by  Baseline Type & Graphics Cooperative.  KINESIS is a member of the Canadian Periodical  Publishers Association.  Second class mail no. 6426.  MOWMF.NT M ATTF.RS  VSW presents fall program  October and November will be busy months at  the Vancouver Status of Women (VSW) as  staff and volunteers gear up for a packed  schedule of programs.  Heading off the fall line-up and continuing  into the new year will be a sixteen week  Consciousness Raising/Study Group.Starting  on Tuesday October 15th and running weekly,  the group will hear speakers on various issues, and include time for informal in-  depth discussion. Some topics are racism,  sexuality, and violence against women.  Please pre-register. fJiWf&'-  1985 marks the end of the UN Decade for Women, and in July 13,000 women from around  the world gathered in Nairobi, Kenya to  assess the decade and look to the future.  What happened in Nairobi ? Punam Khosla  and Emma Kivisild will give a Nairobi  Conference Report,   showing slides from the  conference, and discussing some of the  issues raised there. A representative of  the Women and Development Committee will  ouline plans for a local followup conference in early December. October 28.  What rights do lesbians have in relationships? How can they develop contracts and/  or power of attorney ? Ruth Lea Taylor,  barrister and solicitor, will give a workshop on Lesbian Rights on Wednesday, October 30.  Our apologies  The following errors appeared in the  September 1985 issue of .  On page ten, the photograph identified as  'Indian domestic workers and homemakers  organizing! was actually a picture of a  meeting of South Asian women from around  the world. They are singing Hindi feminist  songs.  On page 16, Angela Davis is identified  as being with Sweet Honey in the Rock.  The group of women in the background of  the picture are members of the International Association of Women of African  Descent. Sitting next to Angela is  Glenda Simms of the University of Regina.  Kinesis,apologizes for these errors and  any inconvenience they may have caused.  There is still room  for your ad in  publicize your event,  service, campaign, co-op or  business in English  Canada's oldest feminist  newspaper  Call us for rates  873-5925  Rock videos are playing a big role in  forming the consciousness of young people  today, and many feminists are worried  about what teenagers (and many adults) are  watching. VSW presents What are you hearing  ?,   a panel discussion on sexism in  rock videos and what to do about it.  Panelists are Harris Taylor, video artist  and musician; Julie Warren, independent  filmmaker; and a representative of the  WAVAW Rape Crisis Centre. Monday November 18.  Women still have trouble getting basic  information on divorce and separation. On  , November 21, at Legal Information on Divorce and Separation,  lawyer Linda Stewart  will give a workshop pn general legal advice, including property division, child  custody, and mediation services.  How can women start a support group ? What  are some of the problems and advantages  of leader-less groups ? At the Women 's  Support Group Information Evening,women  experienced in leader-less groups will  discuss how to start a group, structure,  facilitation, and groups dynamics. Thursday November 28.  All programs are at 7:30 pm. For information on locations, see ad page 16.  For  more information on these and future VSW  events, call VSW, 873-1427.  And don't miss the annual VSW Solstice  Dance,  Friday, December 6th !  Location TBA  Kinesis in transition  Emma Kivisild, current editor of Kinesis  and an active member of the Kinesis  collective for almost three years, is leaving  her position October 10. Although we are  all sorry to see her go we know we will experience the benefits of her hard work for  a long time to come.  The Board and staff of Vancouver Status of  Women, as well as the Kinesis  collective,  will miss her input,•perspective, support,  and most of all her offbeat sense of humour. In terms of Kinesis "specifically,  Emma certainly leaves a positive imprint.  During her fourteen month term as editor,  Emma upgraded the size, quality, and appearance of Kinesis  dramatically.  VSW is fortunate, however, to have found a  new editor in Esther Shannon. Esther brings  a tremendous amount of journalistic experience into the job as well as a long  history of involvement in the women's movement. For the past few years she has been  a regular contributor in the pages of Kinesis.  Her ability to get to the heart of  the matter, her sensitivity in controversial situations, and her innate fairness  will be invaluable assets to the paper and  its writers. Women working with VSW and  Kinesis  are happy to welcome Esther aboard.  Isis continues as production manager for  the paper, liaising with printer, typesetter, typists, staff and volunteers during  the hectic week before press.  KINESIS IS AVAILABLE AT:  VANCOUVER AND AREA:  Agora Food Co-op  ArielBooks  Beckwomans  East End Food Co-op  English Bay Books  La Quena Coffee House  Little Sisters  Mall Book Bazaar  Manhattan Books  McLeods Books  North Shore Women'sCentre  Octopus East and West  Peregrine Books  Press Gang  Reach Clinic  Simon FraserStuden Society Bookstore  Simon Fraser University Bookstore  Spartacus Books  UBC Bookstore  Vancouver Women's Bookstore  Vanguard Books  Women's Health Collective  Women's Resource Centre  IN B.C.:  Chetwynd Women's Resource Centre  Everywoman's Books, Victoria  Honey Books, Maple Ridge  NDP Bookstore, Gibson's Landing.  Nelson Women'sCentre  Pt. Coquitlam Women'sCentre  Quesnel Women's Resource Centre  South Surrey/ While Rock Women's Place  Terrace Women's Resource Centre  Unemployed Action Centre, Nanaimo  IN CANADA:  Halifax  AtlanticNews  Red Herring Co-op Books  Montreal  A ndrogyny Bookstore  LibrairieA Iternative  Sherbrooke  Biblairie GGCLtee.  Winnipeg  Dominion News and Gifts  Liberation Books  Thunder Bay  Northern Women's Bookstore  Thunder Bay Co-op Books  Ottawa  Globe Mags and Cigars  MagsandFags  Octopus Books  Ottawa Women's Bookstore  Edmonton  Aspen Books  Common Woman hooks  Toronto  A <S S Smoke Shop  Book City  Book World  DECBookstore  Lichtman's News A Books  Longhouse Book Shop  Pages  SCMBookroom  The Book Cellar  Toronto Women's Bookstore  World's Biggest Bookstore.  York University Bookstore'  IN U.S. A/:  Chosen Books, Detroit. Mich.  ■I.C.I.-A Woman's Place, Oakland, Ca.  It's About Time, Seattle, Wash.  Old Wives Tales, San Francisco, Ca.  Room of One's Own, Madison, Wise.  NEW ZEALAND  Broadsheet, Aukland  . Women's Bookshop, Christchurch WORKSITE: informal, social art  s October '85 3  .WORKSITE is a bi-monthly  (approx.) evening program of  diverse media, performance,  video, poetry, dance, theatre,  prose, installed and cross-  disciplinary work, by women  artists and set in an informal  social milieu.  On September 5th, WORKSITE took  place at the Anza Club, 3 West  8th. Videos by Media Watch,  Mary Ellen Lower, Stephanie  Robb and Kati Campbell were  viewed. Installed on site were  cibachromes and an essay by  Judith Posner entitled 'Brutality Chic'. The second part of  the program featured slides,  text and voice by performance  irtist Judy Radul.  In addition an art raffle was  held with donations by photographers Kati Campbell, Lorna  Hard lessons from the right  An innovative New York City  school, which provides education for lesbian and homosexual teenagers, is under  .attack by right wing media  and religious groups.  The Harvey Milk School is the  first such program in the  United States and hopes to  educate gay teenagers whose  sexual orientation makes them  an easy target for harassment  from other students and teachers in the regular school system. The fourteen students at  Harvey Milk have all been  labelled 'dropouts' or  'truants' by mainstream schools  and many have been rejected by  their families.  The program is funded by the  Board of Education and the Institute for the Protection of  Lesbian and Gay Youth, a social  service agency which offers  counselling for young people  on sexual orientation topics.  The media has generated a great  deal of controversy around the  school, labelling it "segregationist", "ghettotizing"  and a school for "homosexual  proselytization". The Family  Defence Coalition, a collection of far right Catholic  and Jewish groups, held a press  conference outside the school  calling for an end to "the  sexual aparthied system" and  attacking the city for spending public money on the "promotion of homosexual lifestyles".  School administrators countered stating "This is not  segregation. Harvey Milk is  dealing with the reality that  these kids are not in school  and is offering them an alternative . The school system  has already failed these kids."  At this point the controversy  around the school continues  but efforts to close it have  not been successful.  No free work  Canadian feminsts have long  struggled over the appropriateness of working as volunteers  to provide essential services  for women. The Centre de sante  des femmes, a Montreal based  women's centre funded by the  provincial Ministry of Social  Affairs, has recently said "no  to free work".  The Centre has had its funding  frozen at $30,000 for the past  3% years and has been forced to  increasingly rely on volunteer  labour.  According to the Centre "volunteerism is basically the job  of women, that is, poor people,  and truly free, voluntary work  can only be accomplished when  one can work with a certain financial autonomy...women become  volunteers because of the generalized social and economic  oppression they experience."  The Centre believes its' work  must be run without exploitive  working relations.  The Centre's demand that their  funding reflect volunteer as  well as paid workers leaves  the Quebec government in a  different political position.  While the government will  plead 'budgetary restrictions'  the Centre has, over its 10  years of existence, become  firmly implanted in the community it serves.  Brown and Cynthia Smith, an  audio cassette from Judy Radul,  a hand moulded paper cup by  painter and paper maker Jill  Weaving, and a painting by  Carol Williams.  Our previous event (a woman  only night) held at Main Dance  Place, featured a video-tape  'Hetromania' by Jackie Hegadorn and Tova Wagman; dance  theatre 'A Delicate Lust',  directed by Sam Rathie, performed by Debbie Boyko, Janet  Brook and Trish Ha.lsey, and a  slide poem by Carol Williams.  On site sculpture was by  Pauline Baxter.  WORKSITE particularly suits  artists whose work is tailored  to the single evening format  or is perhaps a work in progress for which the artist  seeks direct audience response.  We are particularly interested in work which experiments  or integrates criticism,  theory and feminist issues.  Dworkin seeks $50 million from Hustler  Andrea Dworkin, feminist anti-  pornography activist and author, has filed a libel suit in  Wyoming against Rustler magazine and its publisher Larry  Flint.  Dworkin, whose suit asks for  $50 million for personal damages and $100 million punitive  damages, charges Rustler  with  publishing cartoons, verbal  descriptions, and pictures of  women engaged in degrading sex  acts specifically and falsely  labeled as Dworkin.  Dworkin's complaint claims that  Bustler's  conduct is intended  to "still and chill her constitutional right" to speak out  against pornography and pornographers. Priscilla Moree and  Judith Fouts, representing the  Wyoming and Jackson .City chapters of the National Organization of Women(NOW) have joined  in the suit claiming the attacks on Dworkin also intimidates them in their work a-  gainst pornography.  Dworkin, along with Katherine  McKinnon, another prominent  anti-pornography activist, has  strongly advocated that women  use civil courts and law suits  to fight against pornographers.  Our next event will be held  sometime in January.  If you are interested in submitting a proposal for the next  or future WORKSITE please contact any of the following  artists/organizers:  Carol Williams - 875-8987  Margot Butler - 687-7585  Lorna Brown - 985-0281  Mary Ellen Lower 687-8240  Media Notes  Out of Line debuts  Vancouver's only alternative  bi-weekly, Out of Line,  was  launched in September. The  twelve page tabloid has a fegvr;  inist and socialist focus and  promises to be partisan.  According to its first issue  Out of Line  will support workers struggles, popular movements and the mass democratic  actions of working women and  men. It will promote union  democracy, the autonomous women's movement, lesbians, gays,  oppressed minorities, youth  and the unemployed.  In its opening editorial, Out  of Line  urges feminists, leftists and other activists to  build on what they have in  common rather than dwell on  their differences. A strong  paper, they believe, can be an  important instrument for  social change.  Subscriptions are available  by writing Out of Line,  P.O.  Box 65701, Station F, Vancouver B.C. If you want to write  or otherwise volunteer for the  paper drop by their office at  #1-246 E. Broadway or call  877-1819.  Pandora from Nova Scotia  The Maritimes has a new feminist paper. Pandora,  a Halifax  tabloid, gives grassroots  voice to Atlantic feminists  in all their diversity.  In their opening editorial,  Pandora  says it will provide  an alternative to the mainstream media that will "become  broadly based so that we will  address the issues of concern  to women everywhere in the  Maritimes.  Pandora  will publish quarterly  over the next year, at which  point they hope to become a  monthly. Write them at 5533  "Black Street, Halifax, Nova  Scotia, .B3K 1P7. Subs are $5  for four issues, and there is  a- sliding scale  'Just Like Women' at ClTR  Women at UBC will be hearing  more news and views about women  this year with the inception of  'Just like Women' on UBC student radio, CITR. The program  initiated and hosted by two  UBC students, will keep students up to date on feminist  issues as well as presenting  opinions, poetry, literature  and music.  Contributions of other women  are welcome and there is always room for guest hosts.  If you're interested in getting involved in 'Just Like  Women' contact CITR at 6138  Sub Blvd., Vancouver, V6T  2A5, telephone:228-3017.  Feminist periodicals  It appears Canada's feminist  periodical conference may become an annual event with  planning already underway, in  Toronto, to follow up on this  year's successful Montreal  conference. The 1986 event is  slated to take place in Toronto in May.  The Montreal meeting (see Kinesis  July/August '85) was the  first conference since 1980  and attracted representatives  from 35 women's publications  for discussions on skill development, finances and the  politics of feminist journalism.  For more information on the  1986 conference contact Kinesis  or write Mary Louise Adams  RFR, 252 Bloor St. W., Toronto  Ont. M5S 1V6 Kinesis October '85  ACROSS BC  VLC birthday cake at opening celebration  photo by Francie Queyrs  Lesbian Centre opens  On September 5, 1985, approximately 300 people joined the  lesbian centre in Canada at  876 Commercial Drive. The  opening consisted of two  parts: one in the afternoon  which was mixed and the other  in the evening which was for  women only. Refreshments were  served at both.  During the afternoon people  were able to wander around the  centre and to look at the  art and information displays.  The art display consisted  of work by local artist  and by the children of lesbians. In the evening, as  well as the displays, there  were performances by local  musicians. Interspersed were  announcements about the  centre and the reading of  letters and telegrams of  support and congratulations  from local, provincial and  federal politicians.  Many people generously pledged items useful for the  setup of the centre and  volunteered time. Present  fundraising.includes "Have  your name carved in herstory"  a project to raise money to  pay for 50 wooden chairs.  Currently scheduling is being  conducted. Started in October there will be coffee  evenings on Friday nights,  pool/billiards on Saturday  afternoon and drop-in times  '  during the day. It is planned to have further displays  by artists. In addition,  several groups intend to hold  collective meetings and/or  events in the centre. A  calendar will be posted on the  door of the centre and recorded on the answer phone (254-  8458). There is still a need  for items and volunteers so if  you can help let us know.  Transition House from page 1  City Hall," said Captain MacMillan.  With both Act II and the Salvation Army having acquired  staff for the new services, the  fate of the former Transition  House workers is left undecided.  Kinesis  asked Captain MacMillan  whether the Salvation Army was  prepared to rehire the former  workers.  " We have done our hiring in the  open market," said Captain MacMillan. "We weren't aware when  we were working on the contract  with MHR that these workers were  available. We wouldn't hire on  the basis of whether the people  selected were or weren't with  the former operation."  British Columbia Government Employees Union (BCGEU) representative Robbie Robertson told Kinesis  the union would definitely  be applying, on behalf of the  workers, for successor rights.  If granted, successor rights  would mean that both groups  would have to rehire the former  workers.  "Given any kind of supportive  data that will enable us to go  before the Labour Relations  Board (LRB) we will apply for  successorship," said Robertson.  "The problem is," he said, "we  are finding it very difficult  find out exactly what kind of  service will be offered. Both  the groups and the government  are being very reticent about the  service, and certainly this leads  us to suspect the government has  a hidden agenda. It certainly  could be the case that in splitting up the service between two  groups we will have a harder  time getting a favorable decision from the LRB, and perhaps  this was the intention."  Captain MacMillan had no comment  on the likelihood of the BCGEU  acquiring successor rights.  It is possible that since the  new services will soon be available, MHR will move to close  down the occupation. According  to Barnsley the occupiers have  no reason to believe this will  happen.  "In June when we first went into  the house," Barnsley said, "MHR  announced that they would not  oust the occupiers. They have  never said anything different.  We do not anticipate any attempt  to move us out."  Kinesis was unable to reach anyone in MHR who could comment on  their intentions vis a vis the  For donations to the occu-  pation call 876-2849.   Want to vote?  Enumeration of B.C. voters began in September and continues  throughout this month, but many  eligible B.C. residents probably won't end up on the list.  Voting laws in B.C. seem to be  designed to make participation  in the electoral process as  difficult as possible:  Even if a person has lived in  the same house and voted in  every election for thirty  years, they will not be on the  list unless they re-register.  Each potential voter must personally sign the enumeration  card. Someone else who is home  when the enumerator comes cannot put them on the list.  Organizations which have wanted  to run their own voter registration drives of their members have been refused the necessary materials.  Once an election is called,  those who missed getting on  the list have only 8 days to  find out they are not registered and then to get registered before the list closes.  B.C. Tel goofs  A Mission, B.C. battered women's  shelter got a cash settlement  from the BC Telephone in August, after the company printed  the shelter's address in the  1984 phone book.  Jane Parlee, a board member  for the Mission Transition  House Society, told the Vancouver Sun that the society  was forced to move the shelter when the address was published in order to ensure the  safety of women seeking refuge  from abusive husbands. Two  members had asked BC Tel representatives to keep the address out of the book.  Parlee would not reveal the  amount of the settlement but  said the money will go towards  salaries and operating costs.  The Mission shelter operates  without a government contract,  and relies on donations and  volunteers.  If there's anything they  want to know, they ask  Following is  Human Resour<  These qu.-.stii  seeking soci;  her children's father, mus  from MHR.  1. Where and when did the  (supposed) father? Who ii  list of questions culled from the Ministry of  form H.R.1400, Child Paternity and Support,  form the basis of the interview single mothers  assistance, and without means of support from  father, must undergo in order to receive support  tothe  'ñ† meet the putatr  ;ed them?  2. What social contacts did they have following the first  meeting? If there was a common-law union, state the date(s)  of commencement and the date(s) of each separation.  3. Where and when did the first sexual intercourse occur?  Did either party tell a friend or relative of this sexual  intercourse? Discussion on use of contraceptives.  4. Has the putative father denied this or any other instances  of sexual intercourse? What does he say about it and does  he have any witnesses in support of his position?  When did the mother i  o the pregnancy  art her last menstrual period prior  8. When did the mother first tell the putative father of  the pregnancy? What did he say? Was anyone else present?  Do we know if the putative father told anyone else? Who?  9. Has the putative father given the mother any money since  the start of her pregnancy? What proof has she of this?  10. Are there any letters from the putative father discussing the child, the pregnancy, marriage or money available?  (attach a copy).  13. Did the mother go out with any other men from eleven  months before birth onwards? Who? When? Where? Any witnesses?  14. Did the mother engage in sexual intercourse with any  other man during this period?  "Women's Voices" funded  The West Coast Women and Words  Society has received funding  from Vancouver's Centennial  Commission to develop a centennial project on Vancouver  women.  The project, "Women's Voices:  A Vancouver Mosaic", is collecting written and visual material  and will mount a.full length  play in June 1986.  Women's Voices is looking for  women willing to be interviewed  about their life in Vancouver.  They are also soliciting mater-L  ials from interested Vancouver  men. Participants in the pro- I  ;t may choose to be named or  I anonymous.  For further information, or to  t involved, call Women's  ] Voices: A Vancouver Mosaic,  872-8014 or write #210-640 0  West Broadway, Vancouver, B.C.  I V5G 1G4 Kinesis October '85   5  ACROSS CANADA  Julie Belmas, sentenced to 20  years on bombing and conspiracy  charges as a result of her involvement with the Squamish  Five, says now that she was  "politically naive."  Belmas, who appeared last month  before the B.C. Court of Appeal  . seeking a reduced sentence,  told the court she was "very  weak in mind and identity" when  she joined the group which in  1984, was found guilty of the  Litton, B.C. Hydro and Red Hot  Video bombings as well as conspiracy to rob a Brinks guard  in Vancouver (see Kinesis  July/August, 1984).  Belmas, emotionally overwrought  throughout the hearing, burst  into tears at several points  during her address to the  judges. She said she believed  the others when they told her  the group's bombings would hurt  no one.  No to  nukes at  Nanoose  Until recently the Nanoose  Conversion Campaign's demonstrations against the nuclear  weapons bearing American submarines at Nanoose Bay have  stayed within legal bounds.  The lines were crossed,  however, in September, when  six of about 30 demonstrators  blocked the gate of the Nanoose  Bay Canadian Forces Naval  Test Facility after delivering a letter demanding the  removal of the submarine USS  Salt Lake City.  While waiting at the gate for  a response to their letter, the  six were arrested and charged  with intimidation by the RCMP.  They were later released and  will appear in court in Parksville on November 14th.  The demonstration began with  singing and short speeches and  concluded with Bert Thomas, one  of the six arrested, reading  the letter to the protesters.  "Your submarine has the capability to cause incalcuable destruction and we demand the  Commander of this base order  its removal from Nanoose Bay,"  read Thomas.  Thomas, along with Sunshine  Goldstream, Miriam Leigh, Brian  Mills, John Campbell and Ted  Phillips then left the demonstration to deliver the letter  to the Base Commander.  After giving the letter to a  Base representative, the six  sat in front of the gate expecting to be arrested immediately.  The RCMP officers, standing at  the top of an overlooking hill,  ■ silhouetted in the sunset, did  not make a move. The police  waited until the singing had  stopped, most of the supporters  had returned home and until  others had rounded up sleeping  bags and food for the six who  were prepared to spend the  night if necessary.  At 11:00 the RCMP issued a  warning and returned to make  the arrests at midnight.  Belmas renounces action, blames others  "I should have had enough common sense to say, ' You don't  plant 500 pounds of dynamite  in front of a building where  people work, expecting that  nobody will get hurt.'"  She blamed the others in the  group for her offenses, saying  she had "a small sense of identity that was easily, easily  led. If I did not meet those  people I would never have  been involved in those of-  A spokesperson for the Free  the Five Defence Committee  said, "We think it's a sad  situation, but it's not  unexpected, these things  happen in political  cases where, one person involved will turn against  their former friends and  associates. We understand  why this can happen and at  this point we're choosing  to ignore the fact that she  is acting without principle.  It should be clear, however,  that there's no respect left  on our part. Certainly Julie  deserves to have her sentence reduced but not off  the backs of the others."  Belmas said she now feels "vei  stable" in her identity and  has good hopes for her rehabilitation.  "I have the right outlook on  life and my values are cor  rect," she told the court. "I  never want to return to that  existence, where those values  exist."  Belmas told the court that the  'leaders' of the group, who  she identified as Ann Hansen  and Brent Taylor, did not  plead guilty to their offenses  and were found guilty at a  jury trial.  Brent Taylor received a 22  year sentence. Hansen was sentenced to life. However, Hansen will be eligible for parole two years before Belmas.  Chief Justice Nathan Nemetz  told Belmas the judges would  reserve decision.  Kresge's workers strike for first contract  Retail clerks in Northern Ontario have been on strike since  April 18 in a bid to get a  first contract at a Kresge's  store.  The eighteen clerks, seventeen  of whom are women, are a local  of the United Food and Commercial Workers at Kresge's store  in downtown Port Arthur. They  have the support of the townspeople, and a boycott of  Kresge's that extends outside  of Ontario as well, but the  main obstacle they face comes  from labour laws.  Under the Ontario Labour Code,  strikers only keep their  employee status for the first  six months they are on strike,  after which they can be fired,  and new workers hired. Ontario  employers commonly use delay  in hopes of new workers supporting union decertification.  The law also forbids new organizing for a year after decertification.  It was this clause which forced  Eaton's workers to settle for  an unsatisfactory contract  earlier this year.  The Kresge strike will finish  its sixth month on October 18  A rally and march are planned  in Port Alberru, Vane  land for the 19th, to try to  build a broader pressure campaign against management at:  this crucial juncture in the  strike.  Is-  Stelco worker has had it with harassment  Six years ago Stelco, a Hamilton steel company, was forced  to hire 200 women after a  successful human rights complaint. Those 200 have dwindled to only a few employees. So  few that Stelco, which has  evaded demands for separate  washrooms, can now point to the  small number of women employees  and say there is no justification for the demand.  Bonita Clark, one of the first  women hired six years ago, has  had enough. After years of laying grievances about sexual  harassment and other workplace  issues, Clark, with the backing  of the Hamilton Workers Occupational and Safety Centre, is  going after Stelco at the Ontario Labour Relations Board  (OLRB).  Clark's case cites 62 incidents  of what she considers sexual and  other harassment, health and  safety problems, and inadequate  working conditions. She is after  an OLRB ruling that sexual harassment be considered a health and  safety hazard.  Last year the Quebec Worker's  Compensation Board set a Canadian  precedent by treating sexual  harassment as a work related  injury. In another case, involv  ing the Department of National  Defense (DND) employee Bonnie  Robichaud, the Federal Court of  Appeal ruled the DND was not  liable for its employees who  sexually harass workers. That  case is now in appeal before  the Supreme Court of Canada.  "I came home at night and cried,'  says Clark. "I couldn't eat, I  had trouble sleeping. I had  severe weight loss. I had diarrhea that I couldn't get rid  of. I'd go to the doctor and  In interviews in the northern  Woman Journal,  a Thunder Bay  feminist newspaper, strikers  talked about some of their experiences on the line, pointing  out that they frequently have  to correct passersby who assume  that they are married and not  self-supporting. They say that  they had been talking about  getting a union for years, to  improve things like company  pensions— thirty six dollars  a month for one woman who  worked at Kresge's for thirty  years.  There is no turning back now.  As one picketer says, "A lot  of people say to me, 'Why  don't you just quit and look  for another job?' Well you  can't do that. That's no sol-  he 'd say 'there's nothing  physically wrong with you.'"  Debbie Field, one of the five  original women who filed the  human rights complaint, said  Stelco's tactics seemed to be  "to hire us and then hope that  we would quit."  Bob Melbourne, Stelco General  Works manager said he has  "equal concern for her (Clark's)'  difficulties in relating to her  work situation as I would have  for any other employee."  PC's plan to de-index family allowances  In September, the Progressive  Conservative eovernment introduced Bill C-70, a bill to  partially de-index Family Allowances. The bill, if passed,  will mean that Family Allowances will be reduced by 3%  each year up to 1991.  In the coming months changes  are planned for the Child Tax  ■Credit and the Child Tax Exemption,  The combined effect of these  measures will take over $1,000  annually out of the pockets of  two child families by 1990.  The impact will be greatest on  poor families.  To protest the Conservatives'  plans, call or write your member of parliament and the Prime  Minister.  Committee hearing on Bill C-70  will take place over the next  several months. Briefs can be  sent c/o Clerk of the Legislative Committee on Bill C-70,  Committee and Private Legislation Directorate, Rm 500,  House of Commons, Ottawa, Ont.,  K1A 0A6.  Kinesis  will have an in-depth  report on Bill C-70 in our  November issue. 6   Kinesis October '85  ACROSS CANADA  Abortion tribunals planned  In November, Concerned Citizens  for Choice on Abortion is  sponsoring the first of a  series of tribunals to be held  across Canada. These tribunals  will hear women testifying about  the difficulties they have experienced in obtaining abortions. The current laws, which  make it almost impossible for  many women in Canada to obtain  an abortion, will be "put on  By hearing women speak out  about real-life experiences, we  can demonstrate to the government that its abortion laws  have hurt and killed enough women. Through the tribunals the  women of Canada can deliver their  verdict on the Criminal Code,  convicting it of being unjust  and inequitable.  This will be the third such  tribunal held in Canada. The  first was in 1972, and was  sponsored by the B.C. Coalition  to Repeal the Abortion Laws,  and the U.B.C. Abortion Action  Coalition. The tribunal heard  many cases of difficulties and  terror women went through to  obtain abortions. It found  "the government of Canada, the  provincial government, the  courts of the land and the  medical profession guilty of  denying women the right to  choose whether or not they will  bear children."  In March 1974 a cross-country  Abortion Tribunal was held in  Ottawa. Fifteen women testified, including women representing a teenager who had died  'ñ†from a "back-street" abortion.  The women came from all walks  of life, different provinces  and different age groups, but  they had all faced danger and  humiliation because of the  abortion law. Some went  through extraordinary financial expense and risked their  lives to obtain their abortions .  While the situation has improved somewhat since the 1972-  74 period, anti-abortionists  are still successfully taking  over hospital boards across  the country,, preventing  these hospitals from offering abortion services. As  a result, many women throughout B.C. are now forced to  leave their communities and  come to Vancouver or Victoria  to try to obtain an abortion.  Many can't tolerate the  hospital Therapeutic Abortion  Committee, and they go to  Washington state, where women  jhave had the right to abortion  for over ten years. In Canada  we have a lot more fighting  to do before we get reproductive freedom.  The Vancouver Tribunal requires  the participation of women  who will speak out about their  abortion experiences.  Please consider sending us  a submission. It may be anonymous or signed, your own  story or one you know of and  can help us document. Be sure  to indicate whether you are  prepared to present your  testimony in person. You can  send your submission to CCCA  P.O. Box 24617, Station C,  Vancouver V5T 4E1 or phone  us for more information.  Joy Irving appeals pension credit ruling  Joy Irving applied to share  her husbands pension credits  as soon as she learned she  was eligible. Irving, although  she didn't know it, had only  three years from the date of  her divorce to apply for the  credits. Her application came  25 days too late and the federal government refused to release the pension. Irving  appealed to the Health and  Welfare Minister, Monique Begin,  who denied her appeal. She then '  counter appealed to the Pension  Review Committee which ruled  in her favour.  Despite the fact that Irving  was only eligible for four  years pension credits Begin  Tory MP  fined for  battering wife  A Tory MP was fined $350 in  September after admitting in  court that he had assaulted  his wife.  David Nickerson, PC MP for the  Western Arctic, pleaded guilty  in territorial court to assaulting his wife, admitting  that on July 27 he beat her,  resulting in bruises and a  swelled eye: Madeline Nickerson  was kept in hospital overnight.  The maximum sentence for assault is six months or a fine  of $500. Judge Michel Bourassa  said he took into consideration  that it was a first conviction  and that Nickerson had admitted  guilt from the outset.  appealed the Review Committee's  ruling and a Pension Appeals  Board was set up to act in the  case.  The three judge panel heard  arguments and granted an  adjournment so that questions  raised by Irving's cousel could  be researched and answered.  Irving's lawyer wanted answers  on the number of divorces in  Canada since the Pension's  Splitting Act was passed, the  number of women who applied  under the act for pension  credits, the number of applications granted and refused  and the number denied for  reasons of expiry of three  years after the final divorce  decree. Irvin? comments, "The  government says they put out  all these brochures on Pension  Credit Splitting, but I'd  never seen any until I went.to  fill out my application.  To date Irving has heard from  27 other women in similar  circumstances. The Equal Pay  Information Committee has been  involved in Joy Irving's case  since its inception and has  sought funds from the public  for court costs. If you would  like to make a contribution  contact EPIC at P.O. Box 4237  Vancouver B.C. Cheques or money  orders should be made to The  Joy Irving Trust Fund.  From A lert Bay to Nicaragua  Women can salmon  for peace  On August 26, 46 women from  Alert Bay donated an hour's  work to raise funds for the  Tools for Peace Campaign that  is working to help fill a ship  for Nicaragua. Union fisherman  Bruce Lansdowne donated 500 pink  salmon and women washed and  canned 2734 cans to be sold at  $1 each. When they had been  asked to donate part of their  wages the women came up with  the idea of volunteering an  hour's work instead. Seafood  Products cannery donated its  equipment and the plant.  Myra Johnson, president of the  local 48 UFAWU said that most  of the women shore-workers  are Native Indian, East Indian  Fijian, Asian and Central  American. One woman said that  if she were in the same position as Nicaragua that she  would like someone to do the  same for her.  The proceeds will be used to  buy equipment to re-equip  fishing boats at San Juan del  Sur, the Nicaraguan community  Alert Bay has twinned with  reality.  National  Farm  Women's  Conference  In November of this year,  Canadian farm women will be  meeting in Charlottetown for  the Second National Farm  Women's Conference. The theme  of the conference is "Farm  Women Networking for Action".  The conference will bring together 350 women to discuss the  the many important issues affecting farm women and to  develop strategies for influencing decisions. Issues included are consumer trends,  the special needs of farm women  the current economic crisis  in agriculture, stress, family  violence, and the need for  child care in rural areas.  It is hoped the conference will |  set up structure to act on  these and other issues on an  ongoing basis.  Conference highlights include  an address by Laura Heuser, who I  will draw from her experience  with development of the Women  for the Support of Agriculture  in Michigan and, most recently, I  with American-Agri Women.  To obtain more information  write: Second National Farm  Women's Conference, P.O. Box  984, Charlottetown CIA 7M4.  Lesbian  family  refused  benefits  Karen Andrews, a Toronto  lesbian who lives with her  lover and two children, has  laid a grievance against her  employer, the Toronto Library  Board, seeking medical and  dental benefit coverage for  her family.  . Andrews' grievance, believed  to be the first of its kind  in Canada, has strong support  from her union, the Canadian  Union of Public Employees.  According to the union, the  library board's refusal to  extend coverage to Andrews  contravenes the no discrimination on the basis of  sexual orientation clause  in the collective agreement.  "My family is a valid family",  Andrews said. "After seven  years I am just like a step  mother... this is a gay rights  issue as well as a union  benefits issue."  Toronto chief librarian, Les  Fowley, refused comment on  the grievance but said the  library board had applied to  their benefits carrier  CUMBA, for coverage for  Andrews and was refused. As  of yet no date has been set  for arbitration. Kinesis October '85   7  Nairobi continued  The United Nations Decade for  women is over. Now what? That  will be the big question on  everyone's minds as local  groups make plans to follow  up on the end of decade activities in July in Nairobi,  Kenya (see Kinesis  Sept. 85).  , Several B.C. women were in  Nairobi. Some, like NDP MP  Margaret Mitchell, attended  the World Conference of gov-  Refugee  women  overlooked  Female refugees comprise three  quarters of the worlds refugee  population yet few agencies  involved in working with refugees consider the special  concerns of women. For the  most part women, working individually within refugee  service and advocacy organizations, are the ones  raising and addressing the  needs of refugee women.  It is clear that the predominantly male policy makers at  every level of the refugee  field do not understand the .  nature and scope of the problem facing female refugees.  Neither are they recognizing  the potential of refugee  women as a resource for solutions to the problem.  Women refugees face unique  problems in addition to those  faced by all refugees, male  and female.  Some of the particular problems facing women are the result of biological factors,  such as female related health  problems and vulnerability to  sexual coersion and abuse.  Still others result from the  cultural or religious taboos  of both the refugee producing  and receiving countries.  During the emergency phase of  a refugee crisis, the international community places a  priority on survival. While  females constitute the majority of refugees in these situations the only specific reference to refugee women in the  United Nations Handbook For  Refugees  concerns nursing  mothers.  Mothers, however, are not the  only special category. Abduction, rape (often followed  by veneral disease) and other  forms of physical abuse of  women by pirates, border  guards, military personnal  and male refugees are common.  It has taken five years for  recommendations concerning the  needs of rape victims in only  one Thai refugee camp to be  implemented.  For some female refugees religious beliefs contribute to  inequality. Strict adherence  ernment representatives who  attempted to outline an international Forward Looking  Strategy for women. Others  were at the Non-Governmental  (NGO) Forum, where grassroots  activists came together to  examine a range of First and  Third Wprld concerns.  These women will discuss and  debate their experiences in  Nairobi at a variety of events  in the coming months. In Vancouver alone, there will be  post-Nairobi meetings on October 10 (Gays and Lesbians  of UBC); October 20 (National Council of Jewish Women and  the YWCA, at Robson Square  Media Centre 7:30 pm); October  28 (Vancouver Status of Women  at Britannia Centre, 7.30 pm);  and October 30th (Congress of  Canadian Women and Women in  Focus, at Women in Focus,  7:30). All of these include  slides and discussion. Call  the individual groups for more  information.  Vancouver Co-operative Radio  (102,7 FM) plans a 4 hour  special on Nairobi, October  27, from noon to 4pm.  At least two B.C. groups are  planning conferences to look  back over the Decade, and forward to local strategies. The  Interagency Committee for Women and Development is organ-  ixing for early December. And  the Port Alberni Women's  Centre will host a conference  in February. Watch future  Kinesi  for details.  Gays gain support in New Zealand  Storiesfrom  refugee women  Following are some film and  video resources on refugee  women for readers interested  in further information on the  experience and status of refugee women: "Women Refugees":  1980, 32 minutes, 16mm and  video. A Cambodian woman  about to give birth in a refugee camp, a Chilean refugee  feeling displaced despite  comfortable surroundings in  Sweden, a Somali woman who  works in the fields while her  daughter cares for the younger  children. Available from UNHRC,  1718 Connecticut Ave., N.W.,  second Floor, Washington, D.C.  20009. FREE  "One of Many - Dr. Nhan", 1984  16 minutes, 16mm. and video.  Biography of an ethnic Chinese  woman who fled Vietnam by  boat in 1979. Rental 16mm -  $32.50; video $15. Contact  Lucerne Films, Inc., 37 Ground  Pine Rd., Morris Plains, NJ  07950. "The Survival of  Sontheary Sou", 1984, 53 minutes, video. Relates the story  of a Cambodian woman and her  struggle to re-establish her  life in the United States.  Rental $40. Daniel Barnett  Company, 260 Lincoln St.,  Alliston, MA 02134  "Guatemala: I Carry Your Name",  1984, 25 minutes, slide show  with soundtrack. Focus on displaced Guatemalans, most of  them women and children. Provides a historical overview,  oral testimonies and descriptions of current conditions.  Rental $15. Oxfam America,  115 Broadway, Boston MA  02116  Things look better for lesbians and gays in New Zealand  as they struggle to push through  the New Zealand Homosexual Law  Reform Bill. Public opinion  polls are showing greater  support for reform than was  evident earlier this year, and  supportive coalitions of non-  gay groups have been formed.  The proposed bill, and with it  lesbians and gays, has been  under'concerted attack from  the right wing, in a campaign  led by tour members of patli-  ament, and abetted by the  Salvation Army, and other  church groups. Petitions  headed 'New Zealand be  warned!' and 'God defend New  Zealand!' were printed as  full page ads in newspapers  and circulated door to door.  The stated goal is one million signatures. (New Zealand  has a population of 3.2 million) .  Lesbians and gays have responded with public meetings,  pickets, and consciousness  raising. The Salvation Army  as a consequence has made an  effort to dissociate itself  from the rabid anti-gay  campaign. Groups like  'Heterosexuals Unafraid of  gays' in Auckland and Wellington and Palmerston North  are indications of what  pollsters say is 61% popular  support for the bill.  Marches in main centres were  slated for September 13, a  national day of action tentatively dubbed Pink and  Black Friday after the pink  and black triangles worn by  lesbians and gay men in Nazi  concentration camps.  to Islamic law has resulted in  widespread inequities between  male and female Afghan refugees.  The law requires females to  remain sequestered at "home"  therefore women who are unaccompanied by male relatives  must rely on unrelated males  to collect their rations.  Whether they are eventually  able to return home, settle in  the first asylum country or  re-settle in a third world  country refugee women face many  of the same obstacles to successful adjustment.  They bring with them a higher level of illiteracy and a  lower of 'marketable' job  skills than their male coun  terparts. Because they are  expected to cook, clean and  care for their families little  time is left to learn a new  language or acquire the skills  needed to adapt to their new  environment.  When refugees from less developed countries re-settle  in more developed the problems are more complex. The  care provided to resettled  refugees appears to have a  predominantly male focus.  When the United States  Committee for Refugees recently surveyed local voluntary  services about refugee women,  of the 131 respondents only  three had a staff member  specifically responsible for  refugee Women's concerns and  The 1975-85 U.N. Decade of  Women, if it accomplishes  nothing else, has started  the important task of directing attention to the unique  situation and needs of refugee women. During pre-Nairobi  conference consultations the  sub-committee on refugee  women recommended that the  conference: take steps to  ensure that refugee women are  involved in the management  and organization of refugee  camps and recommended that  national and international  refugee organizations take  steps to prioritize programs  with and for women. INTERNATIONAL  COUNTING WOMEN'S WORK  "Women do 2/3  of the world's  work, receive only  5% of the world's  income and receive  Less than 1% of  the world's assets."  This is why the  Wages for  Housework is  organizing a  celebration on  October 24, and  asking groups  to join us.  by Marie Arlington  • Women do Qfiffitj^lippp $N¥}{&Vb work,-^|fi5|£fL¥e  only 5% of the world's income and own  less than 1% of the. world's assets;  • Women produce, often with the help of  children, at least half of the world's  food, and this work is mainly uncounted  and unwaged;  • Women are a source of cheap labour  because we're always expected to work for  free;  • Women are the poorer sex, and women of  colour are the poorest of all, and the  poorer we are the more work we are forced  to do;  a When women make demands that would reduce our work, we are told we are not  productive, and when we demand or win  payments or services, they are considered  charity;  e Governments give lip service to women's  equality, and glorify motherhood, in fact  they ignore women's work of feeding, maintaining and financing the family;  • Women produce by great labour all the  workers of the world but are often considered not to be workers themselves.  At the end of the Decade Conference on  Women 1985, in Nairobi, the International  Wages for Housework Campaign called for  'Time Off For Women' to mark the tenth  anniversary of the first general strike  of women in Iceland.  Sixteen women from Canada, Britain, USA  West Germany, and Trinadad attended the  NGO Forum. Housewives in Dialogue, which  has consultative status with the United  Nations put forward amendments to paragraphs in the basic conference documents.  The conference agreed to Housewives in  Dialogue amended paragraph and it was  passed with only the USA absent from the  vote.  The paragraph read:  The remunerated and,  in particular,  the  unremunerated contribution of women to  all aspects and sectors of development  should be recognized and appropriate  efforts should be made to measure and  reflect these contributions in national  accounts and economic statistics,  and in  the GNP.  Concrete steps should be taken  to quantify the unremunerated contribution  .of-women to food and agricultural production,  reproduction and household  activities.  The GNP (Gross National Product) is  supposed to be the total value of goods  and services produced, but up to now it  has only included goods and services exchanged for money. Women's unwaged work,  which is estimated in some countries to  produce as much as 50% of the GNP, has  been left out.  In 1978 Canadian housework was 40% of the  GNP, but it would have been 53% if women's  wages were equal to men's, that is, if  women were not underpaid and if equal pay  for work of equal value were a reality.  In a special study in 1978 Statistics  Canada claimed that housework should have  earned anywhere between $75 billion and  $84 billion the year before.  Women's work is rarely, if ever, recognized  or valued, especially if it is unpaid  work. We are asked to work at home, as  volunteers, in agriculture and in the  workplace. Yet our unpaid work is not  counted or recognized as work, it is  taken for granted and trivialized.  Canadian women work an average eighty  hour week. Third World women work a 100  hour week. How difficult it is for  Third World women to survive is often used  against us, to convince us that we really  'have it so much better'. But we know,  as women, we don't have it 'very good' at  all.  • In the Third World many women spend up  to six hours just fetching water;  o In Africa 60-80% of all agricultural  work is done by women;  e In Hungary women with a waged job spend  80% of their 'leisure' time doing housework:  o The poorest women are single mothers.  They are the fastest growing group in the  world's population;  • The poorer we are the harder we work;  • Multinational corporations are taking  work away from metropolitan countries to  the Third World countries where they pay  low wages;  • As poverty intensifies, prostitution  increases;  a In 1982 - 4 out of 5 black and immigrant  women in the US over 65 were living on  incomes below $2,000 a year;  • In the US 1 out of 2 black children are  living in poverty;  e 30 children die for want of food every  minute;  e 43% of single parent households headed  by women, in Canada, live in poverty;  « United Nations estimates of global  military spending in 1982 was one million  dollars a minute;  • Each woman, man and child in the US paid  $846.00 in military spending in 1982;  • One Nuclear submarine equals the annual  education budget for 23 Third World  Countries;  • Canada has for the first time in years  increased military spending but is unable to afford increase in welfare rates;  • The US spends $28 million per hour on  military spending;  • "The money required to provide adequate  food, water, education, health and  housing for everyone in the world has been  estimated at $17 billion a year. It is a  huge sum of money...about as much as the  world spends on arms every two weeks."  (The Campaign Against Arms Trade)  9 Raising children is not considered work,  but an army killing them is;  In every particle of society we see production: our work. We produce the entire  labour force. We really work for the  government by producing the labour force,  and should be paid by the government  accordingly, but instead we are seen as  charity cases and as victims.  Krishna Patel, an employee of the United  Nations and an organizer, said, "The  woman must be compensated by the state  because women work for the state. It looks  like all we produce is a pile of laundry  and some food. In fact, we produce the  entire labour force - the basic ingredient for all industry and all profit."  We are asked by the men in our lives and  by the men in power "What did you do all  day?" Most women know that a basic  element of housework is managing the tensions of, and servicing in every other  way those women and men who do waged  work, school work, housework, and those  hit by unemployment. They know that work  in the house is precisely to ensure that  work outside and life generally goes on  uninterrupted.  Mothering is the most taxing and difficult work, the least appreciated and  valued by society and the most damning  if you should make any mistakes. There are  no courses to take, no training period,  and no chances to write it off as trial  and error. It is a very different job  than what we imagine or dream of in our  wildest dreams. As stated by a Vancouver  mother, Nancy McRitchie:  "I've been a cashier, waitressj journalist,  factory worker, typesetter, childcare  worker and an unemployed person. Now I'm  a parent, a single parent, of a sixteen  month child. I've never worked harder.  And I've never been poorer. I've never  worked at a job that was as valuable to  me as this mothering. I work around the  clock minding, teaching, cleaning, cooking,  dressing, diapering, feeding, bathing,  playing, organizing, transporting, nursing  and nurturing this child.  "I barely have enough money to pay my rent  and hydro and buy my groceries and  diapers. Having enough left over to pay a  babysitter so I am aMe to go out once in  a while is a luxury. And this money is not  given to me as a wage but as a charity.  Mothers' work, though it does have its  rewards, is extremely difficult. We get  almost no relief, no training, very little  support and must struggle to pay the living  expenses of our children as well as ourselves. We are dependent either upon a man  or the state when our children are young  and often live in abusive situations. Or,  in order to escape, we work away from home  as well as at home and wear ourselves out  in our youth. This is because our work is  not considered valuable enough to be worth  a wage. It is time we stopped quietly  accepting our exploitation and oppression."  Voluntary organizations, from churches to  community groups, from feminist collectives  to anti-poverty groups, from tenants rights  associations to anti-racist groups, from  prostitution rights groups to anti-nuclear  groups are often started by women and run  on women power for every need by that organization, from fundraising to floor washing.  Without voluntary work many organizations  could not function. Many hospitals are  serviced by volunteers and historically  women volunteered for war duty. Men were  paid for fighting for their country but  women were expected to give their time and  energy. Today the Ministry of Human  Resources is asking community groups, mostly Kinesis October '85   9  INTERNATIONAL  women, to pick up the slack for their cutbacks by giving time, energy and extra  money, through being cutback for the government's whims and toys.  Once a year, for one week, volunteers are  honoured by 'volunteer week' but the time  has to be given to ant acceptable cause in  an acceptable way. And if you happen to work  in a social service .setting as a volunteer,  it is expected that you will give of your  time and energy without complaint. It is  almost demanded, but seldom thanked.  It reminds me of a time last year when a  man, paid for a job I volunteered for,  complained that we didn't do our work  well, that we were not visible in the  community. He didn't see our work because  he was never out there, but he never took  into account that he was paid for doing  the work and we were not.  In agriculture, in all countries, women  work extremely hard for no pay. In Third  World countries in particular, the work  of children, especially girls, is a very  important part of the family's prosperity.  In Kenya, and many other African countries,  the women have up to eight children to  be used as a labour force by the rural  and urban areas, and as an income source.  It is a fact that the female children  work harder and longer hours than boys  do. After the girls are finished working  in the fields they are to work for long  hours in the home cleaning, cooking and  tending to their younger siblings. The  female children are trained at an early  age for their role in life.  In Bolivia, peasant women are not paid,  their work is not recognized. The men  are paid for their work but only in goods.  In Canada women who have put years into  farm labour for their husbands still  have a difficult time collecting their  due should the marriage break up. And is  she able to pay into and collect from the  pension plan? If ever the family unit  breaks up, the female has a very difficult if not impossible task to get the  courts to recognize her contribution to  the family's prosperity.  October 24, 1985 can be the beginning of  raising our voices to demand that our  respective governments recognize our work,  paid and unpaid. As Selma James stated  in Nairobi:  "Women are always counted on - as workers  in the home, in the factory and office,  in the fields, and as volunteers everywhere. But our work is never counted and  recognized, especially if it is unpaid.  Therefore we are demanding that governments acknowledge our economic contribution on an international level. We want  them to recognize how much we do. In the  process, we will see how much we have in  common as women and workers.  "Recognizing the economic value of all our  work can only mean putting more money,  services, technology, information, skills,  resources at.women's disposal, in women's  hands in every area of our lives and in  every area of the world. This is the  international recognition owing us and  which we have come to collect."  The women in Iceland held a "Women's Day  Off" rally, to celebrate the beginning of  the Decade of Women, on October 24, 1975 -  this day was chosen because it is also  the anniversary of the United Nations.  The women of Iceland, approximately  25,000 strong, took the day off work at  their paid job and at home. They met in  the town square and held a rally, the  country came to a standstill. The slogan  of the.day became 'when men stop work,  women work harder -when women stop work,  the whole country stops.' We must demand  to be paid for our work and that no  longer will we let it be made illegal or  invisible.  The Wages for Housework Campaign is organizing a celebration on October 24, 1985.  We are asking that groups join us in  organizing or decide collectively how  they will celebrate. If you do not belong  to a group, we think it is up to every  woman to decide what, where and how they  will take time off. Some groups are  having a film during the day and lunch  served, others are taking extra-  unscheduled coffee breaks at work, some  women are writing letters of protest,  others are organizing on their own theme.  WFH is organizing a rally and a speakout  in front of the old courthouse on Robson  at noon, and in the evening we will have  a celebration at Britannia cafeteria,  1661 Napier St., 7:30 p.m.  Please come and join us, let ui  what you plan to do on October  know  24, 1985.  "When men stop working  women work harder.  When women stop work  the whole country stops"—  Iceland Women's Strike slogan,  1975. 10 Kinesis October '85  LABOUR  Women's movement key to boycott success  by Jackie Ainsworth, Pat Davitt and Jean Rands  The boycott of Eaton's, called to support  the strike for a first contract, is over.  The strike, begun in December '84, was  settled, albeit unsatisfactorily, in May  '86 (see 'Strike Ends With Secret Sellout'  Kinesis,  September '85). There was some  confusion about the status of the boycott, but now the Canadian Labour Congress  (CLC) has made it official: as of Sept.  13, the boycott has ended.  The women's movement nation-wide took a  leading role in organizing and sustaining the boycott, and undertook some  innovative actions to promote it. The  major thrust of the boycott activities  was in Ontario, where the struck stores  were located.  In the first week of January, Organized  Working Women (O.W.W.) sponsored a conference in Toronto on affirmative action.  Present were two Retail, Wholesale and  Department Store Union (RWDSU) representatives, Geri Sheedy and Donna  Johansen. Both women worked in Dominion  stores but were on leave and working  full-time on the Eaton's strike and boycott.  There was a lot of discussion in the  conference workshops about the fact that  the boycott against Eaton's was floundering and that as women workers and  union members they should be doing something about it. That was on Saturday. On  Sunday, several strikers from the Toronto  stores were invited to attend. Their  presentations were described as moving  and inspiring.  The following Thursday there was a  meeting to form an ad hoc support group-  Women 's Strike Support Coalition (WSSC).  About thirty-five Toronto women's groups  made up the coalition, and they met  every Thursday until May to help with the  Eaton's boycott.  HE  >m$  Strife \  Eatons' striker Linda McFawn speaks at IWD rally outside  of Eatons, Pacific Centre.  The goal of the group was to make every  Canadian aware of the strike issues and  aware of the national boycott. Events  were aimed at getting media coverage,  both local and national. One member of  WSSC feels the group actually got quite  sophisticated in their planning:  "We figured out which days might be slow  news days and planned our events for  then. We were careful of our timing for  optimum news coverage. We made sure key  reporters were well informed and knew  in advance of our plans. We often held  press conferences before the event so  we would get coverage from two angles—  the conference and the action."  The group organized simultaneous rallies  on February 2 in Toronto, Ottawa, Sudbury, St. Catharine's, Hamilton and  London. Giant Eaton's account cards were  symbolically cut ijp and in Toronto supporters burst through the shopping mall  and closed down the store for about  twenty minutes. The rallies received some  of the first national media coverage  since the boycott had been announced in  early December. These were the first in a  series of rallies that were .held  each Saturday at different Eaton's  stores.  One particularly successful tactic was  writing our message on balloons rather  than leaflets. Out of a van in the mall  parking lot we would fill hundreds of  balloons with helium and write "Boycott  Eaton's" on them. Soon the mall would be  full of children with balloons tied to  their wrists while we alternately argued  with and fled from the mall's security  guards.  The Vancouver committee issued an invitation to the strikers which developed  into the national tour. As part of this  tour, two strikers came to Vancouver for  several days. They attended a Union  Sisters dinner, a Labour Council meeting  and other meetings organzied by local  unions and the Solidarity Coalition,  walked the Slade and Steward picket line,  and did several radio hot line shows.  Out of a van in the mall parking lot we would fill  hundreds of balloons with helium and write  "Boycott Eaton's" on them. Soon the mall would  be full of children with balloons tied to their  wrists.  The coalition organized a shower for one  of the women strikers, held outside the  downtown Eaton's Centre. They were  actively involved in the "March In"  from St. Catharine's, when strikers and  supporters from there marched into  Toronto and met up with Toronto strikers  and supporters for a wine and cheese  party and a rally at the Scarborough  Town Centre store. They helped organize  the "Candlelight Vigil" when strikers and  supporters held candles and sang songs  outside the family home of Frederick  Eaton. They helped distribute lawn signs  issued by the union which urged support  for the boycott.  And when it became clear that the Liberal Party would form the Ontario government, the coalition held a press conference to lobby for major changes to the  Labour Code, changes that would help new  organizing and strengthen picket lines.  There were dozens of meetings, leaflet-  tings and rallies, and one spectacular  event to celebrate International Women's  Day in Toronto. The IWD parade marched  into Eaton's main downtown store. Of the  10,000 marchers, upwards of 3,000 managed to crowd themselves in. Escalators  were jammed with protestors chanting  "Boycott Eatons", and thousands of  boycott stickers adorned mannequins and  counters.  On May 6, the day before the strike was  settled, the Women's Strike Support  Coalition held a fund-raiser at Massey  Hall hosted by June Callwood, and where  Margaret Atwood read a piece she had  composed especially for the occasion.  A short play written by Rick Salutin  about the Eaton's strikers was performed,  the Parachute Club and Sneezy Waters  sang, and commemorative posters of the  event were sold.  Here in Vancouver several women met regularly to organize similar kinds of activities. "Women Supporting the Eaton's  Strike" picketed and leafletted Eaton's  at Pacific Centre. In fact, we picketted  the downtown store the evening of December 1st, the first night of the strike!  As more and more local unions took on  picketting and leafletting, we moved our  activities to some suburban shopping  malls.  The highlight of their visit was the  International Women's Day march which  gathered in the plaza outside Eaton's for  a rally. Linda McFawn, a striker from  the Shoppers World store, spoke and cut  up many Eaton's account cards before a  crowd of almost two thousand onlookers  and protestors, and the TV cameras. The  Women's Conference of the B.C. Division  of the Canadian Union of Public  Employees (CUPE), which was going on over  the IWD weekend, adjourned to join the  rally in front of Eaton's and the IWD  marcn* fctSSt^jS  For many of these active union women,  this was their first participation in  an IWD event. And for IWD regulars it was  wonderful to be able to focus on a working women's strike on the day which  celebrates the history of working women's  struggles.  The campaign against Eaton's showed that  the women's movement in Canada is strong  enough to organize an effective boycott  in support of working women's strikes.  And the willingness of the Eaton's workers to. take militant action was an inspiration for the whole women's move-  PAINING &"EW  ^T/ONS  • COMMERCIAL           ''. '''  • RESIDENTIAL  • INTERIOR  • DRYWALL REPAIR  LEIGH THOMSON  .    2481 WILLIAM STREET  251-6516  VANCOUVER, B.C. V5K 2Y2  B.C.'s only unionized travel agency.  7Z7  TRAVEL UNLIMITED  ELLEN FRANK is October TO 11  LABOUR  by Wendy Frost  Since May 1984, the 76 members of Retail  Wholesale Union who are employed at Slade  L|||>tewart, wholesalers and distributors in  S^icouver, Penticton and Kamloops, have  :'■ -|||en locked out. The major bargaining issue  |P||p:".wages: against the union's final offer  Otfe a three year contract with 0% wage  --^^Ise in the first year followed by 5% and  16%, the company offered a two year contract  j;; sagph a 25c raise each year. Before the union  ' egjuld vote on this offer, the company locked !  f.^fem out.  Mter six months of picketing, during which  flll^icompany operated with scabs, the company  : *i^-opened negotiations and demanded $400,000  St^Liie off the union's last offer. The union  offered to take a wage rollback of $1.50  . sSfc hour which, together with other conces-  0yp|ims would have answered the company's demands. The company ignored this offer and  did not get back to the bargaining table  Ippbil April 1985. Their offer at that time  amounted to a totally new contract: wage  -.  Rollbacks, no pension plan, no job security,  and contracting out provisions. The union  refused this and have been picketing ever  OS  the thirty employees at the Vancouver  plant, 6, the office workers, are women.  What has it been like on the picket line  f^»/^he past nineteen months? Kinesis  ,'^p.ked to Gail Beau, Retail Whoesale Union  t'^pfal 580 shop steward, member of the  , S||;ot'iating Committee and a picket cap-  kp&£n at the Slade and Stewart picket line.  f||p§,'asked Gail about problems on the picket  IfJtlhe: "Before 1984 scabbing was not a way of  faffigotiating in British Columbia, but it is.  now. Never in our wildest imagination did  vm  expect to be scabbed. We just thought  you go on strike, you get locked out, the  " giiSors are locked. But this company decided  to  scab. They wrote letters to all their  customers saying 'really we're not having  any labour problems, it's just that we've  gone non-union'. So you're on the picket  TL^ie and suddenly there's these little office  llpadies coming in and doing your job at your  m&nputer. You feel very personal about your  -'^A.   Some of the men picketing were in the  last labour dispute here, which was in  :«53.* They walked the street then and they're  walking the street now. Some of the truck  Olivers have driven trucks for Slade & Stewart  . Illlfr thirty years and when they see some of  y^pose filthy scabs driving their truck and  f:|||phding the gears, it really hurts.  "We found out that the scabs had actually  '-|f|pen hired two weeks before the lockout, out  ^ a beer parlour on Main Street. They went  ^fSlepugh about 18 to 20 drivers before they  \||||t four that were disgusting enough. Terrible  /j|||pple who threatened our lives.  life on the  Slade and  Stewart picket line  ililband bought me an answering machine so  we never answered the phone before we heard  iHidVit was. The mentality was such that  there'd be these obscene messages on the  .^JSSwering machine."  ' ■Wmesi.8  asked Gail if this was a common  ^sqperience.  "Yes it was, particularly for those directly- involved with the dispute. Bricks  were thrown through windows. In Penticton  "',|j§$S^ilanded on one guy's kid's bed at  HU^ven o'clock at night but she was at a  ffriend's. So what would have happened if  "l&_£d been in...  ?^K^e were threats of violence on the  picket line, but there was also terrible  foul language used against me, being one  of the few women on the picket line. One  dgy the' American said something disgust-  L||j|jg";to me and one of the other pickets  s#id-"Fuck you". So he drove around the  *%Hpcte and came back and rolled down his  Window and said to Danny, 'Why don't you  fuck Gail, eveyone else has.' We're  )l||pl&iig about people I've workind with  '*0$r?$ten  years, but there was nothing I  could do about it, unless I wanted to hire  a lawyer and sue him.  "X can really relate to what's happening  with those women at the airport now  ($i.r Canada flight attendants on strike  "MrAugust and September) because I've  '^fen^hit by a car on the picket line. A  ;p|5i was hit by a car in Penticton so  •jba&Ly  that he had to be hospitalized.  Altogether I've witnessed three accidents  /i&£ the line because of scabs."  p&at about the experience of being a  |||||ari on the picket line?  "^Ciiere were no women in the plant. Of the  ssbmen in the office, we had one who just  iHhised to picket, she was above all  fctA. We had one who lived a way out of  town and there was no way she could afford  ||||jhire a babysitter so she could come and  -apllseft'. Daycare is so expensive. We had  one who was recovering from an operation,  ^raji-we; didn't have her for the first few  ia&uths."  .vSo that left three of us. With all different shifts we wouldn't necessarily De  there at the same time. We tried to work it  •^feso-that we were spread out. We didn't  |§§|n know the guys in the warehouse or the  |§§tick drivers that well, because our paths  'S^erL'crossed.  "ghat's what is going to be the hardest  tiling when this comes to an end: to say  i||fdbye to those guys. We're family.  We've worked in the same building before  and we're family now. It's very hard for  to&%r .They 're like my brothers now, you  i;|||||||- I'm not looking forward to that.  I'm not good at saying goodbye so I  •ggiik-T'll phone in sick on my last day.  "The-thing is, no one understands except  the people that are here. We've got some  ^i-^fts^who are running our union and the  longest dispute they've had is six  fnMkks. during one summer, and they say  tbey understand but they don't understand."  ^gstrike pay for picketers of $100/160 a  |||||k, the locked out union members have  been suffering serious financial hardship.  J||l§ever, many individual unions have  given financial support, and the issue  has received widespread publicity through  j pi§ support tactics of the Organization  ■ ^fe Unemployed Workers. As a result^ of., ^his,  and the union's tactic of picketing  Slade & Steward customer sites, and  l||lling for a consumer boycott of their  Ll^tbmers, the company's business has  p||unk to a mere two deliveries a week.  ■•J^p±'te this the company shows no signs  OJE- returning to the bargaining table, so  the Retail Wholesale picket line will be  _:.^H«at Slade and Stewart for "the for-  :-jMpible future".  Locked out at Slade and Stewart  Locked out at Slade and Stewart  Video by Mae Burrows, 1985, Vancouver.  -;||§§&y phoned the thirteen year old daughter  pplfa guy in Penticton and threatened to cut  Jher tits off and shove them up her ass. We  got a guy who worked here for over thirty  ;ye&rs who's got this rundown little farm in  ^aple Ridge. They phoned him up in the middle  of the night. First of all they told him  'they were going to get his wife. As she was  4i|.England at the time he said go ahead! But  ~tl^ey also told him they were going to burn  ;&|wn his barn and kill all his animals.  jfishey had an American security guard, I don't  lypw who he was, no one aid. Even Immigration  ||||re looking for him for some time. Immigratic  >^mild.come in and look for him and we knew  Si was hiding in the building but the company  -i|§ild deny it. There "would be a fracas on the  ' lllfiket line, the company would want to press  i||arges and we'd say to the police 'speak to  pip'American' and the company would immediately  &X0P  charges.  JmLl I know about him is that he drove a black  §§||u: by four and he followed me home. All I  |pp!d think of was 'how bloody scary'. I'd  llllplk out of my apartment and he'd be cruising  ^pi I'd be pretty scared. I had some rotten  ;|feOne calls, but I was quite lucky as my  I- had stopped by the Slade and Stewart picket line during the summer of 1984 and met  some of the locked out workers, who made a  strong impression on me. After talking to  them I saw now unfair their situation was.  Some, had worked at Slade and Stewart 30  years without a single labour dispute and  then, in the middle of negotiations, they  5?ejce locked out, just like that.  I didn't know much about the food  industry. I understand now that the Slade  and Stewart workers are invisible. The public sees teachers, garbage collectors, even  retail clerks in the food industry, but the  wholesale workers, who work night shifts or  in warehouses, are invisible. They have few  ways to tell the public about their working  piihditions.  There was more. Less than ten. days before  rkers had been locked out, the Social  Credit government brought in amendments to  the Labour Code which outlawed secondary  picketing; picketing at an employer's other,  and usually related, places of business.  The Socred amendment made it almost impossible for the workers to put any pressure  on the employer,.or for the public to learn  l§|put the lockout.  Afc* first the workers were shy and suspicious  bf. me, but when they realized the primary  purpose of the video was to tell their story,  they supported the project enthusiastically.  ^||.l"<3eau, one of the picket captains,  Spent many hours after her picket duty working in the editing room on the final edit.  The video is very pro-worker and shows the  |||ban<dide of being locked out. It shows  how the new labour laws aid the employer,  and also targets the role of the Organization of Unemployed Workers in their support  <^~the Slade and Stewart workers.  . Because of the government's changes to the  Labour Code, lockouts are becoming a way of  l|.£e in B.C. A ban on secondary picketing  is? a new weapon in the employers' arsenal  and makes it easier for employers to weaken  anions and roll back workers' hard won gains.  We must concern ourselves with this development and learn to resist its effects.  Locked out at Slade and Stewart  is important  because it tells the story of one lockout  sM  its devastating impact on the lives of  the 76 workers and their families. It is a  ||||al educational tool for unions, and  other groups concerned about the well-being  of B.C. workers.  Locked out at Slade and Stewart  is available  at the Retail Wholesale Union. 4371 Fraser  pll'eet, Vancouver. 12 Kinesis October '85  Nicaragua:  Taking food power to the people  by Isobel McDonald  "The logic of the majority", is the principle that the Sandinista government has  been following since 1979 when they were  faced with the massive task of planning  the reconstruction of the economy of their  war-torn, pillaged country in desperate  need of educational, medical and agriculture  al reforms. Not afraid to ask for the best «  advice from any source, the Ministry of  Planning in Managua invited Joseph Collins,  an American from the Institute for Food  and Development Policy, to join an advisory  panel of people with experience in agrarian  reform and food policy.  Joseph Collins, along with Frances Moore  Lappe (author of Diet for a Small Planet)  have revolutionized previous understandings  of why hunger exists. They have shown that  the hunger which affects more than half  of the earth's population is not a result  of over population or lack of fertile land.  Furthermore, no amount of foreign aid or  new technology can end hunger. They have  observed and documented (see: Food First:  Beyond the Myth of Scarcity,   Ballantine,  revised 1979) that the benefits of such  aid are monopolized by the elites who control  the economy and government. They've seen  it in India, Brazil, the Philippines and  jother countries claiming to be concerned  about the hungry. They've studied the  launching of costly aid-financed programs  to increase food production. Rather than  getting better, they've seen the hunger  get worse, because such governments  repress movements for change which would  re-distribute power over basic resources,  allowing people to feed themselves.  Collins and Lappe believe that for hunger  to be eliminated nothing less is required  than a fundamental shift in power from a  privileged elite to leadership accountable  to the majority. This means revolution, and  this is why Nicaragua, unlike the other  countries in Central America, is now on  the road to food self-sufficiency.  people were landless. Ninety percent of  the deaths of children under one year were  related to malnutrition. The most fertile  land was used to grow cash crops such as  sugar, cotton and coffee. Vast tracts of  land were used to graze beef cattle for  export, or were left entirely unproductive.  After the revolution, land abandoned by  the ruling Somoza family (about 23% of  the arable land) and the land of other  owners who decided to leave, was appropriated by the government. The land reforms  in 1979 and again in 1981 sought to provide  land for everyone who wanted to farm. In  a major social advance, women received  titles to their own land. By July 1984,  titles to over one-fifth of the nations'  farmland had been granted free of charge  to over 45,000 land-poor families. Since  January '85 there are over 3,000 land  co-operatives created by groups of peasants  who petitioned for the use of land for a  particular purpose. Once a claim is made,  credit is also granted to buy seeds, tools  and fertilizers. The theme of Nicaragua's  agrarian reform is "Idle land to working  hands". There is no ceiling on the amount  of land anyone can own, but the land must  be used. In Nicaragua, if you don't use  it, you lose it. No absentee landlords.  because Nicaragua is a country in war and  is now forced to spend more than 40% of its  annual budget on defense, ths slogan is  "Progress Under Fire."  Project workers have told OXFAM field  staff that Northern Nicaragua has the  largest number of vegetable gardens of  any region in the country. The agricultural  co-operatives there are the most highly  organized. That is why the Contras (U.S.  backed counter-revolutionary forces) have  made them a target and killed thousands of  If the destructive activity of the Contras  can be stopped, Nicaragua will certainly  achieve food self-sufficiency.  Prior to the insurrection, Nicaragua had  been one of the poorest countries in  Latin America. Sixty percent of the rural  To enhance the push to food self-sufficiency  the Sandinastas created PAN (means 'bread'  in Spanish, the national food institute.  PAN has a three part campaign:  •Each region will have several areas of  land irrigated and planted in vegetables  and fruit for local consumption. Distribution and sales will be handled by community  organizations like the National Women's  Organization.  •Large institutions in each city (hospitals,  office buildings, schools) will begin  their own gardens to grow produce for  their cafeteria kitchens; and,  •In each region about 1,000 families will  start backyard gardens assisted by agricultural technicians who will make home  visits.  Last year OXFAM-Canada launched a two-year  campaign to support PAN and food self-  sufficiency projects in Nicaragua. Known  as the "Let's Get Growing" campaign, over  $4,000 was raised in a door-to-door fund-  raising campaign in Kitsilano. This year,  people over the last four years. Many of  those killed were community leaders, those  working hardest to improve the conditions  of the poor majority. They were teachers,  health care workers and agricultural tech-  If the destructive activity of the Contras  can be stopped, Nicaragua will certainly  achieve food self-sufficiency, setting an  example for the hungry and concerned through  out the world.  OXFAM is continuing its efforts to help, too  On October 5th and 6th a film about Contra  activity in Nicaragua called The Dirty War  will be shown at the Planetarium and the  Brittania Centre. On October 21 and 22  door-to-door fundraising campaigns will take  place in the West and East sides of the  city. The money raised will be sent to  support food self-sufficiency projects in  Nicaragua. If you want to volunteer for  this campaign, put up posters, join the  door-to-door canvass, or help with phoning,  get in touch with Isobel McDonald or Joanne.  Walton at OXFAM, 736-7678. Kinesis October '85 13  by Wendy Solloway and Colleen Tillmyn Q  It is 1985, six years since Nicaragua's  Sandinista's toppled the Somoza dictator- J!  ship. Nicaragua continues to concentrate .5  much of its already scarce resources3 dn .fc  preventing the Central Intelligence Agency ^  backed contras from invading their country. 5  The contras, counter-revolutionaries com- «  prised almost entirely of former Somoza *  supporters, have concentrated on attacking J  Nicaragua's most vulnerable sectors in an q  effort to destroy support for the Sandinista .o  revolution. Contra forces target hospitals, o  schools, rural villages and communication a  centres. As part and parcel of these  efforts to spread terror contras systematically rape and murder innocent civilians.  Because of the contra threat many important  projects in the areas of health, education  and general social development have had to  be abandoned.  However, there are groups who are able to  continue valuable work with the backing  of the government and the support of organizers outside the country. One such  group is the union ATC (Association of  Rural Workers), and one of its projects  concerns the role of women in Nicaragua.  It is supported in part by OXFAM Canada  and AMNLAE, the national women's organization, also plays an integral part. We  were fortunate to have the opportunity to  talk with one of the coordinators, Olga  Maria, while we were in Nicaragua in early  1985.  This particular project is a five year  undertaking. Its focus is the improvement  of the lives of rural women. In keeping  with this concept, most of the women  involved in the project - Olga, for example  - are, or have been, agricultural workers  themselves.  The project emphasizes a grassroots  approach. For example, women go into the  countryside where the union has already  established a presence. In the beginning,  women from the project work alongside the  coffee or cotton pickers. In this way they  establish a working relationship with  the agricultural labourers in order to know  more intimately the day-to-day problems  that must be faced. As trust is built,  discussion with women about their problems  is facilitated and possible solutions  proposed.  Says Olga, "we know what the basic problems  are..'.For example machismo has a tremem-  dous effect on the development of women.  We want to confirm this with data. We know  the majority of women in the country are  heads of families...We want to know the  cause as well as the repercussions...as  women begin to analyse their own lives."  Following this stage, women from each ATC  centre are selected to be trained as investigators themselves within their communities. They are taught skills such as  reading and writing to analyse the data  collected; learning to express opinions and  teaching others to do the same; organizing;  developing leadership qualities, etc. The  priority is to find out what people are  feeling and work from there to discover  possibilities for practical change. This  is all undertaken with the awareness that  Project gives  rural women control  *•*  the ATC is an organization with the influence to support and enact its proposals.  The ATC plays a fundamental role in the  reconstruciton of Nicaragua. Since 1976  it has been crucial as a rallying point for  rural workers, the backbone of Nicaragua's  agriculturally-based economy. The ATC was  deeply involved in the revolutionary struggle  to overthrow Somoza. Because any organized  work in those days was accomplished under  the threat of death, they worked in secrecy.  Notwithstanding such conditions, the ATC  held its first National Assembly (underground)  in 1978. Now they are actively supported  by the Sandinista government.  Although conditions for many rural workers  are still poor, in the 1970's it was much  worse, especially for women. In those days  women's inferior status was reflected in  their lower wages. Now through guidelines,  established by the ATC, everyone receives,  for instance, the same wages for picking  the same amount of coffee. (This, of course,  does not take into account the fact that  after completing all her housework a woman  is perhaps not as capable of picking the  same amount of coffee as a man - this is  precisely what this project hopes to address),  One purpose of the women's project is to  gather statistics that demonstrate the need  for specific labour reform. ATC works  closely with the Ministry of Labour to  encourage the passage of laws beneficial  to rural workers. This project could  facilitate reforms that will directly  improve the quality of women's lives.  Another project goal is to take strong  .action towards changing the leadership  role of women within the union itself.  Currently women's representation in the ATC  is very low. One of Olga's hopes is that  women will develop confidence to speak out  and help other women to do the same.  Olga emphasized that the goals, structure  and strategy of this project did not come  out of a book, but are based on the personal  experiences of agricultural workers and  revolutionary fighters. However, research  efforts are limited by the Nicaraguan's  constant preoccupation with the defence of  their lives and their land. Contra attacks  demand that many field workers carry guns  on their backs as agricultural workers are  especially vulnerable.  In this light the project takes on a greater  sense of urgency. The living conditions in  Nicaragua, .as a whole, have improved for  most people. However, those who endure the  most hardship are often those living in  rural areas. Because there are so many men  leaving their homes, and work in the fields,  to fight in the army, the tasks of agricultural production and defense on the home  front have become the primary responsibility  of women. Improving the living conditions of  rural women is therefore an integral part  of the defense of Nicaragua's sovereignty.  That this project of ATC and AMNLAE is being  undertaken with such vision and grass-roots  consciousness is a living testimony to the  widespread feeling in Nicaragua that its  people will defend their country at all  costs and that the ordinary person makes up  the fundamental fabric of society. People  are allowed, and indeed encouraged, to  develop programs out of a sense of concern  for the quality of human life. Similarly,  organizations are supported in their attempts  to formulate concrete solutions to specific  problems. As Olga described this particular  project, "We want to improve the conditions  of rural life - principally women's lives -  in order to have the ability to exercise  our rights...to develop ourselves as persons.'  As vital as the project sounds, there are  many obstacles. Consider that roughly 60%  of rural workers are women. The 24 hour  childcare centres do not nearly meet the  demand. But until we, who live outside of  Nicaragua put pressure on our governments  to end the war, projects such as the rural  women's one will not have the opportunity  they deserve to carry out their worthwhile  and pressing mandates.  (To find out more about the project, contact  Colleen or Wendy through the  Kinesis office). 14 Kinesis October W  Two Stories  Food is the start of the struggle  by Janie Newton-Moss  Food has often played a vital role as  the starting point for women's political  participation in confrontations with the  state. In this article I will be considering the activities of two groups  of women who, though separated by some  forty years and thousands of miles,  _.;*-.  shared a common philosophy: take care  of the subsistence issues first.  In post-war South Africa Mack women  fought the introduction of that  country's pass laws which they knew  would have drastically altered their  traditional domestic power. In the  bitter year-long 1984 British coal  miner's strike, miners' wives organized  community-wide soup kitchens and in  the process many learned there was no  going back to their role as passive  homemakers.  In both these efforts the production  and control of food was a key strategy  women organized around.  The pass laws in South Africa have long  been a politcal rallying point for  Black South Africans. They are the most  hated symbol of the apartheid system.  Their introduction was intended to  ensure the mobility of black labour at  a time when South Africa's urban areas  were expanding. The system of migrant  labour paid no heed to the family unit.  Men living in labour camps formed the  migrant labour force. The pass laws  ensured that all men were regarded as  single. Women were left to assure the,  responsibilities previously associated  with the male provider.  In 1952 the South African Government  extended the pass laws to women. Their  resistance was overwhelming. Two reasons  suggest why they were prepared to confront the government at this.time.  Firstly, their work experience was  different from men's. In the 1950's  only a small percentage of women worked  in urban industries; the majority  worked as domestic servants. Their  labour power was equally as exploited  as men's, but their relationship with  their employer was based on close  .proximity rather than anonymity. The  introduction of the pass laws meant  that like men, women would be told  where and whom to work for.  Secondly, the women's grassroots  experience of organizing food queues  in some of the larger urban centres  had given them the opportunity to make  connections' with trade unions and  political parties whose interests  Went beyond the issue of food supplies.  The Communist Party (CP) was successful  in attracting women as members because  of its emphasis on issues that were of  fundamental importance to women in  their domestic capacities: the cost of  food, the right to brew beer and  lodger permits. The Communist Party,  along with trade unions, worked with  a national federation of local food  committees on the issue of food distribution.  For the Cape Town Women's Food Committee the starting point was ensuring  fairness in the queues which lined up  at the government-sponsored food vans  which sold basic foodstuffs. The  committee, which represented 59 '  queues, was effective in -pressuring  the government into maintaining the  vans. The committee later addressed  the question of the availability of  food and popular suffrage. In Johan  nesburg a similar group, together with  local CP members, led women in protest  raids on merchants suspected of hording  food.  The right to brew beer at home was the  incentive for women to organize in  Cato Manor, a shanty town in the city  ; of Durban, earmarked as an area for  white gentrification. Local officials  decided to use part of Cato Manor as  an emergency transit camp while work  was completed on the new African township, Kwa Mashu. Money was drawn from  the Native Revenue Account, an amalgamation of beer hall sales, to provide  sanitation improvements. Washing and  toilet facilities were installed and  shacks thinned out. Further changes  were made by demolishing overcrowded  dwellings while moving other shanty-  town occupants into the area.  In 1958 Kwa Mashu township was ready  for occupation. The authorities who  had themselves aggravated the problems  of overcrowding in Cato Manor now  turned to the pass laws as a solution  to residency claims in the new township. Those who could not prove residency status would be forced into rural  areas, single women being most at risk.  That year saw women taking out passes  in large numbers as well as an increase  in the number of marriages. Those without passes could, and did, have homes  and possessions destroyed. The guarantee of a new home in Kwa Mashu was not  done and three people were shot by police.  The year long British miners' strike which  ended in 1984 contradicted the generally  accepted image of miners' wives as being  against strikes, apolitical or downright  conservative. It was the women in the mining  communities who proved to be the backbone  of the strike. Women quickly realised that  they had to provide the basic essentials  to keep the strike going - money and food.  In State of Seige,  a publication about the  strike, the authors commented on the effect  the strike had on some women's lives. "It ■  is important to realise that the women's  creation of soup kitchens and the provision  of food is not merely an extension of their  role as housewives. Within their organisation,  domestic tasks once carried out individually  have now been colectivised. Women are not  cooking individual meals at home for their  families, but are spending days preparing, .  cooking and serving meals for the community ,  in addition to speaking at meetings and  raising money."  The soup kitchens were organised by elected  committees with regular weekly meetings,  tasks such as driving and public speaking  being allocated. Some money and food was  donated by trade unions, individuals and  local businesses. While some local merchants  were supportive of the strike, others donated from fears of being boycotted for not  being sympathetic. The kitchens were assembled quickly and a"Sspite their make-do basis,  managed to feed whole communities on a  shoestring.  We're just unpaid bottlewashers and cooks. I won't go back to staying  home after the strike—if 11 be different.  enough of an incentive for some to  want to move. It meant greater travel  time and expense to keep their jobs,  and it meant being more vulnerable to  official scrutiny than under the old  shanty town conditions of Cato Manor.  . A further example of interference was  in 1959 when the South African government  attempted to destroy illegal stills. This  was brought in under the guise of the  sanitation improvements and to prevent the  spread of typhoid through the unsupervised brewing of alcohol.  Two groups of women were affected by this  cleanup operation: women who ran shabeens  or underground beer halls and distilled  liquor for sale and homemakers who  traditionally brewed beer at home for  domestic consumption. Until 1959 they  had been permitted, under license, to  brew small amounts for their family. As  money for this cleanup campaign was  largely drawn from beer hall sales, this  restriction further usurped the homemakers  role as brewer. It meant a potential  loss of income as a disproportionate  amount of the family revenue could be  spent in the beer halls on a product that  cost a fraction of the price to make at  home. It further, ensured that socialising  among men would take place outside the  home and the women's role as hostess  was made superfluous.  For two weeks in June, 1959 women confronted the Durban Corporation and police.  Beer halls were picketed, attacked and  some burnt to the ground. The African  National Congress supported a boycott  of all drinking establishments. The  protest spread beyond the localised  destruction of beer halls and equipment  to a more generalised attack on municipal buildings and vehicles. Eventually  the rioting was' quelled but not before  extensive damage to property had been  In State of Seige,  one woman describes a  typical day:  There are about 20 women involved in our  soup kitchen.  Now we've got it running  properly we get about $500-$600 and food  each week in donations.   We also make up  food parcels - they take a lot of money.  I normally get up at 5 o 'clock and take-  my husband down to the strike centre.  If  I have a lot to do I stay up, but sometimes  I go back to bed until 7:30.  I get down  to the soup kitchen at 8:30 and leave at  about 2:30-3:00.  It's hard work but I  enjoy it.  I then go to work at 4:30 and  get home at 10:00.  The kitchens provided not only food but a  social meeting centre for strikers and their  families. They provided a vital lifeline  as well as a place for people to discuss  their common experiences. For many women  the strength of collective activity brought  into sharp contrast the isolation they had  experienced as homemakers. They were now  doing publically what for years they had  done privately. Many volunteered at kitchens  in addition to doing their own job.  Being here,  I see what women have to put  up with.   We 're just unpaid bottle washers  and cooks.  I won't go back to just staying  at home after the strike - it'll be  different.  I feel as though I want something totally separate from the home.  commented one woman to the authors of State  of- Seige.  It is too early to predict the longterm  effect on the women involved in supporting  the British miners' strike. These women  realised for the first time that they have  a role beyond unpaid 'bottle washing'. We  are, perhaps; nearer to seeing the results  of South African women organising. Recently  the South African government announced that  the pass laws would be revoked. It may be  the beginning of the dismantling of the  apartheid system. This articles appears in Kinesis courtesy of  the Food and Agricultural Organization, Rome.  Much of that work is done by women living  in rural areas. In the developing world,  where these women form 36% of the total  population, they produce most of the food  for domestic consumption. They process,  prepare and serve food to their families.  In some regions they also market what they  grow.  In addition, women raise families, and  manage and care for the household in general. Many of them provide the main or  only support for the family - in  some developing regions, a quarter to  half of rural households are permanently  or de facto headed by women.  Women as food providers  Women in rural areas grow at least 50% of  the world's food. They work in all aspects  of cultivation, including planting, thinning, weeding, applying fertilizer and  harvesting. In some parts of Africa, women  provide up to 90% of the rural food supply. In Pakistan about 50% of rural women  cultivate and harvest wheat; in Jordan,  60% of the women weed crops. Small animal  production for family or market is usually  women's work. In many countries they may  also be responsible for cattle.  Some tasks, especially seasonal ones such  as clearing and preparing land, may be  almost exclusively men's work, but even  this may have high rates of women's  participation.  In areas with high rates of private land  ownership - Latin America, parts of Southeast Asia, North Africa, and the Middle  East - women form up to 40% of the hired  labour. They are usually paid less than  Women farmers often use few or no modern  tools or implements. Crop production using  more modern methods, such- as machinery  and artificial fertilizer, tends to have  higher rates of male participation. Similarly, women in fishing communities generally do not use boats or have access to  modern fishing gear.  Throughout the developing world, women  process foods, especially for family con-  The contribution of women  to society is not relected  in their status.  sumption with few or no modern aids.  Typical work is cleaning, threshing and  grinding grains or drying fish; and making  cheeses or yoghurt.  In some areas, the village women will  share these tasks. Even so, it can take  hours to process grains for cooking: women  in Senegal, for example, may spend four  hours every day grinding millet for  couscous.  Considerable reliance may be placed on  women for processing food exports and  cash crops. In Rwanda, women are responsible for drying the coffee beans, one of  the most important operations. In parts of  coastal India, women constitute the  major part of the labour force preparing  and packing shrimp for export.  In most cultures, women prepare the food  consumed in the home. In addition to cooking, this can include gathering fuelwood  and collecting water. In dry or semi-arid  Overlooking  Women's work  areas of the world, or where forests are  depleted, this may involve trekking  several miles each day carrying heavy  loads. In some areas of central Tanzania,  for example, meeting the minimal house-  . hold needs for fuelwood may take up to  the equivalent of 300 days.  In West Africa up to 80% of the Labour  force in all trade is female; in Ghana,  97% of fish traders are women. In South  and Southeast Asia, women are also  active in trading. In some Indian markets,  women conduct all trade in fish. In general, the participation of women in  marke'ting is greatest where trade is  traditional and is not highly commercialized or industrialized.  Women combine agricultural activities  with childcare or housework, often doing  both simultaneously. For example, a  woman in Africa or Asia may carry one  child and be accompanied by others as  she cultivates (and/or collects water  or firewood). This kind of work can begin  at an early age in some countries. In  one province of Zaire, girls between 10  and 14 years old do 55% as much work as  adult women.  Because of the long day worked by most  women, serious strains may arise in the  family if their work load increases for  any reason. In agriculture, increases  are usually related to crop seasons. A  study in Burkina Faso by the Internationa!  Labour Organization (ILO) showed that  family nutrition deteriorated during  the rainy season, because adult women  were too tired to cook after working on  the land.  The contribution of women to society is  not reflected in their status. Female-  headed households are disproportionately  represented among the rural poor. Women  have little access to education. More  adult women than men in the developing  world are illiterate (68% as compared to  48%). They are far less likely to have  attended schools - in South Asia, half  as many girls as boys aged 12 to.17  attend school.  Moreover, while women produce much of the  food in the developing world, they are  more likely to be malnourished than men.  Women in many rural societies eat a smaller percentage of food than they need than  do men. Girls and pregnant and lactating  women suffer significantly higher rates  of malnutrition.  Kinesis October *85 15  When food is scarce, such as just before  harvest, the workload.of women may increase  without a corresponding increase in food.  This can lead to serious weight losses  in pregnant women and nursing mothers.  The access of children to food parallels  that in the adult world.  Food distribution within the family may  reflect the view that men are more valuable to its economic well-being. Families  may be more willing to invest resources  in sons because the parents' financial  security in old age could depend on them.  In many societies, men eat first while  women and children take what remains.  Changing developmental  attitudes on rural women  In the past, development assistance in  agriculture has often failed to reach  women. There are two main reasons for  this:  New methods and machinery have been made  available mainly to men; often they apply  only to male tasks, such as ploughing. Or,  if mechanization is introduced for a female  task, it becomes men's work - as has happened with the introduction of mechanized  rice milling in Indonesia.  Men either re-invest cash earned from sale  of their crops to increase productivity or  use it to buy personal items such as radios  or bicycles. Improvements in their income  need not, therefore, increase the amount or  quality of food available to their families.  Women, on the other hand, earn little or  no cash from their farming, but what they  If mechanization is introduced  for a female task  it becomes men's work.  grow tends to be used for family consumption.  Furthermore, what income they may earn is  also generally spent on the family, including  the purchase of food.  New agricultural methods and machinery may  lighten the work of the men, but it can mean  more work for women. One irrigation/settlement project in Kenya assumed that men were  the target group, even though traditional  rainfed agriculture was women's work. The  mechanization of land preparation relieved  men of much hard labour, but introduction  of irrigation increased the workload of the  Previously, decisions on disposal of the  crops together with proceeds from sales had  rested with the women. In the project, proceeds from the sale of crops went to the  household head and the womenj other than  those recognized as household heads, lost,  control over their earnings.  Changes in land tenure can greatly affect  the status of women. Traditional systems  often allowed them to use land to grow  food for themselves, their children, spouses  and extended family, without recourse to  formal land ownership. Some land reform programmes, however, have conferred title to  the land on individual men. Women may no  longer have access to it. At the same time,  the new owner may decide to sell rather than  cultivate the land, taking it out of use for  producing food for local consumption.  Extension training may neglect women even  in areas where they do much of the work.  Cultural attitudes may discourage contact  between women and male extension agents.  Agricultural development programmes that have  included women have not always allowed for  their roles as parents and home-makers.  Development continued p. 20 16 Kinesis October '85   by Jeannie Lochrie and Marrianne van Loon  Jeannie:  I first discovered I had  Candida when I had a seizure in the  middle of the night. Immediately I had  severe reactions to my diet, couldn't  walk much. For instance, walking to the  kitchen to make tea would totally exhaust me. Climbing stairs was like  climbing a mountain. I had gas, bloating,  constipation/diarrhea, nausea, night  sweats and incredible muscle and eye  pain. Also, PMS was a big problem for  me.. My cycle stopped twice, causing me  unbelievable pain.  So, lucky for me, my doctor was up on  Candida. This is rare as I've come to  realize. He was excellent at predicting  my symptoms. He referred me to a Candida  specialist, who told me I'd get cancer  of the colon if I didn't follow his  regime. I never went back. Instead I  went to a naturopath, had colonics,  took Taheebo concentrate, garlic pills,  and acidophilus in a soya base.  Isis:   I only decided I had Candida  recently. I'd been having recurrent  vaginal infections for several years,  and also had digestive problems-gas,  Attack of  1 the killer  Indeed I proved to be allergic to all  kinds of stuff-all my favourite foods  ihcluded-but even so, the possibility -  of Candida was not mentioned- One day  at work a co-worker was asking me  about my poor health and told me to  talk to Jeannie. And that was it-  we both immediately suspected Candida,  and I started doing some research. It  all fit-my chronic vaginal infections,  digestive problems, extreme reactions  to certain food, cigarettes and  other chemicals. I went back to the  clinical ecologist and said, "I  think I have Candida." So we started  treating it.  Walking to the  kitchen to make  tea would totally  exhaust me.  anxiety attacks, which would come and  go. At the time it didn't strike me  that, in particular, the vaginal and  digestive symptoms often happened  together. When I did ask my doctor  about it, she said it was not possible  that they were related. So I forgot  about the connection, and things slowly  got worse.  Every once in a while, when I was  having an 'attack' I would go and see  a different doctor. But after examining  me and doing parasite, blood and stool  tests they all wanted to do barium  x-rays. At that.point I would walk  out and say to myself, "I'd rather  live with this than subject myself  to that." Finally, after about three  years, my doctor at the time referred  me to a clinical ecologist to check  out the possibility of food allergies.  J:  Listening to you Isis, makes me  remember more of my own symptoms.  Especially the psychological pain.  First, I just couldn't accept I had  Candida because the doctors and what  little reading matter I could find  on the subject said it would.take two  to three years for me to get better.  Well, they were right, but that was  the worst part of my diagnosis,  knowing it would take so long to  heal.  J: Sometimes I'm still not sure what  is wrong with me—is it really Candida?  And trying to adjust my whole lifestyle to get better is rough. I have  always been pretty careful about  nutrition, since I became anorexic  at 17, and I still can't figure out  why me?  J:  Yeah, I have to eat stuff I've  always had to force into me-like  raw vegetables and salad. No starch,  or very little, is a big part of the  Candida diet. No yeast, no bread, no  alcohol, no sugar (in any form), no  fruit, no fruit juices. Going to a  brunch or a party can be a major  stress for me. You can't eat like  "normal" people. Can't drink alcohol  either' What you don't need is this  added stress.  Let's not forget the stress of the  expense that Candida brings with it.  Having Candida is very costly. After  my seizure, I was unable to work for  nearly a year and a half, yet I had  incredible medical expenses. Alternative  treatment, which, I think, is the only  way to go, costs money. Lots of it.  It's not covered by medical insurance.  This economic stress is a heavy burden  that you just don't need, but have to  deal with. Being sick becomes political-  you need money to get cured, and most  women just don't have it. I was very  lucky in that I had free rent for the  time I was sick, or else I would not have  known how to cope.  I:   I resent the amount of money I am  spending too-seeing healers, buying  drugs such as nystatin, vitamins,  acidophilus capsules, organic foods.  I just can't eat most cheap food like  wheat or dairy. And Candida is more  prevalent among women, who, as we all  know, have less money as a rule. It's  really problematic. Also, women are  often dismissed as hypochondriacs or  told their disease is psychosomatic  when, in fact, there is. something  going on.  J:  You have to go to a doctor or healer  jaho is up on Candida. Many aren't. And,  Candida is intimately connected to the  female hormone cycle. Mine stopped  twice in a matter of months; I thought  my body was falling apart, yet my G.P.  who diagnosed me with Candida said,  "Oh, I think your hormones must be  affected." That's too bad kind of a  thing. Then I read Orion Truss' book,  The Missing Diagnosis.  He's the Candida  theorist, and he says that, in the  presence of progesterone, Candida grows,  or, in his words, "is a potent stimulus  to yeast growth." So a woman could feel  really rotten around her cycle because  of Candida, yet this goes unrecognized  and she feels, or is made to feel,  fJgK&-$r4EPKR fl/RMi^RE DEV6/0  250   MORTHERW   ME.  VANCOUVER, g.c.  669-7523  732~3lo3  VANCOUVER STATUS OF WOMEN  FALL PROGRAMS  Consciousness raising/study group  begins October 15, at VSW, 7:30pm  Nairobi conference report  October 28, Britannia Centre, Seniors Room 7:30pm  Lesbian rights  October 30, Britannia Centre, Family Activity Room, 7:30pm  What are you hearing?  November 18, Britannia Centre, Family Activity Room, 7:30pm  Legal information on divorce and separation  November 21, 7:30pm, location TBA  873-1427 Women's support group information evening  400A West 5th Ave.       November28, 7:30, location TBA  yeast I  neurotic. When I read Truss' book, my  PMS symptoms made sense; sometimes I  feel like I'm in a nightmare when I'm  ovulating: I have severe symptoms of  Candida, yet I'm watching my diet and  so on. It's the progesterone I tell  myself. In a few days everything will  be back to normal. I can suffer a few  days of utter exhaustion, nausea, and  muscle pain. Thank god that these  periods, if you'll pardon the pun,  are becoming less and less, but I  never know when I'll have a severe  menstruation, though.  Sometimes I feel like I'm in a  nightmare when I'm ovulating:  I have severe symptoms of  Candida, yet I'm watching my  diet and so on. '  Looking back at my own medical history,  I can see now that my period was  affected greatly by my Candida. In  fact, at the onset of puberty I got  very sick with which I now believe to  be Candida. Severe cramping in my  bowels, and agonizing periods. I had  recurrent viral infections which were  treated by antibiotics which started  the viscious cycle that kept the  Candida growing. (Candida results from  repeated exposure to antibiotics in  some people; also birth-control pills.  These drugs kill the organism which  keeps the yeast in check.) In fact,  I kept taking antibiotics till I was  in my mid-twenties for infections  which occurred at least three times  Anyway, when I was 17, a doctor gave  me shock treatments to resolve the  resultant depression and anxiety I  feit around my declining health. This,  Orion Truss says is a very common pattern for young girls with undiagnosed  Candida. It's assumed that you are  hysterical, so they try to shock you  out of your 'neurosis.' So, what  happens to a typical woman with  Candida is misdiagnosis which eventually  results in an impaired immune system,  (IS). That's what Candida is, a symptom  of immune system deficiency. When your  immune system is depressed, you can get  any number of diseases: Candida is one  such disorder.   Kinesis October "85 17  I:   So, it is very frightening. For awhile  I was having a lot of bad dreams and  waking up in the night-my sleeping self  afraid of cancer. Now I've decided I  have to use that fear in a more positive way, to strengthen my resolve to  get rid of the yeast-the Candida. I  try to stick to the diet closely, do  lots of vitamins, and visualization.  I refuse to take on too much-trying  to reduce stress, and am learning to be  more peaceful in myself. And Jeannie  already had a support group going-  we're trying to start having regular  potlucks where we can talk, and-this  is real pleasure-not having to worry  about whether we can eat the food.  I:  That's another frightening thing  about Candida. None of the research  I've come across links it definitively  with cancer, but there's lots of speculation. And maybe even with AIDS too.  When your IS isn't functioning well, you  can't fight off diseases.  J:  What I've read is that if you treat  the Candida, the AIDS symptoms disappear. (See The Yeast Connection  by  William Crook.) And, if you don't treat  the Candida, Truss thinks anyone of  these four diseases can occur: colon  cancer, leukemia, M.S., schizophrenia.  J:.  I agree, you have to take incredibly  good care of your total and whole self-  Body, Mind and Spirit must be nurtured.  I don't find it easy; I'd rather take  care of everyone else first. But, you  have no choice. Exercise is also very  important. And support. Hearing.from  other Candida sufferers and sharing  information is healing power. Because  of the financial cost, the psychological  wear and tear, support is crucial to  getting well.  Note: If anyone wants information about  Candida contact Jeannie or Isis at  V.S.W.   873-1427.  Candida albicans: the fungus among us  by Jackie Goodwin  Candida albicans lives in all of us. It is  part of the body's normal flora and in most  people it is kept in control by other,  friendly bacteria. Candida is one of many  species of yeast, albicans has the ability  to live in warm blooded bodies, (unlike  brewer's yeast) and it has the ability to  change its shape into hard edged arrows  that lodge in the cells of the mucous membranes. When someone's bacterial balance is  changed slightly, for example by taking  antibiotics, the result can be vaginal  discharge, thrush (oral candidiasis) or  intestinal upset. In severe cases the yeast  enters the blood stream and travels to the  heart, lungs and brain where it can cause  deadly blood poisoning. A health problem  occurs when one individual immune system  cannot deal with a particular strain of  Candida. Candida appears to upset the  function of organs rather than damaging  the organs themselves, so successful treatment and a return to health is possible.  mold family and can produce cross sensitivity to other molds and fungi. It thrives  on carbohydrates and sugars.  Researchers are developing various theories  of how condidiasis affects the human body.  One study is looking at the connection  between AIDS and Candida. Candida is an  opportunistic organism and AIDS patients  develop candidiasis because their immune  systems are not working. Reports from  Michigan Technological University show a  relationship between Candida albicans and  certain strains of staphylococcus. The two  infectious agents seem to help each other;  staph grows inside colonies of Candida, and  the yeast protects the bacteria and encourages its growth. One suggestion is  related problems the acetaldehyde, which  is toxic, does not oxidize, and the body  is overloaded with the poison. These  studies are not conclusive. They have not  been proven in laboratories or in studies,  and are still only theories. Doctors working with candidiasis are treating their  patients, but not doing scientific studies  using control groups, placebos,, and double  blind experimentation because they say their  treatments work and the purpose of their  work is to make people well not to satisfy some scientific criteria. Two doctors  have written books, The Missing Diagnosis  by Orian Truss, and The Yeast Connection  by William Crook.  Some possible symptoms of reaction to  Candida albicans are gastrointestinal  Candida is a member of the mold family and can produce cross sensitivity  to other molds and fungi. It thrives on carbohydrates and sugars.  Reports indicate that people become ill  with Candida problems after taking certain  drugs, antibiotics, oral contraceptives,  (which alter the body's hormone balance and  stimulate yeast growth), and cortisone (which  suppresses the immune system's ability to  fight the yeast) . Candida is a member of the  that this relationship could be important  in the incidence to toxic shock syndrome.  Candida reactions seem to work this way:  yeast changes carbohydrates into alcohol.  This is the fermentation process. In a  normal situation when intestinal flora  form small amounts of alcohol, the body  immediately oxidizes it into-acetaldehyde  (the precursor to ethyl alcohol) and then  into safe compounds. In people with yeast  problems, allergic symptoms including  asthma and skin rashes, hormonal blockages  and menstrual irregularities, abnormal perspiration, night blindness, low blood pressure, chronic constipation, an appearance  of drunkeness (when no alcohol is consumed),  as well as an exageration of symptoms of  other existing diseases and conditions  not necessarily related to Candida sensitivity (like arthritis or multiple  sclerosis). 18 Kinesis October '85  I  £a  CM few futm*  by Sandy Friedman  In our society, many of us learn to use  food as a way to deal with the world. For  us, food becomes a substance-related  problem or addiction. When we use food consistently for purposes other than the satiation of physiological hunger, we develop  an eating disorder. Roughly 72% of the female  population is affected by some form of  eating disorder. Fifty-two percent of  this number are compulsive eaters who gain  weight, 25% are bulimic - that is, women  who eat compulsively or binge and use  various means such as vomiting, laxatives,  fasting and/or intensive exercise to not  gain weight, and 2% are anorexic - women  who obsess about food but starve.  This creates a paradox, for  while mothering is a value,  the nurturing body is not.  Throughout history, the female body has  been an object of admiration and desire.  It is not the concept of femaleness that  has been admired but rather the external  shape of the body in terms of how well it  fits into the current ideals. The pursuit  of "beauty" has led women to submit to  mutilations in order to alter our natural  physique. Corsets and waist cinches  caused fainting, rib fractures and permanent  distortions of the respiratory system yet  remained in vogue for generations. In the  50's, breast worship gave rise to breast  implants and silicone injections. Face  lifts, tummy tucks and nose jobs still  contribute to the illusion of youth.  In the early 70's Twiggy replaced Elizabeth  Taylor as the "most beautiful woman in the  world" and the quest for thinness began,  accompanied by an extreme distaste for fat.  The prejudice against people who are fat  has created the single greatest cause of  self-hatred in our culture. It is a self-  by Bridget Rivers Moore  Women's hunger knot is tangled and complex  and has not yet been taken seriously, much  less understood. It contains socio, cultural and psycological as well as literal and  symbolic aspects. How they interact is not  always clear but they add up to an obsessive relationship with food and our bodies.  I have recently read two excellent books  that begin to grapple seriously with the  question of women's distorted relationship  to food, body size and shape. Kim Chernin  is the author of both. In The Obsession,  Reflections on the Tyranny of Slenderness,  she begins a study of the social significance and origins of eating disorders among  women. She recognizes them as a cultural  phenomenon, and asks the question: why  now? citing the following developments  which all took place in the sixties.  hatred that breeds an endless variety of  other emotional disorders and that feeds a  multibillion dollar, industry dedicated to  providing quick but ineffectual solutions.  Societal and cultural values and attitudes  towards women and towards body size play  a large part in the creation and perpetuation  of bulimia and anorexia nervosa, and in the  psychological stresses of obesity. While  a man will receive his sense of self-worth  from what he does occupationally, a woman  is defined by the kind of care-taking or  mothering that she does, and by how she  looks. This creates a paradox, for while  mothering is a value, the nurturing body  is not. Pushed to its extreme, that is,  anorexia nervosa, mothering is biologically  impossible due to the loss of the menstrual  function.  When a woman's sense of self-esteem is  attached to the status of the man that she  attaches herself to, to be marketable means  to be thin. If she is achievement oriented,  then part of that achievement is measured  in terms of thinness. Many professions such  as media work, dance and airline service  have thinness built into the job prerequisites, and while it is not written, who  has seen a fat executive? Where thin and  good become synonymous, much time and  energy is spent on external appearance. And  this external fixation becomes an obsession.  Food and fat serve many functions and are  expressions of many things. Difficult  feelings such as anxiety, loneliness,  sexuality and anger are dealt with through  the^'se of food. For the woman who eats and  gains weight, the feelings are stuffed down  and deadened. For the bulimic, the food is  used so that the feelings can /oe purged by  vomiting or through the use of laxatives.  For the anorexic, the starvation provides the  semblance of control. Food provides a sense  Eating Disorders continued page 22  by Maura Volante  In grade five I noticed that I was the  second fattest kid in the class, and  panicked. Up until this time I was both  thinner and less aware of the difference.  My parents are both on the round side,  though not what I would now call fat, and  they had never given me negative messages  about my body. I am grateful for that  early period of self-acceptance, reinforced  by my family. I'm sure it helped me get  through to self-acceptance as an adult.  The weight that you are is determined internally, and is called your "set-point".  This is how much your body says its'  supposed to weigh.  Your natural set-point  is determined by heredity... fat cells are  places where energy is stored away for  emergency situations,   like starvation.  If  you came from a gene pool where starvation situations occurred,   then you inherited this survival mechanism.  How much  of this survival mechanism you 've got  also depends on your gene pool.  The more  times a population experienced famine,  the more the thin people kept dying out  of that group. ^  But there were many years in between, ot  experiencing myself as ugly, under-valued,  unable to measure up to society's standard  of, not just beauty, but basic worth.  Eight groups of children were asked to  rate seven photos of other children, as  to who they would most want to be friends  with, and who they would least want to be  frineds with.  Seven of the eight groups  put the fat child last...Doctors,  nurses,  thereapists,  and teachers all rated the  fat child last, g  I learned to sew at an early age in order  to have cheap clothes that fit, but when  jeans were the rule I would squeeze myself  into the largest available size (36) and  pray I wouldn't get fatter. Its crazy-  making for young women to grow up even  medium-sized, because the media and the  clothing industry provide images and  clothes only for the low end of women's  size, range.  If I, kn my present non-fat body, have a  hard time finding clothes, imagine the  difficulty for those who weigh two and  three hundred pounds. Many can't even find  wmmtmfsi  1. Marilyn Monroe's voluptuous curves,  the ideal of feminine beauty in the  fifties, gave way to the lean lines of  Twiggy, and now Brooke Shields (with  her adolescent body dressed in men's  clothing).  2. Anorexia nervosa and bulimia were  named and became known.  3. The diet industry was created.  4. The feminist movement was (re)born,  asserting women's right to freedom,  develpment and power.  Chernin argues that in response to a new  understanding of female subordination in  our society, women have taken both divergent paths: feminists have embraced  the possibility of new female power, turning their energies to direct protest  against the dominant male culture; while  another segment of women has rejected  that possibility and accepted the status  quo women's role. These women have turned  inwards and are dieting to fit themselves  to the prescribed image.  Chernin points out that "A woman who  enters the women's reduction movement has  allowed her culture to persuade her that  significant relief from her personal and  cultural dilemma is to be found in the  reduction of her body. Thus, her decision,  although she may not be aware of it, enters  the domain of the body politic and becomes  a political act."- Both groups are involved  in a struggle for change, and both work  for that change in the context of a support group of only women.  Anorexia, says Chernin, is a "symbolic  illness...expressing cultural conflict...  it speaks exactly the same protest being  spoken by the women's liberation movement.  Feminists...in an outspoken gesture of re-  ' fusal to comply with the conventional expectations for a women in this culture,  take off their bras. The anorexic girl  starves herself instead, so that she does  not develop breasts that would require  the bra."  This is the reason one in a hundred teenage girls in this country is anorexic. How  could we expect that young girls would embrace the developing curves that identify  them as part of a gender their society despises? It is painfully logical that female  children, unhappy with what they see as  their fate but lacking the power to change  it or even to protest directly, should  assert their wills and express their anger  through violence against their own bodies.  Here is one anorexic girl's description  of her mother's life: "to be a nothing, to  be devoted to a husband, to be devoted to  clothes in a large-size shop, which for me  was a^7ays the threat of ultimate failure.  "If yB get any fatter you'll have to shop  at PeiBJLngti  But I d?  Issgjfet fatter, in dijMct  proportion  to the effBjt I put out iMHieting.- I and  all my friendisvworried_Q^nstantly about  our weigh^^^^^^^Ter^^^jae a really skinny  friend ^Bld chlllsfcse herself for eating,  I wouldjjtake on all her guilt and my own,  becauj I supposedly had even less right  to e^Wthan shi  After awhile I stopped dieting but I continued to feel weak and unhappy about being  "overweight". Although I still binged on  sugar and felt insecure about forming re-  ionships, I see now that to "give up"  was a step in the right direc-  ion?  maintain a normal  t accept some degree of  '   %ed appetite as a way  My v^ght wasATike a yo-yo all through my  teerM   with tab most drastic weight  loss  gettBng me doBa to 130 lbs.,   into my  broker's  32 Bach jeans and onto  the  stage  forBhe leadiBVrole  in a high school play^  It attso got mewery sick,   wit^fe'onsillitis^S  flu Bud penicilJH|^.reactioa|»rc 's no wonder  I waB a little rUjj^OTm*1^tier  three months  of mBirecal and bMck tea.   I gained weight  so rBidly that bBythe time of  the perfor-  mancMthe directoMinsisted  that  I girdle  myse]B from shoujBer  to knee.  To ftwr bjMJ&^bhere is no differ&^^oe-  £wet§^a§jppES? and starvation, ^^^^^^^^^fe  efiAB^TeaeTz has on your sys B^|'  fi^course  I didn't know then that l|ie diets  AT endured were doomed  to failure.   The  fATt ^  ■hat  99% of all  diets fail  in the  longMac^  Lis  carefully hidden by the diet  indu^^   Bk  to protect  a booming market.  And^^prourse  ■be diet  industry is another armpot  the  Bttstic food  industry that convinces  clB^dren from the  time  they  caraBjto  in  froBWpf a TV that  sugar will maTSByiem  ^happ^»^  her childrenfcbut without a life of heBk  own." Does it ifct make sense that this f|  girl  should refuBWto become a woman?      1  Chernin also pointsBkit  that  it  is a  "carBV  inal  assumption" thal^^ccess weight  is a   1  health problem.  A four^kn-year study at  Northwestern University ^ke  of many examples cited)   found  that peBfcle who were  24-38 percent  overweight,   accikding to  the  charts,   had the lowest mortality^fcU^e.  "Medical  studies  suggesting the  dange^of  fat have been done  on people who are eS^^  dieting,   or  thinking they ought  to be       ^^k  dieting,   or hating themselves  for not  dieting.   There is no clear  information:  are the high blood pressure,   the  choles-       A  teroled  arteries,   the heart  disease,   the    ^P  kidney failures  due to being fat,   or are    TM  they due  to the  stresses  of living a  Many women are healthy  until they diet, and  malnourishment does not  Living^fiSfcLand  who  showed'SSine,  are incredil  beautiful  anc  a desire for  alized at thad  CaliBVnia with lesbians  theirBVakedness,   that we  ied  IMour bodies and all  luable,Bl broke  through to  te dra^Acring pants.   I re-  oint tlBt  if   I could wear  white   (so unjAVtteringBy dear!)  on my big  ■|ttjmjthen^l|pQst  feel okay about  it being  Fat women Bho stop diATing and start accepting an|| enjoying fteir own bodies sometimes loseBtfeight ancBfcometimes gain it before reaclB^tefeheir a«dic set point. I  lost weiflBt. stS>ilizingT^ife size that I  don't coKider fat, W^^^^^^M-S still regarded as  "overweight" by^soSl^te^i standards  ^Riough I didn't know it  in 1976 when|||^pent  ktime  in California,  my self-acceptance:i*j||te  pdue,   in large part,   to  the work of  fat  liberation feminists,  who had already begu^  to encourage an end to dieting and an  accep'taBa^>f our bodies.        ^x^iSfe  When I became: a;1  Lreof  fa  studiously avoided, the sufyject whil  playing i  tion, I  dis-  liberal tdleTsmce to fat    .nto it. I w^y discovering health i  bring health.  persecuted, hated life, and undergoing  frequent and prolonged periods of starvation?" (from Fat Women and Women's Fear  of Fat  by Lynn Mabel-Lois and Aldebaran)  Many women are healthy until they diet,  and malnourishment does not bring health  so the compulsion to be thin should not be  misconstrued as concern for health.  Chernin says: "In this era when inflation  has assumed alarming proportions and  the threat of nuclear war has become a  serious danger, when violent crime is on  the increase and unemployment a persistant  social fact, 500 people are asked by^th^AV  pollsters what thAf fear most in the world  and 190 answer t«t their gre^fiit i^K is  'getting fat.'"Mr  In another boAY, The Hu\i&x>y^£>elf—Women,  ^Eating^and Identity  ChefiM^Ppoints out  that eax^^disorders usually being at a  developmental turnij^^point in a woman's  l^K. She sees manATaisorders as a response  tcBthe mother/dauAYter separation struggle,  thlBv>st litera3^pxample being when the  daughter first^Aeaves her parental home.  In colleges ^'^horexia and bulemia have in  some instjAWs been brought out of their  secret sjAKeful closets to take on a  "collecty7e ceremonial meaning". A student  says.^'WeF(sorority members) go out together  ^and ^Kd $30 on food, knowing all the time  we'll throw it up. If we're somewhere with  only one bathroom we take turns throwing  up, but if there are stalls we do it at t  the same time."  Chernin sees that "in the absence of meaningful ceremonies of passage, women will  be driven to evolve compulsive and obess-  ive equivalents to these ancient social  rites—and for the same purpose, precisely, of guiding themselves through the  developmental transition so that they can  move into culture...This behaviour with  its dietary prohibitions, its female  bonding, its exclusion of the opposite  sex, its instruction of older by younger  women...has the serious intention to make  ceremony out of daily life and to restore  to the mundane surface of the contemporary world the collective depth of the  Obsession continued page 26  foods, and I judged some fat liberationists  at the Michigan Women's Music Festival in  1977 for eating hamburgers in town. I disbelieved their claims that fat people eat  (on an average) no more than thin people.  When food intakes of obese individuals  were accurately assessed and compared  with people of normal   (sic) weights,  the  intakes were identical. ,.  I also operated on the mistaken assumption  that everyone's experience should be like  mine. Because I stabilized to a lower weight  when I stopped dieting and started loving  my body, I assumed that anyone who was still  fat wasn't loving her body enough.  There are two cruel attacks on fat women  inherent in this attitude. I was demanding  others to be like me in body type, thereby  perpetuating the fear of difference that  is at the root of society's relationship  to people who are fat, differently abled  and otherwise 'other'. I was also demanding  that women who have suffered terrible persecution all their lives (far more than I  ever received for my 180 lb. body) should  love themselves for an aspect which is the  source of that persecution.  The diet doctor immediately offered me my  choice of pills and I,  firmly but with  great shame,   told him,   "I've been addicted  to pills.  I cannot take them any more  without becoming addicted again, and I  fought too hard to break that dependence  to go hack to it."  Re said,"We'll worry about your being  addicted or not when you get thin. "  I am now in the midst of a big turnaround  in attitudes, spurred by readings and  conversations in the past few months.  Reading Shadow on a Tightrope, an anthology covering ten years (73-83) of writings  by women on fat oppression, I have had all  my assumptions challenged by carefully researched essays and personally experienced  stories.  I realize that the "worst" has 'I  to me. All that I've been warned about  and worried about has occured.  The knowledge frees me.  I know who I am.  I'm fat  and I'm old, and I'm home free.  Fat continued page 21  The incidence of eating disorders and  weight reduction problems among women  has reached epidemic proportions in the  industrialized world. Despite this  governments, the health profession and  society in general do not perceive this  situation as a social problem that  deserves immediate and serious consideration and action. Following are some  statistics which demonstrate the extent  of this 'individualized' social problem.  cent survey for Glamour  75%  esponding women stated they  •In a recent survey for Glamour  75% of  33,000  too fat.  •According to a 1983 Royal College of  Physicians report, 65% of British women  are trying to lose weight.  •Roughly 72% of the female population in  the northern industrialized world are  affected by eating disorders.  •American women spend 10 billion annually  on the reducing industry.  •Ms  reports that 50,000 'stomach stapling'  operations are performed yearly. (This  figure does not include intestinal  by pass or jaw wiring surgery, two  other increasingly popular weight reduction operations).  •According to the Globe and Mail  the  incidence of anorexia among teenage girls  has doubled over the past ten years and  is now one in 100. !;  20 Kinesis October '85  Working in  the cannery  by Patricia Donohue  The B.C. Fishing Industry is among the most  profitable in the world and is dominated  by some of the world's largest multinationals. George Weston Ltd., which owns B.C.  Packers; Marubeni, which controls several  plants; Mitsubishi with major international  investments to name a few. Women comprise the  majority of B.C. shoreworkers in this primary  food industry.  When I first applied for a position at a fish  plant two years ago, I was sure the stench of  fish guts would be one of the most difficult  obstacles to overcome; it now seems minimal.  On the job I found out quickly that I could  not ask my floorlady for instructions about  anything. She stared at me in disbelief and  silence when asked where I would get a  plastic apron and rubber gloves. Other women  were quick to help me recover from my first  encounter with the supervisor and briefed me  about what I could expect from her, about  other bosses to watch for, and about where to  line up for my apron and gloves.  About 65 women punched the time-clock at  7:00 that first morning and took a place on  the herring line, popping roe (herring eggs),  tedious work that causes aches and swelling  in our hands that remains until the season's  end. My co-workers, four inches on either side  of me, shewed me the different ways of getting roe out in one piece, a clandestine  lesson that had to be halted each time a  boss came in sight because talking was not  permitted. Yet the herring line was the best  place to get to know women and to discuss  the headlines in the daily press.  More than half of the women at this McMillan  factory are Japanese, Korean or Chinese.  Most of the new women hired this season  are also Asian and speak little English.  Other employees fear this is a company  . tactic to assert more control and exploitation.  Certainly the hiring of non-English speaking  women is a tactic still being practiced in  non-union plants. At one plant on the Heatly  Street dock among the rows of about 40  workers, I saw only four white faces. At this  plant each woman wears a number pinned on  her back, a symbol of piecework labour into  which a supervisor - all men - punched holes  as a way of tallying their baskets of  herring roe. I was later told by a worker  that there are frequent discrepancies between  the number of holes punched and a worker's  own tallying of her baskets.  Wages in non-union plants go as low as $3.50  an hour and $5 an hour is a common rate among  Vancouver's factories. Other non-union plants  such as Albion and Ocean offer union wages  but none of the other union benefits such  as the implementation of a seniority list.  Overtime and call-out are often abused.  Helen O'Shaughnessy, of the United Fisherman  and Allied Workers Union Women's Rights  Committee, explains that within these plants  tradesmen and linesmen (they are all men)  are treated well and enjoy some benefits,  but women are completely unprotected.  The Canfisco Company, also predominantly  Asian staffed, is one of the largest Vancouver canneries and the most militant. A  plant of 600 or more employees during  Wages in non-union plants  go as low as $3.50 an hour.  salmon season, the women are clear on  their collective strength and bargaining  power and frequently demonstrate it through  work shut-downs and walk-outs. The Chief  Shop Steward, Caroline, inspires much of  this strength and organization. As the company  works to divide the workforce (Canfisco even  has separate lunchrooms designated to Asian  and non-Asian workers), Caroline works overtime to maintain the support and respect  she has gained in the two years since she  became shop steward.  During the salmon run, 12 to 16 hour shifts  for cannery-workers are the norm. Shore-  Development from page is  Nutrition courses, for example, that teach  women how to prepare a balanced diet can  add to their workload. In southern India,  bringing women together from scattered  ties for work in fish packing plants seriously  disrupted family life.  As agencies dealing with agriculture and  rural development reorient their plans of  work and initiate new programmes, they face  three major constraints: lack of data  on women: insufficient technical expertise  on their roles; and shortage of professional  women.  Traditional systems of collecting agricultural statistics define work in such a way  that it can exclude the contribution of  women. For example, only paid labour or  work in the modern commercial sector may  be counted and work done by women to provide food for the family omitted. Seasonal  labour may not be included. In some in-  stances tasks done only by women are excluded.  In many instances, development planners  and administrators do not have sufficient  technical expertise to adapt programmes  to include women. Many of the large develop!  ment agencies have few women professionals.  The lack of women at every decisionmaking or professional level in national  organizations adds to this problem. Less  that 10% of extension workers, for example,  are women. As a result, the roles of women  in agriculture and food production are  more likely to be overlooked, and their  increased participation at the local level  is made more difficult.  Many of the large development agencies also  have few women professionals. Increasing  the number of women would help to create  policies to benefit women.  Food and Agriculture Organization (Rome)  workers put in these shifts for weeks at a  time knowing that once the season ends there  will be little, or no work, available. Many  of the salmon workers are also new employer!  and must undergo a 400-hour probationary  period during which they are ever aware of  bosses and company loyalists lookin over  their shoulder.  They are pressured to remain until the last  tote of fish has been emptied.  Soon, a mother of four, describes her relief  at the opening of 24-hour grocery stores  because she did not have time to shop. She  left her•Burnaby home at 6:00a.m., worked  until 10:00p.m., and would spend her drive  home organizing each step she needed to take  at home so she could get the maximum sleep  before her alarm rang at 5:00a.m.-  Soon.is a Group 2 labourer, a position  automatically assigned to her when she began work at the plant. Group 2 is the cover  name for women's work, as Group 1 is the  cover for men's work. Technically this is  the industry's interpretation of the clause  in the collective agreement: Group 1 =  heavy work, Group 2 = lighter work, but the  United Fishermen and Allied Workers Union  (UFAWU) has been slow to protest this blatant]  discrimination.  In 1973 UFAWU president, Jack Nichol, wroti  in The Fisherman,   the union paper, that  "this year's negotiations attained a milestone objective with equal pay for women  established —". Nichol was referring to a  week-long strike by shoreworkers in July 19731  that did bring about important changes. The  two supplementary wage agreements, one  coloured blue and the other pink, which  set out wage conditions for men and women,  were discarded but in 1985 there is still a  65c per hour disparity between men's and  women's wages in fresh fish. Women receive  a top-rate after 400 hours employment but  men receive an increase at 400 hours and  again at 1000 hours.  In my experience, wage and job discrimination is the most difficult aspect of working  at the McMillan plant. During day-shift  we are under the supervision of at least  three male bosses. Two of these men have  been in the business a fraction of the  time that the majority of regular women  workers have been and yet they warn these  women not to talk and can lecture them  about proper working procedures'.  While a small number of the men do heavy  lifting jobs and freezer work, most of  the men operate forklifts and other machinery  and so enjoy a more varied schedule with  less scrutiny by the bosses. Most of the  men believe men should be paid extra for  the heavy work whether they do it or not.  By being in Group 2, they explain, they must  always be prepared to do a heavy job if one  comes up. Some men agree there should be  no discrepancy in the wages but think it  is women's responsibility to fight for  changes in the contract.  The wage discrimination reinforces the  sexism that is already heavily practiced.  Women's and men's lunchrooms are separate  but women must pass the men's open doors  where nude women stare from calendars on  the walls.  Most women shoreworkers are adamant about  keeping Group 1 work women only. They  cherish the sense of community among the  women. Women are generally more together  on issues and more ready and accustomed to  using collective strength in fighting union  and local issues.  In one discussion of a rapist who had  attacked two women in the area, one of the  women, while expressing her fears of power-  lessness, said, "But I'd know how to use  one of these," and decapitated the salmon  neatly and quickly with two strokes of  her large knife. Several women nodded,  repeated her gesture, looking across the  long tables at each other, grinning with  half-concealed pride. by Shari Dunnet  I Would be famous by now if I hadn 't been  such a good waitress  Words imprinted upon a shirt, told to me  in passing.  Yes. I laughed. How many of us can identify with that.  On the subject of food, the exploitation  of female labour must not be forgotten.  For generations women have grown and  served food for their families. As an  extension of this traditional role,  women have taken their "service" into  the workforce and made their living in  the restaurant industry.  Women have suffered from low wages, poor  working conditions and little status or  benefits. Usually it is men working in  the industry who get the higher paying  positions in management. As in so many  sectors of the workforce, women make up  the majority of the low-paid labour pool.  And if there ever was a thankless job,  waitressing is one of the worst. Being  an old cronie of the trade myself, I  can speak from experience. I have lived  through the meaning of "the customer  is always right". Many times I have  known the angst of being called "Miss"  with a hot coffee pot in my hand, restraining myself from letting loose and  allowing the coffee to flow freestyle  into the lap of a chap who'd; said it  once too often, or in such a way that  too closely mirrored our real power  relationship in the world. I've been  called "dear", "sweetie", "darling" and  "sweetheart". Some men who enjoy testing the limits have called me down with  salutations like "hey, baby". One woman .  I know was once called "cutesie muffin".  As a waitress, I've been a convenient  receptacle for the customers' verbal  trash; I've been manipulated by men who've  smashed their mustard-filled dixie cup  on the table and left without paying.  I've stood in disbelief while men ordered for the women they were dining  with. "The lady will have a grilled  cheese on brown, hold the mayo." When- I've  asked the woman what she would like to  drink, often she's turned to her male  companion and told him  that she would  like "an apple juice...small". Then he  tells me, "The lady will have a small  apple juice". I've noticed that women  almost always order small.  I've worked in bars where men have ordered  "sex pistols" and "dirty mothers". And  despite my rage, I've smiled forth through  the night. "Thank you for coming. Have a  nice evening."  I've noticed that usually it's the white  women out front and women of colour in  the back who often work as dishwashers  at the lowest wages of all.  And I've noticed that the boss can afford  vacations with his whole family when I  can barely pay the rent.  People who haven't worked in restaurants  rarely seem to understand what goes  "Holistic"  waitressing  on behind the scenes. I've often receivec  comments like "Isn't it a great place  to work? It seems so relaxed". A customer's vantage point is very different fron  that of a waitress. Of that there is no  doubt.  In fact, there are many misconceptions  surrounding the restaurant trade. One  of the biggest of these that I've  encountered is the one which permeates  the health food industry. "Natural  Foods" is held up in the sky like a  beacon of light...straight from Mother  Nature. But where is the Goddess, you  might ask? You'll most likely find her  out back peeling potatoes, scrubbing  pots amongst "organic" suds or serving  12 large carrot juices, while making a  fruit shake, heating some muffins,  taking 4 new orders and cleaning the  capuccino machine.  While there are many benefits to a  vegetarian diet, there are few to be  found on the job at a health food restaurant. In the area of understaffing,  under paying and over working, this  type of establishment takes the cake  (in this case, carrot). Interwoven into  every aspect of work in health foods is  a spiritual philosophy which values  selfless service in which hard work for  low wages is seen as purifying to the  soul.  Gross-CounVry    SK\  One   UDeeVC   Woom -v F<  Wm  v    i>¬•\\   Spec\o.\  >'  cvj\\  e>oar<  orA  &oo\V.\  Kinesis October '85 21  One owner of such a restaurant remarked  that it was good for the employees'  Karma to have the opportunity to work  in such a "pure" environment.  Combined with the emphasis on "good vibes"  is the repressive denial of"thS$ disruptive emotion, anger. This aspect.is  particularly detrimental to women as it  reinforces the already well-established  pressure that society places on women  to suppress anger, thus further submerging the rage that women experience.  The conditioning to not only deny anger  but even take pride in never expressing  it, explains in part why so many women  are drawn to the trade, to not only accept their position, but to in fact  idealize it. Once again, as in so many  aspects of women's lives, women exist  for the "other"'Äîin this case, in the  service of her-customers.  One of the aspects of the health food  industry that I find most irksome is  that it gives the illusion that it is  different, an alternative to the conventional food industry.  It gives the appearance of being a relaxed, caring, egalitarian environment.  But upon closer observation it becomes  apparent that it isn't all that different. Like the others, it is based on  hierarchical employer-employee relations,  and women still remain in the lowest  paying, lowest status positions. Racism  still exists. And although it may seem  otherwise, the buck doesn't stop at the  doors to vegie-haven any more than it  stops at the 'golden arches'.  Yet, still half-believing that "holistic"  meant a whole vision of the world, not  just meditation and consuming soy  products, I informed my employer that  the brand of beer we were selling had  ties to South Africa. He replied that  whoever had told me this information  had probably just had a bad reaction  from a beer belch and blamed that on  South Africa. He then turned around and  continued stocking the fridge.  And it's all left me wondering. Does the  concept "holistic", which permeates  every aspect of the health food industry  actually mean an authentic global awareness, or is it merely a new fad for the  privileged part of the world? Is it really  open to women, or is it just another  form of oppression through patriarchal  definitions of spirituality? Ultimately,  is it about transformation? Or is it just  another marketing tool, an old mode  grafted onto a different style where instead of two all-beef patties with cheese,  you get a vegie burger and carrot juice  served to you with a smile...by a  sweet member of the second sex.  Fat from page 19  As I feel the changes in perspective becoming stronger I am suddenly attuned to  conversational references to fat, and I  am dismayed by some (not all) of the misinformed and fearful thoughts I hear from  women.  I understand the misinformed part because  I was, too, and still am in many ways.  And I understand the fear but I'm not  satisfied to let it be an excuse for  holding onto misinformation. I embrace  the fat liberation movement partly  because I have had a taste of the oppression, so it reaches me on a gut  (literally) level. Also, I connect it to  other liberation struggles. The broad  goals of all liberation movements are  freedom and equality for all of us. It's  not fair for any group to step up on the  backs of others.  I hope it feels okay to fat women that I  J  am writing this piece from my non-fat  perspective. I welcome response from  anyone, but particularly from fat women.  Shadow on a Tightrope  is informative and  thought-provoking. It is also an emotionally stirring collection, with gut-  wrenching stories of various persecutions  ranging from social ostracism to surgical  mutilation. This book is important for all  of us to read and to take to heart and  action.  Round is female...We're rated last in the  patriarchy because we were first in the  matriarchy.  To keep fat women down is to  keep all women down.  footnotes  1. Kelly "The Goddess is Fat" p. 16,  Shadow on a Tightrope. 2. Ibid p. 15,  3.. Ibid p. 16, 4. Vivien F. Mayer, "The  Fat Illusion" Ibid p.5, 5. Ibid p. 4,  6. Lyn Mabel-Lois, "We'll worry about  that when you're thin" Ibid p. 64, 7.  Marjory Nelson, "Fat and Old: Old and  Fat" Ibid p. 236 8. Ibid. pp. 20, 21 2 Kinesis October '85  In search of the  politically correct meal  1034 Commercial Drive  254-5044  0PEN: tues.-thurs.  noon-7:3oD|  fri.- sun.  10=30am -7:30pm  by Sharon Knapp ^^!§iM  We all know women who are so politically  active that they don't have time to eat,  much less eat out. These tireless politicos  fuel themselves on black coffee and cigarette  and rush from one meeting to another. It's  no accident tht the 18th century coffee  houses were the home of radical politics in  Europe; then as now the organizers needed  that caffeine boost. You can find that atmosphere on Commercial Drive at Joe's or  La Quena, but where can a feminist go out  for dinner and still be politically correct?  Isadora's Co-operative Restaurant may be your  best bet. Nestled at the edge of Granville,  Island, adjacent to the right brain, left  wing design of False Creek it is, as its  name says, a co-operative restaurant. Workers  participate in profit-sharing and decisionmaking at the restaurant. Profits are also  given towards non-profit developments in  the  - VANCOUVER -  WOMEN'S BOOKSTORE  1st Sobordau of ev/er-q morvtrv.  IOV. off ail titles /205i off selected -titles  Sftt Dec.7: 20%°ff<wtijhok>cya.-prxux  Mail orders welcome.  m  . 315 Cambie Street  Vancouver, B.C.  V6B 2N4    Ph: 684-0523  BECKWOMAM'5 f&  STORE fROWT ART 5TUDIA -&(rT SKoPV  aSS?0*"- EAR FlEftClKk #JD.+70&<  Uelium Sallooms  LOTSA lews LleRV - £ARM65 am®  ffcEE LANCE  ftrVT  Wo&K- ■  ANVrHlNU- HflAPg IN CLA-y-afett /mH MeR :  While you can't get Poulet deBeauvoir there,  you can get whole wheat pancakes with blueberries ($3.75) for brunch. Dinner for two  consisting of soup and splitting a large  West Coast salad (salmon, shrimp and greens)  is inexpensive. Children's portions are also  available.  Isadora's also features a changing display  of local artists, some good and others who  give the term "bad painting" new depths.  Currently, Jeannie Kamins' fabric works are  on display. Once you recover from seeing the  larger-than-life portrait of Gary Cristall  looming over your table, you can get on with  enjoying your meal at Isadora's.  To be politically correct when eating out  means limiting your conspicuous consumption,  which suits my wallet just fine. I'm always  looking for a place where I can eat well for  under $5.00. What follows is a subjective  list of favourites.  The Great Ocean at 703 Denman is one of  Vancouver's newest Vietnamese restaurants  and one of its best kept secrets. Located  between Robson and Georgia on Denman it  attracts little of the English Bay - Lower  Denman foot traffic. As you enter you are  met by a huge tank of Chinese ironheaded  goldfish. Enjoy the Great Oceans eclectic  decor - the plastic foliage and the Christmas  mini-lights, it's always clean, dark and  quiet. They have the cheapest combination  plates in town - $5.25 for chicken salad,  pork brochette and steamed rolls, tea included.  Just up the street at 945 Denman is the Dover  Inn, possibly the best fish and chip joint  in Vancouver. While you wait for your dinner  you can puzzle over the unreadable financial  pages of the British newspapers provided by  management and check out the portraits of  the Royal Family. The Captain Dover, a cod*  fillet and a plateful of hand-cut potato  chips is under $4.00. The coffee is good and  the refills are endless.  The Dar Lebanon at 695 West Broadway has  several dishes at $2.50 a piece that you  can mix and match for a spicy, filling meal.  An order of falafel and a heaping plate of  tabouleh is more than enough for one. When  you order a coffee refill and baklava  you get change back from your dollar.  Any of these places will provide a good  reasonably priced meal the next time you  decide you're tired of standing over your  kitchen sink with a couple of crackers in  one hand and a hunk of cheese in the other.  Now if only they delivered.  BOOK  ;    AND ART  EMPORIUM  New Naiad Press releases:  Spring Forward, Fall Back  PHONE: (604) 669-1753  221 THURLOWST., VANCOUVER, B.C. V6E 1X4  Eating Disorders from page 18  of'well-being and security, especially in  stressful situations where it is necessary  assert oneself, set limits or express  one's needs. The desire for personal power  (that is, to be able to say "yes" or "no") is  normal and healthy, but it is also in  rect contradiction to the conditioning  that women receive around giving or mothering  and therefore around self-sacrifice.  Food and the fat it produces can act as  I a buffer, a protective barrier that gives  the individual a sense of solidity and  strength. Those women who lack the fat but  have just the fear of becoming fat lose  the illusion of the sense of strength, but  instead cling more rigidly to the control  that they seemingly have over the weight  I and the food.  j Because of the societal obsession with  I thinness, most women will negate the areas  in their lives where they are successful  I because they have "failed" in what they  perceive to be the most important criteria.  In order to "succeed" they will frantically  ittempt to control the symptoms - that is,  to diet and/or to stop the vomiting or  laxative use. Then they will go out of  control and binge eat out of needs not met  or from feelings that are difficult to  express. Having "failed" once more they  will repeat the cycle, accompanied by shame,  guilt and self-loathing. This syndrome  then leads to mal-functionlrig to a greater  or lesser extent as women postpone their  lives until they are thin or thin enough.  The obsession with food or non food and  with body size enacts the story of what it  means to be a woman in our society today.  The struggle with eating disorders is not  the cure of a disease, but rather is the  search for self.  In 1980 Sandy Friedman, M.A. and Doris  Maranda, M.A.,  two Vancouver therapists  in private practice created Eating Disorders Programs.  They conduct a therapeutic  workshop program-called "Facing Your Fat",  an ongoing therapeutic/educational program  for bulimia, as well as professional  training seminars, educational seminars  an public talks. For information,  call  Sandy at 731-8752 or Doris at  736-7180. Food co-op show a tasty one-night stand  bv Jill Pollack in re8ular supermarkets and the decrease around food co-op  "".,,. T-. in the overall price margin have all contri- part of our lives  Nicaraguan coffee,  brewed in a machine. ,   s      ,  .   r ,°,       m                                           ,  m,         a       ..                          r. j.j.      i buted to the demise of both active co-ops ensure that they  Kinesis October '85 23  by Jill Pollack  Nicaraguan coffee,  brewed in a machine  They grew it on a co-op for coffee beans.  Nicaragua's got co-ops, and we do too  All over the world, we sing the co-op tune,  (excerpt from Lorna Boschman 's script  for the Fed-Up Travelling Food  Co-op Show,   1985).  There is the theory that if you make people  laugh or feel safe and comfortable, then  perhaps your message (whatever that is)  will be more easily accepted and adopted.  Disarm them, so to speak. If as well as  being entertained, they glean new knowledge,  all the better.  It -was this theory that caused the Fed-Up  Travelling Food Co-op Show to take place.  egular supermarkets and the decrease  in the overall price margin have all contributed to the demise of both active co-ops  and active people within co-ops. There are  .some exceptions, but for the-majority of  people, food co-ops are not the centre of  their life.  So, faced with flagging interest and an  imminent collapse of the effectiveness of  food co-ops, we decided to create a celebratory, informational and entertaining  forum for discussion. Among the four of us  was a performance artist, a curator, two  journalists and a political activist/  writer. We had all previously worked for  co-ops; our combined experience was over  thirty years. Our personal commitment to  food co-ops had strayed somewhat, but our  Kir V    vv*v  Four women - Jill Bend, Lorna Boschman,  Judith Plant and myself - were hired on a  Canada Works grant through the Fed-Up  Federation of Food Co-ops. Our task was  to effect the smooth transfer.-between the  closing of the Fed-Up Warehouse and the  increased emphasis on the Federation itself. Since the Federation and warehouse  began over.thirteen years ago, many changes  have taken place, primarily in the lifestyles  and attitudes of the members. More people  have children, homes, financial/social/  political commitments. There are pressing  issues to be dealt with, such as finding  a job, and opposing political conservatism,  etc. By and large, the food co-op movement  has not been able nor had the resources to  assess those changes and meet the new  needs. There has always been a split in  the reasons why people join food co-ops.  Some become active for political/philosophical reasons. Others, for the better  price and range of high quality food.  The growth and visibility of bulk food  stores, the availability of health foods  I cannot remember a  job where I had so  much fun and still got  the work done.  Lorna Boschman (left) and Judith Plant  interest was revived in the face of the  Federation's decline. We, like most members of Fed-Up, cared, but only up to a  point. It was good for the four of us to  find a way to combine our accumulated  skills and interests in the grant.  The Fed-Up Travelling Food Co-op was  written by Lorna Boschman, who also played  the lead. Judith Plant was the voice of  Festa (a puppet) and presented a slide  show in the new Catalyst  (the Federation's  journal). Jill Bend ran the audio/visual  equipment and had a speaking part. Ariba  was the set-up person and lighting technician. I did publicity and travel arrangements. At one point or another, we all did  everything. It -was hectic, fun, only partially successful, relaxed, horrible, wonderful...but ultimately worth it.  We were trying to present food :  food buying and organization around food  in a creative way. We wanted to reflect  and/or re-instill interest and enthusiasm  including a feature on the  Nairobi conference ending  the UN Decade for Women  noon Sunday Oct, 27  Give Co-op Radio a lift.  Call us at 684-8494 and become a member.  Listener supported community radio  CO-OP RADIO  102.7 FM  Women's music, art and issues have thei  place on our airwaves every week.  around food co-ops. They had been a big  part of our lives once, and we wanted to  that they at least continued, if  not flourished. We also wanted to promote  a co-operative attitude, something in  which we still all believed.  Attendence was sometimes low, sometimes  mediocre but we never had a capacity  crowd until the first Vancouver performance at La Quena Coffeehouse (co-sponsored by the East End Food Co-op). The Show  travelled to fourteen towns and everyone  who saw it enjoyed it, but not enough  people saw it.  We learned that food co-ops are stigmatized  by a '60's hippie' stereotype. We found out  that belonging to a co-op does not automatically ensure that a co-operative attitude  will follow. There are some hard-working,  responsible and dedicated people in co-ops.  They tend to carry the load in most things  they do and are the ones who in fact  keep it going. The Fed-Up Travelling Food  Co-op Show pointed out that the importance  of co-ops in peoples' lives has shifted  to a convenience level. People belong  only when it fits easily (or semi-easily)  into their routines; and only when there  is some other benefit (financial first,  social second, political/philosophical  third). Even a 99c event did not draw large  crowds.  The positive aspects of the Travelling  Show were not necessarily what we expected  but nonetheless valid and worthwhile. We  mostly enjoyed working together (...what  group is ever harmonious all the time?)  Personally, it re-affirmed and indeed  re-activated my belief in working Ih k^ ¥  group situation. I enjoyed the working  conditions and enjoyed my co-workers. We  all met some new people that we liked. We  were able to combine our individual interests  with the job situation. We mingled co-ops  with creativity and either learned new  skills or further developed old ones. We  did not purport a head-banging, romaniticiz-  ing approach to co-ops, but a balanced  more realistic one. And we laughed a lot.  I cannot remember a job where I had so  much fun and still got the work done.  I think that the four of us (five, with  Ariba helping out for the final three  months of the grant) got the most out of  the project. The Federation obtained the  information they wanted and the promotion  they needed. The individuals in the co-ops  who attended felt more connected to the  larger co-op movement. The co-ops had  the opportunity to celebrate, learn, reaffirm and impact the movement in a way  not perceived available to them for a  number of years. We went to them, they did  not have to come to us. But ultimately,  it was those of us on the Canada Works \  grant who benefited the most. We had a close  to ideal situation.  When I consider my definition of the true  sense of co-operation - where every  action is mutually beneficial, does not  deny the individual but promotes a common  vision - the Fed-Up Travelling Food Co-Op  Show stands as an experiment that I would  like to see occur in every aspect of my  life. We learned, had fun, grew and got paid.  Call us for a free programme guide 684-8494  Motorcycle storage available  a.BC.VSYIBl.Canada   (604)879-7323  REPAIRS ACCESSORIES. MACHINING  FOR ALL MAKES  Alice Macpherson 24 Kinesis October '85  ARTS  1  til lil  Fo/ce Over: extra-ordinary dialogue  watching  by Gillean Chase  Voice-Over,   curated by Helga Pakasaar,  is a multi-media exhibition of works  by feminist artists featuring video  installation, graphite and carbon  drawings, sculpture-sound installation  and photographic construction. Both  the eclectic and political nature of the  works wreak havoc with traditional modes  of seeing and perceiving, and force the  observer into subjective responses.  These responses are contrary to established  rules about objectivity in art and in  life, and to the established roles of personal experience and private perception as  secondary or peripheral within the public  sphere. The artists and their curator are  anxious that we understand that the public  sphere has been associated with male perception and experience, and that the private  sphere is the one delegated to women's  perceptions and experiences, in the field  of aesthetics as in any other field.  Diamond, Ingrid Koenig, Kati Campbell  and Amy Jones. Three of the artists are  actively involved as cultural workers  within the alternative gallery network  holding administrative positions in  their arts milieux.  Sara Diamond's contribution to Voice-  Over  is the three-hour long video installation at the Convertible Showroom,  based on Heroics,  her documentary "epic"  on the nature of women's heroism.  Anyone familiar with Diamond's reputation is aware that she brings a  strong socialist and feminist focus to  the documentary form, a sociological  and distanced camera eye to the process  of describing the oppression of women  within patriarchal so'ciety. A long-time  activist, Diamond's "political activities,  more than the need to actualize an artistic identity, has informed her production of videotapes", to quote curator  Helga Pakasaar.  Heroics  is a series of six half-hour  videotapes shown oh three monitors in a  gallery setting which replicates the  domestic environments of kitchen, living-  room and performance space in Diamond's  video production. The pink and grey  tablecloths, tea settings, wall art,  rugs and artificial flowers convey  women's universal attempts at creating a  serene and safe environment. The gallery  becomes home to the audience, which is  invited to move from "kitchen" to "living-  room" to "performance space" as they wish.  The videotape requires audience participation, as its length and its format  induce and deny serenity. A moderated  babble of sound comes from three monitors, each playing different parts of  the Heroics tape. The cacophony of voices  places all sound in a private context;  the observer hears and sees only from  the centre of personal focus.  The first tape asks each camera subject  to define heroism: what the word means  to each of them, what each is afraid of,  and who or what inspires each one. The  camera subject is then asked to discuss  a dream or a goal; there is no interviewer and only occasional interchange among  on-camera participants. There is no  attempt to create an interplay between  "or among each narrator; indeed there is  a careful avoidance of the personal in  the flashing of questions as characters  across the screen. The last question is  directed at the audience: "are you a  hero or heroine?"  Several aspects of heroism are then  presented in the following tapes:  heroism as defined by thirty women who  describe their efforts to be creative,  who they admire (role models/heroines),  the heroism of sheer survival, of  triumphing over misfortune and of living  with conscious and difficult choices.  Heroism devolves as far less a matter of  momentary courage than a matter of persistence in the face of adversity. The  underlying premise is that, while society focuses upon the singular and the  extraordinary, it is the mundane courage  of ordinary women as a collective group  which is the core of heroism.  In focussing only on the meaning of  heroism in the lives of women, Diamond  reveals her premise that the ordinary  has been relegated to the private realm,  to the world of women. Heroism is not  believed to exist in this "private"  realm.  Diamond's socialist feminism determines  her choice of camera subject entirely.  Although no one who approached her to  tell her story was refused, her choice  of Native and East Indian, oriental,  disabled, welfare recipient, trade  unionist, cultural worker and feminist  activist etc. speak to her analyses of  race, sex and class as patriarchal  vehicles for oppression. Her sociological  distance becomes a flaw, along with her  static camera and settings. One of the  subjects, for example, seemed stuffed in  the V of a wall, pushed into a corner  which may or may not be a deliberate metaphor for her victimization. Another  holds a soccer ball on the kitchen table  while discussing her work on a fishing  boat—a visual nonsequitur of uncertain  origin.  Sometimes, too, Diamond switches inexplicably to black-and-white shots in  the midst of a colour documentary. Her  placement of lights causes occasional  shadows on the wall, and the sheer length  of the production with its fixed camera  and talking heads are problematic.  Diamond's technique, however, is deliberately deconstructionist, since her attempt is to deal with the nature of representation and presentation of images  within patriarchal art structures. Her  reductionism has the effect of isolating  her camera subjects from the world,  paralleling women's lack of social integration within the world.  One is left with the inevitable questions about the nature of representation,  of deconstruction and reconstruction which  is the basis for the feminist aesthetic.  I am confortable with the unresolvable  nature of these questions. Not everyone  will be.  Ingrid Koenig's graphite and carbon  drawings very much parallel the questions  Diamond poses about the patriarchal nature  of art imagery and the need for women  of female role models. Koenig's role  models are cultural workers and social  activists like herself, represented for  the most part in portrait realism, except for that of artist Sheena Gourlay,  who experiments with the nature of perception and image reproduction. Her portrait of Gourlay is a squibble of lines;  deconstructionism at its heart.  Combined with the series of nine portraits,  including one of Koenig herself, is text  about the artist's search for creative  values for art, myth, visioning and  dream actualization. Women artists like  herself are looking through what she  calls a window "opening onto the universe.  (Their) heads (are) close to the opening.  And all of (their) eyes (are) watching."  Although little space remains to discuss  the interesting work of Amy Jones and  Kati Campbell, these four artists deserve  respect for provoking exciting dialogue  about the nature of imaging and the role  of women as producers of art using images  of representation which are very different from conventional (male) art. Helga  Pakasaar has chosen a combination of art  which by its very eclecticism had my head,  for one, close to the opening; and all my  eyes, psychic and real, were watching! Kinesis October '85 25  ARTS  Creating a women's culture network  by Nancy Poole  The second annual Canadian  Women's Music and Cultural  Festival, held in Winnipeg over  the Labour Day weekend, became  more than a showcase of some of  Canada's finest women performers.  Twenty five women, representing  all aspects of the business of  women's music in Canada -performing, managing, booking,  promoting, producing, sound  engineering and distributing -  took advantage of the networking opportunity which the  Festival provided, to discuss  their visions for the advancement of women's culture in  Canada.  The plans for such a meeting  were conceived when Joan Miller,  manager and booker for Heather  Bishop and distributor of  Mother of Pearl Records, met  in (you guessed it) the USA  with Jennifer Leith and Rusty  Neal, co-producers with Catch  Fire Productions, a Halifax  based women's production group.  They were attending a comparable networking meeting,  of women involved in production  and distribution of women's  music in the US, held in conjunction with the National  Women's Music Festival in  Bloomington Indiana, in June.  A production network for women's  cultural events in Canada has  been long in coming, not because  there was not desperate need -  everyone, at this initial  meeting had personal experiences  of needing such connections -  but due to our daunting distances  from each other. Joan Miller  joked of the reaction of  American women performers when  they realise there is usually  in excess of 350 miles between  gigs. Ruth Dworin of Womynly  Way Productions in Toronto,  quipped that she explains the  Canadian reality of American  women performers with the true  comparison that there are more  major population centres to be  reached on tour in Ohio than in  all of Canada!  However these distances, the  eight a.m. time of the meeting,  the swarms of Winnipeg mosquitos  and the ongoing struggles of  being involved in advancing  women's culture in Canada,quickly became common forces to be  addressed rather than insurmountable barriers. After workshops on the techniques of management and production, on the  issues relating to broadcasting  and distribution and on the need  for a firm network some common  themes emerged:  • the need for a directory of  performers and producers so  that we may find each other  more easily  • the need for workshops in  communities across Canada on  all the business aspects of  bringing women's cultural  events to these communities  so that more women will have  the skills to be involved in  producing, managing, engineering etc.  • the need for making more  contacts of those interested  in building a women's production and distribution network  in Canada as well as ongoing  communication among those  already identified.  While the linking of these  25 women from Halifax to  Vancouver seems a barely  perceptible start, there was  such satisfaction and determination in accomplishing this  initial networking, that much  is sure to come. Any woman  interested in being involved  in such a network is encouraged to write to Joan Miller,  Woodmore, Manitoba, ROA 2M0.  Nancy Poole is a sound engineer  presently working with the  Regina Women's Production  Group. 26 Kinesis October TO  ARTS  Their rules of behaviour  are prescribed, but they  consider their lifestyle   '  a choice.  Show gives voice to Chassidism  by Sima Elizabeth Shefrin  Chassidism is a branch of Orthodox Judaism;  its members choose to follow very strict  religious laws governing food, dress,  rituals, and forms of worship. The Lubavitch  Chassidim differ from others in that they  are missionaries, striving to bring all  Jews to follow what they consider the only  acceptable form of Jewish life.  Paula Levine's recent installation at  Presentation House Gallery in North Vancouver, We Want the Moshiach  (The Messiah) Now!  offers a respectful but probing picture of  Vancouver's small Lubavitch Community. She  presents the whole community, and much of  her focus is on the women, on their beliefs,  their ideas, their perceptions of their own  lives.  The exhibit consists of photographs, a video,  and various religious and secular items  which illustrate the ritual of daily life.  The exhibit design is both elegant and  meaningful. The gallery is arranged to  suggest a synagogue witht^a; curtain, a  mechitza,  down the centre to separate  what would be the men's and women's sides.  Chairs are placed on either side of the  curtain facing forward. At the front,  on one side only, an hour long video plays  of people in the community describing their  lives.  Accompanying the photographs around the  walls are quotes which don't necessarily  have a direct correspondence with the  images, but relate to them and bounce off  them. The photographs portray holidays and  signposts of the culture. Not a lot of  explanation accompanies the photographs,  but some is attached to actual objects  displayed, such as a woman's dress and wig,  a man's black coat, or a prayer shawl.  In some ways the exhibit is straight forward  The images are representations of people  that one can relate to. In both the photographs and the video everyone is presented  with respect, allowed to speak for themselves  A glossary of terms offers some help to  people unfamiliar with Jewish culture.  But the exhibit also makes you work. Paula  offers many images, quotations, comments  and juxtapositions, which we may, if we  wish, gather up, sift through, and put in  some kind of order for ourselves. More of  an overview of Chassidism in the context  of Judaism might have been useful, but on  the whole the artist has rightly avoided  dry facts and oversimplification.  We get information from different parts of  the exhibit. For example, four photographs  of children in school are accompanied by  an explanation of the teaching methods of  a Rabbi and teacher in the Lubavitch Elementary School.  When the Jews were given the Torah on  Mount Sinai they said, 'We will do and  then we will hear', which means first  obey, and then study to understand the  reasons why. I'm sticking to that rule.  I teach my students, first you do what  you are told, then you can ask questions  and I'll explain it to you.  Obsession from page 19  tribal experience of female initiation."  Chernin explains that an eating disorder  is a logical manifestation of the daughter*!  inertia (dis-ease) at this point. "Since  childhood, food has been the most evident symbol available for expressing her  struggles and failures and triumphs with  an emerging sense of self...When we recall  the inevitable association between food  and mothering; when we appreciate the way  profound communications on the issue of  development pass between mothers and  children through the distinctive ways food  is given and witheld; when we consider how  distinctive a form of female bonding the  giving and receiving of food remains for  mothers and daughters, who are not encouraged to test and know themselves outside  the home, the kitchen, the family table,  in the world, we will cease to wonder that  the issues of female identity express  themselves through food."  "When eating disorder begin to trouble  the lives of women in all age groups, it  is a sign that we are in urgent need of a  ceremonial form to guidi  well be "'  — beyond what may  llective childhood of feTMai°  itity into a new 1  social development.  laturity of female  Yes, women are hungry, insatiably hungry.  But it is a hunger for self-development,  for our own wholeness, for a place in the  world. We eat and eat to fill the emptiness. Some of us grow stout, some of us  throw up afterwards to remain acceptably  slim, some of us refuse to give in to the  hunger, refuse to feed it, and defiantly  starve oursleves instead. The hunger is  not for food so no amount of eating will  ever satisfy it.  There is much work to be done. We must  recognize the importance of the epidemic of eating disorders among women.  We must not allow what is presently part  of the female condition to be trivialized. Women suffering from any of these  disorders must not be left to blame and  "hate themselves, believing it to be their  own problem and their own fault. No woman  can be free in her own life while millions  of others are caught in the quagmire of  of anxiety, guilt, and remorse that characterizes a disordered relation to food.  The unattainable goals of the diet or  discipline (lost weight, returns, the  fast must be broken) create a cycle of  despair and self-loathing that is tragic  to the individual women. The social cost  in wasted energy, time, talent and lives  is abhorrent.  Imagine what women could achieve if not  one of us spent one moment worrying about  the food we eat or the size of our bodies.  These words are not just a philosophy of  education, but rather a clue to the values  of the culture.  One particularly appealing series of photographs takes us through the Upshernesh, a  three year old boy's first haircut. We are  shown Avraham, solemn and charming, with  his untouched shoulder length curls. He is  fully aware that this is a serious occasion  and his special day. We see him standing,  still as a mouse, as his hair is cut, his  pride mixed with anxiety. We see him studying himself in the mirror afterwards,  grinning now, but still proud.  And we see his mother in the pictures,  pleased, anxious, proud, herself. Even  though she is presented in her role as the  mother of her son, Paula has in no way  trivialized her on this account.  Accompanying this series of photographs  are three quotations: the father's explanation of the ritual, the mother's explanation, and the verse from the Bible on  which it is based. According to the father  • the ceremony is performed because that's  what's done. "When we choose this lifestyle we choose a package deal." According  to the mother, the ceremony is based on a  3.verse from the Torah instructing you not  to pick the fruit of a newly planted tree  for three years. It is a literal interpretation of the Bible.  It is unusual to see a woman explaining  the rites of Judaism. In much popular  material depicting Jewish culture, little  serious attention is given to the women.  Even Barbara Streisand's very feminist  movie, Yentl,   is the story of a woman  trying to find her way in a man's world;  except for the one who would rather be  a man, the women are not presented in any  depth.  In Paula's work, in many cases the community is presented from the perspective of the  women rather than the men. On the video  some women explain the mikvah, the ritual  community bath which women take after  menstruation. We follow two other women  with their babies through Woodwards food  floor as they shop for the kosher food  they cook for their families.  It is the same with many of the photographs.  In "Purim at Chabad", we stand behind a  little girl peeking out from behind the  women's side of the curtain. In "Morning  Prayer from the Women's side of the  Mechitza" we see through the curtain,  veiled shadowy figures of the men at  prayer. We, the viewers, are the women; it  is the men who are hidden away.  Another series of photographs show women  dancing together, as the men are not  permitted to dance with them. Some of us  in the Women's Community also prefer to  dance without men. Is it a choice for the  Chassidic women? Their rules of behaviour  are proscribed, and cannot be easily altered  but they consider their lifestyle a  choice. Paula gives a number of women a  chance to speak of this choice, including  one woman who converted from Catholicism.  There is a stability, a structure, a  continuity;  there 's a way to live your  life.  A lot of women ask me whether I'm not  going crazy with all these children or  whether my husband isn't the dominant  force in my life.  To both of these I  answer   'no'.  To us as feminists  firmly entrenched  roles as wives and  be missing out on  feel the same way  one of the goals <  all women a voice,  to each other even  Paula has, in her  women a very publ  the opportunity t<  the Chassidic Women,  in their traditional  thers, appear to  a lot. Doubtless they  about us. But surely  f feminism is to give  and to learn to listen  when we do not agree,  installation, given these  c voice, and given us  listen to them. Kinesis October "85 27  ARTS  Canadian compendium focuses on women's health  by Marrianne van Loon  The Healthsharing Book    is the first and  only truly national health guide for  Canadian women. The result of a year long  collective effort by the members of Women  Healthsharing, regular publishers of the  periodical Healthsharing: A Woman 's  Quarterly,   this book is both an important  information source and a valuable resource  guide.  The Healthsharing Book: Resources for  Canadian Women,   ed. Kathleen McDonnell  and Mariana Valverde. The Women's Press:  Toronto 1985, 200 pp. $9.95.  Fundamental to the authors' approach is  the definition of health as more than the  mere absence of disease. In her chapter,  "Self Care", Susan Moger explains:  (Health) covers the mental, physical  and spiritual parts of living.   (It  ■ is) inextricably linked to the world  in which we live,   the people we are  close to and the paid and unpaid work  fertility", "pregnancy and childbirth",  "women and aging", "health problems of  women", "drug and alcohol abuse", "women  and eating disorders", "mental health,  violence and sexual assault", "occupational  and environmental health", "minority women  and health", and "staying healthy".  The focus of the book is controlling our  own health, as much as that is possible.  It does not deal specifically with a biologi  cal view of how a woman's body works. In  some ways, this is unfortunate, because  many of us have very little knowledge  about such things as how our hormone cycle  works, the natural ecology of the vagina,  or even a basic understanding of nutrition.  On the other hand, the book does present  resources so that one can easily learn  where to go to find out information of  this sort.  Because the book covers such a broad range  of material, many things are dealt with  inadequately. An article in the occupational and environmental health chapter deals  with women's work, and environmental  issues are only mentioned in the resource  list which follows. With pesticides,  children is growing, and family violence  and sexual abuse (generally alcohol related)  is "a way of life."  Simard and Barrett maintain that alcohol  and drug abuse is the most urgent problem.  They also criticize all levels of government  for "sporadic, inconsistent and ineffective"  delivery of health services. "The health  of whole communities is a women's health  issue, one way or another...It is not surprising that the overwhelming concern of the  :ive women's movement is survival."  (Health) covers the mental, physical and spiritual aspects of living.  (It is) inextricably linked to the world in which we live, the people  we are close to and the paid and unpaid work we do.  we do...Our health is also connected  to the economic conditions of our life,  the environment and the social and political climate of the world.  The book is divided into two main sections;  a general information article on each  topic covered, followed by a section on  resources, including organisations,  and materials. An index at the back of  the book lists resources - organisations  and information - alphabetically for easy  reference.  Topics cover a wide range of subjects  concerning women under chapters titled,  "taking health into our own hands", "women's  cycles", "sexuality", "controlling our  HOUSING CO-OPERATIVE  Sitka Housing Co-op is a 26 unit housing  co-op especially for women and women  with children in East Vancouver. After  months of work the building has started  and we are excited to begin accepting applications for membership.  If you are interested in applying please  contact Sitka by phoning 255-9265 or  251-3241 or write to us at Sitka Housing  Cooperative Society, 2842 St. George  St., Vancouver, B.C. V5T 3R7.  radiation, and additives in the food we  eat, as well as pollutants in air and water,  it is unfortunate this particular issue  is not discussed specifically.  .This is my biggest problem with the book:  most of the articles are too short and  generalized, more to introduce the resources  with which they are linked, than to be  actual resources themselves.  The largest chapter, "Out of the mainstream:  minority woman health" is an attempt to  overcome the fact that the collective  who produced the book was composed of  "Toronto-based, middle class white women".  This chapter contains sections on lesbians,  disabled women, black women, native women,  prisoners, immigrant women, women in poverty  and women living in rural and remote areas.  Priscilla Simard and Millie Barrett's  "A crisis of survival" about native women  and health, is particularly disturbing. They  discuss the many serious health problems  natives face, including poverty, lack of  local resources, suicide, alcohol and drug  abuse, mental illness and violence. Drug  and solvent abuse by youth and even small  In terms of design, The Healthsharing Book  is  outstanding. It is clean, easy to read,  and attractively illustrated. The comprehensive index at the beginning, resource  index at the back and the chapter titles  at the top of each page make the book  readily accessible. And, if you're the  sort, there is plenty of room to make notes  in the margins.  Mary Firth's illustrations contribute  greatly to the book's visual appeal. Firth  has taken care to relate her drawings to  the chapters with which they are associated,  and her simple cartoon like style is  appealing and at times humourous. They work  well with the general design of the book.  Anne E. Davies, M.A.  Counselling & Therapy  s issues  • sexuality  • relationships  • families  groups  ible Thursdays  Vam  210-1548Johnsto  White Rock, B.C.  iRoad  V4B 3Z8  Wild West  all-women collective,  selling bulk organic  produce, yogurt, and  juices, for the health of  you and your family.  For a free catalog, call  WILD WEST ORGANIC  HARVEST CO-OP  2471 SIMPSON RD, RICHMOND BC V6X2R2 O (604)276-2411  Like the American counterpart, Our I  Ourselves  (and this is one of the few ways  that the two are truly similar), the problem  with this sort of resource book is that it  quickly becomes out of date as organisations  form or fold, and new information becomes  available. However, in the Healthsharing  case,  this is not such a serious problem, because  the quarterly magazine, also called Health-  sharing,  can be used to continually update  and add to the book, as its creators intended.  Of course, they will probably want to publish  a revised edition at some time in the future,  because this book is a valuable res<  in itself.  The Healthsharing Book  is a useful refe:  guide for Canadian women, in sickness and  in health. Every women's centre should have  a copy, as should public libraries, and many  women will find that they want to keep a  copy at home for their personal use.  'MATRONIZE  LIVES!  December    1     -    24,     1985,  ARIEL      BOOKS  will host the event which  had become a tradition  at Women in Focus.  Women artists and artisans  are invited to send samples  or slides of items suitable for sale as holiday  gifts  to  Ariel  Books,  by November 15,  and to  call  733-3511  for more  information. 8 Kinesis October '85  ARTS  Australian Judy Small cheers audience  m  by Laura Field  On Thursday September 12 the gloom of a  rainy Vancouver evening was dispelled by  some Australian sunshine in the form of  singer Judy Small. Judy has appeared at  the last two Vancouver Folk Festivals and  gave a rousing concert at the Vancouver  East Cultural Centre last September. This  year she gave us another wonderful evening  before returning to Australia.  The concert began with Gary Cristall of  the Folk Festival Society stating simply  that "Judy needs no introduction". To a  very warm welcome from the audience Judy  came on stage carrying her guitar. When  the applause finally died away she thanked  us for our support and added "But I was  going to sing a song to cheer you up! Oh  well, I'll do it anyway." With that she  launched into "One Voice in the Crowd" the  title cut from her new album.  Judy's songs celebrate the power of the  individual. Her next song "Walls and  Windows" suggested that if people on  either side of military conflicts spoke to  each other free from government propaganda  and intervention -that we might find that  we have more common concerns than we have  differences. The chorus asks - "Do you  think of me as enemy and could you call  me friend, or will we let our differences  destroy us in the end? The wall that stands  between us could be a window too, when I  look into the mirror I see you."  Judy's mother once commented "You know,  Jude, since you started singing we no  longer have any secrets." "The Family  Maiden Aunt" is just such a song. Judy  claims to have written it in sheer  self-defence against her family's  duckings over her single status.  Judy often warns her audience that "By  the end of this evening you will know  more about me, my family and my friends  than you would have ever dreamed possible.  "People ask me how I can be :  optimistic" she told us, "but I can'  help it, I was born this way." She  paused and added slyly "My mother says that  I got it from my father."  r-Judsls..§fitias_hlghli&h£-Jthe, strength of  : individual women. These included a rollicking number about a Scottish labourer's  Judy's songs highlight the strength  of individual women.  wife who has finally had enough of her  husband's abuse, to a quietly moving  ballad describing the life of a rancher's  wife on an isolated sheep station in the  Australian outback (entitled "From the  Lambing to the Wool").  "A Heroine of Mine" is about Australian  feminist Lady Jessie Street, who lived  from 1889 to 1970. Though she was well-to-  do and the wife of a Chief Justice, she  was a socialist who fought for equal pay,  Aboriginal rights, and for world peace.  "Annie" (written by American Fred Small,  no relation) tells the story of a teacher  who must conceal her lesbian identity  from her well-intentioned colleagues  who wonder "why a pretty girl like her  should be alone". Judy opened her second  set with the a cappella "Bridget Evans",  a rousing tribute to the determination of  the Greenham Common women.  ably Judy Small's first album, Mothers, Daughters, Wives  Among her autobiographical numbers is "A  Song for the Roly-Poly People" that  challenges society's concept of the ideal  female form. Judy lamented that she spent  the first 28 years of her life trying to  look like Connie Kaldor! "You know, tall,  blond..."  "Women of Our Time" was written in the  year of her mother's 70th birthday, her  own 30th, and her niece's 15th birthday.  It tells us how each generation follows  in the footsteps of the previous one but  makes them her own.  "Mary Parker's Lament"  one of Judy's ancestors  became a criminal. Her  fabric and a blanket ti  her baby warm. But the  was sent as a convict  seven years of forced  another convict in ord  self from the sailors  is the story of how  :, an English girl,  crime was stealing  o keep herself- and  baby died and Mary  to Australia for  labour. She married  o protect her-  and other convicts.  The song chronicles Mary's hardships, her  longing for the home that she'll never  see again, and the joy of watching her own  children grow. Throughout the song we see  the full range of emotions, from tragedy  to triumph, play across Judy's expressive  face. To sit a hillside away from her when  she performs at a folk festival is to miss  this added dimension to her performance.  The Cultch is the right size to keep the  atmosphere intimate.  &jt ft it it it it it it it it it it it it it it j?j? ft it J? it it ft it it it ft ft it it it ft JZ&  IP  HEN NITE  at the Patricia Hotel, 403 E. Hastings it  October 22,7 p.m. ^  Women's Jam Session J  ititft ft ft ft ftftft ftftft 9"  kit it it it it it it it it it it it it it  with a 5-piece women's back-up band xj>  M.C. - Terilyn Ryan    %  Please bring your own instruments.  ^  it it it it i? it it it it it it it it it it it it it~  On the lighter side we have Judy's  own "Turn Right and Go Straight", a  country and western style song featuring  one of the funniest introductions of the  evening. She also sang a very saucy  rendition of Nancy White's "Thirty Years  a Princess and Never a Queen", another  tongue-in-cheek C&W lament, this time  for "poor Princess Anne". The audience  joined in lustily when Judy belted out  "The I.P.D." a song about male contraception. The album liner notes read  "If men could get pregnant, contraception  would be an art form!"  Judy feels that Canada and Australia  have much in common. "After all, you  were established as a British Colony and  so were we, and now you're an American  colony and so are we!" This uneasy  relationship with America appears in  several of her songs. "The Futures  Exchange" is about her concerns with the  American military base at Pine Gap, near  Alice Springs in the Outback, and the  mining and export of Australia's uranium  which is used in the manufacture of  nuclear weapons.  "Our Best Friend" shows how in thirty  years the image of America abroad has  changed from the innocence of the 1950s  to the Vietnam War in the '60s to America':  involvement in Central America in the  '80s. Images of "Bicycles across the moon  and laser beams in space" create a haunting refrain. New Zealand is honoured for  her refusal to shelter U.S. nuclear  subs in a witty song where Judy sings  "Oh-ho the kiwi, who'd have thought it  would be you? But if kiwis can stand  up to eaglesi why .not the kangaroo? And  why not the beaver too?"  One of my favourites was "Just Another  Death in New York City". While in New  York last year Judy witnessed the death  of a construction worker who fell from the  25th floor of a new building. Painfully  she recounts the crowd's reaction to  this tragedy, and the anguish of the man's  partner and workmates. The callousness  of big city life is laid bare as she  looks up his death in the N.Y. Times to  learn that his name was Edward, that "he  was all of thirty-five, he had a wife and  a couple of children, and he made page  forty-five."  Judy closed with the title cut from her  first album "Mothers, Daughters, Wives",  another song written for her own mother  but addressing all women who have ever  watched their men go to war. The women  of her mother's generation have lost  fathers, husbands and sons to the madness of world conflicts. The song deals  with the effects of war on women's  lives, both when they're left behind  and when the men return home. The  audience softly sang the chorus with her  and my friend next to me cried, as I had  when I first heard the song a year ago.  After much applause Judy reappeared to  lead us in a gospel-style song called  "Never Turning Back". Purged by her  songs and warmed by her love and her  hope we trailed out into the Vancouver  night.  ■ 11P1 ~"~                                 CFRO 102.7 EM.  "W RUBYMUSIC.,  Rubymusic is on hoiiday and will  not appear in this issue.  Connie  Smith's column returns to Kinesi  in December. Swan Puss  $HH!A>0  by Deb Thomas  Fable From The Women's Quarters.  By Claire Harris. Williams-Wallace:  Toronto, 1984. 61p.  I get the feeling sometimes while reading  poetry, that I wished I had thought of a  particular phrase or metaphor. Claire  Harris's Fables From The Women's Quarters  gave me a different feeling - the realization that she's out of my rank.  In the use of her preferred genre, the long  poem, she is effective, skillful, and inspiring. In several of the pieces, she has  strung together shorter lyric poems which,  though whole in themselves, seem like  fragments of a whole when strung together.  The first poem, "Nude on a Pale Staircase",  falls into this category. It follows the  general theme of much of Harris's work in  this collection, that of exploration of  women's relationships to men and to themselves. In these poems, politics, families,  and environment are set into this context,  clothed in the colours of the relationships while the relationships are coloured  by them.  In this poem, Harris explores the thoughts  and feelings of an East Indian woman, settled in the comfort of the prosperous West,  while still tied in blood and spirit to  her strife-torn homeland. She remembers  the bazaars and marketplaces. She listens  to the news of "a massacre in Assam" with,  mixed feelings -half guilt, half sorrow.  The woman's partner is of European origin  and cannot remember with her or identify  with her feelings.  dry pressed  between the pages of his  culture  ut of her  is faded to  he approves  The second long poem, "Where the Sky is a  Pitiful Tent", is the story of a family  of Guatemalan peasant revolutionaries,  forced into action by an oppressive regime.  Each small poem is capped with a quote  from the testimony of one Rigoberto  Manchu, a Guatemalan whose family were  revolutionaries. The quotes inform and  lead us into the poems which follow them.  The language is rich, sensual, full of  colours and smells:  All night the hibiscus tapped at our  jalousies  dark bluster of its flower trying to ride in  on wind lacinated with the smell of yard  fowl   The lives it portrays are harsh and painful but they are also full of love, deep  and passionate, for each other, the land,  their country. I love this long poem unabashedly. Among the many beautiful  passages, this is one of my favourites:  The catechists say "in heaven there is no  male no female" that is far foolishness  why else seeing you smelling of danger  and death do I want you so  your mouth your clear opening in me  Punctuating each long poem is a haiku.  Haiku is,.essentially, an Oriental art and  requires the combined sparseness of vision  and complexity of thought that is particularly Eastern. Harris does well, however,  as an English-speaking Haiku artist, in  capturing the necessary spirit.  young wife hurries  through the busy evening street  Venetian blinds twitch  Sandwiched between the four long poems in  the collection are six shorter poems. These  Eare as skillfully written as her long poems.  "Blood Feud" speaks from the numbed mind of  a battered woman. "The Fall" is the story of  how a child's adult, friend becomes her  molester.  The one I like best of these was "this was  the child I dreamt", a sensitive and complex  expression of a woman's thoughts on her  aborted child. It is, from beginning to  end, exquisite, from the delicate evocation of the unborn child:  and she was bright  as the splash of wings in the forest  yet she was delicate as spray  from the mountain falls  To her grieving for her emptied womb:  I have become the charnel house of my own  seed  the dead end of my line  never again will their strength gleam  black in sunlight        never  will a woman call and their eyes  look up in answer...  The third long poem "Policeman Cleared  in Jay Walking Case", begins with a story  from the Edmonton Journal about a policeman's sexual harassment of a black, fifteen-year-old girl when he arrests her  for jay walking. As she always does in her  best work in this collection Harris  launches from these cold facts into a  fierce flight of poetry. The poem's parts  are both passionate rages and clear analysis of the racism and sexism inherent in  the case - of the unthinkable act of strip  searching a girl for jay walking.  It is this ability to combine passion,  beauty, a personalizing of the events, and  a reflection of the complexities of any  seemingly black and white situation that  sets Harris's political statements apart.  While Harris rages about the clear injustices of the case, one phrase gives the  reader a revealing look through black eyes  at a white person: "I fear your heavy fall  of hair like sheets of rain and/ the clear  cold water of your eyes." This passage is  included in a part of the poem which gives  the white race responsibility for the major  ills of the world, from acid rain to napalm  to stealing land from aboriginal peoples.  Kinesis October "85 29  The last long poem, "Seen in Stormlight",  is for me the least successful in the book.  Harris states at the beginning that "it.is  included here because it is important to  me. It was the first long poem I wrote.  The first poem published." It is often  a mistake to include old pieces with  new work as the inevitable comparison seldom works in favour of both. In this case  Harris's development as a poet is plain  for the reader to see and this "first"  poem pales next to the others. The  extensive use of footnotes throughout to  explain Nigerian references is quite  distracting.  There are flashes of brilliance, of course,  precursors to Harris's later development  as a poet. The poem shows Lagos, Nigeria  by "stormlight". Here the fragments of the  long poem are indeed fragments, scenes  revealed by the flashes of lightning. The  pieces are strung together more tightly,  each leading directly into the other. This  technique is effective as a vehicle to  show the contrasts of Nigerian urban  society, squallor and wealth, power and  admiration of power, death and the living.  The whole vision is punctuated by the  brightly painted slogans on buses, trucks  and cars: "God follows me",   "Fear God",  "Trust God".  These messages are the major bits of life  and colour in an otherwise skillful but  less passionate picture. Here Harris explores the insides of whole groups of  people instead of the private thoughts  of one or two and this gives the poem  less punch.  Despite this minor criticism, I felt that  the collection generally displayed Harris's  substantial skills well. This book, Harris's  first, places her alongside such noted poets  as Livesay and Warding ton. "A '^e<Mnd/VoolcL  is due out soon. Watch for itV  PRESS GANG  PRINTERS  a feminist, worker-controlled collective.  603 Powell Street, Vancouver  253-1224    .  Marsha J. Arbour  Signpainting  Screenprinting  Graphics & Design  734-9395  eline will design your brochure, typeset  your newsletter, paste-up your program,  reduce or enlarge your illustrations,  and halftone screen that photo.  At decidedly reasonable rates.  let Baseline  be your line  to printed communication  can 683-5038 30 Kinesis October '85  Bill  COMMENTARY  Feminists are isolating poor women  by Zoe Lambert  The September issue of Kinesis  focussed  on class. Much was said about classism  in the feminist movement - "white middle  class women" with access to education,  financial choices, etc. How easy it  seemed that writers from middle class  backgrounds, or privileged with a supportive environment within the women's  community, admitted the differences  between themselves and less privileged  women. How easy.  The lack of articles actually by women  living with the day-to-day reality of  poverty (with exception of 'Experiencing  Women, Race and Class, Personally'., by  Kandace Kerr) was so obvious that Cy-Thea  Sand, in 'What's Class Got to do with it?*  apologized for the absence of "some  contributors' work". "Ironically", she  continued, "material conditions of ill-  health, work commitments..."etc. was the  reason these "contributors" were unable  to represent themselves. As Cy-Thea  stated, it is "a grim reminder of the  historical silencing of working-class  And yet, with this silencing stated,  Kinesis  served to be an example of precisely the classism which exists in the  feminist community. Does the lack of time  and energy that poor women have to put  into activism give the white middle class  womens' movement the right to speak on  behalf of all  women?  In last month's issue of Kinesis  I did  not read about women on welfare, about  prostitution, about growing up in a poor  home, nor about the day to day reality of  being poor. In fact, these topics were not  even mentioned. Instead, I read about an  upper middle class woman's recreational  privileges, and alot of intellectualism  about class differences and how poor women  fit into the movement (although Sara  Diamond's 'Caught in the Gender/Class  Squeeze' took a historical look at working class women, mediating with the middle  class women's movement.)  As such, I would like to describe my life  both as a poor woman, a young woman, and  an activist.  As a child, I grew up in a middle class  home. However, for the past five years,  since leaving my parents' home at age 15,  I have learned what it is like to be poor.  My largest privilege has been the intellectual and social confidence I have retained from my childhood.  In my first year of living below the  poverty line I romanticized poverty. I  could always count on extra money arriving  at.birthdays, a new radio, good meals,  etc. to fall back on. In short, I was not  deprived of basic and some luxury items,  because I still had access to the world  of the middle class through family and  friends.  Unfortunately, middle and upper class  women who have lived on low income often  experience this kind of 'poverty'. With  this experience under their belts, women  in the women's movement seem to think that  they understand what it is to be poor.  How deluded these women <  quickly my own delusions  and how  e smashed.  for a short time. Being young and a  woman, the quality of my work was undervalued and poor treatment led to low  self-esteem. What was most difficult was  my lack of options. Verbal abuse and  sexual abuse were tolerated out of financial necessity.  In my period of unemployment, I considered  accepting a job where the restaurant owner  clearly specified that my qualifications  didn't matter, but my willingness to  perform sexually was the criteria for the  job. He said this in the job interview  after running his hand across my crotch.  In my emotional and physical exhaustion  from being poor and isolated, I did not  resist but clearly calculated the pros  and cons of the job. I did not accept the  job, but had all my experience been in  poverty, I might very well have accepted  the "opportunity".  I was still not nineteen and therefore  not qualified to receive welfare. Many  young women in the same position I was in,  who are from low income backgrounds, are  the young women who sell their bodies on  the streets. It is this basic need for  survival, this lack of options, that  middle class women do not understand.  After my period of unemployment (and  self-employment), I worked in another  restaurant. I was fired from this job  specifically because I was a woman. Again,  I did not have the emotional and physical  energy to report this to the Human Rights  Commission. I at least recognized this  option. Luckily, by this time I was old  enough to get welfare.  My two years  best given m<  elfare have been what has  understanding of poverty.  At age 16 I moved to Vancouver, 3,000  miles away from my middle class support  system.  Currently,,1 am on welfare and have been  for two years.  Before I was nineteen, I worked mostly in  low paying restaurant jobs and was on U.I.C.  In my first year I was overcome with loneliness and isolation. I no longer had the  social interaction with co-workers and  did not have the money to go out and meet  new people. I spent most of the time in  my one-room 'apartment', or with my  emotionally abusive boyfriend. There were  no options.  The most crippling effect of having no  money is the lack of options on a daily  basis, and the overwhelming sense of  worthlessness and paralysis. I want to  stress that this is not a mere moment of  reflection on a weekend, but something that  consumes every moment of every day of every  week...  That fall my diet consisted almost entirely  of bread and apples. I owed a lot of money  (about $175.00) to B.C. Tel for long distance phone calls made during moments of  severe emotional distress. Being hungry on  a daily basis, I was less rational and  suffered periods of dizziness and faint-  ness.  In the last year I have learned more  about survival. On Sunday 'evenings, I  often walk to Granville Island and fill  a pack-sack full of food thrown out as  garbage. I spend hours going through  private garbages and commercial dumpsters  looking for furniture, clothing and  possible art supplies. I now know what  stores one can rummage through to find  cheap necessities. Survival is a lot of  work.  Both physically and emotionally, living on  a survival level is extremely exhausting.  I cannot over-stress this. When I am  physically weak and fighting depression,  it is very difficult to take action to  change my situation. Moreover it is difficult to even identify an option.  As well as the time, physical and emotional effort, is the constant process of put  ting my experiences through an analysis  so I can retain my sense of self-worth  and dignity.  As an activist I am very frustrated. I have  yet to be involved in a group, feminist,  left or otherwise, which addresses poverty  (with the exception of the Ottawa based  group, Youth Information Network). And  yet, this is the basic reality which results from our patriarchal, capitalist  economy. To put it simply, politics is the  management of the economy; ,and poverty is  economics. To me, poverty is essentially  interconnected to all social, political and  economic analysis. Feminism must embrace  these facets.  Aside from the obvious gap within the analysis in the women's and left community  (this is an article in itself); aside from  the political frustration this provides me,  there is the reality of working as a poor  activist. When I arrive at a meeting exhausted and spun out, especially one  scheduled near the end of a five week  welfare month, I do not get support. Many  activists do not even comprehend this  struggle, much less identify it. When the  group goes out for a drink after a meeting I can't afford the $3 cover charge of  an NDP-owned bar plus the $2.50 beer.  Aside from feeling a theoretical isolation,  I am also isolated from the feminist and left  community because of money. It seems that the  easiest way to get to know people in the  community is to attend events sponsored by  feminist and political groups. I cannot  afford the 2 to 25 dollars to participate ii  politically correct films, cultural events,  benefits etc.  I have occasionally come across the attitude that if I really wanted to attend,  I would make the sacrifice.  Often I find that middle class feminists  think that sacrifice is part-and-parcel of  being an activist., Sacrifice is a luxury.  Sacrifice -is not being able to attord a  second beer; survival is not being able to  eat for a day or two or...  There is much left out in this article.  Problems of ageism; sexual abuse in a low  income environment; access to education  and middle class bias in the content of  education; boring, abusive and poorly  paid employment and job ghettoes; emotional/mental instability; health care; welfare  rights, etc. etc. This is not meant to be  an overview, but one insight into life  with poverty. And even this is not a good  representation, as I will always have  priviliges'assigned to me from middle  class childhood.  I would like to suggest that the feminist  movement excludes poor women on the basis  of the movement's priorities^ A poor or  'working class' women's priority is, out  of necessity, survival.  : last question I would  There is but  like to ask.  The Downtown East Side Women's Centre  provides women from the Downtown East  Side a place to congregate. Almost all  of these women are on welfare and many  have experienced battering and prostitution. The Downtown East Side Women's  Centre was not covered in last month's  issue of Kinesis,  yet it is here that  women come together in their struggle  for survival both financial and as  women. I have heard from two sources  that there are "poor links" between  these women and the rest of the women's  community. Why? Kinesis October '85 31  LETTERS  Chicago never  gave birth  . giving birth and  Re: Jill Pollock's review of Judy Chicago's  Birth Project (Kinesis,   September '85)  I saw the Birth Project at the Vancouver  Museum with my four month old son and  his father in conjunction with a fascinating  lecture on the history of midwifery in  Canada by Debbie Fainsworth and a slide-  video of recent births in Vancouver attended  by midwives.  I had seen, or rather attended the procession around, the Dinner Party in San  Francisco when I first came to North America  in March 1979 and had been overwhelmed  by this huge celebration of the vagina and  the immense historical representation of  women and our crafts.  Having recently given birth to a child I  expected the Birth Project to be small  and intimate, instinctive and private, a  gentle celebration of women and their  children, and the intense concentration  of giving birth.  I found the embroidery and craft work  fascinating and my son was delighted by  the bright colours. But I found Chicago's  images lacking and for additional reasons  to those discussed by Jill Pollack.  .It think it is  significant that Chicago  has never given birth. Even more significantly, I suspect that she has never  attended a birth and I think that this  is the source of my unease with her  images.  The enlarged uteruses of Chicago's women  rarely nurture a child within them and I  can't remember any of the vaginas giving  birfch to an actual child.  I was particularly incredulous at Chicago's  mountainous breasts with great streams of  white formula-like liquid gushing forth  into open space. In the usual experience  after birth an eager little mouth draws  out a few drops of yellowing colostrum  and later there.is a thin, watery, high  protein, low fat, often bluish milk as  distinct from the high fat, white cows'  milk that appears to be the source of  Chicago's imagery. (I apologize for the  biology lesson.)  At the time I looked down at my own tiny  breasts, hardly more than a pair of nipples,  which have remained unchanged through  pregnancy and four months of nursing a  fat baby and felt dismay that some  pregnant women may miss this skin to skin  nuzzling by being put off by Chicago's  imagery of formula producing mountains as  much as they have been put off in the past  by male imagery of the breast as a male  sex object.  The lack of babies in Chicago's Birth  Project was contrasted by their abundance  in the midwives' slide-video. Here was  real birth, women with wonderful big  tummies giving birth, and all those little  heads being welcomed into the world by  caring hands.  My child's father did object that there  were few fathers in the slide-video,  and he had a point. I thought the father  was probably behind the camera, as he  was at our son's hospital birth, and I  hoped he was the one ungloved pair of  hands catching the baby, unlike our son's  birth. Afterwards he was probably just off  camera phoning the grandparents, getting  a cup of tea for his wife, or a clean  diaper for his child.  Certainly for me the highlight of the  evening was the slide-video. I was impressed by the midwive's skill, care and  respect for the j  her child.  My mind retains images from that video'  while the Birth Project has faded.  Best wishes, Eve Petersen, Victoria, B.C.  Impressed by  Kerr's class story  Kinesis:  I was very impressed with Kandace Kerr's  article, 'Experiencing Women,  Race and  Class  Personally', in the September '85  issue.  Not only do I feel it was well-written,  but incisive and to the point. She  has tackled what has become an inherent  dilemma and made clear her reasons for  doing so.  Not being a 'joiner' myself, for much the  same reasons, I was especially pleased  to read her analysis of the different  approaches to feminisn taken and her  sentiments around the personal-as-political.  Kandace has been working very hard for a  long time, and without much support or  money. I, for one, want to applaud her  work and let her know how much we need  that information that she so consistently puts out.  Again, it reaffirms that Kinesis  is  performing a vital function, and giving  us a public voice where, in many cases,  no other exists. One step forward, two  steps back, turn the page...  Jill Pollack, Vancouver  Springsteen album  dangerous, offensive  In your June issue there was an article  by Kim Irving ("How do we deal with  Rapists?"). I would like to point out that  Bruce Springsteen's song "Born in the  USA" in my opinion is racist, "...gone  to fight the yellowman..." is a racial  slur on the Vietnamese people at large.  I am not prepared, as Ms. Irving is, to  give Springsteen the benefit of the doubt!  Ironically, since I've been incarcerated  it doesn't seem to matter to the majority  of the women here, correctional staff or  inmates, if Springsteen's music is racist  or promotes child rape/incest. I personally find the album dangerous and offensive.  In Sisterhood, Beverly-Jeanne Whitney,  Okalla Prison, Women's Unit, Lakeside.  Censorship book  cold, abstract  Kinesis:  I was interested in Pat Feindel's review  of Women Against Censorship,   (W.A.C.)  edited by Varda Burstyn ("Book is exasperating" Kinesis,  May '85) and should  like to add my own reaction. Pat has  termed the book "exasperating";  I term it divisive, insulting, patronizing, and quasi-American, in that its  purpose appears to be a promotion of the  American First Amendment: a concept that  is alien to Canada. Many Canadians, indeed,  consider that this Amendment makes a  mockery of the phrase "freedom of expression".  For a start, do W.A.C.'s writers really  believe that feminists here have not  already discussed the issues and strategies that they put forward? I, personally, have lost count of the times I have  been warned on these very issues by V.S.W.,  Rape Relief, WAP in Victoria, indeed, by  every feminist group working on the porn  issue in B.C. Perhaps if W.A.C. had had  the courtesy and the common sense to contact women's groups here - which, with  the exception of Sara Diamond who spoke  to two members of W.A.V.A.W., they  did not -they might not have made the  mind-boggling statements that overflow  their book. I, for one, deeply resent  the inference that we have made porn our  sole issue, to the detriment of all else.  A visit to the North Shore Women's Centre  could have put the lie to that, as I'm  sure it could for other women's centres  also. We work constantly on issues such  as child sexual abuse, career counselling,  and financial planning. It is not our fault  if the press chooses to pay attention only  to our work against porn.  My list of complaints regarding this book  is too long to detail here. However, a few  are: the strong whiff of jealousy emanating from those Americans who dismiss  Dworkin's and McKinnon's suggestion that  we use a civil ordinance against porn  pimps. I am not the only woman who has the  impression that the real reason W.A.C.  object to this suggestion is because THEY  had not thought of it first...  W.A.C.'s urging us not to trust government, while at the same time urging us  to ask government for millions and millions  of dollars so that we can make our own  films and books to counter the hate propaganda of porn. What, in these days of  cutbacks? NOW who's being trusting and  naive?!...  Their twisting of language into Orwellian  Newspeak, such as their frequent referring  to our work as "censorship". "Censorship"  infers that someone's rights to freedom  of expression have been contravened. The  porn pimps never had the right to produce  rape and incest materials in the first  place, as Section 159 CC makes clear. On  the other hand, OUR right not to have this  hate propaganda in our communities has  been contravened. W.A.C. are attempting  to contravene citizen's rights to have a  democratically debated law upheld. In this  they aid the porn pimps, not women...  And by the way, I note they do not define  what they mean by "freedom" of expression.  Whose freedom are they referring to? The  porn pimps? Certainly it is not women's  freedom..  These are but a few of. my many complaints  regarding this book. However, for me, the  most distrubing aspect is that these  women hold a cold, philosophical abstraction (their so-called "freedom of expression") - as representing the highest good,  placing it above the dignity, safety and  human rights of their fellow human beings.  Anyone who values a philosophical abstraction above people is demonstrating an  extreme right-wing stance. Because of this,  to me, and to several other women who have  read this book, W.A.C. represents a group  who are to the right even of the Right.  We who have been working so long and so  arduously on the porn problem in B.C.  should beware of them.  Sincerely yours, Jancis M. Andrews,  Vancouver.  ; Letters to the editor should be received by the 15th of the  I preceding month for publication, and should be no longer  [ -than 500 words. We reserve the right to edit for clarity,  space, and libel. Writers will be notified about letters con-  I cerning their articles and can choose to reply in the issue in  j whkh the letter appears. Editor's notes will he limited to  j clarification only. In the event that numerous letters on any  j one article or issue are received, we reserve the right to  I publish a representative sampling ot the opinions expressed. LETTERS/BULLETIN BOARD  Women's Studies  Chair at SFU  The following is an open letter to  Kinesis  readers re: Chair of Women's  Studies, Simon Fraser University.  This new Chair has been partly endowed by  the Secretary of State, and further fund-  raising is proceeding. The Chair's mandate includes community outreach and many  other activities that would be beneficial  to the women of B.C. As the first occupant  of this Chair, from Sept. 1, 1985 to Aug.  31, 1986, I am available to women's  groups to speak about women's issues  (especially in the areas of Mental Health)  or consult about services or projects.  Currently on leave of absence from U.B.C.  where I work with the Medical School and  B.C. Children's Hospital, I-am a psychiatrist who sees children, adolescents and  their families. A longtime critic of the  mental health system, I have co-authored  a book (Women and the Psychiatric  Paradox,  Eden Press, 1983), and written a  number of articles including: "Mothers:  Guilty or Not Guilty?", "Women and Depression", "The Psychiatrist-Woman-Patient  Relationship", "Women and Psychotropic  Drugs", "Parents' Perceived Responsibility for their Children's Problems".  While I am at S.F.U. I would like to  collect information about two areas of  grave concern to me. These are:  1) The hidden problem of sexual abuse of  women by their therapists, and the  long-term effects which are usually  very destructive.  2)0ver-prescription of anti-depressant  and anti-anxiety drugs to women.  Would anyone who shares these concerns or  has any information about these problems  please contact me.  Yours sincerely, Sue Penfold, Women's  Studies Chair, S.F.U.  !  Azrael responds  to ASP letter  The following letter has been edited for  length.  Kinesis:  I was disturbed by Marie Arrington of  ASP's letter in September's Kinesis  and  feel obligated to reply, although as a  founding mother of ASP, it strongly overrides my sense of the way we ought to be  working together to change a situation  that we agree is intolerable. We at the  Women's Shelter Society are glad that ASP  is articulating its concerns, but we wonder why they didn't bother to check with  us first so we could clarify the misconceptions that are the basis of the criticism in their letter.  ASP's logic leads us to a dead end. In her  letter, Marie Arrington is quick to jump  to conclusions, shift blame, and denigrate  the efforts of others. If we can't transcend our differences and if ASP continues  to slam its theoretical doors in our faces,  than they sever the possibilty that we,  from different worlds, can work together  for a common goal. This effectively assures  that what we both agree is a nightmare  situation will flourish.  Anyone can scoff, but only Jancis Andrews  cared enough, after reading the original  article in June Kinesis,   to suggest confronting Christians as a fundraising possibility. The church does, after all, have  a moral imperative to fulfill to the dispossessed. Contrary to Marie's facetious  comments, the churches have shown a historical interest in the issue. While so  far none have committed themselves to backing us, at least the lines of communication  are open, and we in turn have made it  clear that any money we receive, while tax  deductible, has no strings attached.  What I would like to know is, given their  concern, why ASP never attended any of the  community meetings we organized and to  which they were invited? We do not see  ASP on the street anymore, nor at community  events. It is ironic that those who speak  the loudest when claiming concern for the  women of the Main and Hastings area, most  notably the Downtown Eastside Residents  Association, City Council, and ASP,  should turn out to be the main opponents  of a women's shelter in the area.  For the women in the area have spoken out,  only nobody is listening. It is their  words in the article I put together. It is  their wish to have a place to live where  they will have a say, a place where they  can live without fear, and with the advantages of the creative, social, medical,  legal and educational programs and assistance that will be accessible, not only to  residents, but to all the women of the area.  The Vancouver Women's Shelter Society has  its standards listed in point form in our  constitution, which anyone can arrange to  see. What is emphasized in this document  is our belief in basic equality and integrity, and in the right to self-determination and opportunity for all women. The  Society was formed in direct response to  the needs of the community.  Some of the hopes and fears of downtown  eastside women are documented in a 1983  questionnaire designed to find out directly  what was needed. The shelter idea sprang  from a concensus among the women as to  what would be most comfortable, necessary,  and exciting in a living place for themselves. The women will determine the rules,  work on the board, the desk, on security,  and in the kitchen. The women will decide  if, who, and when men will be welcome.  Our goal is to provide a context beyond  crises for street women, and to act as a  support and backup for women who seek it.  The shelter will not be an institution because it will be part of the community.  We have always intended to work closely  within the network of existing services.  We have no daycare because there is an excellent daycare next door to our chosen  site.  As for Aleta, she is puzzled and insulted  by Arrington's attitude. She wants the  hostel, wants some help with recovery, want  to work there when she's ready. She's excited by the many possibilties for herself  and other women of the area. She doesn't  want to be integrated, no thank you, at  least not just yet. The world is still a  basically hostile place where she does not  feel at ease. The problems and situations  she has to navigate are very different  from those of battered women who seek refuge in transition houses.  Marie admits to suspicion of 'straight'  neighbours, a tendancy she has not left  behind. Why lump together women in different crises? As for the young street  mothers - ASP's suggestion is another obvious need, another necessary project, why  not for ASP?  I agree with ASP's basic premise that it is  poverty, unequal distribution of opportunity and resources that is the root of  social malignancy. It will take more than  a magic wand to rectify this.  If the  churches are willing to fund our project,  I say amen. It's obvious the city will  not take responsibility, bleat on though  they may about 'shocking conditions' and  'something must be done.'  What is to be done when we cannot even agree among ourselves what is to be done, or  even who is most entitled or obligated to  do it ? The time is long past for theoretical hair-splitting. We know why those  women are out there, and nothing will  change unless we can work together to  change that.  Miriam Azrael  Vancouver Women's Shelter Society  EVENTS  •EDUCATIONAL ON NICARAGUA (West  Side) Food Self-Sufficiency Campaign and  Tools for Peace. Oxfam office, Oct. 19,  10-noon.; Oct. 20,same as above except on  East Side Brittania Centre, rm. L-3, 1 pm  -3:30 pm. Contact Oxfam for more info.;  Oct. 21 - Door to Door Fundraising Campaign (West Side) 6 pm to 9 pm Reception  at Isadora's 8:30pm - 10:30pm.; Oct. 22  same as above except East Side 6 pm -  9 pm. Reception at La Quena Coffee House,  8:30pm - 10:30 pm.  •PARKS CANADA & ENVIRONMENT CANADA & THE  NATIONAL FILM BOARD are pleased to present  the Vancouver Premiere of 'From Ashes to  Forest': a film about modern conservation  and environmental re-birth. Thursday Oct.  10th at 8pm. Robson Square Cinema, 800  Robson St. Vancouver. Info. 666-5900  Environment Canada/666-0718 National Film  Board.  •NICARAGUA: THE DIRTY WAR - a film presentation will be featured on Oct. 5th,  Vancouver Museum and Planetarium at 7:30  pm. (Premiere showing); Oct. 6th -  Brittania Auditorium 7:30 pm. 1661 Napier  Tickets-$3., $2. (unemployed)  Reception to follow. All proceeds go to  the PAN CAMPAIGN.  • GET INVOLVED, BECOME A MEMBER OF THE  Saskatchewan World Food Day Committe.  Each year, on Oct. 16 Canadians and  people around the world focus for a day  on the causes and potential solutions to  hunger in the world. For more info, on  how you can help write to: Saskatchewan j  World Food Day Committee, c/o 401-230-  22nd St. East, Saskatoon, Sask. S7K 0E9  •A SUKKAT-SHALOM SERVICE WILL BE HELD  7:30pm Saturday Oct. 5 at Havurah Or  Shalom, 1053 Douglas Cres. at Oak St.  in Vancouver. All are invited to attend  and participate. For more info, please  phone 732-0150.  •FARMWORKERS BENEFIT DINNER AND DANCE on  Oct. 19th sponsored by the Canadian  Farmworkers Union. The purpose of this  event is to raise funds for the CFU to  continue its struggle against the injustices suffered by farmworkers.  Tickets are $10. ($7.00 students/unem-^  ployed), and are available through  calling the CFU office, 430-6055, at  La Quena Coffee House, and at Octopus  Books (east and west). Free Childcare  is provided.  •CALLING ALL WITCHES, CRONES, NYMPHS...  Hallowe'en dance, November 2, 8pm.  Arrington Hall, Parksville. For more  info, and sleep space, call 248-6582. Kinesis October '85 33  BULLETIN BOARD  •A PLACE IN THE GARDEN: A SEXUALITY  WORKSHOP FOR WOMEN: is designed for women  who wish to explore and enhance their  sexuality. This is an experiential workshop for personal development.  Times: Friday 7-10 pm. For more info, and  registration phone (604) 531-8555 or  write to Anne Davies at: #210-1548  Johnston Rd., WhiteRock, B.C. V4G 3Z8.  •The following lecture series entitled  "Women, Technology and Culture" will be  offered in Room 136 at Langara College  on 4 Thursdays from 12:30-2:30 pm. Admission  is free.  Thursday Oct. 17: "Test-tube Babies and  Surrogate Mothers: Legal Repercussions";  Thursday, Oct. 24: "Women and the Media:  Not a Long Way Baby".  Thursay, Nov. 7: "The Women's Music industry—A Decade of Progress".  Thursday, Oct. 31:"The Joy and the Agony:  Rewards and Risks for Women in a Scientific  Career".  •Sandy Friedman, M.A. and Doris Maranda,  M.A. of Eating Disorders Programs will  hold a Professional Training Seminar on  Saturday, Nov. 2. This is open to individuals who in the course of their wo.rk  come into contact with women with  eating disorders. Fee is $75. For info,  call Sandy at 731-8752 or Doris at 736-  7180.  ©Sandy Friedman, M.A. and Doris Maranda,  M.A. of Eating Disroder Programs will  hold Public Information Seminars on  Monday, Oct. 28 at the Hotel Georgia and  on Monday, Nov. 4 at the Royal Towers  Hotel in New Westminster at 7:30 pm.  Topics discussed are dynamics and causes  of overweight, bulima and anorexia from  an individual and social point of view,  and what can be done in terms of change.  $5 per person, $3 students. For info,  call Sandy at 731-8752 or Doris at 736-  7180.  •FIRST ANNUAL FUNDRAISING DANCE for S/SW.R.  WOMEN'S PLACE at Star of The Sea Church  Hall, 15262 Pacific Ave., White Rock,  B.C. Friday Oct. 18, 8pm-lam Live Entertainment, door prizes, raffle, No host  bar. Come and have fun. Price $7.00.  •FAMILY MEMORIES, FAMILY MATTERS. Marsha  J. Arbour, Debbie Bryant, Wendy Lewing-'  ton, Sima Elizabeth Shefrin, at the Car- -  negie Centre Art Gallery, 401 Main, Oct.  14-26.  •THE INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S DAY COMMITTEE  needs women to help organize IWD '86 —  rally, dance(s), info, day, or whatever  you'd like to see happen. No experience  necessary. Meetings are on Tuesdays at  7:30 pm at 1834 East Georgia until further  nqtice. All women welcome!  CONFERENCES  •CHALLENGING OUR IMAGES: THE POLITICS OF  PORNOGRAPHY AND PROSTITUTION. The Ontario  Public Interest Research Group (OPIRG) wii:  be sponsoring a conference that will be  held on the weekend of November 22-24, '85  For more info, contact: OPIRG Toronto,  Room 302, 2 Sussex Ave. Innis College, U  of T, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 1J5 (416) 978-  3032  •THIS FALL SIMON FRASER UNIVERSITY WILL  BE PRESENTING THE FOLLOWING PROGRAMS ON  THE KNOWLEDGE NETWORK:  -Perspectives on Women: a series of 8  programs  -covering the issues and concerns of  women today, starting Tues. Sept. 17th  at 10 pm.  SUBMISSIONS  •SECOND NATIONAL FARM WOMEN'S CONFERENCE  Nov. 21-24, 1985 Sheraton Prince Edward  Hotel and Convention Center. For info. &  registration form contact:"Second National  Farm Women's Conference" P.O. Box 984,  Charlottetown, P.E.I. CIA 7M4  •SEVENTH ANNUAL SINGLE MOTHERS' WEEKEND  CONFERENCE will be held on Oct. 19 & 20,  1985 at YWCA, 580 Burrard St., Vancouver.  Early registration is advised and childcare pre-registration is essential.  •THE CANADIAN RESEARCH INSTITUTE FOR THE  ADVANCEMENT OF WOMEN is holding their  annual conference on Women: Social and  Physical Isolation, from Nov.8-10, 1985  at Sheraton Cavalier Hotel, Saskatoon,  Saskatchewan. Contact the U. of Saskatoon.  S7N 0W0 concerning registration.  CLASSES/WORKSHOPS  -•I am collecting names of women who are  interested in an ongoing group at my  •THE CHILDBIRTH BY CHOICE TRUST, a pro-  choice educational organization, is compiling women's stories about their experiences with illegal abortions. We intend  to publish these stories. If you are  willing to write or to be interviewed,  please write in confidence to: Leslie  Pearl, Childbirth by Choice Trust  40 St. Clair Ave. E~, St. 310  Toronto, Ontario M4T 1M9; or call:  (416) 961-1507  •SHORT STORIES WANTED: for an anthology of  short stories by Black Women living in  Canada. Please contact editors Dionne Brand  and Makeda Silvera immediately at P.O. Box  217 Station E Toronto, Ont. M6H 4E2. The  book is to be published by the Women's  Press, Spring '86.  •BLACKOUT IS BACK AND IS LOOKING FOR  SUBMISSIONS of letters.  Interested?  Write to P.O. Box 65306, Stn. F.,  Vancouver V5N 5L3  •Would women who used to write for The  Radical Reviewer please call Cy-Thea  about reviewing for Kinesis  875-1543.  MISCELLANEOUS  t weekly and I  follow-up weekend  nded 'A Place in the  e in the past. .  mation about any of  11 ing  GROUPS  •BUDGET UNIVERSITY IS STARTING TO PLAN  FOR NEXT SEMESTER'S COURSES. If you are  interested in working with Budget University, come to an organizing meeting  on Thursday, Oct. 17 at 1st United  Church, Gore & Hastings, 7:30pm. for  more info, call 254-1421.  office which would  would like to offer  to women who have at  the Garden' at any t  If you want more inf  our offerings or cou:  would like to book an appointment, call  531-8555 Mon. to Sat. 8am. to 8pm. Leave  a message if I am not available.  Anne Davis - Counselling and Therapy  •JUSTICE INSTITUTE OF BRITISH COLUMBIA  PRESENTS EXTENSION PROGRAMS FALL  SCHEDULE SEPT-DEC 1985, some of the programs available are:  -the sexually abused child  -rechanneling stress through assertive  communications  -heading Adult Survivor Groups  -Let's talk about touching: (prevention  Program for children); for more info,  and registration contact Extension  Programs, Justice Institute of B.C.  4180 W. 4th Ave., Vancouver, B.C.  V6R 4J5 tel: 228-9771  •ROS SHERRARD AND JESSIE MACGREGOR TAKE  great pleasure in announcing the arrival  of our daughter Kaitlan Piri, on Sept. 2  '85 in Powell River.  •GAY & LESBIAN LEGAL ADVICE CLINIC: Vancouver  Gay Community Centre 1244 Seymour St. Van.  Mondays 7:30-9:30 pm. Free. Live out of  town? Write: Legal Advice Clinic, c/o VGCC  P0 BOX 2259, MPO, Van. V6B 3W2  •ANY WOMAN INVOLVED IN ORGANIZATIONS AND  advocacy groups where procedural skills  will be valuable are advised to purchase  "The Meeting Manager" a simple, inexpensive, quick reference guide to meeting  procedures. Order from: Gloria Resnick, The  - Meeting Procedures Company, 27500 Cedar  Rd. Cleveland, Ohio 44122. $1.50 postpaid  (US Funds)  •WOMAN LAYING SEXUAL OFFENCE CHARGES would  like lots of support in courtroom. Nov.4  '85 10 am. Courtroom 510, 222 Main St. All  women needed and appreciated.  OCTOPUS  BOOKS  INIXMNSIVI QUALITY BOOKS  HARD TO GIT ART, S0CIAI A  LITERARY MAGAZINES  A JOURNALS  CAROL  WRIGHT  DESIGNER + BUILDER  TELEPHONE: 876-9788  Spartacus Books  311 West Hastings Street  Vancouver, B.C.  688-6138  ANARCHISM • FEMINISM  SOCIALISM • THIRD WORLD  PRISONS • LABOUR HISTORY  ART • LITERATURE  UPRISING  BREADS  BAKERY  Vancouver's Best  Wholegrain Breads  1697 VENABLES ST.  VANCOUVER, BC  V5L2H1 (604)254-5635  LAWYER  Susann Richter  B.Sc. L.L.B.  Preferred Areas of Practice  Family Law  Employment Law  Commercial Law  Civil & Criminal Litigation  Languages Spoken—  German & English  Free Initial Consultation  687-0545  1200-1055 West Georgia St.  Vancouver, B.C. V6B 2P4 jnesis October '85  BULLETIN BOARD  •UNION MADE (CO-OP RADIO) BENEFIT, Monday  October 7th, 7:30 pm - 11:00pm. Pay by  Donations. Wine, beer and great entertainment provided. La Quena Coffee House,  1111 Commercial Drive.  •VANCOUVER LESBIAN CONNECTION PRESENTS  HALLOWEEN DANCE Fri. Nov. 1st at 3925  Fraser St. Tickets $4-$6, 8pm-lam.  Tickets available at: Ariel Books,  Women's Book Store, Octopus East and  Little Sisters. Childcare offsite;  wheelchair access.  NEXT DANCE: Nov. 29th,  next issue.  info.  •THE AGNES MACPHAIL FUND was established  last year by Canadian Women in order to  provide extra assistance for women candidates running as New Democrats. Help  us carry on the struggle for equa'lity and  future elections by contributing to the  "Agnes MacPhail NDP Fund" 301 Metcalfe  St. Ottawa, Ontario, K2P 1R9 (contrib. are  tax deductable).  •SUPPORT WOMEN'S HEALTH: Join the Canadian  Pelvic Inflammatory Disease Society/ P.O.  Box 33804, Station D, Vancouver, V6J 4L6.  $2 unemployed/ $5 regular. ^|||l|||p  •CBC-TV- THE BEST YEARS - weekly programming  for seniors, Wed. 7 pm. CBC 2/CABLE 3  CLASSIFIED  •DONATIONS ARE NEEDED FOR THE BCFW PRISON  Education and Action Committee. Women in  Lakeside Prison need books and records,  both feminist and more general interest  (if you'll pardon the distinction). Also  art supplies and whatever else you think  women in prison could use. We need  women and groups to do workshops and  programs as well, on topics ranging from  massage to music, women's issues and  'events. Call Ivy at 327-8534.  •SEXUALITY WORKSHOP FOR WOMEN, October  25-27, 1985 in Vancouver Fee: $100.00  Registration by October 18 with nonrefundable deposit. Preorgasmic Women's  Group Nov. 9 and Dec. 7 on Vancouver  Island. Fee: $150.00 Registration by  Oct. 25 25 with $30. non-refundable deposit to Anne E. Davies, M.A. (Psychology)  Counselling and Therapy, 210-1548  Johnston Rd., White Rock, B.C. V4B 3Z8  531-8555.  •DESPERATELY SEEKING PARTNERS to share  SALT SPRING character home. Completely  beautifully furnished. Sauna. Sunny,  private near ocean. Call Phyllis, 254-  6527, if you need to get away from the  city on a part time basis.  •HEALTHY WIDOW, LATE SIXTIES, LOOKING FOR  Mature woman to share home for companionship. Private room and full home  privileges for small share of expenses  only. Prefer someone with car. ph.  434-1197.  •COMMUNITY SOUND SERVICES: Complete three-  way P.A. plus operators and truck, available at socialist rates. Phone Communique  253-6222.  C   O-O   P      BwL&TnUB.riNT  The B.C. Potato Party!  to Oct. 9th.  Our Annual Pumpkin Carving  Oct. 27th 11 am to 3 pm  Tarot Readings  Tues. & Thurs. 2:30 - 5:30 p:m.  COME DOWN TO GRANVILLE ISLAND AND ENJOY  •MATURE INDEPENDENT FEMINIST WANTED  to share newly renovated home in  Strathcona Park View. Wood Stove.  Piano. $325. inc. utilities, call  255-5230 or 251-3660.  •EARTHSONG PHOTO CALENDAR 1986: Twelve  full colour photographs by noted  Vancouver Island photographer Judy  Heron, celebrating the everyday beauty  and harmony of life on the West Coast.  Calendars are 18" X 11", folded, saddle  stitched and drilled. Each month is set  out in black format providing ample  space for writing in engagements. Photos  are 5"X7", printed on high quality stock,  suitable for framing. Retail Price:  $11.95. Postage and Handling: 10%.Order  From: Earthsong Calendar '86, 1000 Fool  Bay Rd., Victoria B.C. V8S 4J1, 7% Sales  Tax - B.C. Residents only.  •NONCUSTODIAL MOTHERS WANTED: I am doing  research for my Masters thesis at UBC and  require volunteers for my study. I am interested in women who are living apart  from their children. I will be conducting  one-hour interviews with each participant.  If interested, please contact Lori  Larsen at 683-4940 for further info.  •EMILY's PLACE'. WOMEN "'S CREEKS IDE CABINS,  camping and workshop space 4 miles  west of Parksville. Cabin $10 per woman  per day." Camping -$3 per woman per  day. Workshop rates available. The  Emily's Place Society directs fees to  the project's growth. Reservations:  248-5410.  •LESBIAN FEMINIST HOUSEHOLD LOOKING FOR  a fourth woman. Spacious basement room  at ground level with own extrance to  garden. Non-smoking. No (furry) pets  (due to allergies). 29th & Fraser. Very  . reasonable rent. Call Yianna 731-4270  or Jean 876-4541.  •A DRAWING, PAINTING AND SCULPTOR COURSE  for women. 8 Fridays starting Oct. 9 am.  to 12 noon. Lower studio, Duke Hall,  Centre for Continuing Education, 5997  Lona Dr., UBC $114.00. 222-5273. Female  imagery and female experiences form the  focus of this studio course. Women at al]  levels of experience are welcome.  •STOREFRONT STUDIO SPACE-Store No. 1 is  looking for a like minded woman who wants  to promote her own work through a self-  managed retail outlet. $100./month plus  utilities gets her a shared studio with 3  clothing designers and a sharp storefront on Main St. With a steadily growing  interest, call 875-1897 days.  •FOR SALE - balloon woman from Persimmon  Blackbridges' circus show. Call Jane  at 254-3883.  •GIANT MULTIHOUSEHOLD GARAGE SALE Sunday  Oct. 6. 10am-3pm, 1110 Odium Drive.  Garage entrance on 1400 block Napier  St. Many items of interest and value.  Be there!  1986 KINESIS WALL CALENDAR  VSW/Kinesis will publish its first wall calendar featuring  photographs of local women's groups. Limited supply will  be available. Advance orders are now being accepted. Send  $8.75 plus $1.00 for shipping in cheque or money order to:  Kinesis Wall Calendar, 400A West 5th Ave., Vancouver,  B.C. V5Y 1J8. Include your name, address & phone no.  ^1 IM I fc  49H  • • THEATRE • • IB  For the best in Foreign Films  and Independent Quality Films  Non-Sexist, Coffee Bar, Crying Room for parents  with small children  16th and ARBUTUS STREET  Phone 738-6311  $2.99 on Tuesday $4 Students with valid cards  •A PLACE IN THE GARDEN: A sexuality  workshop for women Oct. 4-6 (Residential);  Preorgasmic Women's Group begins Nov. 9.  Both events at Westholme B.C. Info, and  registration to Anne Davies, M.A., Counselling and Therapy, 210, 1548 Johnston  Rd. White Rock, B.C. V4B 3Z8 (604) 531-  8555.  •FOR RENT, HOURLY, MONTHLY  900 Sq. ft. downtown studio, dance,  martial arts, theatre, call: Suzanne  738-9435.  •FEMINIST BISEXUAL WOMEN'S GROUP  For more info, phone 254-3664.  •THE BISEXUAL WOMEN'S GROUP IS DOING RESEARCH ON BISEXUALITY. We are particularly  interested in hearing from women who have  previously been involved in lesbian  relationships, and are now involved (or  wish to be) with men. If you are such a  person, please call, 254-3664 and leave  your name and number.  •WANTED: WOMAN TO SHARE CO-OPERATIVELY RUN  home with 2 other women and child.  Starting Oct. 1. Children welcome. Rent  negotiable. Phone 874-1968.  •BEAUTIFUL COUNTRY RETREAT HOME for rent  Oct. 1 '85 near Parksville. 2 Br., wood-  heated, $250/month. If interested contact  Shelagh .734-5047.  4S*  $1  | Dec. 6  % LOCATION TBA  j£ Volunteers are needed  .£. for the following  4fr committees;  j| decoration,  jf transportation  £, bar, and food.  *  *  *  t W  * FEATURING A ONE-TIME ONLY  $ DANCE BAND OF 10 VANCOUVER  * WOMEN ROCK MUSICIANS  t WATCH FOR DETAILS!  THE  WKXXJVER  OUTDOOR  CLUB  FORWOMEN  ORGANIZED AND RUN BYWOMEN  LEARN MEW SKILLS  For more  informat  Phone:  Dee-875-  3021  Jill-732  -5607  LESBIAN  INFORMATION LINE  Need Information?  Want to Talk?  Contact LI.L(604) 875-6963  Thurs. &Sun. 7-10 p.m.  eoMteGtiWG      or write 400A W. 5th Ave. 1+  Canada  §l§l§f  I *,«.*.*"*&  UNITED NATIONS DECADE FOR  WOMEN 1976-1985  The Decade for Women, proclaimed by the United  Nations to eliminate (iiscrimination against women  will end in 1985. The co-operative efforts of  women working to achieve this goal will however  continue.  A poster in full color, acknowledging and celebrating  the work of women over the past decade, has  been produced by the Government of Canada and  is available free of charge from:  Communications Directorate  Department of the Secretary of State of Canada  Ottawa, Ontario  K1A 0M5  DECENNIE DES NATIONS UNffiS POUR LA  FEMME 1976-1985  La Decennie pour la femme, proclamee par les Nations  Unies afin d'eliminer la discrimination envers les femmes,  prendra fin en 1985. Toutefois, les efforts deployed  collectivement par toutes celles qui cherchent a ameliorer  la condition feminine n*en resteront pas la.  Une affiche en couleur a 6t£ produite par le gouvernement  du Canada pour saluer et cellbrer le travail accompli par  les femmes au cours de la derniere decennie. Vous pouvez  l'obtenir gratuitement en &rivant a 1'adresse suivante I  Direction des communications  Secretariat d*£tat du Canada  Ottawa (Ontario)  K1A 0M5 \The 1986 Kinesis calendar won't s\and ymi up,  I you're trying to find oul when Nativi  Janis Joplin's birthday, or the pho  women's group. It's witty, politically  Ch*t\p  Only $8 7g> if yn" nrrler fmrr.  whether  the* \7oTe,  aware} atW&c&iveran%  \us. Want a date? Call  873-5925.  For mail order, add $1 for postage and handling. Send cheque or money order to Kinesis Wall Calendar,  400A West 5th Ave., Vancouver, B.C. V5Y1J8. ^^TV^P^  Published 10 times a year -*""'----'    VQ,  by Vancouver Status of Women  400A West 5th Ave., Vancouver, B.C. V5Y 1J8  □ VSW Membership-$23 (or what you can afford)  — Includes Kinesis subscription  □ Kinesis subscription only - $15  □ Institutions - $40 □ Sustainers - $75  □ Bill me □ Here's my cheque  □ New □  Renewal  □ Gift subscription for a friend  Name   Don't miss an issue  of KINESIS-is  your subscription  about to expire?  CHECK YOUR  ADDRESS LABEL  FOR YOUR EXPIRY DATE.