 wtMJlDi  3 The pickets are down.  The deal has been made.  In the aftermath of the  Munroe/Bennett agreement,  Kinesis looks at some of  the behind-the-scenes manoeuvres, labour's gains and  losses, and whether Solidarity will be able to hold  a movement together in the  upcoming months.  5 What happens when a  group of ordinary people  challenges a multinational  corporation and their provincial government? Ruth  Schneider gives us a profile of the most significant  environmental case in the  history of the Maritimes.  6 Punam Khosla interviewed two B.C. CUSO  workers who returned from  Grenada three days after the  U.S. led an invasion into  that country. The highlights  of their story appears here.  10 For most people,  alcohol consumption is  rarely challenged in their  personal lives. Linda Hall  discusses the dangers of  alcohol abuse and the rea-  COVER:  Claudia  MacDonald.  sons why women experience a unique relationship  tothisdrug.  13 This month's feature  supplement looks at chil-  ren: their relationship to  the recent strike, their nuclear fears, self-defense  programs, anti-sexist literature, the difficulties raising  sons, and more.  22 Cy-Thea Sand begins  a new column for the arts  section, A Little Night  Reading, an annotated reading list for feminists.  26 Local poet, playwrite,  and English prof Betty Lambert recently died of cancer  in herBurnaby home. Jennifer Svendson provides us  with a fitting memorial of  this extraordinary woman  and the works she has contributed to feminist literature.  29 Feminist academics recently tackled the issues  surrounding women in  sports. Nicky Hood reviews  the Canadian Woman Studies Journal's special issue  on athletics,  photo by Sandra MacDonald  I  L  SUBSCRIBE TO KIMMSiJ  Published 10 times a year  by Vancouver Status of Women  400A West 5th Ave., Vancouver, B.C. V5Y 1J8  □ VSW membership - includes Kinesis subscription -  $20 (or what you can afford)  □ Kinesis subscription only - $13  □ Institutions - $40  □ Sustainers - $75'  Name   .Amount Enclosed_  Please remember that VSW operates on inadequate  funding — we need member support!  O  o  »r  (A  3  So  ><  < ft  !  I  iublou'.e«'ement KMCJtS  "A no-concessions agreement",  as announced by BCGEU chief  negotiator Cliff Andstein, is  hardly the term to apply in  describing the strike action  and subsequent events of the  past few weeks: a rounder  epithet like "sell-out" or  "sleazy deal" springs more  readily to mind. Leader-to-  leader, the outcome of the  Kelowna discussions hurt no  one's career, least of all  Bill Bennett's, who didn't  even have to leave his living  room to effect even the minor  concessions made to Operation  Solidarity.  In Port Alberni, the day after  the 'settlement', the Solidarity Coalition had not received  formal notification regarding  the deal, and several of their  members dutifully headed for  the picket lines. They were  under the impression that  their contribution was still  necessary. One wonders at this  point, if any of the picketers'  contribution had been necessary all the way along.  Why, after the majority of  unions in the province voted  in favor of strike action, was  the decision to end the strike  made by the leadership of  Operation Solidarity alone?  That was one of the major  questions raised at an open  Solidarity Coalition meeting  held on Monday, November 14th,  the day following the decision  that affected hundreds of  thousands of workers and citizens of B.C.'s communities.  Prepared for the flak, Art  Kube waved his hand at the  general assembly of union and  coalition supporters, answering that the decision was an  "executive issue". The first  question, of course, had been,  "Why did you sell us out?"  But the sell-out was not exclusive .to groups concerned with  social issues. That labour in  part sold out its own constituency became clear during the  question period when several  trade unionists, young and  old, disassociated themselves  from the type of Operation  Solidarity leadership that  had pulled the rug from underneath them. This is hardly  surprising when you consider  that a major achievement of  the solidarity movement,  amongst both labour and community groups alike, had been  the understanding that in  fact, labour issues were community issues, and community  issues were also labour's.  Obviously, this understanding,  so visible throughout the  province, never managed to  rise to the top.  How did Jack Munro, first  vice-president of the B.C.  Federation of Labour and  leader of one of the two most  powerful private-sector  unions in the province, end  up being the negotiator for  the entire Solidarity Coalition? The clue to this is the  shifting of power within the  executive of Operation Soli  darity that began several  weeks prior to signing the  final agreement.  In early November, the Confederation of Canadian Unions  (CCU) was expelled from the  steering committee of Operation Solidarity on the grounds  that they had not paid their  membership dues and were unwilling to sign a "no-raiding  pact". In fact, the B.C. Fed-  . eration of Labour had also refused to sign. The expulsion  of the CCU left only two in-  depenent unions - the Hospital Employees Union and the  B.C. Teacher's Federation -  sitting on the 24-member  steering committee.  As the strike approached, the  leadership of the public sector unions became increasingly concerned at the lack of  too far from B.C. Federation  control. Even in the final  hour, independent representatives like Larry Kuehn of the  B.C. Teacher's Federation,  could not be included in the  'Ģ negotiations.  For community and labour  alike, it is highly disturbing that a deal was worked  out so quickly in respect to  issues that have been unresolved since last July. But  it is even more disturbing to  look at how that deal was  made. In light of reports from  the recent B.C. Fed convention, details of the settlement were indeed worked out  in advance, and certain key  players were negotiated or  manipulated into agreement  ahead of time.  But, no one bothered to manipulate the Solidarity Coali-  support from the.private sector, as represented by Jack  Munro. The end result, it  would seem, became a matter  of cold feet in the opening  days of the strike. When negotiations between Munro and  the public sector leadership  broke down, it was Munro who  emerged as the most powerful  figure in Operation Solidarity, effecting the final consolidation of conservative  interests within that coalition.  Clearly, the character of  Operation Solidarity had  grown and changed throughout  the battle. Afterall, there  was always substantial concern that a democratically  based coalition of labour and  ity groups could stray  tion. In fact, no one even  thought to inform them. Possibly steering committee  members of the provincial and  Lower Mainland coalitions  would have learned more about  the weekend's events by staying home and watching television.  And so, the membership of the  coalition is left to pick up  the pieces. There is no other  choice. The legislation a-  round social issues sits comfortably in Bennett's arena,  and it is time to group the  forces to continue the struggle. Yes, there has been a  violation of trust, but that  is perpahs because too much  trust had been invested. It  had not fully occurred to feminists and other community  groups that Operation Solidarity would not be accountable to the Coalition in a  significant way. But in the  aftermath of the settlement,  valuable lessons have been  learned. Certainly a more  thorough understanding of the  trends and different political  interests in the labour movement would have indicated the  dangers of the expulsion of  the CCU from Operation Solidarity, the exclusion of independent unions from the  final negotiations, and the  last minute insertion of Jack  Munro.  Negotiations have already  begun between the Provincial  Steering Committee of Operation Solidarity, and Operation  Solidarity, to move towards a  more accountable coalition.  Both unions and community  groups are going back to  their memberships to strength-  and broaden the issues of particular concern to them.  It has been said that the  first negotiation attempted  by Bennett was the dismantling  of Solidarity. If that was the  first demand, then we know it  must be our last concession.  The  strike's  final days  Nov.   7th,   3am:  Strike Support -  a phone call. Injunctions have  been issued against Vancouver  teachers prohibiting them from  picketing schools. People  join together to help organize the morning pickets.  By 6am, most of Vancouver's  schools and community colleges  were covered by CUPE, VMREU,  BCGEU, faculty associations  and community support pickets.  Women against the Budget  covered 10 schools, providing  additional picket support to  several others. Lower Mainland Solidarity closed another  twelve.  Friday,  Nov.   11th:  Remembrance  Day. School holiday and no  picketing. Special meeting  of the Lower Mainland Solidarity Steering Committee.  Almost full attendance. The  first signs of trouble....  several steering committee  members had heard rumours that  a deal had been cut. The  strike was to be called off,  but community groups had  neither been informed nor  consulted.  In response, the Steering  Committee prepared a statement for^ endorsement by the  provincial Solidarity Steering Committee and all regional coalitions. They demanded  that the Solidarity Coalition  be part of the negotiating  process to speak to broader  community issues.  continued on p. 3 2 Kinesis December '83  MOVEMENT MATTERS  Crosbie case  sets precedents  by Emma Kivisild  A Toronto woman arrested in June will  plead not guilty to charges of procuring  an abortion, possessing stolen hospital  goods and supplying tools to procure an  abortion in a case that also focuses on  precedent-setting civil liberties and police harassment issues.  Colleen Crosbie, a nurse and lay midwife,  was arrested one week after 14 police  officers raided the house where she was  living with five other people, some of  whom were connected to work in defense of  the Vancouver Five. Named on the search  warrant were seditious libel, last fall's  bombing of the Litton Systems plant outside Toronto, some fire-bombings in Montreal, the abortion charges, and a list of  equipment to be used in menstrual extraction, apparently taken straight from the  book A New View of a Woman 's Body.  One '  focus of the five-hour raid appears to have  been Bulldozer magazine, a prison publication that was published at the house.  When Crosbie was picked up, the police  drove her around for more than an hour,  questioning her about the Litton bombing.  She was questioned about her midwifery  practice before they reluctantly released  her on bail that evening. She faces a  possible life sentence.  The key civil liberties issue in the case  is the refusal of the police to disclose  on what grounds they were issued a search  warrant for Crosbie's house. The preliminary hearing of the case has been postponed  from October 24th to March of next year,  pending an appeal by the defense to both  KIMCJIS  KINESIS is published ten times a year  by Vancouver Status of Women. Its  objectives are to enhance understanding about the changing position  of women in society and work actively  towards achieving social change.  VIEWS EXPRESSED IN KINESIS are  those of the writer and do not necessarily reflect VSW policy. All unsigned  material is the responsibility of the  Kinesis editorial group.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status of Women, 400 A West  5th Ave., Vancouver, B.C. V5Y 1J8.  MEMBERSHIP In Vancouver Status of  Women is $20/year (or what you can  afford). This includes a subscription  to Kinesis. Individual subscriptions  to Kinesis are $13/year.  SUBMISSIONS are welcome. We reserve the right to edit, and submission  does not guarantee publication.  WORKERS THIS ISSUE: Libby Barlow, Dory Brannock, Jan De Grass,  Cole Dudley, Amy Fong, Patty Gibson, Mich Hill, Lisa Jenkinson,  Emma Kivisild, Barbara Kuhne, Cat  L'Hirondelle, Claudia MacDonald,  Judy Rose, Rosemarie Rupps, Joey  Schibild, Swee Sim Tarn and Michele  Wollstonecroft, Nicky Hood, and  Vicky Donaldson.  KINESIS is a member of the Canadian  Periodical Publishers' Association.  Colleen Crosbie  the Ontario Supreme Court and the Canadian  Supreme Court on the grounds that the trial  cannot go ahead until the defense has  access to that evidence. If the appeals  fail, the case could set a precedent under  the new constitution for police raids with  no accountability to anyone but the judge  who issues the warrant.  Another related issue is the invasion of  the privacy of Martha Harrison, Crosbie's  housemate, whose medical records were  seized from two doctor's offices in an  effort on the behalf of the police to determine when she had been pregnant. Harrison also had a set of records at Toronto's  Hassle-Free Clinic, where a nurse refused  to hand them over despite repeated police  pressure.  Crosbie's case has caused some controversy  in Toronto's feminist circles, because of  its connection to lay abortion, and her  position as a midwife. No group has given  her case public support, though emotional,  political and financial support has been  forthcoming from individuals.  The Defense Fund needs money and support  letters. They are also asking that individuals write the Canadian Abortion Rights  Action League (CARAL) stressing the  national significance of Crosbie's case.  Colleen Crosbie Defense Fund,  c/o David Cole (in Trust)  11 Prince Arthur  Toronto, Ontario.  Clampdown on  engineering students  Engineering students at the University of  Saskatchewan were forced to remove the  slogan "Rape and Plunder" from their van,  the Tank.  Pressure from the faculty of education and  Labatt's breweries, sponsors of the engineers' Hell Week, resulted in the slogan's  removal. But it appears that the slogan is  st,ill being flashed prominently on engineer-l  ing college jackets.  "We were dismayed at the manner in which  a serious problem like sexual harassment wasl  trivialized," said Ken Cochrane, an education professor. "Several people phoned Labatt's and they felt they were not taken  seriously; but when we outlined our concerns in a letter, they responded very  promptly, in full, and with understanding,"  he said.  The student union has recently passed motions to clamp down on the antics of engineering and agricultural students. Council directed president Beth Olley to write  letters to both groups, protesting their  activities during Hell Week.  Some of these antics include a bash dedicated to murdering homosexuals, pulling  down students' pants in public, hosing  down passing students and a staged simulated rape. (Canadian University Press)  Women protest  victim's incarceration  Women protested outside courthouses in  Ottawa, Toronto and Vancouver on November  29, the day after an Ottawa woman was  jailed for refusing to testify against  her alleged rapists because she feared  for herself and her family.  The twenty-year-old woman was cited for  contempt of court and sentenced to a  week in jail for refusing to testify  against one of the men she previously  said raped her in January, 1982, on her  nineteenth birthday. The defendant was  acquitted of the rape because the Crown  said it was unable to make a case against  him without her testimony.  The same charge against a second man had  been dismissed a month earlier after the  woman refused to testify against him at  his preliminary hearing.  In Ottawa, 40 women held hands and sang  outside the courthouse to protest the  incarceration of the woman. They said  they would maintain a vigil outside the  courthouse every lunch hour until the  woman is released.  Cindy Moriarty of the Ottawa Rape Crisis  Centre voiced women's outrage at the  "judge's decision to use incarceration  of the victims of sexual assault as a  solution to the problem," and said the  issue the court should have dealt with  is the fear that victims feel when asked  to testify.  Moriarty proposed that Justice Minister  Mark McGuigan set up a task force to look  at changes in the procedures for dealing  with rape victims. Opposition leaders in  the Ontario Provincial Legislature called  on Attorney General Roy McMurtry to explore  ways to have the woman released as soon  as possible.  "We have the bizarre situation where a  rape victim has been jailed and the alleged  rapists are going free," said Liberal  Leader David Peterson.  In Vancouver, protesters were joined by  a woman leaving the courthouse with supporters after testifying against her attck-  er. Jiwan Fishman of Vancouver Rape Relief  said, "It is a retaliation against the  rapists and the courts that keep women  silent. She must be heard. We must be  heard. Women must have control over where  we tell our story."  (Resou:  Globe and Mail)  Part-time workers  The federal Commission of Inquiry into  Part-Time Work has issued its report.  The report says part-time workers are  not equal members of the workforce and  that governments must begin now to  improve the status of part-time workers.  Seventy-two percent of part-time workers are women. Only 35 percent of the  full-time workforce are women, in  contrast to a male participation rate  of 65 percent. The report predicts  that part-time work will increase by  the end of the century between 15 and  19 percent. Copies of the report can  be obtained from the Publications"Distribution Centre, Labour Canada, Ottawa,  Ontario. KlA 0J2. December'83 Kinesis 3  BUDGET  The final days  continued from p. 1  Saturday,  Nov.   12:  Provincial  Steering Committee Meeting.  Delegates from the Lower Mainland take the statement to  the meeting seeking endorsement. An uproar ensues. Some  steering committee (Provincial) members interpret the  Lower- Mainland Steering Committee (LMSC) statement as  an infringement of their provincial decision-making mandate; others argue that such  a statement would be "divisive", by separating labour  and community issues. The  statement is referred to a  joint committee meeting on  Sunday between Provincial  and Lower Mainland delegates.  A day is lost. .  Sunday,  Nov.   13th,   10am:  Emergency LMSC meeting. Full  attendance, grave concern.  Was there time to stop or delay an Operation Solidarity  deal with Bennett? In lieu of  time, the Nov. 11th statement  was scrapped and replaced  with a short memorandum for  immediate delivery to Operation Solidarity at the Labour  Relations Board. It demanded  a place in the negotiations  for the Solidarity Coalition  on issues of community concern  and a process of accountability whereby any tentative  agreements reached could be  referred back to the Solidarity Coalition. LMSC delegates  met with representatives of  the Provincial Steering Committee, discussed their concerns, and received limited  support. They sent their statement directly to the Labour  Relations Board. Too late.  It arrived shortly before the  champagne corks first popped.  Our demands were never answered;  Sunday,  Nov.   13th,   7:30pm:  Special meeting of the Provincial Solidarity Coalition  Steering Committee. Prior to  this meeting, concerned members of constituency groups  spent hours discussing the  seriousness of the situation  with some members of the  Provincial Steering Committee  who had opposed the Lower Mainland's initiative on Saturday.  A more informed and united  Provincial steering committee  met with observers from the  LMSC and community groups like  Women Against the Budget. Too  late, again.  Joy Langan and Leif Hansen,  Operation Solidarity officers,  came to explain the "deal"  that Munro was working out  with Bennett. There was immediate outrage. People had not  been consulted, let alone informed. Without input or participation from community representatives, a process of  consultation had been negotiat  ed for dealing with community  issues. Community groups quickly recognized the. futility of  this so-called "consultative  process."  What did labour achieve?  by Lorri Rudland  Jack Munro, President of the  International Woodworker's of  America, Art Kube, President  of the B.C. Federation of Labour, and Mike Kramer, Secretary-Treasurer of the B.C. Federation of Labour, all tried  to put the best face possible  on the Bennett-Munro agreement,  but the fact is the community  got nothing out of the "deal".  In the midst of the largest  and strongest labour/community  mobilization ever seen in the  history of B.C., the Operation  Solidarity leadership - dominated by the B.C. Federation of  Labour Executive officers - decided to pull the plug on the  escalating strike action in  favour of a nine-point agreement with Premier Bennett.  Actually the community got even  worse than nothing, -because the  "consultative process1-' incorporated into the community concession presents an illusion  that something was achieved.  If the community got nothing,  the next question is: What was  achieved for labour?  Bills 2 and 3 were directly  aimed at destroying public  sector unions, in particular  the B.C. Government Employee's  Union. Bill 2 attempted' to  limit the areas in which the  BCGEU could collectively bargain. Bill 3 attacked job se-  The making of a coalition  Immediately following July 7, the Vancouver and District Labour  Council's Unemployment Coalition called an emergency meeting  on the budget out of which was formed the Lower Mainland Anti-  Budget Coalition. Probably the largest coalition in B.C.'s  history, it was comprised of a majority of community groups and  trade unions in Vancouver's lower mainland. On July 12, Women  Against the Budget, (WAB) representing more than 35 women's  groups, was formed. WAB went on to become an important and dynamic  part of B.C.'s Solidarity movement.  Also motivated by the implications of the Bennett budget, the  B.C. Federation of Labour set out to organize Operation Solidarity, which for the first time included both affiliate and non-  affiliate unions in a labour coalition.  By early August, negotiations began between Operation Solidarity  and the Lower Mainland Budget Coalition. The intent - to integrate the two into a broader coalition. It was apparent that  the leadership of the B.C. Federation of Labour wanted greater  control over this new and potentially powerful coalition. In the  resulting struggle, the Lower Mainland fought for and won a  steering committee truly representative of its constituency  (women, seniors, public sector unions etc.), with the support,  but not the domination of Operation Solidarity. During that  time, while attention was focussed primarily on the struggle of  the lower mainland, a provincial umbrella structure was set in  place that was neither directly representative of regional concerns nor accountable to them. The Lower Mainland Coalition,  for example, the largest and strongest region in the province  was not permitted representation. Other regions throughout the  province were in some ways in a worse dilemma. Not only were  they divided from the provincial structure by lack of accountability, but also by geography, as the Provincial Steering Committee was based in Vancouver. This isolation of a provincial  umbrella body from its regional constituencies was to separate  the grassroots strength of the coalition membership from the  provincial decision-making structure.  The consequences of the weaknesses were: domination of the  Provincial Steering Committee by a conservative labour agenda  and ultimately, a severe lack of coordinated effort between the  Provincial Steering Committee and the largest of its constituencies (Lower Mainland), at the most critical juncture in the  escalating job action.  curity, seniority rights and  due process in termination. If  Bill 3 had gone unopposed,  seniority rights would have  been legislated away and no  workers would have protection  from arbitrary dismissal. Public sector collective agreements would be virtually meaningless .  As a result of the strike and  massive community support, Bill  2 will probably die on the  qrder paper. On this point, the  BCGEU successfully negotiated  into its master agreement recognition for a provincial  system of seniority rights and  have obtained an exemption  from Bill 3.  The BCGEU and the B.C. Teacher's Federation shared a similar problem with respect to  negotiating some form of seniority rights for their workers. The government employees  union didn't have much in the  . way of seniority or layoff  clauses in their collective  agreement because they had a  job security clause guaranteeing no layoffs, after three  years of service. Secondly,  the reliance on auxiliary  workers in the public service,  and on substitute teachers in  the education system, meant  that regular employees were  substantially buffered from  threats of dismissal. The massive number'of auxiliary workers without tenure (25% of the  BCGEU, for example) would conceivably absorb any layoff.  Consequently, in face of staff  reductions, the BCGEU and the  teachers both had to build a  system of seniority rights  into their contracts.  The teachers now have two  "model" agreements, approved  by the School Boards of North  Vancouver and Coquitlam, both  of which received exemptions  from Bill 3. The teachers  successfully built into these  agreements some seniority  rights protecting teachers  with longer service. But,  each teacher's organization  still has to negotiate School  Baord by School Board throughout the province and, in order  to receive exemption from Bill  3, each contract must then be  submitted to Ed Peck, the Compensation Stabilization Program Commissioner..  Another snag for the teachers  is the much publicized dispute over Bennett's supposed  agreement to return strike  savings to the 1984 education  budget in order to keep education funding close to 1983  levels. During the strike,  teachers clearly demonstrated  a solid committment to quality  education. In return for their  strength and solidarity on the  picket line, the Bennett-Munro  agreement may have achieved  nothing.  Finally, what was achieved for  the rest of the public sector  continued on p. 30  unions ? 4 Kinesis December '83  ACROSS B.C.  Women fighting prisons  by Diane Morrison  Many people believe the penal system in  Canada is inhumane, expensive and inefficient. Many people believe that women  are descriminated against at every level  of society. Put those two beliefs together  and you come up with some shocking facts  about the treatment of women in Canadian  prisons.  Womyn Against Prisons(WAP) in B.C. was  formed about five years ago to try to  combat some of these problems. Many members have first-hand experience. One woman  spoke of being beaten and stripped by a  male guard and put in solitary confinement  for 25 days.  The group is small, but they are doing  everything they can "to let the authorities know we recognize they are discriminating against women", said a woman speaking for the group.  WAP wants to publish the discrimination  taking place in prisons and lobby the  responsible administrators. They also want  to act as a much needed -support/liaison  network with women who are in prison.  Last August, the Lynda Williams Correctional Centre (LWCC) was"closed down due  to budget cutbacks. The LWCC was the only  institution which provided women with an  alternative to 24-hour lock-up and allowed  them to live and work in the community.  The Elizabeth Fry Society proposed to continue the management of the centre but the  offer was rejected because a committee was  to be formed to make recommendations to  the government. In the meantime, the building stands empty.  The women from the LWGC were moved to Twin  Maples. For over a year at Twin Maples,  there have been charges of sexual harassment from the men with whom, because of  lack of space, the women must share the  section.  Pat Drew, director at Twin Maples, says  the charges are ridiculous. "We screen  the men very carefully," Drew said. "If  anything like that happened, the men  would be out."  A year ago,'Drew said, when the men were  first brought into the women's section,  there were some complaints, "But there  were not problems that could-not be worked  out."  In fact Drew thinks the climate at Twin  Maples is better since the men and women  have been together. At Oakalla too, there  are charges of sexual harassment and sexual assault. But other actions seem specifically aimed at the women too. The chaplain  service, which provided spiritual support  and important family ties outside prison,  was cut as part of the government's  restraint program. A former inmate spoke  of inadequate medical services and doctors  who had no specialized knowledge in women's  health problems. This woman said women  recovering from drug and alcohol addictions  were not adequately treated for withdrawal.  She said she had seen women in such pain  that they had taken their own lives or  escaped in order to get medical treatment.  WAP fights against this kind of discrimination by writing, calling and petitioning  the directors and administrators of the  various institutions, by trying to get  media coverage for the issues, organizing  benefits to support the groups' activities,  and maintaining an international network  with women who are in prison. The group  also hopes to get more actively involved  examining legal reform in general.  The kinds of problems and discriminations  these women spoke of are just variations  on a theme that women everywhere experience  with medical and legal authorities. But  their problems are increased because it's  so easy to forget about the human beings  who are paying their debt to society behind thick stone walls.  WAP is looking for new members. Anyone  interested in the work this group is  doing can contact them at: Womyn Against  Prisons, P.O. Box 46571, Station G, Van.,  B.C.  Kit teaches self-help skills  The Women's Self-Help Educational Kit is a  resource kit designed to help women, particularly isolated and rural women, gain  access to the skills and information they  need to make changes in their lives. This  kit is intended for use by women in groups  and can be used to create, sustain and  support groups exploring issues of personal  and social change. Adapted from popular|||jfe  education methods developed in Latin America, the approach of this kit encourages  groups to explore common concerns and find  collective solutions.  The kit is the end result of a three-year  demonstration grant, federally funded by  Health and Welfare Canada and the Secretary  of State Women's Programme. The intent of  the programme was to create a preventative  mental health support system to alleviate  the isolation and powerlessness experienced  by women living in resource-based rural  communities.  The Women's Self-Help Network approached  this task by developing and offering two  courses, Women Changing and Peer Counselling. It also developed a training programme  to teach community women to facilitate  these courses. Over a three year period,  900 women were involved in the Network,  either through the courses, the training  or workshops. The use of the popular education method, by having participants identi-  The Network has made the Women's Self-Help  fy and define the skills they need to make  changes for themselves, gave women a sense  of actively creating their world. This  process strengthened participants and gave  them more confidence to make both personal  and social changes in their communities.  The kit includes the Facilitator's Training  Manual, the Women's Self-Help Handbook and  the Collective Handbook. Also available on  request is the Final Report of the Women's  Self-Help Network and the final evaluation  by its independent evaluator.  Educational Kit as self-sufficient as  possible. The Facilitator's Training Manual contains criteria for identifying  trainers and some guidelines on how to  self-train a training team which lacks  experienced facilitators. A video programme has also -. been developed to help illustrate the Network's use of the Popular  Education Method and can be used to supplement the training.  The kit costs $25 and is available now  from the Women's Self-Help Network, Box  3292, Courtenay, B.C. V9N 5N4. For groups  able to share their resources on a regional basis there are a limited number of  copies of the video available at a cost  of approximately $20. The video tape is  half an hour long and is available on half  inch video-cassette.  Positive steps;  BCFW convention  by Pat Feindel  It's December and that means another Annual  Convention of the B.C. Federation of Women  (BCFW) has gone by. This year's event took  place in Naramata for the second year running. It began with unexpectedly extended  travel plans for those from Vancouver, with  the Hope/Princeton highway closure adding  another three hours to the drive. A flat  tire on one of the buses allowed even more  time for its passengers to appreciate rural  settings, while the other bus load arrived  just in time to miss dinner. Never mind,  the scenic surroundings were a visual reprieve for those of us accustomed to concrete and cubes.  Approximately 25 women attended the convention this year, representing 13 member  groups. (Total membership now stands at 28  groups, down from 35 last year. Six of those  lost were groups who folded over the year.)  Despite a convention shortened by one day  and an absolutely-guaranteed-to-burn-you-  out agenda, the weekend saw positive developments for BCFW.  A friendly and relaxed mood of cooperation  prevailed, with a general concern for getting on swiftly and congenially with the  work at hand. In terms of both policy decisions and general directions, women seemed eager to move BCFW forward as ah effective and active organization. In two workshops on BCFW structure and future, much  discussion took place on the best ways to  develop BCFW's role as a communication network and tool for exchanging valuable information, support, and skills between member groups.  Considerable discussion also took place  concerning what sort of shape next year's  convention could take (assuming funds are  available to hold it). There was generally  a strong push to work for developing action  and strategies that would further the already well-developed policies of BCFW, and  to move away from analysing and amending  internal structures. Delegates eventually  agreed that next year's convention would be  held in the lower mainland area and that  there would be a special effort to publicize it to non-member groups, to include  more issue-oriented workshops drawing on  skills of both members and non-members,  and to keep all aspects of the convention  as open as possible to observers and non-  members. Although some members expressed  concern about the possible loss of a strong  enough basis of unity to do effective work  together, it seemed the majority saw a need  to reach a broader range of women and to  expand and improve both internal and external communication systems. As an approach  to "outreach", it was refreshing to hear  creative ideas for how we could interact  and exchange resources with our communities  rather than "convince groups to join BCFW".  At the workshop level, in addition to discussions on BCFW itself, women looked at  the B.C. "restraint" legislation and possible strategies for combatting it. The  Red Hot Video Committee discussed its past  year's activities and ideas for the year  to come, and the lesbian action committee  offered a workshop on rural organizing.  Specific policy passed included a position  on civil disobedience, recognizing that  non-violent civil disobedience can be a  necessary and effective political tool. (A  qualifier stipulated, however, that no  member group of BCFW could undertake CD in  the name of BCFW.) Women discussed the federally proposed Civilian "Security" Service  (Bill C157) and strongly opposed the establishment of such a service, while endorsing efforts to educate ourselves and the  general public on its implications on the  kinds of police surveillance already taking  place.  The convention voted to continue sending a  delegate to the Solidarity Coalition, who  would report regularly to member groups.   i December '83 Kinesis 5  ACROSS CANADA  On trial:  The herbicides  case in Nova Scotia  by Ruth M. Schneider  The Herbicide Case in Nova Scotia has been  in the courts for over a year now, since  a hot day in August, 1982, when a group of  landowners challenged the right of a Swedish owned company, Nova Scotia Forest  Industries (N.S.F.I.), to spray the herbicides 2,4-D and 2,4,5-T on Eastern Nova  Scotia and Cape Breton.  Numerous studies have shown the herbicides  to cause cancer and birth defects, leading  the plaintiffs and we who support them to  take the stand that economic security, if  that's really what spraying herbicides  is meant to insure (a questionable assumption at best in this case), is of no value  if one's health and the health of one's  children are endangered.  Dr. Susan Daum was one of our sixteen  expert witnesses, and one of many outstanding women involved in the case, all,  interestingly enough, on the side of the  plaintiffs. As a toxicologist, Dr. Daum  says that persistent chemicals that cause  cancer should not be introduced into the  environment in any amount. "It only takes  one molecule...in contact with your genes  or chromosomes to cause cancer."  During the month long trial last May, the  company lawyers told us that we must be  willing to take some risks in life, that  it's foolish to be afraid of chemicals  which are safe (if used properly, they  always added). Their witnesses told us  that the Environmental Protection Agency  (EPA) in the United States was about to  lift its ban on 2,4,5-T, and they informed  us about "risk benefits" and "dose effect  levels", assuring us that we were worrying  needlessly. But the more they spoke, the  clearer Dr. Daum's words became, "It only  takes one molecule...".  Other women involved in the case include  Elizabeth May, spokesperson and legal  advisor for the plaintiffs, who finished  her law degree in the middle of the trial  and rose to examine her first witness at  that time; lawyer Liz Walsh, who obtained  the August court injunction; Victoria  Palmer, the main plaintiff and the first  to step forward to put her property on  the line; and Connie Schell, the meticulous  treasurer of the Herbicide Fund Society,  who undertook the gargantuan task of knowing where every penny contributed comes  from and Where it goes.  There are others: Jane Grose and Lynda  Calvert, plaintiffs; Jan Newton, economist  and expert witness; Liz Calder at the  Ecology Action Centre in Halifax; Stephanie  May, the first to actually sell land to  pay a court bill; and numerous support workers.  But those of us who were in the courtroom  on May 17th are haunted by the face of one  young woman. Anna Steele, who worked as a  monitor for the Department of the Environment during the 1982 spray season, testified about the ground spraying operation.  In a voice almost too low to be heard 'Ģ  she told of wind conditions which were  too high nineteen times in three days, of  machines spraying in watercourses, of  chemical spills improperly cleaned up.  To contribute,  contact:  Connie Schell,  HERBICIDE FUND SOCIETY,  RR.   1,  South  Haven,  N.S.   BOE 3G0.  The judge gently asked her if she had worn  her protective clothing and mask. No, she  said, it was so hot that she couldn't  breathe with them on. And where was she  standing as she took wind readings? By  this time the courtroom was absolutely  silent, and we could all hear her answer  than sometimes she had stood - she hesitated then, and her voice dropped still  lower before she continued - right in the  spray.  Throughout the case, the burden of proof  was on the plaintiffs. We had to prove  that "a serious risk of health will occur  if the spraying of the substances here is  permitted to take place." (Page 163 of  the Decision). In other words, the chemicals were to be treated like humans:  innocent until proven guilty. Because  cancer sometimes develops many years  after exposure to a cancer causing substance occurs, it is difficult to prove  the danger of the substance until it is  too late. Because of the many studies  Women of Framboise, Nova Scotia, working on their third  quilt, which will be raffled, like the others, to raise funds  for the plaintiffs.  indicating harmful effects from the herbicides, however, the plaintiffs wanted the  Courts to grant an injunction prohibiting  their use- until more is known. They noted  that the herbicides were banned in.many  other countries (Sweden included) and in  other Canadian Provinces (British Columbia  included).  The Nova Scotia government has taken the  part of the company. Government officials  have called the plaintiffs "subversives"  and the Department of the Environment continued to issue spray permits during the  1983 spray season while the court decision  was pending, claiming that the court case  should have little effect on the spray  program.  On September 15, 1983, Mr. Justice D.  Merlin Nunn decided against the plaintiffs,  determining that they had not met the burden of proof. He awarded costs and damages  to Nova Scotia Forest Industries.  Since September, not a week has gone by  without a plaintiffs' meeting. The EPA  has permanently banned 2,4,5-T in the  United States, and Dow Chemical has  announced its decision to no longer produce it. The Federal Government in Canada'  is preparing to introduce legislation which  would shift the burden of proof from the  victims of pollution to the polluter.  Environment Canada Minister, Charles  Caccia, has said that ordinary people  should not have to prove that a new chemical or a new product is dangerous. Instead,  those who are introducing the product into  the environment should have to demonstrate  that it is not harmful. "That is", of  course, a very fundamental shift in onus,  a very difficult one to bring about, but  I think that it's going to become necessary..." (Radio interview after the decision) .  "Perhaps all we've done," Elizabeth May  said in a press conference, "is to stop  them from using those chemicals during  the last two years that they would have  been able to use them."  The price has been high. So far the plaintiffs have spent over $180,000 on court  costs, and the bill from the company for  costs and damages has not been delivered.  The plaintiffs have decided to appeal the  costs because they acted in the public  interest and not for their own advancement. They had little to gain, and now  they may lose the lands and homes they had  hoped to protect. Worse yet, N.S.F.I. plans  to step up spray efforts next year, even  though they may have difficulty obtaining  the chemicals.  Connie is tired, but she has agreed to  remain treasurer of the Herbicide Fund  Society. Shelleen is expecting a baby, but  she is overseeing another quilt in Framboise, to help pay for the appeal. Jane is  frustrated and Lynda is braced to meet the  bailiffs. We are all frightened - but we  won't give up.  Jane and Steve Grose,  with thehr two children,  Cody and Shawna. They  |jB!|gj|f are one of the fifteen  ^Hl families who could lose  iflff their homes because a  pv& recent court decision  ^feull upheld the rights of a  ms*- Swedish-based trans-  f national corporation to  spray herbicides across  Cape Breton and Anti-  gonish County forest  plots. 6 Kinesis December '83  PI  INTERNATIONAL  by Punam Khosla  On October 25 more than '7000 U.S. troops  invaded the small Carribean Island of  Grenada. This followed a week of confused  and traumatic events in which Prime Minister Maurice Bishop, along with a number of  his cabinet ministers, was killed as the  result of an internal conflict in the governing party - The New Jewell Movement.  Using the deaths as a pretext, the U.S.  claimed their invasion was necessary to  secure the lives of approximately 1000  U.S. citizens inside Grenada. News of the  invasion was met with widespread protest  inside Canada. In Vancouver, 250 people  rallied at the U;S. consulate six hours  after the invasion. A similar demonstration  took place in Edmonton and Winnipeg within  days and more than 2000 people in Toronto  took to the streets the following Saturday.  In an unprecedented move, the U.S. barred  journalists from the Island for four days  following the arrival of the Marines,  leaving the international community in a  position of relying on the U.S. State Department as the sole source of information.  In Canada the first independent statement  on the situation came with the return of  six CUSO workers who had been living and  working in Grenada. They condemned the  invasion as a violation of the sovereignty  of the Grenadian people, denied reports  that they had been in personal danger  until the arrival of the U.S. marines, and  reported that U.S. citizens had been free  to leave the Island for a full day prior to  the U.S. invasion.  Following are excerpts from an interview  with Sue Mitchell and Harvey Dotton, CUSO  workers, originally from Chilliwack, who  had been living in Grenada for twenty-one  months at the point of their evacuation  three days following the invasion.  What was your experience working in Grenada  under the New Jewell Movement?  Sue: The New Jewell Movement was very dedicated to uplifting the cultural, educational, financial - all facets of the society.  There were a number of very dedicated people in the Government working many hours a  day. It was a climate where you had people  really pulling hard to make better programs and was a really stimulating environment to work in. At the same time you  have to recognize that it is a poor country. The people who were making things  happen were young and inexperienced. There  were difficulties and coming from a western society we had cultural differences  to deal with; things move at a different  pace, people had different priorities.  Who was responsible for putting Prime Minister Bishop under house arrest?  Harvey: The Central Committee of the New  Jewell Movement. There was a difference  of opinion in the party - a unanimous  decision had been made to create a dual  leadership structure for the party - not  the Government - and, Bishop had agreed  with this but consistently didn't put it  into practice. This led to his house  arrest. He was still Prime Minister though  and they were reasoning with him to institute this.  S: Apparently there were negotiations over  the weekend until the Wednesday when there  was a demonstration and he was freed from  house arrest. 5§§M*'  What was the response of the people as far  as you know it to Bishop being put under  house arrest?  ■•.rfra^«gjr-ttflw.«i»«*-A<».sy *;<** '8^3fagasyrafc-:-,«  c  US  o  wlorkets  report  rfi*  jp  __  14  •  •  LUkEUL2Li.i2_iJLL.tiX       1 MUKLiULi  1  1 1 1  1 1 1 1  1 1 1  1  1 1  1  1  1  1 1  1  1 1 1  S: People were very upset - very, very  upset - one of the problems is that not .  much information was being put out and  there were a lot.of rumours floating  around because it's such a small place and  everyone knows each other.  How was Bishop released?  H: There were three groups who gathered  to demonstrate on the Wednesday of the  release. They joined together and formed  a long snake up to Bishop's house. When  they got there the guards fired over their  heads, this gave them a sense of elation  and power so they stormed past the guards  and freed Bishop - we could hear them coming back after and they were chanting "we  freed we leader".  Where did the demonstration go at that  S: Apparently they went to Fort Rupert.  Everybody was waiting for Bishop to go to  Market Square to speak - we were waiting  Former Prime Minister Maurice Bishop  and waiting and decided to go home because  it was obvious he wasn't going to speak  right away. By the time we got back the  events of the Fort (where Bishop" was killed)  had already taken place. We could see  black smoke coming out of the Fort.  What were the events at the Fort?  S: We have conflicting stories. Some say  they went into the Fort and began to disarm the members of the People's Revolutionary Army (PRA), that Bishop and the people  with him had turned on the army and were  threatening to overtake the.Fort and assas-  inate the officers, that they opened fire  on people and the PRA moved in at that  point.  Others say that Bishop and some others  had gone into a room for a meeting and the  PRA came - they came in three armoured  cars - there was some shooting of smaller  weapons, we don't know which side they  came from, there were also some larger  shells shot from the armoured cars at the  tower where Bishop and the others were.  H: I talked to a nurse who helped clean up  after the events. She said the bodies showed signs of concussion and shrapnel but no  rifle wounds. The only gunshot wounds were  about two inches in diameter which would  indicate a heavier type of fire like what  you might get from an armoured car. They  were not lined up and shot with rifles. I  have to think that the order to fire came  from some middle echelon officer. There is  no conspiracy at all in my mind - no slightest chance of conspiracy - not even CIA  involvement. It's impossible because of the  way the events unfolded - it was not a preconceived idea, the situation was spontaneous, highly emotional.  Who else was killed at the Fort?  Jacqueline Kraft, Fitzroy Baine (labour  leader), Eunicen Whiteman (Minister of  Foreign Affairs), Vincent Noel (labour  s_ leader), the Minister of Housing and two or  | three businessmen. The radio reports also  | said that some civilians had been killed.  3 What happened after these events - what was  g the situation inside Grenada?  * H: There was a 24-hour curfew from Thursday  j§ to Sunday with a four hour break to replen-  ■g ish food supplies on Friday but in practice  | the curfew seemed to be quite loose.  §  g Was there a lot of sentiment against the  I army for what had happened?  J H: I think you can describe people as having great feelings of devastation. They  were angry that their Prime Minister had December '83 Kinesis 7  INTERNATIONAL  been put under House Arrest. No one knew  what was happening.  When was the' curfew lifted?  S: Monday morning at six o'clock.  So were Canadians and Americans free to  leave at that point?  S: Absolutely.  H: We could've left on Monday except the  plane we had chartered would not land in  Grenada. The Government of Grenada did not  prevent their landing, other airlines were  coming into the airport and people were  leaving quite freely without any restraints  being placed in the way.  S: They were making it easy for people to  go, no question about that. The problem was  that the plane coming for us was restricted  - some of the CARICOM nations wouldn't give  permission for it to take off from Barbados  because they had a blockade on against  Grenada.  Can you describe the invasion from your  points of view? What were you aware of?  H: At five o'clock in the morning (Tuesday)  there were heavy planes overhead. We were  sleeping and it was still dark. We headed  over to the CUSO house at about nine in the  morning and as we were going over we could  see the American" marines being air-dropped  at Point Salines - Quarantine point.  Did you know what was happening at that  point?  S: Yes, because during the curfew we were  kept up-to-date as to what was happening  with the Organization of Eastern Carribean  States (OECS) and the CARICOM countries.  The OECS decided they wanted to invade  Grenada but for a while it looked as though  CARICOM was going to stall that off. By  'Saturday we knew that there was a decision  by the Carribean countries to invade. At  that time we heard that the Americans were  sending some boats down to Grenada - by  Sunday evening there were two American warships in Grenadian waters. The radio was  putting out an alert that the country was  going to be invaded and that people should  report to the militias. We expected the  invasion on Monday morning. As soon as we  saw the planes on Tuesday morning we knew  the invasion was happening - there was no  question.  What was the level of resistance on the  day of the invasion itself by the Grenadian  a suicide resistance. You couldn't compete  against it, it was just incredible. But  not so - after an hour or so of calm the  fighting began again and continued on  and off in the next few days. Radio Free  Grenada was off by nine o'clock in the  morning so we were depending on reports  from the BBC and the Carribean States.  You know that the International Media reported that much of the resistance came  from the Cuban construction workers - is  this true?  H: When the little bit of heavy armament  the Grenadians had was put out of action,  S: When they first landed at Point Salines,  between six and nine in the morning, there  was a lot of firing going on - by nine  o'clock things were very quiet, it was  obvious that they had control of the airport because they were landing planes.  They no longer had to drop paratroopers  and they were landing helicopters. We  thought it was over at that point because  we recognized the amount of military hardware the Americans had taken in and we  knew that any resistance was pretty much  Revolutionary Army weapons anyway - is  ludicrous. They said there were enough  arms for 1000 people for a month. The Grenadian army was 1000 people. To have enough  arms for one month is not inconsistent  with the needs for self defence. Why has  the world accepted this as being a great  supply of arms?  So how do you respond to Reagan's line that  he got there   'just in time '?  H: That the U.S. has found the psychological idea that if you tell enough lies -  somebody is bound to eventually believe  some of them.  Literacy lesson: volunteer and learner  the Grenadians took rifle in one hand and  machete in the other and headed for the  hills. The^Grenadian Army was about 1000  and only about 500 of them would have got  to the hills. The Americans were afraid to  go in after them because, after all, these  people knew the hills. It was their home,  they know it like the back of their hand;  every trail, every tree. Had they been  Cubans as the Americans said, they would  have been as lost in those hills as the  Americans were.  S: It's also interesting to note that the  airport itself is on a peninsula that protrudes off a tip of the main Island. From  where the Cuban barracks were down there  and the way the marines were coming in, it  seems unlikely that the Cubans would've  even been able to move from the airport  position into the hills without having to  pass through the areas where the marines  were - there wasn't much cover. As I understand it most of the Cubans had been captured at that point anyway. We feel very  strongly that the resistance had to be  coming from the Grenadians.  In a speech explaining the Invasion, Ronald  Reagan made the statement that they had  discovered enough arms to indicate that  Cuba was planning a takeover of Grenada for  use as a base of some sort - can you comment on this?  S: As a point here, Grenada is just slightly  larger than Texada Island - it's very  small.  H: There were between 100 and 1000 times  more arms there after the U.S. marines  landed than had been in Grenada the week  previous. For the Americans to start screaming about Cuban arms - which were People's  Some people say that the invasion of Grenada is a military signal by the U.S.  to  the F.D.R./FMLN in El Salvador and to the  Sandinista Government in Nicaragua that the  U.S.  is prepared to defend their interests  in Central America in the same way as they  have done in Grenada - what do you think  of this?  H: I have to think that the U.S. is testing  the water to see how much they can get  away with. I feel very strongly that there  has to be a gigantic protest from people  around the world because that's the only  thing that's going to stop this kind of  murderous warfare.  Do you think it signals a coming invasion  by the U.S.  into Nicaragua?  H: Unless there's a great public outcry -  yes.  In the last two centuries the United States  has intervened one hundred times in Latin  American and Carribean countries. The  American military presence in Central  America has increased dramatically in the  last two months. Since the invasion of  Grenada 5000 U.S. troops, along with 6000  Honduran troops, have massed along the  Honduras/Nicaragua border. The U.S. backed  contras have been launching attacks into  Nicaragua trying to capture an area to use  as a base of operation. They have been  unsuccessfull to date.  El Salvadoreans face the threat of 4000  Guatemalan troops sitting on their border  in addition to the five U.S. warships sitting along both sides of the Central American coastline. The most recent move by the  Americans was the stationing of 1000 U.S.  military engineers in Costa Rica. 8 Kinesis December '83  PEACE  Women  at Greenham  step up action  by Kandace Kerr  November 14, 1983 - the first airload  of American Cruise missiles arrives at  the United States Air Force base at  Greenham Common, England. While the women of the Greenham Common Peace Camp  watch, American military personnel unload the missiles. More missiles continue  to arrive at the base throughout the week,  signalling what some are calling Britain's  descent-into becoming a 'saturation bombing target'.  With the arrival of the missiles, came  intensified civil disobedience. Over one  hundred and forty women were arrested  Monday and Tuesday in blockades of the  roads leading to the base. Other women  chained themselves to the fence surrounding the base. On Tuesday, British Defense-  Secretary Michael Heseltine was splattered  with red paint as he entered a conservative students' meeting in Manchester.  There has been a peace camp outside the  Greenham Common air force base since 1981.  The women of the camp were first regarded  by the media and the authorities as little  more than a silly joke. Today, following  civil disobedience, fence cuttings and  blockades, that notion has been discarded.  There are currently between two and six  hundred British police patrolling the  nine mile long exterior fence, while  inside hundreds of well-armed paratroopers  Seline, a woman at the camp,  told me: "They can have  whatever they like inside the  base, but they won't be able to  deploy it. The women in this  Country aren't going to let them."  reportedly have orders to shoot first  and ask questions later.  In the midst of the increased military  presence, police harassment and now.the  presence of the cruise missiles, the women  of Greenham continue to be a protest  against this deathly symbol of male violence . Lisa is one woman living at the  camp. When I spoke with her Tuesday, the  day after the missiles had arrived, she  was cooking dinner for the other women  of the camp. They had all participated  earlier in several blockades of the road,  and some had been arrested. Lisa described  the feelings of the women at the camp,  and talked about some of their actions.  Lisa: "Well, there were blockades at two  gates, and one hundred and forty women  got arrested (as of Tuesday)...we got lots  and lots of television and all sorts of  camera crews and reporters around. More  planes are being flown in all the time.  "We've really tried to settle down this  week. The worst thing for us, at the moment,  is that we are standing under incredible  police harassment all through the night  graphic from Project Plowshares  and that makes things a bit hard at the  moment. But all the women who live at the  camp are determined to stay here. Now that  we know the missiles are starting to come  in, we're not going to give up or go home  or whatever and forget about it."  Did you know the missiles were coming in?  "I wasn't sure. I mean, I personally  thought they already had gone in two weeks  ago - we saw one of the planes, which we  heard from another group carried the  missiles, that was going in. Because we  saw this plane we were quite sure they  (the missiles) were in already, and also  because there were launchers on the runway.  It's very difficult, because all you see  is the outside packages. It's all a guessing game. I went through this whole really  worried thing about two weeks ago when the  first planes went in, the first heavy Galaxies started arriving, because they are  bringing in the really sensitive equipment ." ^gyp*^  How did you feel when you heard the missiles were on the base?  "Well... certainly not very happy...I didn't  really expect anything else, t mean, one  always hopes for wonders, but...(laughs)  I didn't really expect them to be physically stopped, but we still want to keep on  working and just keep changing public  opinion, and at the moment here in England  it changes a lot. I think a lot of people  are really frustrated and upset about  what's happening, a lot more frustrated  than ever before, because it seems so blatantly obvious after the Grenada invasion  that they can't rely on the Americans, and  that makes things a bit more dodgy, makes  people a lot more thoughtful about this  whole idea of NATO."  (Lisa also talked about some of the actions  that have occurred at the base, including  the large action last month.)  "At the camp, October 29, we took the  (exterior) fence down, which was actually  supposed to be two days before the first  planes landed. I mean for us it was just  luck because we planned the action about  two months before we decided on that day,  because it was Hallowe'en and that day has  a lot of history. On October 29, we took  about four to five miles of the fence down,  we just cut it down, all the way around, to  cut the barrier.  We find a lot more women are determined to  do direct action, non-violent direct  action, but on a lot bigger scale than  just blockading. They're ready to sort of  go over £he step of just blockading, more  in the direction of. what the Ploughshares  Eight did (as in hammering missile nose  cones)...and we find that a lot more women  actually come prepared to be arrested, to  go to prison for what they're doing, to  take the responsibility."  (Lisa also mentioned that there are peace  camps at all known American military bases  in England, bringing the total to 102 camps  "A lot of people just don't realize how  occupied we are...and from that point of  view it (all the peace camps) was very  good. And a lot of people in Holland now  have become active as well...people there  | did a week's vigil outside the American  embassy in support of us and of the court  case in America."(The Greenham women took  Ronald Reagan to court in an attempt to  stop the placement of cruise missiles at  Greenham - see Kinesis,  Nov. '83).  The goal of the women at Greenham now is  to block deployment of the cruise. Seline,  another woman at the camp, told me: "They  can have whatever they like inside the  base, but they won't be able to deploy it.  The women in this country aren't going to  let them." Lisa told me the only way she  could be stopped from doing civil disobedience would be if the authorities were  to put her in prison.  I asked Lisa how women in British Columbia could help the women at Greenham.  "Well...stop them (the missiles) coming  over here, (laughs). We heard about a lot  of very good actions, like walking into  the testing area and blockades...I mean,  the bits and pieces we hear only when  women write us about them. We don't get  information over here about what is  actually happening. I mean there is nothing in the official press about what is  happening in the American peace movement,  but what we do hear is encouraging, really  I think just keep working, it's our only  chance... either we change, or we're going  to get blown up."  While the women of Greenham have been a  model for many peace camps, they seldom  get information on our activities and  actions. They would love to hear from  women. The address is:  Women's Peace Camp, Outside Main Gate,  RAF Greenham Common, Newbury, Berkshire,  England. December '83 Kinesis 9  PEACE  New year's  actions planned  The Kipichisichakanisik Women's Peace  Camp in Cole Bay, Saskatchewan is inviting  women from across western Canada to participate in a two day action on December 31  and January 1.  The Cole Bay camp was initiated in August  of this year, when 80 feminists gathered  on the edge of the Primrose Lake Air Weapons Range to protest the testing of the  cruise missile in Canada and its impending  deployment around the world, (see Kinesis  Sept. '83). Some of the women remained in  Cole Bay after the gathering to set up an  ongoing camp.  The camp has received ongoing support  from surrounding communities with villagers  offering their homes as accommodation,  sharing skills with the women and setting  up opportunities for members of the camp  to speak to high school and adult education students from the area. The camp is  now located in a small house in Cole Bay.  The women of the camp have been busy. As  well as doing school educatiohals and  putting out a newsletter (available  through contacts below), they organized  a second Women's Gathering to Stop the  Cruise on the October 1st and 2nd weekend  which was attended by over 30 women from  Western Canada, with visitors from Germany  and England. They have also been travelling  to different centres in Alberta and Saskatchewan to spread news of the camp and to  gather support. At press time, plans were  underway for an action to participate in  Canada/US Solidarity days on December 2nd  and 3rd.  Women interested in joining the New Year's  action and celebration are urged to come  as self-sufficient as possible (warm clothing, food, candles, balloons, wool,  banners, musical instruments, face paints  ...).  If men wish to come, their support is  welcomed in doing childcare, and preparing  food, but the workshops and action will  be for women only.  For more information call Edmonton, (403)  454-7689, or (403) 424-9672. The Peace  Camp phone number is (306) 829-4400. Mail  can be sent to the women's camp at General  Delivery, Cole Bay, Sask., S0M 0M0, Canada.  Peace Camp targets CIA  from all over  I am writing this letter to contacts I  have made in the peace movement in the  Pacific, Europe, the U.S. and Canada.  Women for Survival (WS) organized a  peace camp to take place outside Pine  Gap, the U.S. satellite communications  base, close to Alice Springs. We set up  camp on November 11th. Because the Northern Territory laws are stringent and in  addition Pine Gap comes under special  Commonwealth laws, we are liable for  arrest just for camping outside the gates  of Pine Gap.  Canada/U.S.  Solidarity Days  A peace camp at the Peace Arch on the Canada - United States border crossing scheduled for Friday, December 2 and Saturday,  December 3, was in its final prepatory  stages at press time. The Peace Camp and  related activities were expected to be  part of a two-day international event  featuring rallies, vigils, blockades and  border actions across North America to  protest the testing and deployment of the  cruise missils.  As the 'hot autumn' of protests against  the Euromissiles continue throughout Europe and Ndrth America, peace activists  from Oregon, Washington and British Columbia were preparing to congregate at the  symbolic Peace Arch. Ignoring the international frontier, people from the two  nations were about to set up a peace camp,  show slides and movies and build a unity  tent. Music, a bonfire and the setting up  of information tables for the benefit of  passing motorists were also on the agenda.  The action symbolizes the resolve of citizens of both countries to work together  to achieve disarmament.  A feature of Canada - United States Solidarity Days against the cruise will focus  on actions involving civil disobedience;  in this case the establishment of a 24-  hour peace camp, beginning 5pm Friday, December 2.  This protest involves  Australia.  Aboriginal women of Alice Springs have  said that they too oppose the presence of  Pine Gap and they support the women's  camp. We have been given permission to  camp on one side of the road outside the  gates of Pine Gap by the Aboriginal  traditional owners of that land. Any  action of this sort in Australia must  involve our support of the Aboriginal  people in their struggle for autonomy and  land rights. The presence of Pine Gap  represents yet another act of imperialism  - this time by the U.S. - against the  Aboriginal people.  Pine Gap is one of the key satellite  communications bases outside the U.S.  It is a CIA controlled base which has  been described as the 'eyes and the ears'  of the U.S. defense. The base is so top  secret that not even the Australian  government is informed as to what exactly  goes on there. Some of its known functions  •to monitor Soviet missile launches,  military communications, and radar transmissions etc.;  •to provide an early warning system;  •to map out targets for U.S. missiles;  •to work on the 'star wars' scenario  through its research into laser beam  technology.  It is clear that with one of its prime  functions to pick out Soviet targets, Pine  Gap itself becomes a number one target.  Even if there was only a limited nuclear  exchange, Pine Gap would be one of the  first places in the world to be hit.  WS in Australia have chosen November 11th  as the first day of their protest action  because it was on November 11th, 1975 that  the democratically elected Labor government was sacked. CIA in collusion with the  Governor General and the Liberal Party  engineered to displace Whitlam and his  government. There was reason to believe  that the Labor government was considering  a refusal to the U.S. on the renewal of  Six Vancouver women participate in a protest against  Canadian military recruitment on November 9 at the  recruitment centre. The "Die-in" included using the  participants' own blood.  the lease for Pine Gap which was due in  the following year.  November 11th is also Armistice Day when  the world remembers the signing of what  turned out to be an all too tentative  peace agreement at the end of World War I.  Another reason for choosing November (when  it is already getting very hot in Alice  Springs) is that we want to express our  solidarity with the peace movement in  the U.S. and Europe as the pressure to  struggle against the imminent deployment  of the Pershing II missiles in West Germany and the Cruise missiles in Britain  and in Sicily comes to its height.  Especially we want to link hands with the  swomen in Cosimo, Sicily and with the women  at Greenham Common in Britain. These  women have given us inspiration and we  hope to generate some energy back to them  at this crucial time.  We have sent letters off to contacts we  have all over the world. We are particularly anxious to reach women's groups and  peace groups or individuals in Russia and  in Eastern Europe. We also want to make  contact with women who are struggling in  the so-called Third World. Many of us  feel now that one of the best hopes for  the kind of transformation that is needed  if we are to reverse the arms race can  come from the women's movement which is  growing and strengthening throughout the  world.  In Australia on November 11th and 12th  there were actions not only at Pine Gap  but also throughout the country as women  who could not get to Alice Springs joined  in the expression of our profound opposition to the base and to all it represents  in the terrifying build-up of the arms  race. We are asking for a cessation of the  lease for Pine Gap; for more information  in the meantime to the Australian government and people as to what actually goes  on there; and for Australia to become  independent through a foreign policy of  non-alignment. ^taB^  Women for Survival,  PO Box 3603,  Alice Springs, N.T. 5  Australia..5750  y^A  ^i  ****  wYUru, ■ 10 Kinesis December '83  HEALTH  ALCOHOLISM:  :jl&A  by Linda Hall  Christmas - traditionally a time for merrymaking. Trees, gifts, parties and for many,'  lots of alcoholic good cheer. People often  remark how commercial the festive season  has become and how peace and good-will have  been replaced by consumerism and stress.  Often we "take care" of this stress by  over-drinking. In some homes, the gifts  remain unopened Christmas morning while  people nurse their hang-overs. Many a  Christmas dinner has been spoiled by someone in the family being drunk.  Some individuals pass the holidays in a  fog. In fact, the holiday can seem a kind  of predictable horror-show with alcohol  abuse resulting in an escalation, not a  reduction, of stress. Feelings of guilt,  shame, remorse, anger, and fear are often  generated by alcohol abuse. While I do not  wish to put a damper on any reader's  f%sfelve mood or rituals, it may be useful,  before the holiday gets underway, to provide a brief discussion of the most popular  and legal mood-altering drug: alcohol. It  is hoped this article can heighten women's  awareness of alcohol abuse and generate  discussion among women, although it is in  no way meant to be the "final word" concerning alcoholism.  In order to understand why some women drink  abusively, it is important to consider  women's social roles and the conflict these  roles provoke. There is not a woman among  us who has not experienced or witnessed  the oppressive nature of unequal and restrictive sex roles. Sexual inequality, so  deeply entrenched in our private and public  social worlds, frequently places women in  SexisnflpI alcoholism interact  Kilfand reinforce each other as  obstacles to women's autonomy.  In this sense, the reality of the  alcoholic, woman is not separate  from the reality of all women.  powerless positions. Some women, statistically still a minority, experience yet  another form of acute powerlessness - that  of alcoholism. Sexism and alcoholism interact with and reinforce each other as obstacles to many women's autonomy and joy of  life. In this sense the reality of the  alcoholic woman cannot be separated from  the reality of all women.  a feminist analysis  The way in which women in general are  perceived and treated within society tells  us a great deal about why the woman who  drinks to excess is so harshly judged, neglected and abused. So while it is true  that alcoholic women are a minority population, many of us either are or know of  women whose lives have been made unmanageable because of their relationship to  alcohol.  It is our daily work as women, to struggle  to become wholly human in a gender-based  culture which divides personality characteristics, human needs and behavior into  the often mutually exclusive categories  of "male" and "female". It is important  for us to remember that our roles and our  value, as women, are socially assigned.  This needs to be firmly asserted in the  face of research that strains to explain  psychological and behaviorial differences  between the sexes as biologically determined. The myth that all women need and  want in life is to be a "good" wife and  mother, continues (although not always  successfully!) to be instilled in both  women and men.  Deviation from sex-specific role behavior  can result in varying degress of discrimination, punishment, ostracism and abuse.  Within our families, education system, the  labour force, amongst our peers and within  our sexual relationships, sex roles and  thus, social values and identities are  systematically inculcated in women's lives.  We learn that, even if we mold ourselves  so as to live up to male standards and  expectations, doing our upmost to "be" the  "ideal" woman, we are still, in spite of  our psychic contortions, viewed as inferior,  indeed constitutionally inferior.  The dominant cultural ideology wrongly  purports that women, as sexual subordinates,  are innately less able to perform the more  valued social roles. Unfortunately, ideological conditioning does have an impact  on us and many women internalize this  stigmatizing inferior status and consequently, have little faith in their own insights  and abilities.  While it is clearly evident and hopeful  that the constrictive nature and scope of  "feminine" and "masculine" roles and behavior is undergoing daily transformation  in countless arenas where women and men  interact, it is also important to characterize the kind of social backdrop that we  interact in. Ours is a "drinking society".  A 1979 American Gallup Poll estimates that  "69% of the adult population (18 and over)  or nearly 102 million Americans, drink  more or less regularly and only 5 to 10%  overdo it."l Canadian statistics are similar, relative to our population.  Alcohol has been incorporated into a  great many social and cultural rituals and  is consumed for a great many "psychological" reasons. It is, in fact, not "normal"  to not drink and because we are all, to  some extent, consumers of normality, we  seldom exercise our choice to not drink.  Since World War II, the availability and  promotion of alcohol has increased markedly  With increased urbanization and leisure  time, drinking has become a "social must".  The media continually projects  images of the sex appeal and  romance that is ours if only we  drink a certain liquor. Women  are portrayed as beautiful, sexy  and composed... but they are  never drunk.  As women entered the labour force, they  became potential alcohol consumers. The  alcohol industry has, over the past two  decades, made women a major sales target.  The media continually projects images of  the sex appeal and romance that is ours if  only we drink this liquor or that. Women  are protrayed by the male standard, as  beautiful, sexy and composed. They are  always smiling and they are never drunk.  We are, then, a society where we frequently  use alcohol to oil our social interactions.  Most people report greater feelings of  self-confidence and sociability after having one or two drinks. What exactly is this  chemical substance that is so widely ingested? Most people have a drink or more,  anticipating that they very soon will  experience the familiar feelings of alcohol intoxication. Yet, few of us really  understand just what physiological effect  alcohol has upon our bodies that results  in one's mood, attitude and behavior being  altered. December '83 Kinesis 11  HEALTH  The important point here is that alcohol  affects all bodies. It is all a question  of degree. The more quickly we drink, the  more alcohol is absorbed into our bloodstream and therefore into our brain, and  thus the greater the feelings of drunkenness. While many experience the beer as  just "running through" us, and we urinate  more frequently, actually only a very small  amount of alcohol is lost. The rest, our  body has to work to metabolize.  It is our liver whiJi plays a key role in  this metabolism process. One of the liver's  primary functions is to maintain a consistent blood sugar level. When the liver  must metabolize excess alcohol present in  the body, it does not produce and provide  enough glucose (sugar) into the bloodstream. There is then a drop in blood  sugar and our brain does not receive the  nourishment it needs.  Alcohol Anonymous describes alcohol as  "cunning, baffling, powerful" and so it  is, even for the nonalcoholic person. We  are deceived by both advertising and by  the drug into believing we are more communicative, more carefree, more sexual and  more lovable. We are deceived into thinking we are being stimulated when we drink.  In fact, alcohol is a depressant. The  next time you see someone drinking who  slurs their speech or has difficulty responding to a question, realize that what  you are seeing is the physiological effects  of the drug.  Women, generally speaking, tend to weigh  less than men and also have different  proportions of body fat and water. Alcohol  is not fat soluble and women have less  body water to dilute the alcohol. Therefore, if a woman of average weight attempts  to drink the same quantity of alcohol as  an average man, there will be a higher  level of blood alcohol in her body and  she will get drunker than him.  While the alcohol industry, the media,  bars and clubs, family, friends and work  acquaintances all urge and invite us to  drink, those same people are usually  appalled at a woman who is drunk. It is a  commonplace sentiment that "nobody likes  a drunk". This reaction is intensified  when the drunk is a woman. Society tolerates her even less than her male counterpart.  When a woman loses her inhibitions while  drinking, she also temporarily loses a  grip on the "feminine" social attributes  and behavior that men have defined for  her. Prescribed sex-role behavior of sub-  missiveness and servitude require a considerable measure of self-control. When  women drink, particularly to excess, their  role performance is impaired. The alcohol  now has control. The woman at the party  who is talking loudly "at" everyone or  who is slumped in a corner in tears or  passed out has committed a serious social  sacrilege. She has, in her drunkenness,  toppled the icon of the idealized woman.  "If you're a woman and an alcoholic, your  culture disowns you".2 Our culture finds  women's alcohol abuse unacceptable and  simply doesn't want to know. Women who  abuse alcohol are viewed as social failures and are blamed for their sickness.  Nine out of ten men with alcoholic wives  desert the relationship, whereas nine out  of ten women stay with their alcoholic  husbands. These statistics often reflect  real economic hardship in the case of  women being left alone.  As women struggle to work and care for  their children on their own, their drinking often escalates. They are not socially  recognized. They and their problem with  alcohol become invisible. They do not  have a place in our male-dominated culture. Women's suffering from alcohol abuse  is a very real experience. Yet others in  society have misread her problem and have  given both the drunk and alcoholic woman  any number of negative labels - a bitch, a  slut, a ball-breaker, a woman's libber,  a neurotic or a mad woman.  In the 1930's, psychologists began to  understand and treat alcoholism as a  disease. Since then, alcoholism has been  recognized as a physically and psychologically addictive disease, particularly  among the mental health profession and  among thousands of recovering alcoholic  members of AA. Debate continues among many  as to the causes, symptoms, effects and  treatment of alcoholism. However, women  alcoholics are socially negated and neglected and there is a critical lack of  research of and treatment for women alcoholics . ".fggrPg  Alcohol abuse is perhaps best viewed on  live our lives within a power structure  where we, as women, often have relatively  little power. If we suffer from alcoholism,  we have even less control and opportunity  for achieving autonomy.  Many women mismanage and abuse alcohol at  stressful times in their lives. This stress  is often the result of an identity crisis.  Separation, desertion, divorce, infidelity,  the empty-nest syndrome, and post-parturn  depression are common catalysts to women  developing an alcohol problem. Feeling  like a failure at her "assigned" role,  being alone and ill-equipped to take  charge of her life, many women internalize  the negative judgments made about her. She  blames herself for her problems and hides  a continuum. Many recovering alcoholics  see their alcoholism as a progressive  disease which resulted in greater unman-  ageability in many or all areas of their  lives. They are unable to choose with any  consistency whether or not they will  drink. Once the drinking has begun, there  is*no choice about whether to stop. The  alcohol has seized control and the individual is rendered powerless over it.  Alcoholism, as a social phenomenon, has  several components - physical, psychosocial and cultural. Currently there is  much theorizing about the hereditary or  biological factor in explaining why some  people drink abusively. No one has yet  singled out an alcoholic gene but research  does suggest a kind of physical defect  exists among some people. Others call it  a vulnerability or an allergy.  Moreover, a woman's metabolism and hormonal balance has a special chemical reaction  with alcohol. Many women experience in-  tosication faster when they are pre-men-  strual or on the Pill. Menopausal women  suffering from depression, who also drink  abusively, are high risks for developing  alcoholism. Another position argued is  that alcoholism is the result of a dietary  deficiency .caused by insufficient enzymes  needed to metabolize B vitamins in the  body.  Other researchers purport that lack of  self-esteem and the inability to define  oneself, rather than be "other-controlled"  is a contributing factor in the development of a woman's alcoholism. As has been  discussed, women develop behavior, self- •  images, and self-esteem, life experiences  .and goals different from that of men. We  graphic by Randy Grant  the fact that she has a problem with alcohol.  Alcoholism in the final sense, means  isolation - a lack of connectedness with  the world. One drinks to forget, to  escape, to feel and be someone else. This  identity and role conflict is often further exacerbated by other factors - age,  employment, marital status, ethnicity,  sexual preference, and socio-economic  status. The point is that there are many  common collective aspects of the chronic  condition of alcoholism. No two people  are alike, so no two alcoholics are identical and yet, thoke who are recovering on  a daily basis, share a knowledge of the  pain and horror of alcoholism. They also  share the experience of how being alcoholic women in a sexist society is a further impediment to personal growth and  freedom.  Informing ourselves about the causes,  consequences, and tragedy of alcoholism  is the first step we must take towards  a greater understanding of the woman alcoholic who suffers today. A following  •article will look at treatment for women  alcoholics, specifically, services within  the Lower Mainland.  Footnotes:  lNorman E. Zinberg & Margaret H. Bean,  "Introduction - Alcohol Use, Alcoholism  and the Problems of Treatment" in Dynamic  Approaches To The Understanding and Treatment of Alcoholism.  The Free Press, USA,  1981, p. 1.  2Marian Sandmaier, The Invisible Alcoholics,   Women and Alcohol Abuse in America.  McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1980, p. 4. Understanding Alzheimer disease  by Sarah Searl and Phyllis Forsythe  Alzheimer Disease (senile dementia) affects  .300,000 Canadians today. It is a progressive, neurological disease with no known  cause or cure. Persons with Alzheimer  Disease manifest progressive deterioration  "bf memory, intellect, personality and self-  care over a period of 2 to 10 years. This  almost always leads to a severely demented,  helpless condition.  Because of the long course of the disease,  spouses and other family members are  responsible for the person's care during  75% of the remainder of the victim's life.  The severeness of the dementia in the  later stages of Alzheimer Disease usually  requires institutionalization in a nursing home or extended care facility.  Coping with an invisible disease  The earliest stage of Alzheimer Disease is  accompanied by signs of memory loss, particularly of recent events. The affected  person may be able to cover up this for-  getfulness for quite a while. Eventually,  however, family members begin to pick  up signs of memory loss, as in one family  which noted their mother gave up corresponding with friends and relatives entirely. When asked about this, she indicated  that she couldn't remember the names of  her friends' children. Other persons may  give up balancing the chequebook or make  an attempt to do so, but are unable. Coworkers may be the first to notice that  something is wrong, as in one man, who  when asked by his wife what he had done  at work, replied, "nothing".  The early stages of this disease are  characterized by frustration and annoyance. Because the afflicted person often  looks normal, it is hard to suspect a  serious illness. Therefore support and  understanding for the victim are often  not forthcoming. Typical reactions of  family members are criticizing the person,  ignoring the symptoms, or in the case of  many families, seeking psychiatric consultation, ^dfrafir^''  This latter step is taken due to the fact  that the victim may show sighs of depres-  1 ¥  Vital  ■ C-il  information  £d!  on women's  if^l  health  c©!  issues you  won't find  anywhere  al  CANADI/  else  Deals only with  O  issues as they  affect women:  C  reproductive health,  nutrition, sexuality,  violence, drug abuse,         '^te?**'  mental health,  1  and more                                     .    1  D Individual $8   D Group or Library $15      1  Mail cheque to: Healthsharing  P.O. Box 230, Station M     1  Toronto M6S 4T3               |      1  Send subscription to:  Citu                                       Code                    1  Hi  - — -- — -_—— — --.--.J  sion. Perhaps a spouse has recently died,  or the last child has just left home.  Apathy and withdrawal are attributed to  some external event, and not to the real  cause. In some instances psychiatric  treatment is instituted - such as electroconvulsive or drug therapy. Although  often stopped upon further understanding  of the disease, depression remains the  main diagnosis of certain individuals  suffering from Alzheimer's Disease.  The fact that a victim has had to undergo  psychiatric care before a correct diagnosis  is made often leaves families with feelings of guilt. Occasionally there is  residual anger against health professionals as well, which can complicate future  relationships with professional caregivers. Fortunately, as more professionals  become aware of, the nature of the illness,  a correct diagnosis can be given to  families earlier in the course of the  disease, thereby eliminating inadvertent  treatment.  Middle stages of Alzheimer disease  Generally a victim may be entering the  middle stages of this illness by the time  the family receives a diagnosis. For the  caregiver, it is a time of re-ordering  one's priorities. A spouse may feel he  must retire to look after a victim, or a  woman who has been out of the workforce  for many years may be forced to find a  job.  As a person with Alzheimer Disease does  not become demented overnight, there is a  long slow process of role deterioration.  A woman who has been a homemaker may  slowly find she is unable to cook, clean  or shop.  This second stage of Alzheimer Disease  imposes many hardships on the caregiver  as well. The needs of the victim may  require that she give up most activities  outside the home that gave her life meaning. Going out becomes difficult unless  someone is available to stay with the  victim. The victim may also resent outsiders, considering them intruders in the  home. Violent outbursts or constant  complaining can be sources of difficulty  for the caregiver at this time.  Because many activities require, cognitive  abilities which are no longer intact,  ordinary pastimes such as watching TV are  beyond some Alzheimer patients. Being  unable to follow the show, they may pester  the caregiver to turn it off. Walks are  generally well tolerated and give the  victim and the caregiver exercise.  Cost of remodelling the bathroom to make  it safer, or increased medical bills, can  cause money worries for the caregiver as  well. Some spouses will go to extreme  measures to seek out a cure for the dis  ease through expensive means. Others, content with traditional sources of medical  care, become disillusioned with the medical practitioner who appears too busy  to cope with their problems and concerns.  People who are frightened or embarrassed  by the person's behavior may stop visiting,  which further decreases the victim's and  caregivers' contact with the outside world.  Other families may draw together in  adversity and share the grieving process,  which can enhance the family's functioning.  ' During these stages community support  services can be particularly helpful for  persons who are caring for their loved  one at home. In some communities there is  help available through home-makers and  community health agencies. However, other  services are needed, particularly more  daycare centres, chronic homecare, hospital beds for respite care, and home  visitors. Tough economic times make  restraint measures in these areas particularly hard on caregivers who are trying to  support the victim at home.  The terminal phases  When institutional care becomes necessary,  as it does eventually in most cases of  Alzheimer Disease, the grief process  initiated by this traumatic event is further complicated by the fact that families  often find few nursing homes that are  willing or able to care for the patient.  Given the absence of specific medical  treatments and formal rehabilitation programs for victims of Alzheimer Disease,  those who do get institutionalized are  often drugged and/or simply left to sit  in the hallways.  Other families have found psychiatric  hospitals more suitable in terms of care;  however this adds a further stigma to a  family already burdened with grief. The  distance from home to the institution  where the victims are finally placed can  also decrease contact with their family  and loved ones. Part of the solution to  this problem includes the establishment of  nursing homes specifically for Alzheimer  patients, where family members can continue to participate actively in their care.  Strengthening the morale, emotional well-  being and caregivlng skills of the family  are the most important factors in attaining optimal health and function of victims  and caregivers in Alzheimer Disease. The  family support group is one way to share  coping strategies, information and grief.  In British Columbia there are now many  such groups available. More information is  available by writing to:  Alzheimer Support Association of B.C.  P.O. Box 86609, North Vancouver. B.C.  V7L 4L2. Qr by phoning 922^1129.  Calgary conference  Early in the summer, a group of women got  together and began to talk about what it  might be like to have a Health Collective  in Calgary.  About the same time, the Alberta Status  of Women Action Committee (ASWAC) announced  it had received funding to organize regional conferences around the province.  'For Our.Own Good', a women's health conference held in Calgary on Remembrance  Day week-end was the product of that union.  Besides the usual line up of work shops  on everything from Herbology to Therapy  to Body Image, there were a lot of extras,  appreciated by all who attended.  First, the community centre hosting the  event was brightened up with dozens of  international feminist posters. There was  a scrumptious and cheap lunch of vegetarian delights with enough nutrition to keep  us going all week.  A dance performance with acoustic accompaniment talked about the witch burnings  and reminded us that these women were also  healers...a theme that tied in directly  to Barbara Erhenreich's talk in that same  auditorium the night before. Ehrenreich  spoke to about 200 people about the vicious cycle created by allopathic medicine,  and about women's role in healing through  the ages.  A post-conference meeting with Debbie Haw-  lett from the Vancouver.Women's Health  Collective helped lay the foundation for  the establishment of an ongoing women's  Health Collective in Calgary. '83 Kinesis 13  "Sexual assault? That's something that  happens to other people or other peoples'  kids!" Are you suffering from the: 'It  will never happen to me or mine' myth?  Well, let me offer you some enlightment in  the form of a few statistics:  •Conservative figures indicate that one in  four female children will have some experience with sexual assault before the  age of 13 years.  •Statistics for male children are less  well known but figures estimate from 10-15%  of male children will experience sexual  assault.  •Approximately 10% of the children who are  assaulted are under five years old. There  are, also, more children between the ages  of 8 years to 12 years old reporting  al assault than teenagers.  There is no real profile of the individual  who assaults children. Statistics show  that 97% of the offenders are male, and  that 75% of the offenders are known by the  child, but we have to face the unnerving  fact that people we know and care about  could be a danger to our children. This is  not easy information to deal wit  by Anita Tremblay-Roberts  Four young women, 11-13 years did, stand  casually leaning against the wall; hands  in back pockets, thumbs hooked in front  pockets, pelvises thrust forward and lecherous sneers contorting their usually  innocent faces. "Hey baby! Where ya goin'?"  one of them jeers at 11 year old Anna who  is walking by.  "Howja liketa go all the way with me?" one  of her 'mates' jibes in. One of the others  lets go with a long 'wolf whistle and  the fourth steps forward and blocks Anna's  path, looks her up and down and says:  "Nice tits."  Anna blushes deeply at this remark, her  shoulders are up around her ears and her  two hands fly up, one to cover her small  breasts and the other to suppress the  giggle escaping her lips.  "O.K.", I say, "Now let's try it again,  the assertive way." The exercise is repeated and this time Anna makes strong  eye contact with each person that she  passes and when stopped with the 'nice  tits' remark she stands calm and centred,  hands relaxed by her sides, eyes unflinching, face totally relaxed and says in a  full bodied even voice: "I don't like that  remark."  "Aw c'mon...what's the matter, can't you  take a compliment?" (the 'guy'). "I said  ...I don't like that remark." She repeats  calmly but with more emphasis. The 'guy'  squirms under her gaze, shrugs and walks  off mumbling under his breath. The whole  group bursts out in applause.  "So", I ask, "How was that for you as the  guys?" They respond: "It was really hard  to hassle her the second time when she  was looking right at me." "Yeah, me too!"  "When she wasn't looking it was easy and  I felt like reaching out and grabbing her,  but when she spoke to me like that I just  felt like, uncomfortable and like, what's  the point?"  "Well, Anna, how did you feel?" I ask.  She says, "The first time was terrible...  I just wanted to die! The second time I  felt more in control, like, stronger but  it was really hard not to look away."  "What do you do if an older guy offers you  money?" thirteen-year-old Laura asks.  "That really happened to me. once. A guy  came up to me when I was playing video  games and said here and put some, quarters  down in front of me. I though why not?  So I used them and then later I saw him  following me in the mall. I ran and I guess  I lost him but I was sure scared!"  "Good, I'm glad you brought that up...Let's  role-play that exact situation. Here's  the rule: there is a secret code in our  society that says: If you say yes to the  money - you've said yes to the man!" We  then discuss at length men, money and  power and I give examples that they will  encounter when they get older and begin  dating and going out to bars and night  clubs. Their faces are attentive, they  ask serious questions, they are so hungry  for information and skills to deal with  this exciting but frightening new world  that they are teetering on the brink of.  We end the class by forming a circle and  punching and kicking in unison. It is our  fifth week together and their voices are  full and unself-conscious as they 'KYAII'  with each front snap kick and well aimed  punch.  As well as assertiveness and punching and  kicking, I teach girls and women how to  break holds: wrist holds, choke holds,  tiie&i Selves;  hair pulling, arm locks. I teach them that  they have the right to say No - even to  people that they like - that they have  total rights and-control over* their bodies  and that they can say, even to their fathers  uncles, brothers, teachers: "I don't like  the way you're touching me/talking to me/  looking at me." I tell them that adults  can make mistakes; I tell them to tell  if they experience a 'funny' (confusing)  touch and that they will be believed.  I leave my classes each time with a deep  sense of satisfaction and joy knowing that  I am giving these children and young women  a sense of their own power. I firmly believe  that even young children can cope with  the facts about sexual assault. Although I  understand some parents' resistance to talking to their children about sexual assault.  in my experience they have felt empowered,  not more fearful or jaded, by gaining the  facts and the'skills to deal with them.  I am currently teaching my program at six  elementary schools in Vancouver. If your  child's.school is not offering my program  and you would like your child to attend,  suggest to your parent representative or  principal that the school sponsor one soon.  I am also interested in doing a "How to  talk to your children about sexual abuse"  workshop If enough parents are interested.  For any further information contact me  Monday evenings at 874-1968.. Classes for  adults begin Wednesday, January 18th at  Kits High School, 7:30-9:30pm for 8 weeks.  (Self Defence and Assertiveness - fee  approximately $30~- register at Vancouver  School Board, 731-1131).  Also, Assertiveness Training for Women -  Tuesday, January 17th at Vancouver Technical School, 2600 E. Braodway, 7:30-9:00  pm for 6 weeks - fee approximately $20.  — 14 Kinesis December '83  Where were the kids?  by Cole Dudley and Susan O'Donnell  Where were the children during the strike?  While some were on the lines supporting  parents, teachers, or ideals, others  stayed home confused and alienated. Many  .children had parents who explained their  view of the strike - pro or con - while  others had no, idea of what was going on  at all. Moreover, each child had peer  pressure to contend with.  One child went to school with her mother,  a strike supporter, to see what was happening in all the confusion. Some of her  classmates were inside the school and  called to her to come in. One of her  teachers crossed and set up classes while  her other teacher stood beside her on the  line. W^M^i  A sister and brother coming to school  together found that one's teacher went in  while the other's stayed out. The brother  was able to go to school but his little  sister had to hang around in the schoolyard.  Classes were divided, with many children  being sent to school and the rest staying  out. One boy went to school and resented  his friends for having a "holiday" while  he had to stay in school. Who knows what  feelings could have arisen if the strike.  had gone on any longer. How did this '/ffl§Sji«?>  happen? Why were children used as pawns  in this political action? It was disappointing to see them caught in this kind  of dilemma: forcing children to make a  major decision without having given them  accurate information with which to make  a choice.  The children were forgotten by the government, the school board and by Operation  Solidarity. Their major source of information was the news media which seemed  to take great delight in covering the  plight of little children abandoned by  mean teachers. All they heard was how much  they were hurting and what they were going  to lose. Not only was the coverage biased,  it was incorrect. Teachers were repeatedly  referred to as "striking" and most of the  children interviewed were either from  private schools, which were not affected,  or from schools in more affluent areas.  The government and the school board, for  all their protestations of concern for  the children, made no adequate provisions  for them. Operation Solidarity also did  not address the needs of the children.  When the school board tried to divide the  teachers by slapping on injunctions, the  negotiations could have been stepped up  to insure the inclusion of children's  rights. BCGEU bargained for the workers  who take care of the children but not for  the services those children require.  Teachers did not discuss the strike in  their classrooms because of the fear of  being accused of manipulating students..  Consequently, most school children were  given no information by their teachers or  principals and had very little idea of  what the issues were about.  The Lower Mainland Solidarity Coalition  did make one attempt to integrate children  into the fight against the repressive  government cuts. They organized a Picnic  Against the Budget and included children  on the planning committee. In this situation kids were able to pick up information about the budget and put it into  their own words so as to discuss it with  their friends. They also had input into  developing a format for the picnic which  kids would enjoy.  We do our children a disservice when we  exclude them from politics. It is important for anyone involved with progressive  movements to consider the effects of our  actions on children and to provide them  with the information to use in making  their decisions.  In the event of another job action by  schools, parents and teachers should act  together and share responsibility for the  to families and children at risk. .  •Regional coordinators: specialists who  provide back-up skills and advice to  front line workers in hcild welfare, income assistance, mental handicap, etc.  •Specialized services: Includes Child  Abust Teams, Post-Partum Counselling,  Homemakers, and Provincial In-Service  teams (training program for children with  behavior and communication problems)  •Children's Resources: Residential treatment and care residences for children who  cannot be cared for in forster homes  because of emotional, social or physical  problems. Twenty-four centres to be closed.  •Children's Resources: Non-residential.  Includes street workers, school-based  workers, stress care workers, pre-school  of emotionally disturbed children, family  centres.  •Needs test eliminated for Day Care, Home-  maker and Special Care Home Agreements:  this will result in more and higher user  fees.  •Pre-natal Program for Native mothers in  downtown Vancouver cut.  •Big Sister and Big Brothers receive a 10-  20% cut in their grant.  oPre-school observation unit at the Children's Hospital has been closed.  •Planned Parenthood cut by 24%.  This list of cutbacks is not complete -  many agencies receiveing grants from the  Ministry of Health, Labour, etc. have  also been cut. As well, welfare rates  have been frozen at the 1982 level.  Information compiled by B.C. Assn.  of  Social Workers, August 29/83).  children. This could be accomplished by  the formation of an advisory committee  consisting of teachers, parents, older  children and day care staff whose mandate  might be to decide on the actions of the  school as a whole. This committee could  also have authority to approach the  school boards. In this way all those  affected by the decisions of the school  boards would have a forum to express their  views and have access to the decisions  being made.  It is very important to look closely at  the events of this strike and consider  the position of children in our society.  In a fight concerned with workers' and  human rights, how could we ignore the  children - the ultimate beneficiaries of  these rights? The answer seems to lie in  the attitude that prevails in our society.  Children are seen and riot heard and are  excluded from all controversial topics  affecting their lives. Only when they come  of age are their opinions valued and are  they allowed to participate in decisions.  Having been excluded all along, they lack  much of the information needed to make  these decisions.  As children are growing up and forming  their ideas, it is important to address  their curiosity about the world and to  provide safe and educational places for  them to express themselves. They need a  voice in activities which affect them  and access to the information needed to  make these decisions. As Michele Hoeppner  (13 years) said in her speech at the Picnic, "We should fight to get a new Human  Rights Code, and make sure that kids are  included, because they were excluded from  the first one, and lots of people just  ignore us."  Services to children cut by new budget:  •Family Support workers:, in-home services  111 Teaching:  by Hilary Mackey  As I waited in the yard of L'ecole Bilingue,  an ancient feeling of nervousness came  over me; obviously I haven't made peace  with my ghosts of school authority. I was  there to interview Marisa Ortho-Pallovicini.  and I was waiting for the sound of the bell  that would empty her classroom of grade  six students. A young blond girl of about  ten ran by, reminding me of my friend  Marion, when we were in grade six. I cast  my mind back to that year, and remembered  a sincere but stern teacher whose idea of  a controversial topic was the manner in  which Tom Thompson died, and that was in  the controversial sixties.  After the bell rang and the majority of  the kids spilled out of the portable, I  read the work on the wall while I waited  for Marisa to finish up with the stragglers.  I read a number of poems written on white  paper, each framed with a different colour  of construction paper which was also the  title of the poem. The first one I read  was called "Black", and I was pulled into  the imagery, surprised by the depth and  insight of the writing. I found the rest  also to be thoughtful and original; sensin_  tive. No hackneyed phrases intended to  sound correct or poetic.  Finally, I sat with the woman who communicates to these students that their own  ideas are okay to write about. We took up  our conversation on a square of indoor-  outdoor carpet in front of their desks,  where she and the kids sit for their discussions. She's been teaching for about  seven years, five of them in Vancouver,  and through all of that time she's been  trying to teach kids to think for them-  by Emma Kivisild  "I have no idea how they would be dealt  with. If I knew a child in an abusive  situation I would call the Ministry (of  Human Resources), but I don't know what  kind of treatment they would get."  The words come from Stephanie Crane, a  former worker on the now 'restrained' (i.e.  dismantled) Child Abuse Team. That a professional in the field can recommend no  resources in the Lower Mainland to an  abused child is a reflection of what Crane  says amounts to a "definite choice" on the  part of the Socred government to ignore  child abuse altogether.  "We know how to treat abuse, to a great  extent, and we're not treating it, because  our government has made a decision that  this society at this point chooses not to  protect their kids, not to prevent abuse  that is preventable."(At a time when other  provinces (Ontario, Manitoba, Alberta) are  escalating their child abuse prevention  and treatment programs, B.C. is the only  province that is cutting back.  The Child Abuse Team, a consultative and  assessment agency that worked under the  auspices of the Ministry of Human Resources  (MHR), was not the only program to go.  Post Partum Counselling, which provided  early preventative counselling, has also  been cut, as has Parents and Children Together (P.A.C.T.). P.A.C.T. was an intensive counselling and parenting program for  abusive families where MHR or the courts  were already involved, and where the children were in most cases already in the care  of the Ministry. The program had been  funded as a demonstration project by the  National Ministry of Health and Welfare,  and had a high success rate.  Other cuts that of necessity affect the  plight of abused children are the proposed  elimination of- family support workers from  MHR, and the reduction of MHR staff in  general with the imminent loss of many of  its workers. The only services left are a  Child abuse  Mo5f6-C  P  ttim  cwt  few private agencies, some individual  therapists, hospital programs, existing  MHR apprehension and foster home services,  and the Zenith Helpline. Each has its own  "substantial drawbacks when called upon to  bear the burden of what is a massive social  problem.  Hospital programs, for instance, only deal  with that portion of abusers and victims  who come into contact with the hospital,  and cannot provide enough long-term care.  Individual therapists cannot possible provide the support network necessary for  effective prevention and treatment. Crane  points out that she has investigated foster homes that were in themselves abusive;  no mandatory training or education in treatment of abuse is part of the foster parent  program.  With no viable additional resources available, the maintenance of the helpline becomes a trap for the children, who are  always in more danger if they disclose the  fact that abuse is happening, and now are  more than likely to be left with no support  to deal with the disclosure.  "It's taking the identification of cases  back to where we were more than ten years  ago," says Crane. Margo Buck, who was director of the P.A.C.T. program, elaborates:  "We'll move back to where only the really  drastic cases are identified, those where  the medical staff can tell it's abuse without a social worker even being there, and  children speaking out  selves, an original goal in a school system  that is based on propagating values of the  dominant culture, the patriarchy.  At first, students find it difficult to  give their own opinion, which they must  do in the current events class where they  summarize an issue brought up by a newpaper  article. They examine language, to learn  to separate fact from opinion, in the media.  Marisa's intent is to show the students  that they must learn enough on any subject  to decide what they themselves believe.  She will discuss any issues that come out  of the current events class or the one on  family life and human sexuality, which she  started with a couple of other teachers,  two years ago.  The topics which arise include nuclear  disarmament, ecology, gay rights, racism,  poverty, and relationships with their  parents. She started a peace choir three  years ago, which performs at nuclear demonstrations, peace walks and on CBC. Singing  songs about peace helps kids to get over  the feeling of despair that accompanies  awareness about the nuclear threat. They  discuss other ways in which they can make  a difference to the things which are important in their lives; kids at that age  have a strong sense of justice.  Marisa also uses songs and books with  strong images of women to counter the sex  role stereotyping that is still prevalent  in the education system, and where it is  necessary to use books that still use sexist language, she changes the pronouns as  they are being read. The result is that  the girls are very pleased and the boys  feel threatened. Although she believes it  is important to understand that the boys  feel threatened it is more important  not to back down. Through the year she  brings up topics like International Women's  Day, and works at making the girls feel  proud of being girls.  The human sexuality course is taught to  mixed groups because the teachers who set  it up realized that there can be no respect  without understanding. The result is that  the children are much better friends because they are encouraged both to have a  strong sense of self and to appreciate the  differences between themselves and members  of the other sex. Marisa works on improving  this feeling of respect by getting boys and  girls to cooperate on tasks in the classroom, like sending a boy and a girl to get  the film projector.  The teachers in grade seven have related  to her that the kids coming from her classes know how to ask questions. Some of the  kids go through changes in grade seven,  succumbing to the peer pressure which is  strong in that grade, but Marisa feels it  is a stage we all go through and that  eventually they will return to their own  sense of what is right and wrong.  Of course not all of the attention Marisa  receives is favorable, since controversy  brings up a lot of fear, but she deals  with the negative feedback by reinforcing  that she does not shove her own views  down, the throats of the kids and that it  is important for them to realize that  there are many opinions on any issue.  Marisa says she'll continue to bring up  these issues as long as she is teaching,  but that she is presently about ready for  a break to replenish her personal  resources.  December '83 Kinesis IS  all the worker is there for is apprehension." There is speculation that the increased number of identified cases while  the Child Abuse Team was in operation was  one reason for its loss of funding. Buck  goes on to point out that, "We want to deal  with child abuse as a social problem, see  where it is coming from in this society,  and if you have a specialized unit (eg.  the C.A.T.), then you get data that broadens your whole understanding of it as a  social problem. Even if an individual is  working very well as an MHR worker, they  just don't get enough cases or time for  this analysis."  Crane notes that the cancellation of all  these programs will likely mean an exodus  of skilled workers who see no opportunities  in their field in the province - a wealth  of knowledge and expertise that it will be  difficult to recover.  Couple this probable loss with the inevitable escalation of abuse when it is not  dealt with, and the Socreds' attempt to  ignore the issue becomes more clearly unconscionable. Margo Buck: "Almost any  assault outside the family unit is committed by someone with an early history of  abuse. By not intervening, (the government)  is increasing the potential number of  abusers two-, three-, four-fold every generation. That's what gets me most upset:  that not only would they pretend that it  doesn't exist:, but even ignore the fact  that it is a problem that is getting  larger and larger."  Green Thumb Players, a children's theatre  company in Vancouver, has been operating  a child sexual abuse program that was  started in January, 1982. The "Yes Feeling/  No Feeling" project, which has inspired  a similar program in Winnipeg, is in jeopardy because of lack of funding by the  provincial government.  The theatrical aspect of the project is  two series of sketches performed in schools  that focus on children's need to learn to  recognize their own feelings and respond  appropriately to touch from adults. The  sketches are but the tip of the iceberg,  capping extensive sessions with the particular teachers, parents, and community resource people (MHR, police, abuse teams)  involved. The educational aspect ensures  that disclosure is made as safe as possible  for the child - a possibility that is jeopardized by the severe Socred cuts of child  abuse services.  Green Thumb is currently assessing what  changes they must make. The company is  applying for funding from the federal government, and the program may continue from  January to June 1984. Requests for "Yes  Feeling/ No Feeling" must come through the  school (which has to raise $500), via Superintendent John Wormsbecker's office.  ^-——^  ...'.'...,. •■ In case you didn't know. . ..children's  literature as such didn't exist in the  western world until about the middle of  the 18th c. After the invention of the  printing press and prior to the 18th c,  »ooks for kids were mainly illustrated  lphabets, etiquette manuals and lessons  rom scriptures, i.e. aids to literacy,  nd social and moral instruction.  :  (  :  ■    Iff:  Like any literature, children's litera-  Bture reflects and helps shape the times  Bin which it's written. To-day there's a  ■movement to scrutinize the old favorites  ■that many of us read as kids - Grimm's  I Fairy Tales, Peter Pan, Tom Sawyer, Wind  | in the Willows, the Just So Stories,  Winnie the Pooh - and new potential  favorites being published, and to be  cr^^alofthemforthesex-ro.  race and class) stereotypes.  There's no denying the vivid imagery of  the fairy tales or the cosy, warm appeal  of little animal heroes in traditional  bedside storybooks, but think back to  some of the classics you loved as" a  child and be aware of the dearth of female characters and the severely circumscribed and often very negative roles  assigned to the few female characters  there were.  The following lists provide some alternatives to those classics. Thajt these  lists are by no means complete attests  to the amount of work that has been done  In recent years to unearth and create  ■progressive reading material for young  people.  |  1  Lollipop Power,  Inc.  is a feminist collective from North Carolina that writes and publishes  books for kids that offer  accounts of alternative roles  and life-styles.  The books listed  below have simple story-lines  for young children.  Some are a  little didactic in the effort to  be an antidote to stereotypes,  and. the graphics are not all  ■inspirational.  Some in which the  instructional element is subtler  have a lot of appeal.  All of the  books validate the experience  of kids who live in non-traditional families.   (Annotations by  Judy Hopkins)  \just Momma and Me.   By Christine ,  Engla Eber.  Regina is adopted and at first  it's just Momma and her. Then  Karl moves in, her mother becomes  pregnant and Regina feels a little  threatened. But while her Mom is  at the hospital, Regina shares  her hamburger sub and her feelings with Karl and then is more  able to share her Mom's love and  attention when she comes home with|  the new baby. (Ages 4-8)  These books are primarily written   Two newcomers to an all-girls'  for teenagers, rather than kids,  but are included here because of  the importance of good books with  gay themes for adolescents.  The  Vancouver Public Library has an  excellent annotated booklist,  "Gay Themes in YA Fiction"(YA denotes   'young adult') from which  these selections are taken. The  list -includes a variety of recommended reading for adults, much  of which comes from the feminist  and gay liberation movements.  It  is also available at no charge  from the library.  school become inseparable friends  ...and then realize that their  shared love is more than friendship. Both are afraid to voice the  desire to physically hold the  other, and when, almost inadvertantly, they find themselves  sleeping in the same bed and holding each other, they are washed  over with guilt, and are afraid  that Chloe's mother might have  seen them. Rather than talking  about what has happened, they recoil, assuming the feeling is  not mutual, and the friendship  almost ends. The book concludes  Annie on my mind.   By Nancy Garden, on a positive but. nebulous note.  Farrar, Straus, & Grioux. 1982.  15 yrs. and up. 11111111111  Counter Play.   By Anne Snyder. NAL,  1981. $1.95 Paper. 14-18 yrs.  Liza and Annie have both gone to  .':    , ,   . . Brad has always been a loner till  separate universities and have had ,       ^ _ ^  TT       ,  he comes to Fort Hanmng and meets  little contact for a few months  mainly because Liza has pulled  away. However, as Liza remembers  eeting Annie and falling in love  ith her; of realizing, first pain  [fully and then with joy, that she  is a lesbian; and finally the  hearing at school and the dismissa  f two gay teachers who have be-  Alex. They both play on the football team and love camping - they  immediately become best friends  and shortly thereafter Alex tells  Brad that he is gay. Brad accepts  this and continues the friendship,  and in fact goes to great lengths  to help Alex cover up his gayness.  In Christina's Toolbox.  Homan.  Christina loves to build and fix  things using the tools in her  toolbox. This.is a simple how-to  book with appealing illustrations.  (Ages 3-6)  Amy and the Cloud Basket.  By  Ellen Pratt.  This is a tale told in rhyme  about Amy McLune of the village  of Pan where people work to uncover the clouds from the sun by  day and the moon by night. Amy  objects to the traditional sex-  roles in this important work and  refuses to be denied the chance  to try what the men have traditionally done. After initial ar- '  gument the roles are integrated,  each person does the job they  prefer, and Amy is applauded.  (Ages 3-8)  ILots of Mommies.   By Jane Sever-  I ance.  Emily and her mother share a house  with three other women who all  act as parents and role-models  and combine energies to make a  pleasant home. Emily is laughed  at when she tells the other kids  that she has lots of mommies, but  after an accident that brings all  four of them to school, she is  believed, accepted and even a  little envied. (Ages 3-8)   come unwittingly involved (yet who X" theJr seni°r h^h school year  encourage and support Liza and    the other students and the foot-  ball coach learn about Alex •  basis of the story is Brad's  struggle to continue to support  Alex when suspicion that Brad 1  v,  Doll face.   By Doborah Hautzig. ,      .  %  ,, c  ni  n .-ii    in-.o  a« -,,- /a, -,,.    also gay inevitably follows  Greenwillow, 1978. $9.75/$1.75 Pa-   JU    ,.   -i,    . «•  -. ". '      y   'v       positive ending with its affirma-  per. 14-20 yrs. *..   c c   .     ,\.   ,    , .,  | tion of friendship and the avoid-  This is a low-key, but fairly,    ance of gay stereotyping make this  accepting story about lesbianism, book one of the best on this list.  nd Americans  of the San Juans.  By Dianne BE llBJAimi-e) , she reaffirms her love and ■  ^Hphones Annie long distance to arrange a meeting during Christmas.  the  The  The following are books around  anti-nuclear and peace themes.  The list and further resources  are available from United Nations  Education  (see p.   20). All of the ■  books are available through the  Lower Mainland public library  system.  For ages 4-^8...  The Pig War.   By Betty Baker.  How the British  fought over one  Bang,  Bang You're Dead.  By Louise  Fitzhugh.  Playing war is different when  people really get hurt.  War. and Peas.   By Michael Foreman.  Depicts a strawberry-cream-pie  battle between the hungry animals I  and the overfed army of the Fat  King. Foreman also wrote The Two  Giants.  Potatoes,  Potatoes.   By Anita Lobel  A mother tries unsuccessfully to  protect her sons from war by  building a wall around them.  The Hating Book.   By Charlotte  Zolotow.  Two girls carry on their own cold  war, but discover the source of  their misunderstanding.  For ages 8-12...  The Devil In Vienna.   By Doris  Orgel.  Two girls - one Jewish and one  not - try to save their friend-  ship during the Hitler era.   Days of Terror.  By B. Smucker  A Mennonite family in revolutionary Russia is persecuted for  their pacifist beliefs.  The Wonderful 0.   By James Thurbei  A tale of a town terrorized by  vandals who demand that the  letter "o" be stricken from the  language.  How The Children Stopped The Ware  By Jan Wahl.  The children gather strength in  numbers and march right into  their father's battle.  Non-fiction:  Hiroshima.   By Marion Yass.  Written and laid out for easy  use by students, this book details the bombing and aftermath |~  of Hiroshima.  My Shalom, My Peace.   By Jacob  Zim.  Painting and Poems by Jewish and  Arab Children. Filled with empathy for the "enemy".  Biographies:  Sadako And The 1000 Paper Cranes  By Eleanor Coerr.  Introduces the tragedy of Hiroshima without gore or terror.  Sadako died of leukemia nine  years after the bombing. (Ages  9 and up)  Hiroshima No Pika. By Toshi Maru-  ki.  One child s account of the bomb  ed city. (Ages 10 and up)   These three are little books -  3 1/2 x3 1/2, written by Robert  Munsch with excellent,  detailed,  tumorous illustrations by Michael I  'artchenko and Sami- Suomalainen.  *Mud Puddle.   Anniek Press, Ltd.,  [Toronto, 1979.  |jule Ann, scrubbed and clean,  eads outside to play but is am-  ushed by a mud puddle and goes  home with mud from head to toe,  five times in one day. Finally  she scares the mud puddle away  with the help of some smelly  orange soap. (Ages 3-6)  Jonathan Cleaned Up - Then He  Heard a Sound or Blackberry Sub-  oay Jam.  Jonathan is upset when his living-  room becomes a subway stop and  crowds trample through his home.  He gets no help or sympathy from  the Mayor, and finally discovers  [the little man who sits behind  the broken computer at City Hall  and does all of the work for the  city.  The Paper Bag Princess.  A dragon blasts Princess Elizabeth's castle and carries off  her groom-to-be. Elizabeth, wearing a paper bag because her  clothes are all burned up, sets  off to rescue Prince Ronald. She  succeeds, but Ronald is not impressed with her scruffy appearance... and Elizabeth is not impressed with Ronald's values, and  dumps him. (All ages)   Many of the following titles  (all  of those not marked by an asterisk) are recommendations of the  Vancouver Public Library's  ing Beauty, Meet the Practical  Princess" booklist.  The list is  far too long to be printed in its  entirety here, but is available  at no charge from the library.  It  will be updated in 1984.  The other books were chosen because they have charm, appeal and  beautiful graphics.  The storylines  range from inoffensive to liberated.  You can read them aloud,  relax and enjoy the delightful aspects without having to flinch at  sexist themes or violence or condescension.  The heroes are mostly  kids themselves who take initiative in solving problems,  dealing  with frustration or bad feelings,  and learning about the world.  (Annotation of additional books  by Judy Hopkins. )  Bonny McSmithers, You're Driving  Me Dithers,   by Sue Ann Alderson.  When her mother gets angry at the  slightest thing, Bonnie goes to  outrageous lengths to bring her  round.  dark and the unknown. Gorgeous  graphics. (Ages 4-7)  *The Day the Fairies Went on  Strike.   By Linda Briskin and  Maureen Fitzgerald. Press Gang  Publishers, Vancouver, 1982.  Hester looks at a long wait for  her wish for a cherry tree to be  granted, because the Me-Firsts  keep the fairies overworked with  their unreasonable demands. Hester borrows from her Mom's experiences at work and helps the  fairies organize a strike. Appeal-  ing characters and cute illustra-  who wants to do what boys do, is  no exception. Her liberated parents and a young friend see her  through the crisis.  Jennifer Takes Over P.S.   24.  By Mary Lystad.  A little girl fantasizes about the  things that she would do if she  , were in charge of her school.  *Counting on an Elephant.  By Jill  McDonald. Puffin Books, 1975.  Sam goes to the store to buy some  ginger for his Mom. On the way  he meets 1 witch, 2 dogs, 3 tom-  especially of the fairies, cats, etc. and interacts with them  i*The Travels of Ms.  ■Rosemary Allison and Ann Powell.  [Women's Press, Toronto, 1973.  Ms. Beaver makes her way to the  big city where she dams up a  stream in Riverdale Park and is  dragged off to the dogpound. The  children instigate a protest of  her arrest. Authority is challenged and her lake is pronounced  first safe, then legal. (Ages 4-8)  *Ms.  Beaver Goes West.  Women's  Educational Press, Toronto, 1983.  (Ages 4-8)  Meal One.   By Iver Cutler.  An uproaring fantasy. A boy and  his mother plant a plum stone  that grows into a furniture-eating tree. The mother is protray-  ed as a real companion and friend  to her son.  *Good Times,  Bad Times - Mummy  and Me.   By Priscilla Galloway.  University of Toronto Press,  1980.  "I hate Mommy, I really do." A  little girl states her resentment of her working mother who  leaves home evarly and isn't home  for lunch and won't let her have  a dog. She also tells how her mom  watches her bath and tickles her  and reads to her and takes her out  for Chinese food and says at the  end "I love my Munimy" too. Black  and white graphics are simple  and expressive. (Ages 4-7)  *How the Sun was Brought Back to  the Sky.   By Mirra Ginsburg. Ham-  ish Hamilton Children's Books,  Ltd., London, 1975.  in various kindly and considerate  ways till the fog clears and - lo  and behold! - they discover that  they have been walking on a giant  elephant. Sam gets home kind  ents but not the children. There  is a relaxed, companionable relationship between mother, daughtei  and nature. (Ages 3-6)  Plenty For Three.   By Lisl Moak  Skorpen.  Celebrates the joys of childhood  with simplicity, making the sexes into friends and not rivals.  Martha's Birthday.   By Rosemary  Wells.  Martha's adventures while wearing a pair of ugly, homemade  Argyle socks to her aunt's house.  Amusing and very real.  The Practical Princess.  By Jay  Williams.  The Heroine of this tale, by a  modern author, is an unusual  princess, who saves her kingdom  late but his parents aren't cross. from a dragon and rescues the  Graphics are dramatic and colour- prince.      £$$$$W-  ful. (Ages 3-6)  ■^Blueberries for Sal  McCloskey  By Robert  Puffin Books, 1976.  This is a relatively old book .  (1948) with attractive black and  white graphics. Sal and her  mother go blueberry picking and  run into Little Bear and his  mother, to the alarm of the par-  William's Doll.  By Charlotte  Zolotow.  William wanted a doll to hug,  but his father gave him trains  and trucks. Only grandmother,  realizing that every child has  various needs, finds just the  doll for him. .  Chicks, snail, magpie, rabbit,  Ms. Beaver comes to B.C. to visit  Cousin Penny and finds mountains  and valleys laid waste by the  J.P. McGee Logging Co. The beavers *uck "|d hedgehog journey to the  dam up the river that floats the   h°me f,the STM ^atJ^s  dl?aD~  peared from the sky.This is a  pretty and positive little book  with cheerful, colourful, beautiful graphics. (Ages 3-6)  *Free to Be - You and Me.   Edited  by Francine Klagsburn. McGraw-  Hill Book Co., N.Y., 1974.  logs to the. sawmill and refusi  remove it until J.P. agrees to  take only the trees he needs and  to replant afterwards. (Ages 4-8  to  I Madeline  I A class!  I gutsy  Ludwig Bemelmans.  picture book with a  ctical orphan heroine  who has her appendix removed at  the hospital.  December '83 Kinesis  *What the Wind Told.   By Betty  Boegehold. Scholastic Book Services, 'N.Y., N.Y., 1974.  .  The wind visits Tossy who is  lying sick in bed and tells her  stories that go on behind the  windows across the street. It's  an imaginative, non-judgmental  look at fantasy lifestyles that  helps lay at rest fears of the  This project of Ms. Foundation is  a well-known collection of stories  poems, photographs, pitcutes and  songs that "dispel the myths that  distort reality - lik^e pretty-  equals-good, and all-mothers-stay-  in-the-kitchen and big boys don't  cry." If you haven't seen this  book yet, get a copy for your kids  or just for yourself. (Ages 6-12)  12)  Nice Little Girls.   By Elizabeth  Levy.  No child wants to be ridiculed  for being different and Jackie,  The Endless Steppe.  By Esther  Hautzig.  An autobiographical account of  the hardships and joys of a Jewish girl and her family, evacu-  summer more stimulating than she ated from Poland to a Siberian  OHtf kids  Runaway Summer.  By Nina Bawden.  Eleven-year-old Mary makes her  had hoped, when she and Simon  hide an illegal immigrant boy.  Enchantress From The Stars.  By  Sylvia Engdahl.  The heroine and her father from  a highly philosophical civilization attempt to prevent a techni  cal society from destroying the  planet of a stone age people.  Science fiction.  Harriet The Spy.   By Louise Fitzhugh.  Harriet, an imaginative and intelligent girl, is an outcast  after she writes with extreme  honesty about her classmates, and Engel Randall,  spies without qualms on all her  neighbours.  concentration camp.  Womenfolk And Fairy Tales,   ed.  Rosemary Minard.  A collection of traditional fairy  tales in which the heroines show  resourcefulness and courage.  The Island Of The Blue Dolphins.  By Scott O'Dell.  An adventure story in simple and  touching style pits a young  Pacific Indian girl against  dangerous natural and man-made  obstacles on the isolated Island  of San Nicholas.  The Almost Year.  By Florence  Rumours and hints of occult power surround a tough, self-centred §  Julie Of The Wolves.   By  Jean     black girl who comes into the  George. lives of a white family.  A lost, young Eskimo girl survives Wings. By Adrienne Richard.  by making friends with a family  A young glrl growing up in an off!  f wolves. Her intelligence, resourcefulness and heroism meticulously observed are totally believable .  A Long Way From Verona.  By Jane  Gardam.  In a witty yet bittersweet style,  a teenage girl who wants to be  a writer recounts growing up in  England during World War II.  beat community in California in  the 1920's, dreams of becoming  an aviatrix.  The Pigman.' By Paul Zindel.  Lorraine and John's strange  attraction for each other grows  to encompass an eccentric old  Italian, and a whole world of  understanding and responsibility  opens to them. 18 Kinesis December '83  I  I  I    -  m  • by Diane Morrison  A few years ago, if I thought of having  children, the only options that came to  mind were parenting with one male partner  or single motherhood. Neither appealed to  me. At thirty, I haven't decided whether  or not I want children of my own, but the  idea of participating in some sort of  support group, as a parent or non-parent,  does appeal to me.  "All people should be responsible for all  children," says the mother of a 15-month-  old son. This mother and father share the  son's care on an equal basis. They do not  live together. The schedule has flexibility, but the time is always even.  The woman is on welfare. The father is now  on UIC. They pool their incomes, pay the  bills, and split what's left over. "Raising my son the way I want costs me a lot,"  she says, "but that is part of the misogy-  nistic way society works. If I was  completely on my own or with more than one  child, I couldn't do it...The ability to  raise children the way you want shouldn't  be a middle-class privilege."  This woman and a group of friends are in  the process of setting up a co-op day care.  They want to involve non-parents in a situation where there would always be at least  one parent working who could make final  decisions.  Another woman, Patti, decided to have a  second child, knowing she would be raising  it on her own. "If you want something done  right...", she jokes. What she originally  wanted to set up was an apartment with a  single, non-working mom with whom Patti  could leave the baby when she went back to  work. But then she answered an ad in the  paper for childcare. "I answered this one  because the woman had used her name. I  liked that. The next step was to meet her  kids."  Patti feels, when looking for child care,  a person with children of her own is important. "It's a good indication of how  they respond to children and what kind of  a job they have done with their own. If  there are no children, you have to find  other ways of evaluating and it's more  difficult."  What Patti pays for child care is a lot  less than the market price. And payment  takes the form of money, care exchanges,  clothes, toys, friendship, and watching  out for ways to help out.  Another women, with a young child, has  recently moved in with Patti. "My income  and expenses are just even, Patti says.  "It will be nice to have a little room to  breathe in case of emergencies. It's also  by Cole Dudley  "Let's play." These words are most often  uttered by children; rarely do we, as  adults, propose this to each other or to  our children. The People to People Play-  workers,  a group of young women and men who  love to play, are determined to change this.  They play in parks, in gyms, in community  centres, for private groups and organizations, for adults and for kids. And in between "they play for each other.  The Playworkers  evolved from a group who  set up the Activity Tent at the 1980 Children's Festival, The next year there was no  money to fund the Tent so the players took  their activities onto the grounds, becoming the Playworkers.  The helpers who came  back for the next three years to work with  the crowds at the Festival decided to organize an ongoing group, the People to  People Playworkers.   They are now in the  process of incorporating into a society.  The Playworkers  feel that play can energize  and stimulate interesting communication and  therapeutic laughter. They try to include  parents and other adults in their games because they want to break down the resistance which most adults have regarding play.  Children have a lot to teach adults, and  when they see you playing side by side in  their games, the distance separating adults  and children decreases and positive interaction becomes possible.  The philosophy and the games the Play*  workers  use come from the Co-operative  Games and the New Games books. These publications stress that playing should be non-  eliminating and should encourages participation and input from the players. The  rules of the games are very flexible, growing and developing as the games continue,  and varying according to the situation. For  example, rather than ending a game if the  children are rambunctious and doing a lot  of pushing and falling, you can introduce  a handicap such as everyone hopping on one  foot. The process is -always more important  than the product; the actual process of  playing the game is considered more important than the winning or losing.  Besides facilitating games, the J  also do face painting, bubble blowing,  groups and individual juggling, co-operate  arts (communal arts), parachute games,  dress up and creative role playing, skits,  hat ballooning, making music with whatever  is at hand, and just generally acting silly.  These other activities tend to be drawing  cards for more reticent children and also  for adults. Draping a piece of material or  putting a silly hat onto an adult who is  watching the fun can be the catalyst for  participation.  Breaking down rules and encouraging people  to explore themselves and their situations  is the name of the game for the Playworkers.  If you want to know more or learn how to  play their way, write People to People  Playworkers,   3392 West 22nd Ave., Vancouver, V6S 1J2, or phone 738-8906,  736-5173 .  Grownups who play  nice to have someone to share things with,  the cute things the kids do as well as  the not so cute things. To have another  woman to talk to. And to have someone else  here so I can run over to the corner store  without having.to bundle the kids up and  take them with me."  Patti is also involved with the Single  Mother's Action Committeej which evolved  out of the last Single%Mother's Symposium.  Leslie Stern, one of the co-ordinators,  says single parents try to be 20 different  individuals all at once.  "There is a withdrawal period, anywhere  from six months to•two years, when a woman  tries to figure out how she is going to  manage single parenthood," she says. When  they finally do reach out, there are support groups there with friendship, socializing, emotional stability, help and some  solutions.  The Single Mothers' Action Committee was  formed "to effect change so women don't  have to go through all the distress."  There are four main areas of study: housing, child care, income and welfare, and  women and law.  "Each woman focuses on the most pressing  personal problem and commits time to that,"  says Stern. "A big part^ of what we want to  do is educate the public to the reality  of single parenting, to improve the image  of single mothers, to remove the social  stigma of this and being on welfare.  Change is limited by our perceptions."  In an informal study done by the 'Y' in  1981, the most favored housing situation  for single parents was co-op housing.  Stern's feeling is it gives the children  a sense of community, of responsibility  to others, as well as a sense of confidence .  Ruth Meechen agrees. One of the founders  of Inner City Housing Society, Ruth lives  in a co-op where she doesn't have any formal responsibility for children but where  she has lots of contact with them.  I Ruth is retired now and works as an artist  from her home. When she first moved into  the co-op her family and grandson had just  moved away and she was lonely. "Because of  my set up, it was just natural I should  develop a relationship with the kids here,"  says Ruth. "I don't let them interfere  with my work but I always have the time to  go if they need something...And I like the  idea of being granny with cookies in the  jar."  She is pleased the kids feel they can turn  to her. And she thinks the parents appreciate knowing someone is there in an emergency. "It's good for children to have a  relationship with an older person," Ruth  thinks. "Then it's not a real mystery for  them." 1NI&S§^ HH  Another single mom, with a two-year-old  daughter, has always lived communally but  has always been the primary parent. She  is not willing to co-parent just now because it takes time to get to know people  and trust them. "It's hard to give up  decision making powers...Although, an ideal  situation would be two or three people  willing to take responsibility so no one  was the primary parent."  At the moment she has five people helping  her with child care."Three of these people  have one-year commitments. She met most of  continued on p. 19 Feminists raising sons  "I was raised by:  feminist mother, I ]  in a feminist household]  and some of it has^  rubbed off."  by Claudia MacDonald  This article is based on personal experience and conversations with four other  feminist mothers: Melanie Conn,  Cole Dudley, Anita Roberts,  and Paullette Roscoe.  We each have one child.  Our son's ages  range from 6 to 15 years.  Many women are attempting to raise sons  according to feminist principles in a culture working energetically against that  goal. While fighting against and pointing  out the limitations of what the dominant  culture elicits we are also encouraging  characteristics in our sons which they  will seldom have reinforced in the world  or see reflected in the majority of the  men around them.  When our boys were younger the task was  simpler. We allowed them to cry and be  sensitive, taught them to cook, introduced  them to strong female and sensitive male  protagonists, alternated the procession  of "he's" with "she's". We explained that  women drove buses, men cared for babies;  we did not wallpaper their nurseries with  hockey players.  We are at times reassured by the fact  that our sons generally have a good rapport  with girls. Some are competent cooks and  are nurturing with small children. They  are basically sensitive and emotional,  not afraid to cry and admit fear. They  are aware of sexism and other social and  political oppression to some degree and  attempt to apply that knowledge to their  life experiences.  They may also be loud and aggressive, they  may blow up firecrackers, play with guns  and Star Wars, and watch hideous TV shows.  It can require constant vigilence to  counteract negative social influences  surrounding our children. Despite these  conditions, as Paullette Roscoe says, "you  can't beat your kid over the head with  our analysis."  Many of us regret the times we have lectured rather than dialogued about our  views, pounced on our sons for less than  ideal comments, opinions or attitudes as  though we could beat the sexism out of  them.  Because we see the necessity of an extended community in which to foster alternative values, we often feel pressure to  provide one whether it is possible or not.  We often have restructured large areas  of our lives to fulfill that goal, committed more of our time; many of us have  sought communal living situations and worked hard to maintain their integrity. Some  have invested much time and energy in  co-operative schools and daycares, alternative social events. Most of us have  struggled to raise the conciousness of  those around us.  Some mothers have mariaged to create and  maintain support systems with people  committed to the same goals. Others have  found themselves isolated and alone in  their efforts to raise sons. We must often  rely on mainstream institutions (such as  day cares, schools, sports leagues, community centres) that expose our boys to  contradictory values. Feminists, as a  social group, reinforce our views but  there are few feminist alternatives to  such social activities as scouts, camps,  video games or to the extended family.  Although most of us have kept outdated  freudian ideas at bay, rejecting such  ideas as the impossibility of raising  boys without a dominant father figure,  most of us believe it an asset for our  sons to have relationships with feminist-  oriented men, fathers or not.  Unfortunately, this belief can be another  burdensome responsibility, yet another  pressure added to our feminist super-mom  agenda.  We cannot be responsible for providing  such relationships although some of us  try. Men struggling against sexism and  willing to relate meaningfully to growing \  boys are not a gigantic sub-group, although there are some who are valiantly  attempting to do so.  Raising sons in an active feminist milieu  can creat other unique problems. One  mother regrets having exposed her son to  meetings and conversations where she believes he has picked up anti-male sentiments which he personalized as "all men  December '83 Kinesis 19  iare bad therefore I am bad." We have  been concerned about the damaging effects  of negative generalizations about men,  no matter how casual, being made, in the  presence of our young sons and some of us  have requested that our friends, housemates, lovers and co-workers refrain  from making them.  Conversely, it is not desirable to protect them from the painful knowledge of  women's experience or our anger, or from  becoming acquainted with manifestations  of male privilege and abuses of power.  With that information must come the message that by their awareness of sexism  and by their personal commitment to being  a different sort of man, they can participate in the struggle against that  oppression.  The parenting challenge for feminist  mothers is to be able to let them choose  for themselves what they believe and what  they will reject of the behaviors and  values of the society around them and of  what we have tried to instill. We do not  want our sons motivated by guilt and  self-hatred. It seems essential to maintain an awareness of their basic "goodness", to adhere to the philosophy that  maleness is not inherently bad. It is  also useful to have expectations that are  possible to fulfill. "Non-sexist is beyond possibility" suggests Melanie Conn.  She prefers the term "anti-sexist" which  refers to an ongoing struggle.  We can not raise a perfectly "non-sexist"  male but we are working toward what is  more of an evolutionary process which  also includes rejecting other negative  attitudes such as racism, militarism,  and homophobia. We are making a step in  that direction. Many of our sons have  internalized their feminist upbringing  and have often stated their desire to  develop into non-sexist men.  There are no accurate words to describe  what we are striving towards but one  five-year-old tried: "I want to be a  man like a woman. Not a woman but a man  like you want."  Alternatives  continued from p.  them through support groups. She was able  to watch how they interacted with her  daughter and vice versa. She then appraoch-  ed some of them and asked if they were interested in helping.  The shared care of her child has not worked  other places, "because no one took it seriously, there were no agreements," she said.  "There are political commitments from the  people I'm with now."  This woman feels since 80% of women are  mothers, if they can't be freed up to  some extent to take part in society, then  the women's movement is missing a large  segment.  "The role that we are placed in is unnatural. When you are a single mother you are  isolated, you're busy just surviving...  With some help, mothers could participate  and riot be excluded...I think my daughter  has more confidence knowing that more than  one person cares for her."  For people who want to spend time with  children and young people in a non-parenting situation, there are some formal  agencies, although some have been cut back  with the recent budget. Big Sisters,  Volunteer Grandparents, and the Boys and  Girls club are three possibilities.  Non-sexist parenting outside of the familiar family unit, or single parenting without losing one's sanity, would seem to  take a great deal of energy and creativity.  Perhaps if more people can become involved  the job won't seem so awesome and we might  have time to really enjoy our children. 20 Kinesis December, '83  I  by Vivienne Vejrdon-Roe  mi  "I'm scared I won't grow up." Over the past  six months I have interviewed many children  and young people for a book and documentary  film entitled "Growing Up in the Nuclear  Shadow - What Can the Children Tell Us?"  and this simple, clear statement is what I  have been hearing continually.  Little research has been conducted to  investigate the emotional and social  effects of living in an age when we know  self-annihilation is a possibility.'The  most recent survey (1980) was the work of  a special task force of the American Psychiatric Association, who examined children's attitudes and feelings by sending  out 1,000 questionnaires and interviewing  100 students in the Bost area. The study  revealed that children are much more aware  of the threat of a nuclear holocaust than  most adults would assume. The majority  felt that neither they personally nor their  city nor their country could survive a  nuclear attack. And more than 50 percent  thought there would be a nuclear war during their lifetime.  My own research confirms these findings. I  heard many young people express a very  real fear that their lives were going to  be unnaturally shortened.  If young people feel that nothing lasts,  they will develop an attitude of "Nothing  matters." It is very difficult to form  stable ideals and values in a world that  does not appear to be stable.  "I think the turning point for me was  seeing  'The Last Epidemic'  (a powerful  documentary showing that an eminent  group of physicians,  scientists and  military experts do not believe that  the United States could survive a nuclear war).  I suddenly realized how  easy it is to slip into that little  world of "It's not going to happen to  me." I started crying at the end of it.  I was very angry about the adult world  handing us this world that is so imper-  - feet.   Why are we expected to accept the  threat of nuclear destruction as part of  our growing-up experience? How are we  supposed to start out lives with death  looking over our shoulder?"  (Jessica,  17)  The difference between adults' and young  people's understanding of what a nuclear  war would really entail is apparent in  how they speak of weapons. Adults tend to  depersonalize them and refer to statistics,  Growing  up in the       stj  nuclear ageyJ%J|j  while a child will think of a nuclear bomb  as something that blows up people, imagining blood, mutilated bodies and dreadful  suffering. We block off any deep consideration of such war because it is simply too  painful to imagine. This is a defense  mechanism that psychiatrist Robert Jay  Lifton has termed "psychic numbing". However, children's fears are much nearer  the surface; their defense mechanisms are  not fully developed and therefore can more  easily be broken down.  Another difference in perceptions of the  aims race is that young people do not see  it as a political issue, as adults apparently do, but as a moral issue.  "We 're discouraged from fighting when  we 're being brought up.   Yet when President  Reagan is facing someone representing  another country,  it's all right for him  to do what children are told not to do.  Even if the Russians were the worst people imaginable,  even if they wanted to  take over the world,  there is still no  place for the nuclear bomb - there's no  excuse". ^^^ 1?)  Young people are regarding national leaders with a certain contempt because they  are not exhibiting the values and principles that they have been taught are desirable.  I also found the imagining of the other  side's way of seeing things, the empathy,  very refreshing in young children. Mariy  expressed grief at the thought of the destruction of the Earth and our species  should we allow a nuclear holocaust to  occur. The children fear not just for their  own lives, but for all living things and  the quality of life, as is evidenced in  the following letter to President Reagan.  Dear Mr.  President Reagan,  I know you're probably proud of man's  knowledge,  but man 's knowledge is destroying the Earth and the Earth doesn't just  Resources for talking with kids  To deal with our children's fears, Kevin  McVeigh, a California teacher, suggests1  we change our oft-used phrase "Talking  to children about nuclear war."  Children have much information and many  strong feelings about nuclear war, and  they have a hunger to be heard. Given the  opportunity, they will talk freely, openly,  and at length about their concerns. McVeigh  did a 1 1/2 hour session with sixth-  graders which started^ with a "survey" of  the children's thoughts, feelings, experiences, and attitudes, by asking them a  series of questions and letting them give  their own answers.  McVeigh also included role play and gamess  in the session, and asked the children  when and how they felt kids should be told  about the nuclear threat. There was unanimous agreement that six or seven was the  best age, and that the children be told  the exact truth (but "don't tell kids  real scary things, like that bombs could  come in the night' and kill everybody").  A complete list of the questions Keven  McVeigh asked (and suggests asking) is  available at United Nations Education  (see below). There are many resources  in Vancouver for concerned parents and  Public Education Resource Centre.(P.E.R.C.)  •Facilitators for workshops and resources  for schools: Women Against Nuclear Technology. (W.A.N.T.)  •Teaching material for senior high: Peace  Education Network (P.E.N.)  •"In the Nuclear Shadow: What Can the  Children Tell Us?" Film or video, 28mins,  produced by Vivienne Verdon-Roe, available  from U.N. Association and P.E.R.C.  •"Wanna Grow Up...not Blow Up" Video,  26mins, Lower Mainland children ages 7-18.  Suitable for showing to elementary grades.  Available at P.E.R.C.  •Teaching material for intermediate  grades: U.N. Education.  •Teaching material for junior high, and  Women Against Nuclear Technology  P.O. Box 65673, Station F  Vancouver, B.C., V5N 5K7 Ph: 253-0412.  Public Education Resource Centre  1111 6th Avenue  New Westminister, B.C. V3M 2B7 Ph: 522-1123.  Teachers for Peace Action  c/o 6174 Malvern Avenue  Burnaby, B.C. V5E 3E8  United Nations Education/U.N. Association  2524 Cypress Street  VAncouver, B.C. V6J 3N2 Ph: 733-3912  Peace Education Network  5885 University Blvd.  Vancouver, B.C. V6T 1K7 Ph: 224-3722  Project Ploughshares  104-1955 West 4th Ave.  for parents of all age children:   Vancouver, B.C. V6J 1M7  to man.  If we get into a war,  I'm  not just worried about me and my family or  people.  If we Want to destroy ourselves,  we should do it without destroying nature.  When I think about the way people treat  the Earth and the way animals treat the  Earth, I find a big difference.  . Mickey  ' Children appear to have a better under-  1 standing of something the American Indian  ihas been attempting to teach us since our  arrival on this continent. Chief Seattle  of the Squamish nation said in the last  century, "Whatever befalls the Earth,  befalls the children of the Earth."  In the interviews it soon became apparent  that there was one basic difference between  those children and young people who felt  hopeless and helpless and those who were  feeling positive and optimistic about  their future. The former were not involved  in any way in changing what causes them so  much anxiety, while the latter were actively doing something to alter the situation.  "I think kids like myself,  students who  are not 18,  have a lot of influence over  what goes on.  And I think there's a lot  we can do,  and we 're not going to sit back  and leave it up to everyone else anymore.  We 're going to take some responsibility. "  (Anna,   17)  It is essential that parents open up the  channels of communication and encourage  family discussion of nuclear issues and  other important matters. Parents who do  not exchange views on world affairs are  saying, by their silence, that such topics  are not their business and should be left  to politicians and the "experts".  Some young people criticized their parents  for not having mentioned war/peace issues;  they questioned how much their parents  truly cared for them if they were not  carefully evaluating their future. They  apparently had not recognized that their  parents might not be able to acknowledge  the lemming-like (self-destructive)  characteristics of the arms race because  they are too paralyzed to do so, or that  they might not discuss issues with their  children in order not to alarm them. But  several teenagers did address the question  of frightening children.  "Kids already know  (about the nuclear  threat).  I think it's more terrifying not  to talk about it. Mystery is the worst  thing possible.  Being left alone to deal  ■ with it - that's much more frightening. "  (Elizabeth,  14)  Children learn by example. Those whose  parents were actively involved in the  community and were working to bring about  peace reported they felt comfort and confidence from their parents' participation.  Even if the parents admitted not knowing  all the answers, the fact that they were  attempting to solve difficult questions  was encouraging. These children are most  likely to follow their parents and also  participate in peacemaking.  Not only should parents talk to their  children about important world issues,  but it may well be to their own benefit to  listen to what they have to say. Children  tend to bypass all the misleading psychological barriers that block adults and  get to the heart of the matter, thought to  some their ideas may seem naive and simplistic. llSfe^**  I find myself pondering these words of a  7-year old:  "We can get rid of nuclear weapons and  have peace and stuff.   'Cos if you want  something bad enough and you work at it  hard enough, you can do anything."  Vivenne Verdon-Roe of Oakland,  Calif.,  is trained as both a kindergarten and a  college-level educator.  She edits a  peace newsletter, Spirals.  This is a  considerably condensed version of an  article that originally <  Presbyterian Surve y. December '83 Kinesis 21  ARTS  Film  updates  Pygmalion  by Janie Newton - Moss  Educating Rita based on the play by Willy-  Russell. Starring Michael Caine and Julie  Walters.  Critics have been divided over this latest  film from England. At a time when dominant  cinema seems obsessed with special effects,  teenage rebellion or re-creating history,  Educating Rita  is a bit of an anomaly. It  is a plain and simple tale of a young  working class woman's desire for education  which she sees as a way of changing her  life. In this aspect the film is timeless,  for education has always been seen as  one route open for the British working  class "to improve their lot" but until  recently this has been a masculine peroga-  tive. The film is brought up to date in  having a woman as its central character  and one whose adopted name is in honour  of Rita Mae Brown, author of Ruby fruit  Jungle.  Rita is a hairdresser who has been married  for six years and despite constant pressure from her husband and family, avoided  what they see as her inevitable fate:  becoming a mother. Instead she enrolls in  an Open University course and starts having tutorials with Frank, a professor of  literature at the local college. Frank is  a middle aged alcoholic whose first love  is poetry and whose life has been coming  apart .at the seams since his wife left  him several years previously. His liaison  with a fellow staff member and his relationships with his students are tired and  unchalleriging. In Rita he sees enthusiasm  and an unjaded approach to both life and  Frank, played by Michael Caine, is the disillusioned  English professor, who teaches and finally learns from the  lively Rita.  literature. She in turn envies his lifestyle and command of language.  One of the first shots we see-of her is  climbing the stairs to his study and being  passed by a group of students discussing  poetry. Overhearing the word "assonance",  she asks Frank to explain its meaning.  Later Frank incorporates her version that  it is a "rhyme that's gone wrong" into  one of his lectures and it is at this  Rita, played by screen newcomer Julie Walters, is a young  hairdresser who yearns for knowledge.  point that Rita realizes that the power  balance in their relationship has shifted.  Visually the film is a delight. Filmed at  Trinity College, Dublin, it represents any  of the old established university towns'.  It is successful in showing through Rita  and Frank's parallel lives how rigid the  class system is in England and how their  perceptions of each other is partly based  on myth and fallacy. The second half of the  film concerns itself "with the resolution  of their unreasonable expectations as Rita  becomes more of the person that she set  out.to be. Or does she? Rita's "conversion"  happens a little too quickly and in this  way the second half is weaker than the  first.  Its debt to George Bernard Shaw's Pygmalion  filmed as My Fair Lady,  is obvious  although Frank is a more sympathetic  character than Professor Higgins. Rita is  the heart of the film, her determination  to explore her own potential should be an  inspiration to all of us. It largely relies on humour to get its message across  and yet each memorably funny scene is  underpinned with poignancy. The audience  laughed hardest at the scene where Rita  is upstairs desperately trying to study  while her husband is knocking down walls  to enlarge their house. He speculates why  in six months of being off the pill she.  has not conceived while she uproots the  floorboards to reveal her secret stash.  Occasionally the humour seems slightly  forced but it is worthwhile noting that it  was written as a stage play so those larger  than life moments may have suffered in its'Ģ  adaptation for screen. Julie Walters,  already an established stage and television  performer in England gives an outstanding  performarice in her first major film role  as Rita.  If you like literature and feel like a light  hearted look at how one woman sets out to  improve herself, then this is a film for  you to see.  Testament:  Psychological  images, not  visual horrors  by Joan |  Death is one of the inevitabilities that  all humans must face. One hopes, however,  that old age will be pleasant and come  at the end of a rewarding life. The possibility that old age may in fact never  arrive, not just for the tragic few who  lose their lives by accident or disease,  but for anyone, is horrific and frightening.  Testament  is a film about just that. No  one in the small town of Hamelin will  have the opportunity to grow old; some will  never even have the time to understand  what adolescence is. This tragedy is not  brought on by an epidemic or an act of  nature but by the stupidity and arrogance  of ordinary human beings. A nuclear blast  destroys this ordinary American town.  There isn't a window broken or a person  injured in the explosion but they die  slowly, one after the other from radiation  sickness.  The film centres on a typical middle class  family: Carol and Tom and their three  children. The first scenes deal with their  life. The family relationships are. by no  means perfect; they quarrel and nit-pick  just like every other living family anywhere. Collectively however, they are  looking toward the future with dreams and  aspirations. Tom leaves for work in San  Francisco one morning and-by that evening  Carol and her children are alone with no  future and no hope.  An interesting aspect of this film is the  lack of visual images of horror. The  modern audience has become accustomed to  ghastly depictions of death and violence.  The viewer of Testament  is not subjected  to running radiation sores or balding or  long sequences of people unable to digest  food. Rather, the death of Carol's youngest son Scotty becomes representative of  all the deaths. The image of a mother  cleaning up her child when he can no longer control his digestive system; that same  mother holding him, waiting for the end -  these psychological images have a far  greater impact than visual horror could  ever have.  Under the direction of Lynne Littman this  creation becomes So vivid and so compelling that the audience cannot help but be  influenced. The film doesn't point a finger at any super-power or blame any political body. Rather, it leaves us all to  blame. We are the ones who must decide  whether our children will ever grow up.  As in the fairy tale the Pied Piper of  Hamelin, which is a central symbol iri the  film, we the audience must create a world  deserving of our children.  Jane Alexander as Carol offers an excellent performance. Her ability combined  with those of the children played by Ross  Harrison, Lucas Huas and Roxanna Zal create  not only a film of social and political  importance but also a piece of art.  The origins of this movie lie within a  story by Carol Amen aptly titled, "The  Last Testament". One would hope that her  work as the author and Lynne Littman's  endeavours as the director and producer  will at the very, least force people to  reconsider their position on nuclear proliferation.  Testament  is a powerful film that every  human who cares about our earth should  see. It is a film of the soul, the place  where the love and preservation of humankind begins. 22 Kinesis December '83  ARTS  Little  Night  Reading  by Cy-Thea Sand  For Nights Like This One.   By Becky Birtha.  107 pages. Frog in the Well, East Palo  Alto, CA., 1983. $4.75 U.S. (paperback).  This is a first collection of short stories  by a Black lesbian feminist whose work  has appeared in the feminist press in years  past. The work is subtitled "Stories of  Loving Women" and concerns lesbians in  relationships with each other, as friends,  and in relation to biological families.  I like the fact that Birtha discusses ideas  in her fiction and dramatizes many issues  of the contemporary lesbian lifestyle.  Birtha is at her best when she is totally  in control of her characters' emotions.  Her weakness is in creating setting - her  language often is too journalistic and  lacks descriptive power. Sometimes the  reader is told too much, as in the title  story, and I think a better editor would  have considered "Sakekeeping" a practice  piece.  I consider the story entitled "Babies" to  be well thought out and provocative. My  favorite stories are "Marisa" and "Next  Saturday". The former describes a lesbian  from a heterosexual point-of view; the  latter is taut with tension and despair.  For Nights Like This One  reflects the  highs and lows of a beginning writer and  reveals a talent that should be nurtured  into a steadier craft.  Undershirts And Other Stories. "By Cathy  Cockrell. 64 pages. Hanging Losse Press,  Brooklyn, N.Y., 1982. $4.00 U.S. (paperback) .  I was impressed with this collection of  short pieces which rivet aspects of Cockrell 's experiences to an article of clothing. Cockrell's language is as refreshing  as her perspective: an exploration of sensation, thought and memory from a lesbian,  anti-war, and feminist sensibility. Lis- -  ten to Cockrell's rhyme and cadence as  she describes her lover doing laundry:  Your silver labyris on the delicate chain  falls near the shrit's top edge; the vertical ribs follow the contours of your  breasts, your bones, your solid, muscular  body. By 'the end of the day, or the next,  : humidity and heat,  the shirt  A mention  of a  book or journal in this  column does not  preclude it being re  viewed in  depth  in future issues of  Kinesis. Review  copies of fiction by  and about  women  may be sent to Cy-  'ñ†  Thea Sand,  P.O.  Box 24953,  Station C,  Vancouver,  B.C.  V5T 4G3.  will stretch,  lose tone,  fall away in  places where it once hugged close and comforting.  Then it must be thrown into a-  limp heap 'with the others,  unuseable,  until their next journey through the suds,  water,  and heat of the laundry,_ the motion  of your hands flicking and folding,  smoothing and stacking the still-warm white  shells,  thin garments trailing' streams of  meaning and desire like the misty veils  of teenage brides.  Reading Undershirts and Other Stories  is  like looking through a photo album and  wondering at the kaleodoscopic richness  of our lives. Read this first collection  and watch for future work by this astute  young lesbian writer.  So Long A Letter.   By Mariama Ba. 90 pages.  Virago Press, London, 1982. $7.95.  In the form of a letter to her best friend  an African Muslim woman records her reactions to her husband's polygamy in this  powerful novel of feminist consciousness.  The work is an intriguing introduction to  the Black Muslim culture of Senegal. The  language is philosophical and precise, as  in this meditation on friendship:  Friendship has splendours that love knows  not.  It grows stronger when crossed, whereas obstacles kill love.  Friendship resists  time, which wearies and severs couples.  It  has heights unknown to love.  So Long A Letter won the first Noma Award  for Publishing in Africa. Unfortunately,  Mariama Ba died in 198l after a long illness. Her only novel is a treasure for  Western feminists interested in the women  and literature of the Third World.  Walking On The Moon.   By Barbara Wilson.  161 pages. The Seal Press, Seattle, 1983.  $5.95 U.S.  Run to your nearest women's bookstore for  this collection of six stories and a  novella. Barbara Wilson, the author of  Thin Ice and Other Stories  and Ambitious  Women,   a novel, is getting better all the  time. This collection takes us through  California, Venezuela, Germany, and Italy  with ease, wit and a delightful carousel  of characters. Il Circo Delle Donne  originally appeared in Maenad.   I enjoyed.it  then but this revised version is sharper  and as enthralling as on first reading.  When Wilson depicts heterosexual women  who are hopelessly centred on men, she  does so with affectionate anger and grace.  Her lesbian characters are diverse: some  are tragic; others self-defined. The title  piece is rich-in emotional dimensions,  profound and humorous. Wilson's portrait  of an intellectual at eighteen is unforgettable. Barbara Wilson is a serious  writer. I look forward to her future work.  Black Lesbian In White America.   By Anita  Cornwell. 129 pages. The Naiad Press,  Tallahassee, Florida, 1983. $7;50 U.S.  Anita Cornwell is a pioneer activist, a  feminist lesbian who wrote for Tne Ladder  -  America's first lesbian periodical. This  is a collection of Cornwell's articles,  letters and autobiographical pieces. Introduced by Becky Birtha, the work will  have you stomping your feet and pounding  table tops in the good old separatist  tradition. "Lament For Two Bambozzled  Sisters - a Sequence of Letters", is  particularly hard-hitting. Cornwell's rage  at some women's complicity with oppression  is acute and unrelenting. This is primal,  gut-wrenching rhetoric which may remind  some of us what the past fifteen years  have been all about.  There is also an interview with poet  Audre Lorde, which fills in a few gaps  about her heterosexual past which are not  explored in her recent autobiography,  Zami: A New Spelling Of My Name.   Cornwell  is at her best in the autobiographical  excerpts and I hope a complete one is in  the works.  Shabono.   By Florinda Donner. 301 pages.  Delacorte Press, N.Y., 1982.  This is a fascinating account of an anthropologist's time spent with the Yanomama  Indians who "inhabit the most isolated  portion of the border between southern  Venezuela and Northern Brazil." Donner  discards the exploitative objectivity of  social science to become as intimate with  the people as is possible for a white,  stranger. Female infanticide, the capture  of the women of an enemy tribe, the ritual  rape of captured women and extensive  taboos for menstruating and pregnant women are practiced by the Yanomama. Women  are honored as creators yet femininity is  second rate.  The work is flawed by Donner's lack of  analysis and integration of her experience,  How does she relate the year spent in the  jungle with her life as a white woman in  the twentieth century? If she liad not been  forced to leave, how long would she have  stayed? We are left with too- many questions for the work to be sholly satisfying but Shabono  is female-centred and is  a much needed addition to androcentric  anthropological literature.  In Search of April Raintree.   By Beatrice  Culleton. 228 pages. Pemmican Publications  Winnipeg, 1983. $3.95 (paperback).  Beatrice Culleton tells the story of two  Metis sisters, Cheryl and April Raintree,  who are taken from their parents to be  raised by white foster .parents. The work  is important for confronting the issue of  non-native people raising native and Metis  children, which is currently a focus of  attention for native social workers.  The book is also a documentation of the  relentless oppression suffered by Canada's  native people. Cheryl Raintree .is a lively  intelligent child who is devastated by  the racism she spent years courageously  fighting. April survives by denying her  native heritage and living in a fairy tale  world which eventually crumbles. A novel  of documentary realism, In Search of April  Raintree,   explores both the psychic and  physical violence of racism and yet manages to end with a vision of healing and  hope. December '83 Kinesis 23  ARTS  by Helene Rosenthal  In 1980, a year after the revolution in  Nicaragua overcame the regime of dictator  Samoza and formed a coalition government  under the leadership of the Sandanist  National Liberation Front (fFLN)l, a team  of Canadian film makers arrived in the  country. Their purpose: to interview women  who had been involved in the resistance,  in the actual fighting, and who were now  part of those carrying out the necessary  work of. reconstructing the country along  new lines of freedom and justice. The result: a film which sensitively approaches  the question of what changes in the lives  of women are evident as a result of their  involvement.  DREAM OF A FREE COUNTRY: A MESSAGE FROM  NICARAGUAN WOMEN,   Producer: Edward Le  Lorrain, Co-directors: Virginia Stikeman  and Kathleen Shannon, Editors: V. Stikeman and E. Le Lorrain, Distributed by the  National Film Board, Date: Soon to be released.  A moving and inspiring document, it is as  beautiful to look at in its bright range  of tropical colours as it is deeply informing. Out of a small population of 2 1/2  million, only half are over 15, the majority being women. They comprise 30% of the  country's defense forces, with many more  engaged in organizing and support activities. They were and are the indispensible  factor in the success of the revolution and  in continuing the struggle of creating a  new society.  It is at once a celebratory and sobering  thought. Sobering because, as a result of  increasingly massive military aid to Honduras (a buildup which began after the  Sandanista victory in 1979), Nicaragua's  northern neighbour has become the largest  new war base for Reagan's interventions in  Central and South America. Facing this  ominous threat and provocations on its  boarders, Nicaragua is having to deploy  energies needed to combat a historical  legacy of poverty, hunger and other aspects  of oppression to ready itself for possible  invasion. This was seen in the government's  declaration of a state of emergency on Oct.  14 following CIA-instigated attacks on  border posts"north and south and on ports  of both seacoasts. The marine attack on  Corinto on the west coast alone resulted in  the destruction of 3.2 million gallons of  gasoline, oil and diesel fuels and 600 tons  of food and medicine stored at the port.  With fires raging, the entire populace of  25,000 had to be evacuated.2  In this newly aggravated contest, the bond  the film creates between its subjects and  us makes us tremble for them. Yet listening  to them,-seeing them, is like being privileged to attend a symposium on the life  force in action. Stories of incredible  courage, bravery and hope are related as if  they were everyday events, which they are  for these people. Telling of how the former  dictator's private army, the hated U.S.-  trained National Guard,, "oppressed activists like us" with imprisonment, torture,  rape, disappearances and assassination,  a woman refers to Maria Rojas, who became  an activist at age 12. She was apparently  not at all unusual.  Considering what they've been through,  these women present an amazingly vital,  attractive appearance; it's a pleasure to  look at them. Some speak English, not needing the narrator's translation. We meet \  peasants, workers, professionals, soldiers,  organizers, a nun, government ministers,  women formerly of the petit bourgeoisie.  Though it is easy to miss trie impressive  names of some (whose testimonies are  eloquently recorded in depth in Margaret  Randall's Sandino's Daughters^),  who the  individuals are does not seem to be as  important to the aims of the film as the  Street vendor and soldier, Nicaragua. Photo from Studio D, NFB  Nicaragua:  A compelling portrait  composite portrait. Their comments are  women together in a way that pays homage  to all.  A Nicaraguan male' painter who has dedicated himself to recording the valour of  such women in a permanent form because he  does not want it to be forgotten in the  transience of journalistic accounts, shows  us some paintings he has done. One, of a  woman fighter with a baby on her back,  commemorates the first village to rise.  He tells of how the village artisans used  the techniques they had for working in  clay, reeds and pyrotechnics, to make  contact bombs. So many fell in such battles  that children often carried on with rifles,  taught how to use them by their mothers.  A female photographer who served in several capacities in the army also has something to say about this. Concerned "to  show the world afterwards" some of the  horrors that were suffered, she displays  a couple of photos out of the many she  took. They are of children maimed and  killed, as many were, in the streets all  over the country. Some had the bombs they  were carrying explode in their hands.  Children acted as messengers, built barricades. They, along with older youth, were  especially persecuted. One, only seven  years old when he joined the FSLN, was  assassinated by the National Guard for his  activities, a park being later named after  him. He had not yet turned ten. Leaders  aged six "to 15 years emerged from such as  these.  An excellent feature of the film is that  it is careful to balance negative with  positive aspects. We see happy children  "who got through the war in good shape."  It was feared by some that they'd be  traumatized, says this speaker, proud of  the children's "great capacity to adjust  to new situations." This natural capacity,  she implies, was increased by their unavoidable involvement in their parents'  fight for survival and freedom. This  strikes me as something more than a virtue  made of necessity. It exemplifies the force  that through the green fuse of commitment  drives these women warriors, as it did  the children and the men, giving them the  strength and vision to endure.  There is humour, too. A journalist named  Marguerita laughingly tells on some "famous" colleagues - men who were unfamiliar  with and so terrified by war, by the revolution, that they had to be physically  assisted by the women in order to carry  out their assignments. A 25 year old  guerrilla commander, Monica Boltodano,  recounts how men of the National Guard who  surrendered did not want to talk to a female commandante, but she was it!  Tales of bravery, over and over. Another  commander is Dora Maria Tellez, who became famous when her commando took the  National Palace in 1978, a feat which  resulted in "terrific gains" including the  release of 2000 political prisoners. A  daughter of the middle class, which "makes  it harder", she was already active in  high school, joining the FSLN in her first  year at university in 1972. She worked and  fought in the mountains, went underground  when that became necessary, had to leave  the country after the National Palace takeover, returned to take Leon, the second  largest city in Nicaragua, in 1979.  Many of these women were members of the  National Association of Women Confronting  the Nation's Problems (AMPRONAC) which a  few women got started in the years immediately preceding the overthrow of Samoza.  Following the Sandanista victory it was  renamed the Luisa Amanda Espinosa Nicaraguan Women's Association after the first  woman member of the FSLN to die fighting.  She was only 21.  A member of the Association since its  earlier days recalls having joined the  Sandanistas on account of the cruelty  suffered by her mother who was imprisoned  by the National Guard for two years. "I  never forgot," she says, speaking of women  like her mother who were ignored because  they were poor and female. "That is why us  older women are joining struggles with  younger women...so that not even our  husbands can exploit or exclude us. The  struggle must go on or we can lose everything we've gained," she tells us. During  the revolution she conquered her fear to  carry leaflets from zone to zone, found  food for companeros, learned to avoid '  continued on next page 24 Kinesis December '83  continued from previous page  armed guards. Now she works to help "raise  women's social conscience." Her message  is that personal liberation is through  women working together.  This theme emerges more clearly as the  film proceeds. The women's struggle to  overcome sexist oppression has grown  directly out of their militant participation in the revolutionary struggle. But  we have to see what they are up against,  in pushing for change. The dictatorship  left a legacy creating almost impossible  conditions for recovery, the male painter  points out: huge foreign debt; destruction;  shortages; rising inflation; educational,  medical and social services concentrated  in the few large centres; high unemployment. He reminds us of stuff we all know:  most women held two jobs - at home and  in poorly paid work in the public sector.  The female narrator adds (also hardly  news) that many had to turn to prostitution. There were many large families, many  single parents. The hard life of poor women is underscored in the 76 year old  market seller we meet who has been working since the age of nine. Another, a  plantation worker - a wife and mother of  11," talks of always cooking, cooking,  cooking.  The children help out, however. "Little  by little," she says, "they bring strength  to us, their parents. More than anything,  I want my daughters to have an education  - not to be what I am." Later we learn  that while the older women still tend to  work at traditional employments, the  younger ones are all studying. Grade V is  required for factory work. Education, like  health care, is free to all, including  university. Illiteracy has been reduced  from a 55% average before 1980, when an  ambitious campaign began, to a present  14% and "everybody knows the literacy  song." Indeed, we are treated to a few  delightful shots of young children singing it. Nutrition is another special  focus, particularly in the peasant population which mostly concerns women.  "We're still fighting against the cultural  backwardness of the Samoza dictatorship,"  says a woman previously introduced. She  cites as the "real" problems those particularly affecting women, such as the lack  of daycare and of training centres for  skills needed in the rebuilding of the  country. An English-speaking nun who says  she's been here six years and has learned  much, much more from the people than what  she has been able to give (she is a nurse),  makes the point that one of the problems  for women in the post-revolutionary period  is that they haye been inundated with projects and they don't know how to decide;  "they have no past training for this."  The.nun also has some pointed political  comments to make about the USA criticizing the Junta (it comes as a surprise to  learn the term has positive connotations  in the Nicaraguan context) for taking  Russian and Cuban aid freely offered,  while hedging their own promise of a huge  amount to revitalize private industry with  conditions which were unacceptable. (For  a detailed rebuttal of the many spurious  charges the USA has levelled at Nicaragua  to justify current military aggression  against it, see Tomas Borge Martinez'  article in the Guardian,  Aug. 21, 1983,  p. 17. Martinez is Nicaragua's Minister  of the Interior.)  On the positive side, the revolution has  brought women out of many forms of oppression they suffered in the past. A sewing j  machine operator is joyful about the  -opportunity the revolution gave her to  learn her trade. She hid behind the machine  when she came, "but, together, we've done  it." She works in a cooperative where they  took a collective decision to all earn  the same salary, $100 a month. "I was  ARTS  completely isolated...now I have a place  in society," she says proudly. Another  talks about her hard life in the past in  relation to marriage, and of how all this  has changed. Her husband was "a true-blue  macho" whom she had to serve hand and foot.  "He hit her, he dragged her from church.  Nevertheless, she kept reiterating her  love for him and gives thanks to God for  the miracle of changing her husband into  As the beautiful, smiling faces of the women and children of Nicaragua pass in  review across the screen, ending the film,  we are left to ponder. For one, the debate  in the Women's Association meeting.* Also,  the power of a feminism which has arisen  out of, and been tested in, the crucible  of fire and blood. A strength of 40,000  out of a population of 2 1/2 million certainly speaks for itself.  Is there an answer for us in this model  Sustaining a confident  outlook as it moves  toward its conclusion,  the film does not shirk  the troubling issue the  majority of women  face, of how to bring  men's consciousness in  line with the lessons of  the revolution.  Daisy Zamera, former Deputy Minister of Culture, 1980. From Studio D, NFB.  a partner who now babysits for her. She is  often away from home working on such community projects as harvesting cotton,  building roads, cleaning public buildings.  Sustaining a confident outlook as it moves  towards its conclusion, the .film does not,  however, shirk the troubling issue the  majority of women face of-how to bring  men's consciousness in line with the lessons of the revolution. It is still an  enormous problem. We are taken to a meeting  in Managua of the 40,000 strong Women's  Association (the same that, under its  original name, numbered only 25 women at  the end of 1977 when it was first established!). It is now a broadly based organization which functions as a consultative  legislative body with representation on  the Council of State. Reaching out to women all over the country, they decide together which of the laws that instituted  "the discrimination and marginalization  of women in our society" need attention  first, so that such laws can be abolished  and replaced with others guaranteeing  equal rights. Citing inequities in the  present system, a speaker points to the  fact that there are no women in the (governing) Junta nor in the National Directorate of the Sandanista Front. Does the government intend that women will be represented in proportionate numbers, she asks?  Grievances closer to home surface. "Most  of my friends fear their husbands and don't  know what to do about it", says the women  we earlier heard tell of how she helped  educate her husband to share the load. "We  must help them to learn, to overcome," she  insists. "The fighting must not be directed to dominate men", says another, "but  to eradicate the difference." Another still:  "We fought the Nicaraguans: we are ready  to fight for ourselves. We must unite...  with women everywhere." The most trenchant  note, perhaps, is struck by a speaker who  makes the point that "We've always said  that the liberation of women could only be  achieved through revolution. If they are  faithful to the revolution, they are then  by definition faithful to women's struggle."  of a revolutionary struggle in which women  join with men? Do we keep on lettirig theory  dictate practice, creating bitter division  about who is politically correct? A hopeful  sign is that we have already joined forces  in the fight against nuclear annihilation,  as in our battles at home with repressive  legislation, layoffs, and in our rape  crisis work. DREAM OF A FREE COUNTRY  is an  empowering film: don't miss it.  *An update on the women's struggle is that  on Sept. 13 of this year, Nicaragua's  Council of State approved the passage of  a bill concerning conscription for all  males between the ages of 18 and 40, and  voluntary service for all females in that  age bracket. Military service is defined as  the active participation of all the people  in defence-related activities. However,  women have been angrily voicing their |  criticism of being excluded from compulsory  active service, insisting in Council debates that they "have won the right to be  more broadly included in the law." They  have not won their point. (See Oct. 5 issue  of the Guardian:  "Where Draft Resistance  is Right Wing," p.14.).  Footnotes:  iNamed after General Augusto Sandino, a  national hero, who led a six year struggle  of guerrilla warfare from 1927 to 1933 to  get the U.S. Marines out of Nicaragua.  ^'ñ†Central America Alert,   Bulletin #5, October-November, 1983. The information cited  is from a yellow insert in the Bulletin  entitled, "News Flash: State of Emergency  in Nicaragua." Published by U.S. Out of  Central America (USOCA), 303 Cortland Ave.,  San Francisco, CA. 94110, USA.  3published in 1981 by New Star Books of  Vancouver, to whom I am indebted for their  generosity in providing me with a copy of,  this and Randall's earlier book, Doris  Tijerino: Inside the Nicaraguan Revolution  (1978). Sandino 's Daughters: Testimonies  of Nicaraguan Women in Struggle  (the full  title) like the film, constitutes a series  of interviews and is invaluable as a supplement to it. ARTS  _,#f|^S.  _ Arlene Mantle  by Rachel Epstein  Toronto singer, songwriter and educator  Arlene Mantle played for two evenings at  La Quena coffeehouse during her 2 1/2 week  stay in Vancouver. By the second time word  had got out and the place was packed. The  combination of her music, lyrics and presence on stage kept everyone attentive  for the entire evening.  Arlene's songs focus on the struggles  we're engaged in today. In her words: "Any  great social movement has always had a  lot of music accompanying.it. I can't  imagine a great movement without it's  music...Music is inspiring, it helps to  hold people together when they're starting  to feel really defeated and down, it's  mobilizing...Sometimes I think we need to  sing certain songs to recapture some of  our history, but if we rely on songs of  past movements we won't build a new one.  We have to have new music that goes with  today's struggles."  What is most useful and exciting about  Arlene's music is that she links our  issues. She sings about poor women, immigrant women, women in trade unions, lesbians, the invisibility of women in language, unemployment, pornography, the  rise of the right, worker's health and  safety, and she sings in solidarity with  anti-imperialist struggles. As well she  sings a mean blues (and if anyone caught  her rock and roll renditions of Elvis and  Janis Joplin tunes at the IWW benefit,  they were dynamite!)  Many of Arlene's songs have come from a  process of collective songwriting where  a group of people with a common issue or  goal get together to share their feelings  and thoughts and put them into a song.  One of the songs that came from this process is "Forget Me Not", a song about the  lack.of support some trade unions provide  to their unemployed members. It was written by a group of union organizers at the  Humber College Labour Studies program.  The chorus sums up the sentiment of the  song:  Well I'm singing Solidarity Forever  Trying hard to keep my union^spirit hig)  But my spirit's almost spent,  and I-  can't pay the rent  Have you ever seen a union member cry?  Another collectively-written song is "We  Hold Up Half the Sky", written in a  women-only workshop that Arlene conducted  at an International Council for Adult  Education conference in Paris. These women  were upset and angry at the invisibility  of women in the opening ceremony of the  conference so they got together with a  few bottles of French wine and transformed  their anger into music.  Arlene has done songwriting workshops  with groups of women workers, trade union  women and men, English as a Second Language classes, welfare mothers, public  Songs for-  the_struggle_  housing tenants, adult educators, religious groups, etc. While in B.C. she  worked with a group to write a song about  the Socred budget. She and the people who  wrote it sang it the next evening at a  New Westminster Solidarity Coalition  meeting.  Arlene's priority is to sing about women,  and particularly poor women. Having lived  in public housing for 11 years, raising  her five kids as a single mother on welfare she feels some impatience and frustration with the organized women's movement  and its lack of attention to women's  poverty. Her song, "Hey, Hey, What About  Class?", written for International Women's  Day in Toronto, addresses this. Also in  her repertoire is, "This is Not a Love  Story", the most powerful song I've heard  yet about pornography and what it does to  kids.  Arlene's songs are easy to sing along with  and the tunes are interesting and varied.  They're perfect for picket lines, rallies  and just general humming along. She's  recorded a tape of 19 of her songs to go  along with a pocket-size songbook called,  "Arlene Mantle On The Line". The tape  and songbook are available at the Women's  Bookstore, Octopus Books, Spartacus Books,  the Co-op Bookstore and La Quena. For  information on bookings or workshops, call  251-3872.  (Next month an interview with Arlene)  Poet  exposes  'the dangerous'  by Erin Moure'  Read this book! You women whose bodies are  restless, read this book. You women whose  touch is power, read this book. You women  and men whose gentleness is suffocated by  the politicians, read this book.  THE LARGER LIFE,  by Libby Scheier. Black  Moss Press, Windsor, 1983. $7.95. ISBN:  0-88753-099-0.  These are tough poems. They are poems from  the mouth of love, directed against the  dangerous. As the poem, "What The Welfare  Department Did After The Budget Cuts"  begins:  The mothers and children are in detention.  The guards are -.fish-faced/ women with  dogs.  The dogs are children with the  faces of dogs.  The poem looks in on the tower where welfare is administered; it places the mothers  and children inside the building, where  they are trapped. People guard each other,  and are set up to resent and fear each  other; the guards, mothers, and dogs are  almost indistinguishable here. Now the  ground opens. 'Ģ S^SS^I  ...The building topples through the  long  and gaping slit to/ somewhere without  bottom. Mothers and children fly about  with/ bits of steel and glass.  Guards  December *83 Kinesis 25  and dogs fly about too. The/ administrators had not worried about letting them  out before/ opening the earth...  This image evokes fearsomely how welfare  mothers feel after budget cuts to social  services. Everything is sucked inward. No  one lets them out, before destroying the  system where they are trapped, and must  live.  The "dangerous" are ordinary humans after  all, who eat, make love, and refuse to  murder, and support democracy and the hierarchy of the state, and do not, unfortunately, challenge their thousand discriminations. The love we profess is so often  twisted into a way of death; it is eviscerated by the civilization we live in,  where "we have come to believe we need  cars",   as Scheier writes ("Why Poems Should  Not Be Fictions").  The poems reveal satisfaction and clarity  happen in small events, like smoking, or  ironing. Yet it is "the larger life" that  Scheier describes most directly and surely  - our public lives as social beings, or  our lives with the people we cherish, both  of which are political and conditioned.  Scheier's work as a poet is thankless in  this country, where even readers of poetry  reject criticisms of the political system  in which we live; these poems tie into a  tradition of revolutionary writing that is  not part of the mainstream of North American poetry.  photo by Yossi Schwartz  Scheier speaks in these poems of our ordinary lives where, under the surface, violence lurks. Even under the tender acts of  mercy, great violence is proposing itself.  It hangs in small clouds  over human heads on line  at banks and cafeterias  it is the blood of psychiatrists  and the ink of journalists  ("Violence")  The only pure thing is the birth of a child  after her mother's nightmares and long  waiting. In "Fetal Suite", the new child's  presence overcomes fear and noise and language. "How I loved you/ how I felt shame/  for my art",  Scheier concludes.  Scheier's voice is capable of many forms:  the long line and insistent rhythm of the  prose poem, the public rhetorical voice,  and the short lulled line of the simple  continued on p. 29 26 Kinesis December '83  ARM.  RUBYMUSIC  by Connie Smith  Old Enough.  Lou Ann Barton. (1982)  Electra/Asylum Records.  Recently, there has been a lot of attention  given to Stevie Ray Vaughan, a Texas guitarist "discovered" by Davie Bowie. And as  Stevie's popularity increases, so do the  stories about his life. It was one such  story that made me want to bring Lou Ann  Barton to your attention. If you're a ^%^'.'t  Radical Reviewer  reader, you may remember  that I reviewed Lou Ann's album last year.  But I think she's worth talking about  At one point in Stevie Ray Vaughan's  career, Lou Ann was the vocalist for his  band, 'Double Trouble'. I don't know why  they parted ways, but it was soon after  that he became well-known. Occasionally,  Lou Ann's name comes up in reference to  him, but overall, she is considered a  flash in the pan. Well, let me tell you.  If her one album, Old Enough, is just a  flash in the pan, I'd sure like to hear  her with all her grease on the griddle.  Lou Ann Barton sings female  rockabilly  like nobody's business. (I stress female  because if you ask around, people will  tell you that women don't" sing rockabilly.  Never did. Never will.) Lou Ann's voice is  raw and wild and at times she reminds me  of Bonnie Raitt or Wanda Jackson. But I  Betty Lambert 1933-1983  by Jennifer Svendson  Betty Lambert was a writer to the end.  Shortly before her death from cancer on  November 4, 1983, she even created her own  memorial service which was held November  22nd at Simon Fraser University. She asked  that it be called a celebration, and it  was - a celebration of the life of a  remarkable woman.  I first met Betty in 1965 when SFU had just  opened. At that time she was a part-time  instructor in the English department, but  she went on to become an Associate Professor. In our degree ridden world, this was  no small achievement considering Betty had  simply a B.A. in Philosophy and English.  But of course, there were her plays (she  had written seventy plays and several  musicals by the time of her death), which  in themselves gave her an impressive curriculum vitae.  Betty's students remember her most as a  teacher of incredible generosity. Despite  a gruelling workload as teacher/writer/  parent, she always found time to give to  her students something of her own boundless enthusiasm that went far beyond the  confines of the classroom itself.  In addition to being a playright, Betty  also raised a daughter}  Ruth Anne^ as a  single parent and wrote a novel, (titled -  Crossings  in Canada and Bring Down the Sun  in the USA), which created quite a tempest  here in Vancouver. A local woman's bookstore even declared it forbidden reading  when it first came out. The narrator of  Crossings  is a woman of her times and her  times were the fifties; hardly the stuff  role models are made from, but all too  real none-the-less. All Betty's women are  real - disquietingly so. All too often  they show us parts of ourselves we perhaps  would rather not see.  By this time Betty was used to getting  flack from all sides. One of the marvelous  things about her though, was that she  really didn't care whose toes she stepped  on. If she had something to say, she was  going to say it - and in her own way. This  forthright and determined manner of living  permeated everything she did.  Often, she described herself as an angry  woman - and she was. Angry at the moral  and social injustice she saw in the world.  Angry at the position of women and the  silencing of women over the centuries.  Betty used her anger to shape her art but  the art she brought to life was not always  pretty, nice, amusing, or even pleasant. I  remember interviewing her after Jennie 's  Story  was staged in Vancouver, and she  described to me one of the scenes she had  been obliged to cut. In this scene Jennie,  after having drunk the lye, was laid out  on the kitchen table with buckets of blood  and vomit all over the place. This was  deemed just a bit too much for sensitive  audiences to deal with.  This is not to say that Betty was not  amusing. Indeed, she is most remembered  for a remarkable humour that was as developed as her sense of the human tragedy.  Her play Spieux  - de - Dieu  is a bitirtgly  witty look at life, love, sex, relationships and a great many other things that  contribute to the human condition. In an-  Betty's students remember her  most as a teacher of incredible  generosity. Despite a gruelling  workload she always found time  to give to her students something  of her own boundless  enthusiasm.  other play, Clouds of Glory she turned her  comic/tragic insights to academics - with  devastating results.  Betty began her life as a writer, primarily  as a poet, publishing her first poem at  the age of twelve. She said it was by selling poems she kept herself in spending  money as a teenager. By the time she was  nineteen, she had won a couple of scholarships to the Banff School of Fine Arts.  Three years later she sold her first radio  play and was on her way. Now, almost thirty  years later that way has come to an end-.  Betty will be missed by all of us who knew  her. We are fortunate that she was able to  finish a play Under The Skin  and a musical  The Foolish Virgin  before her death.  think it's more their spirit that I feel  because Lou Ann's Texas tones are all her  own.  Ironically, my favorite song on the album  is the slow one. It's called "Maybe" and  it was made famous by 'The Chantels', 'The  Shangri Las', and the late Janis Joplin.  It's good to know chat the word is getting  passed down.  Gwen Guthrie.   Gwen Guthrie. (1982) Island  Records Ltd.  When Gwen Guthrie went into the Compass  Point Studios in Nassau, she wasn't there  to make this album. Instead, she had been  asked by her two friends, musicians Sly  Dunbar and Robbie Shakespeare, to do  background vocals for a project they were  working on. But as luck would have it,  her vocals were so predominant, Sly and  Robbie's project became Gwen's first album  release.  Until this time, Gwen was best known as  a session singer. She backed Aretha  Franklin, Roberta Flack, Carly Simon and  Ray Charles. Once, she sang a duet with  Luther Vandross, but this is her first  attempt at stepping out alone.  This album is a dance album. A disco beat  runs underneath every song, but that  doesn't take away from the funky sound. And  one song leads right into the other, so  there's no chance to stop dancing.  Of the eight songs on the album, only two  are written by Gwen. But regardless of  the songwriter, there's nothing embarrassing about any of the lyrics and Gwen  doesn't use pronouns, so this album can.  be for. everybody. The only thing I didn't  like is that sometimes there's too much  electronic gadgetry in places where I  would have rather heard her voice.  Showpeople.   Mari Wilson. (1983) London  Recordings.  No, this is not a feminist album...which  is too bad because I could really go for  a girl like Mari. When she sings, she  makes it sound effortless. In fact, Mari's  so casual about the beautiful sound that  comes out of her mouth, you'd think she  didn't mean a word of what she's saying.  This is good, considering that in nine out  of ten songs on the album, her boyfriend  has left her.  Mari's music reminds me of being back in  high school when all the girls danced  together in lines or sat on the edge of  the gymnasium stage and did identical  hand movements to girl group music. In  fact, Mari's songs are similar to the kind  of music that was written in the Brill  Building during the early '60's. But I'm  hardpressed to imagine a group of politically conscious women dancing together  singing, "I love everything about my  boyfriend/ he can make my heart beat/ I'm  in heaven when we meet/ our love will  never falter/ take me to the alter..."  Nevertheless, her version of Julie London's  "Cry Me a River" is wonderful.  Mari began her musical career when she  left her desk job at Global Van Lines,  in London, to form an 11-piece band. Yes,  her own band. She appears on stage in  what she calls "classy tack" and her beehive is almost a foot high. She's now  making less money than she did at the  van lines, but she doesn't care. Forming  the band was something she had to do,  because as she puts it, the fun had gone  out of music.  continued on p. 28 December "83 Kinesis 27  ARTS  RCoUbSiUctmpbeii:   Landscapes of the Heart  by Michele Wollstonecrof t  Landscapes of the Heart, sculpture by Robin Campbell, was exhibited at the XChanges  Gallery in Victoria from October 30th until November 14th. It was part of a two-  person show; the other artist, Marie Bergman, exhibited large paintings, poetry and  pastel drawings entitled, Landscapes of  the Soul.  •> of the Heart  includes six wood  floor reliefs, sculpted in cedar, of  approximately 33" to 35" square. The blocks  themselves are all made of 4" X 12" planks,  cut and glued together in three panels.  All of these pieces represent mons Veneris  (also known as the mound of Venus), mountains and hills. They speak of the power •  of women's sexual energy, of its inter-  connectedness with her emotional and spiritual being, hence the title Landscapes of  .the Heart.   They are large, solid works.  The use of three panels is significant,  three being the age-old embodiment of the  spirit of the feminine, representing past,  present and future.■*■ The external squarish-  ness does' not make these pieces alien to us,  but shows female strength alive and well  and rising up.  These works are manifestations of my love  for Earth in her feminine aspect.   They are  symbolic landscapes inspired by  "my"  geographical world.  Most recently it has been the rushing rivers,  rain forests,  mountains,  and ocean  islands of this Pacific Coast.  This world  which I inhabit is animated by the presence of the Goddess.  It is the world of The  Mother: The Creatrix.  -Robin Campbell, Artist's  Statement, Landscapes of the  Heart,   October, 1983.  What is exciting about this work is that it  unifies women's sexual power, the landscape  that we live on now, and feminine ritual of  times past.  Robin's work has evolved from the female  figures of Sanctuaries   (exhibited August  '80) that represented steatophagous goddess  forms, developed from her studies of Egyptian and Minoan dancing figures.  In the more pure forms of Graveposts and  Headstones  (work done in '80 and '81), the  mons and female form were implied; in this  current exhibition the work is explicitly  mons Veneris. Now Robin has integrated the  feel of neolithic ritual objects with  actual landscape elements that were sacred  to numerous neolithic civilizations, particularly those of Crete. Common to these  sites were the gently mounded hill on which  the palace and shrines were located2,  the  burial mounds and beehive tombs (such as  at Mycenae), and the double-peaked or cleft  mountain located some .distance from the  palace hill, but on the some axis.  These wood sculptures feature the vulva,  each mons holding something different inside  or around the "labial gorge": earth, sand,  shells, water, fur.  Although the rising mons has symbolized the  motherly form it is not the pro-creative  aspect of the mons that Robin is emphasizing  with this work, but rather, the potential  for pleasure and insight. The clitoris is  the highest point of the topography of each  piece.' The, wood is worked down from the  clitoris, thus making it the focal point of  the piece.  Warm Earth  is a very simple form; the mons  rises out of the wood, swelling out towards  the sides of the block. The hollowed mons  around the labia is filled with dark earth  which accentuates the raised  clitoris and semi-circle of wood  that surrounds the earth. This  curve makes a moon shape and the  earth-filled space inside it  looks like horns, or a double-  axe. These shapes re-occur in  the other Landscape  pieces as  well. The horns, suggested both  within the hollow and outside  the rising mons, are a symbol of  the earth's active power^; the  double-axe,'visible on the inside  of the cleft in Warm Earth  and  Kyak River  (which will be discussed further on in this  article), is a moon symbol.  Time Flow, by Robin Campbell  Warm Earth, by Robin Campbell  Beach Rubble Prodded was inspired by  Robin's readings of Sappho, in particular:  If you're squeamish  Don't prod the beach rubble.  -trans. Mary Barnard  On this piece, the knots of the wood are  left and, unlike the smoothness of Warm  Earth,  the pattern from Robin's chisel  covers the surface. The mons opens out- as  an oval bowl, painted red, that holds  rocks, shells, bits of wood, pinecones and  such, in essence, "beach rubble".  I What is exciting about  f this work is that it unifies  f women's sexual power,  \ the landscape that we live  1 on now, and feminine  i ritual of times past.  The resulting sculpture, Kyak River, is  much more worked into than the other Landscape pieces: the block is thinner, the  edges are more rugged and the markings of  the chisel cover the surface in turbulant  grooves. The hollowed mons is filled with  water and looks like a high mountain pool.  The knots are accentuated.  Wood is like a solidified flow,  the eddies  and current are revealed in the grain of  the wood. _ , . _  , nn  Robin Campbell  The final piece, and the last that Robin  made, is Time Flow,  a "double" piece that  has a rectangular external form. There is  The Home Of the Dragon  is a beautiful stronga figure-8 or hour-glass shape in the  elliptical form rising out of a book-ish   centre, filled with sand, within which  block of wood. The base of the mons  covered with a woolly pubic thatch, that  partially hides a deep earthy purple labia.  Cosmic Crack  is the sole piece that is  composed of wood only. Cosmic Crack  takes  up the entire block, curving forward and  down at the front in a fluid motion; the  labial parting is circled by the oval  figuration of the wood that creates movement  around the deep opening. The flattened out,  broad triangle above the cleft, is covered  with little holes that make it appear like  a shaved mons Veneris, or starry sky. This  piece speaks of the concealed spaces within  us and of another universe, uninhabited by  men.  The last two pieces are radically different  than the first four works. One can see  that, for Robin, the connection between  mind and body is crucial to making sculpture .  Kyak River is the direct result of kyak-  king lessons I have been taking, in particular a weekend course on Cowichan Lake  and Cowichan River - I felt the sameness  of working water and wood. I had to- become one with the water as I Have to become one with the Wood - one with the  character of the material: its placidity;  its turbulance - its life force."  -Artist's statement  floats.a canoe-like shape or double clitoris..  This figure-8 is the infinity symbol found  in the frescoes, pottery and jewelry of the  Minoan and Mycenean cultures. (Although  Robin is familiar with this symbol, it is  interesting that she did not have it in  mind when working on this piece.)  Unlike floor relief that incorporates the  floor as part of the work, each Landscape  piece uses its own form as the tension  point. Each of the six pieces demands that  the viewer crouch down to view it more  closely.  Unlike sculpture that sits on the floor,  these pieces appear to be rooted in it.  They are recumbant but not passive. These  floor reliefs are meditation pieces. They  channel earth's energy up to their highest  point and beyond; they draw down sky energy,  into the earth. Landscapes of the Heart  tells of the connection between the earth's  active power and the flow of women's  creative and sexual energy.  Footnotes:  iNor Hall, The Moon and the Virgin,  New  York, 1980. p. 190.  2vincent Sculley, "The Great Goddess and  the Palace Architecture of Crete", Feminism  and Art History,  New York, 1982. pp. 34-35.  3Vincent Sculley, as above, p. 35.  4vincent Sculley, as above, p. 35.  ^Nor Hall, as above, p. 10. 28 Kinesis December '83  ARTS  * RUBYMUSIC  continued from p. 26  Two Sides of Wanda.  Wanda Jackson. (1964,  reissued 1981) Capitol Records.  In the old days, Wanda Jackson hung out  with Rose Maddox and Kitty Wells. She  also toured with Elvis Presley as his opening act. She knew how to shake it all over,  as well.  She recorded somewhere around a dozen  albums before she changed her lifestyle  and began singing on a religious label.  Two Sides of Wanda  is one of her best if  you can only afford one album and you want  to get a taste.  On it, Wanda sings, "Whole Lot of Shakin'  Going On", "Yakety-Yak", "Rip it Up", and  other golden greats; better, I think, than  the golden boys themselves.  Oregon Summer.  Marcia Meyer, (to be released in December).  There were times when Marcia Meyer wanted  to throw all her tapes off the Burrard  Street Bridge. A very common feeling, I'm  sure, for any woman who sets out to produce an album of her own compositions, all  by herself. But Marcia persevered and if  everything went according to schedule,  Oregon Summer  should be released any day  now.  This is music you will want to play on  Sunday mornings, every evening, and when  you ride the bus. It is music that will  calm you down,- make you dream, make you  think, or get you sentimental.  Oregon Summer  is the sound of guitar,  piano, oboe, flute, cello, viola, violin...  and Mary Watkins on synthesizer.  To say that Marcia Meyer has produced an  album of beautiful music is an understatement.  On December 9, on Rubymusic  (7:30,  102.7  FM), I will be playing selections from  these albums.  If you're thinking about   i  spending hard earned money on music,  here 's  your chance to listen first.  The program  is called Ruby's Xmas List. Then, on Dec.  16,   (same time,  same station),  Marcia  Meyer will be in the studio to debut her  new album and to talk about her trials  and tribulations as a composer and producer,   Women's bands  make group record  MORAL LEPERS, a Vancouver based women's  band, have recently returned from a three  week tour of Toronto and New York. The  tour came about as a result of an offer to  participate in a performance series called  WOMENSBANDS, sponsored by A SPACE, an independent artists co-op in Toronto.  The series was co-produced by Susan Stur-  man, formerly of MAMA QUILLA, and currently  of WORD OF MOUTH BAND (a women's band from  Peterborough), Clive Robertson, of FUSE  Magazine and VOICEPONDENCE (a cooperative  record producer and distributor), and  Janet Martin, of FIFTH COLUMN, a Toronto  women's band, and also a member of VOICE_  PONDENCE. Five women's bands were featured  in the series, as well as films by Toronto  women artists.  VOICEPONDENCE will soon be releasing a  compilation record of Canadian women's  bands, which will include MORAL LEPERS as  well as some of the o.ther bands who performed in the series.  Green Thumb Productions:  One Thousand Cranes  byAnnBemrose  Green Thumb Theatre for Young People, a  local theatre company committed to exploring social issues from children's viewpoints, recently presented A Thousand .  Cranes.  Written by Colin Thomas, the play is about  a twelve-year-old Japanese Girl, Sadako  Saski, who developed leukemia after being  exposed to fallout from the Hiroshima  bomb at the age of two. It's also about  a Canadian boy called Buddy and his struggles with the idea of nuclear annihilation  and the effectiveness of peace demonstrations .  Sadako (played by Melanie Miller) was an  active, engaging girl, full of the promise  of the new Japan after the war. Interested  in emerging new options for girls, she  wants to develop her athletic abilities  and does not want to grow up to wear traditional kimonos, or to be a "lady" like  her mother. When Sadako first begins to  feel sick she doesn't want to tell anyone,  because "too many people get sick in Hiroshima", and so covers her illness as best  she can.  There is a Japanese legend that says that  each crane lives for a thousand years,  and that if a sick person folds one thousand paper cranes the gods will give her  good health and a long life. Once in hospital , Sadako Sasaki sets out to fold the  cranes, and completes 864 before she dies.  Buddy (played by Ray Wallis) is struggling  with present-day nuclear armament and his  fears for his life and the lives of his  mother and friends.' His mother doesn't  believe in peace marches and he initially  decides not to take part in an upcoming  demonstration - "a bunch of stupid kids  with signs" - but he still needs to do  something. He builds a fallout shelter in  his basement and waits for the bomb blast.  Janic Nutter appears as both Mrs. Sasaki,  Sadako's mother, and Buddy's mother, Mrs.  Harman, both women who are confused and  frightened about the effects of the war  that has already happened to one and the  war that may yet devastate them both.  The play moves back and forth between the  two situations, always focussing on the  need for hope. Hope for renewed health and  hope for peace so that no one else will  have to suffer and die like Sadako. There  is the hope of the thousand cranes and  the hope of peace demonstrations, the  symbol of visible protest against the  threat of nuclear war.  One thing that impressed me was the connection the play makes between Star Wars  and the bomb. Buddy and his friend Lee  (played by Wendy Neil, who also plays Sadako 's friend Yoshlko) re-enact scenes  from Star Wars,  blowing up evil forces  with death rays. But Buddy is eventually  unable to play the game when he starts to  see nuclear war as a real possibility in  his own life. However, where Buddy is  initially desperate in his feelings of  powerlessness, Lee is constant in her belief that the peace demonstration is an  event of significance, a concrete action  where their voice is important.  Sunday afternoon's performance also included a play called Kids for Peace,  written and produced by a children's theatre  group coordinated by Bonnie Worthington.  This fifteen-minute performance was a  montage of scenes including take-offs on  television interviews and characterizations  of Ronald Reagan and his staff. Like A  Thousand Cranes,   the production was fast-  paced and captivating. The actors and  writers are clearly well-informed and inspired, with a lot of enthusiasm for their  topic.  Green Thumb productions are primarily  performed in public schools in the lower  mainland, but the company also had successful tours of Sweden, Britain, West Germany,  and has plans to tour Australia in 1985.  Last year Green Thumb gave more than three  hundred performances, including a tour of  B.C. and Ontario. A Thousand Cranes  is the  twenty-seventh original play produced by  Green Thumb since 1975, including such  works as New Canadian Kid  about immigrant  children's problems, and the well-received  Feeling Yes,  Feeling No,   about the sexual  abuse of children. December "83 Kinesis 29  SPORTS  Feminists study sports  by Nicky Hood  Given that academics are more inclined to  be engaged in contortions of logic in  cerebral, philosophic debates than to be  limbering up their hamstrings before a  soccer match, one might show surprise  at an academic journal which has devoted  an entire issue to women in sport. However,  given the wholistic perspective that feminists hold, it is not that surprising.  Canadian Woman Studies Journal - Issue  On Sport,   Spring/May, 1983, Vol. 4, No. 3,  York University.  We have as a movement made the personal  political. We have fought to build a  structure wherein a woman can pursue  both a family and a career and many of  us are trying to repair the rupture of  the mind/body split that is so endemic  to our western society and its accompanying ills.  The Canadian Woman Studies Journal  issue  on sport, then, is not so much amazing  as it is simply a confirmation that the  feminist movement is concerned with the  total well-being of women.  The first article in English (the journal  is bilingual) holds great promise in its  title. Alas, "Sport, Capitalism, and  Patriarchy" (Cathy Bray) does not break  new theoretical ground. Bray merely restates the obvious - sport is an institution within our capitalist/patriarchal  society that serves to enforce and perpetuate the subjugation of women.  It is a good starting place, however, as  it gives us a solid base from which to  approach the other articles in the journal.  Bray demonstrates how the myth that femininity and athleticism are diametrically  opposed is used to the advantage of the  patriarchy.  The relationship between capitalism and  sport as an industry is also examined. -  This analysis would have been more powerful had the obvious link between sport and  Scheier continued from P. 25   lyric. Scheier cuts through the false and  politeness we use to reach each  ther. Although her poems don't always seem  tructurally complete, their intensity  brings to question our fixed ideas about  poetic structure. Occasionally in the more  abstract, lyric poems, Scheier's endings  are diffused and appear to abandon the  images she evokes in the poem. One senses  a loss of energy, whether deliberate or  not. Still, nothing here is falsified,  rigged, or tricked. Scheier lets the words  peak without being terrorized by the old  set ropes.  This first book of poems reveals a poet  who does not throw off any of the threats  of our North American ways. She does not  excape in a self-conscious ego, masquerading as the soul. She is clear and hard,  and speaks without accusations, clearing  the way for us to think for ourselves. If  we do not think, we are all of us dangerous, whether we like it or not, these poems]  expose us.  jg)Erin Moure - Reprinted by permission.  Libby Scheier was a panelist at last  ummer's exciting  'Women and Words' conference at UBC.  She will be in Vancouver  January 26th to read from her work as part  of the Vancouver Industrial Writer's  Union's WORK TO WRITE poetry series,  7:30p.m., Mt.  Pleasant Library, Kingsway  &  militarism and the militarist base of the  capitalist economy been explored.  This otherwise lucid article concludes  somewhat ambiguously. While it points  out how capitalism is willing to exploit  the demise of patriarchal myths regarding  femininity and sport in order to take  advantage of higher marketability of  women's sporting goods, it fails to point  out clearly how they are at the same time  exploiting women's negative body image.  Capitalism is pushing women's obsession  for thinness not fitness.  For those who are literate in French, this  point can be further explored in "La danse  aerobic.en faites-vous?". The English  summary of this article explains how  although "some claim that aerobic dancing  is liberating and open to anyone, the  typical participant is a woman who has a  great deal of spare time, whose priority  is good looks and well-being, and who has  money to pay for babysitting and fancy  tights."  "The New Female Jocks" (Thelma McCormack)  seemingly to do with body-building, if one  is to judge by the photographs which illustrate the article, turns out to be about  Hollywood's images of the female sporting  figure.  Setting aside the strange choice of illustration, the text alone is confusing  enough. McCormack rambles from one film  to the next making unnecessary reference  to the sexual preference and prowess of  male dancers and horse fetishism of young  girls. The film "Personal Best" is then  held up as a beacon of light to men "who  are groping their way toward ending patriarchy."  There were other articles in the collection which I found both inspiring and informative. "We Want to Play...We'11 Play"  (Helen Lenskyj) sums up the attitude of  outstanding women athletes of the twenties  and thirties when they met with criticism  for their unladylike behavior. These women  overcame overwhelming social pressure to  drop out of athletics to achieve international acclaim often in more than one  sport. Many went on to work in organizations for the advancement of women in  sport after they retired from competition.  "In Praise of Older Women Athletes" (Diane  Palmason) challenges our assumption that  athletes are both young and male. And,  having got past that hurdle, challenges the  assumption that athletes of any sex are  necessarily young. Given the opportunity,  the older athlete is able to maintain and  often surpass earlier levels of performance.  This, and the ability of older women to  take up rigorous, sports for the first time  in their lives, is documented in a number  of case studies.  The collection of articles overall is  fairly comprehensive. There are articles  which present scientific data outlining  the effects of intensive training on the  reproductive system, and research on women's physical potential. Lesbianism as an  issue in sport and disabled athletes each  have their own article as well as being  mentioned throughout the collection of  works. There are also two articles which  discuss governmental efforts to both discourage and promote women's sports.  The one area that has been overlooked is  recreational sport. This is too bad because it is as a leisure activity that the  majority of women will participate and ¬a  benefit from sport. Nor was there a critical view of the relationship between competitive sport and feminism: Had these  two perspectives been included it would  have been a more complete issue.  Gay Games  Summer 1984  Would you like to participate in Gay Games  similar, to those in San Francisco? The  action has already begun.  We need women to take part in the various  aspects necessary to organize the event.  Specifically, we need women to outline the  structure and function of the games, as  well as women to be involved in the important initial stages of what could become  annual event in Vancouver.  We need your skill and enthusiasm.  Interested ? Good ! Call 736-4017 for messages or 266-0470 for further information. 30 Kinesis December '83  BULLETIN BOARD  EVENTS  FREE CHILDREN'S FILMS every Sat. from  l-3pm at the Little Mountain Neighbourhood House, 3981 Main St. Dec. 10 -  Dr.  Dolittle',  Dec. 17 - Mysterious Island.  MALASPINA PRINTMAKERS 8th Annual Juried  Members Show of original fine art prints  is on display at the Simon Fraser Gallery,  Nov. 28 - Dec. 16 at SFU, Burnaby.  WORKING,  A MUSICAL adapted for the theatre  by Stephen Swartz, directed by Catherine  Caines for Studio 58, will be staged Dec.  6-17. Working  is down to earth entertainment which celebrates the joys, frustrations and hopes we all have about our  working day lives. Preview Mon., Dec. 5  at 8pm ($3.50); Opening Tues., Dec. 6 at  8pm ($4.50); Regualr performances Tues.-  Sat. at 8pm. Admission: Tues.-Thurs.,  $4.50; Fri. and Sat., $5.50; Seniors and  students, $3.50 on Tues. evening only.  Phone 324-5227 for reservations.  Labour-  continued from p. 3  Nobody knows...there is no clear concensus  of opinion. Some think that a Bill 3 exemption is a rubber -stamp. Others are not  so confident. In the case of CUPE, for example-, the strike achieved nothing. Unlike  the BCGEU, CUPE already had extensive seniority provisions in their contracts. In  essence, they are in exactly the same position they were in when Bill 3 was amended  on August 4th. F.or the more than 190 locals  of CUPE, each contract has to be negotiated  separately and submitted for exemption. The  course of action is the same for every  other public sector union. As their collective agreements expire, they too must negotiate a contract and apply for an exemption.  In the final assessment, it is clear that  a deliberate attempt to smash the largest  of the public Sector unions failed. But  perhaps a critical error was made in defining the parameters of the struggle within  Bill 3, rather than negotiating its complete elimination. Bill 3 remains law and  all unions must apply for and be exempted  from it. No one is positive just how certain these exemptions will be.  There are other serious obstacles that  were not settled by the Bennett-Munro  accord. Unions relying upon the provisions  of the Employment Standards Act to cover  weak areas of their contracts are now in  serious jeopardy. For example, where contracts did not guarantee full benefits  during maternity leave, the Employment  Standards Act took precedence ensuring  that full benefits were paid. Now it has  been altered to ensure that only collective agreement provisions apply. Secondly,  the continuation of the Compensation Stabilization Program sets up a disincentive  for most unions to remedy inequities between categories of workers (for example,  women and men) receiving differential pay  scales or benefits. There is so little to  be had at the bargaining table that most  union members would be disinclined to  remedy their sister's position at the expense of even a miniscule wage increase.  Finally, there remains the question of  threatened Labour Code Amendments. What  does it mean for labour to sit on an  advisory commission that will ultimately  assist the Socred government in the process of gutting the Code? This and other  questions will provide the basis for important debate in upcoming months. The  strike is over. We'll just have tp wait  and see.  WOMEN AGAINST THE BUDGET (WAB) CONFERENCE  Sun., Dec. 11, 805 E. Pender (Ukranian  Hall), 9am-5pm. Bring your lunch and a  snack contribution for coffeetime. Childcare available (preregister by phoning  Cynthia Flood 255-7820). Aim of the  conference is to discuss where we've  been, what we've done, our role in the  Coalition, and where we go from here.  All women welcome.  B0B"B0SSIN OF STRINGBAND will be presenting  an evening of fact, myth and anecdote  about Stringband's recent month-long  tour of the Soviet Union at La Quena  Coffeehouse, 1111 Commercial Drive, Sun.  Dec. 11 at 8pm. Admission: $3. Sponsored  by Vancouver Folk Music Festival.  DIALOGUE WITH JUDY WILLIAMS at Surrey Arts  Centre, Thurs., Dec. 15, 7:30pm, free.  Judy Williams, whose work is on display  at the Surrey Art Gallery Dec. 15-Jan.8,  will discuss the development of her work  and her unique approach to painting with  water colours. Phone 596-1515 for more  info.   ART ENCOUNTER FOR CHILDREN at the Surrey  Arts Centre., Wed., Dec. 28, ll-12noon  for age 4 & 5.(parent participation required) ; Dec. 28, 1-2:30pm, age 6-8;  Thurs., Dec. 29, 10:30-12noon, age 9-12.  A combination tour and workshop featuring  work of Judy Williams.. Pre-register by  Mon., Dec. 19. Cost: $l/child. Call 596-  1515 for more info.  GAZEBO CONNECTION is holding a party -  cocktails, nibbles, music and singing.  Dec. 12rat The Holiday Inn, 711 W.  Broadway, (prices not yet set). ...  SURREY ARTS CENTRE FAMILY CHRISTMAS Celebration, Sun., Dec. 18, l-3:30pm. Make  your last minute Christmas decorations  (1-2:30), see the "Celebrations" exhibition in the Children's Mini Gallery,  listen to a storyteller.  At 2:30pm Fools  Theatre will present a special performance ($2-adults; $1.50-children, students and seniors). Other events free.  [ 13750 88th Ave., Surrey.  PACIFIC BALLET THEATRE present their annual  Christmas concert, a pot pourri of  unforgettable holiday delights, Wed.,  Dec. 21 at 8pm; Thurs. & Fri., Dec. 22  & 23 at 2pm and 8pm at the Surrey Arts  Centre, 13750 88th Ave., Surrey. For  further info call 596-1515.  RAPE RELIEF is holding a New Year's Eve  Bash at the Hastings Community Centre:  live bands, theatre, food, drink, movies,  costumes and more. Childcare is available and there is wheelchair access. For  more info call 872-8212.  NOT A LOVE STORY - A Film About Pornography will be shown Dec. 29 at 7pm, Rm.  1807 at Douglas College, 700 Royal Ave.,  New Westminster. A discussion will follow the film. For women only. No admission charge.  COMMITTEE OF PROGRESSIVE ELECTORS (COPE)  is having a New Year's Eve Party. Full  dinner, champagne and dancing to the  Kitchen Syncopators at the Ukranian Hall.  Dec. 31st. Tickets are available at  Octopus Books West and East. $25 for employed; $15 for under-employed, seniors,  students. For more info, call Roseanne -  731-0976.  MEDIA WATCH FUNDRAISING DINNER, Jan. 17,  1984. A feast for body and soul, catered  by Isadora's. Held at University Women's  Club, 1489 McRae St. (Granville & 16th).  Guest speaker Maude Barlow.  Guest entertainer to be announced. Tickets:  $19 ($15 unemployed). Women only. For  more info, call 873-8511.  THE INTERAGENCY COMMITTEE ON WOMEN AND  DEVELOPMENT is sponsoring a representative of AMES (Associacion de Mujeres de  El Salvador) on a cross-Canada tour.  She will be speaking in Vancouver on  Jan. 22 as part of events being planned  for International Day of Solidarity with  El Salvador. For details on time and  place, contact Beth or Kirenza at 732-  1497.  POET LIBBY SCHEIER will be reading from  her book, The Larger Life  as part of  the Vancouver Industrial Writer's Union's  Work to Write poetry series, Jan. 26,  1984, 7:30pm at Mt. Pleasant Library  (Kingsway & Broadway). Read a reveiw of  Scheier's book in this issue of. Kinesis.  GAZEBO CONNECTION NEW YEAR'S EVE dinner &  dance, Dec. 31 at the Stanley Park Pavil-  lion. Tickets reserved by Dec. 12 are:  $28 for members; $33 for guests. Later  reservations are all $38.  GROUPS  SELF DEFENSE FOR WOMEN, for ages 12-99,  first three Weds, of each month; cost:  $12 for 3 wks. Pre-register by phoning  the Little Mountain Neighbourhood House  at 879-7104. Instructor: Joe Evans.  Courses will be continuous.  TEEN MOTHERS SUPPORT GROUP for teenagers  who are pre-natal, single or married.  On-going group. New people welcome.  Thurs. 1-2:30pm, at Tupper School (25th  -  & Sophia St.). Childcare provided. Call  Sheena or Irene at 879-7104 for details.  ►WEEKENP ART SALE  An open house Sale of handmade card*, drawings,  etching, lifoogirapH*, sculpture*, seriorapte iwoodcute.  ty    PERSIMMON BUCKBR\P6E  PORTLANP KORANIC  ClAJRE KWJUNPZ.IO  MAUREEN SWGRUE  PECEMBER 110,11*  Friday ev/evuwg 1-10 ?.«.  *V7-(,l<\\\ea\\ey(dK*eferi  rormforrnatum or other viewiiog -rimes phone 251 "531+ or 253-0743 December'83 Kin<  BULLETIN BOARD  SINGLE MOTHER'S SUPPORT GROUP sponsored by  Little Mountain Neighbourhood House,  3981 Main St., Mondays, 5-6:30pm, beginning with a potluck dinner. Childcare is  provided. New women welcome.  C.A.A.W.&.S. (Canadian Association for the  Advancement of Women and Sport) is now  having monthly meetings in Vancouver.  3rd Tues. of each month, 7.30 pm. Boardroom, 1200 Hornby, 687-3333.  ON THE AIR  CO-OP RADIO, 102.7 FM - Dec. 9, Rubymusic,  7:30pm. Ruby's Xmas List, featuring  albums reveiwed by Connie Smith in this  issue of Kinesis.  Dec. 16 features Marcia Meyer to debut  her new album "Oregon Summer" and to  talk about her trials and tribulations  as a composer-producer.  Courses  IYENGAR YOGA STARTING JANUARY '84:  Britannia Community Centre, Commercial &  Napier St., 253-4391. Introductory Level.  Mon., Jan. 16, 7-9pm - 10 wks/$27.  Instructor: Claudia MacDonald.  Thurs., Jan. 19, 7-9pm - 10wks/$27.  Instructor: Paullette Roscoe.  Trout Lake Community Centre, Victoria &  15th Ave., 876-9285. Introductory Level.  Tues., Jan. 24, 9:30-11:30am -- lOwks/$30.  Instructor: Paullette Roscoe.  Level I. Fri., Jan. 27, 2-4pm - 10 wks/  $30..Instructor: Claudia MacDonald.  Riley Park Community Centre, Ontario &  30th Ave., 879-6222. Introductory Level.  Sat., Jan. 21, 10-12 noon - 10 wks/$25.  Instructor:  Claudia MacDonald.  Dunbar "Community Centre, 4747 Dunbar &  31st Ave., 224-1374. Introductory Level.  Mon., Jan. 17, 6-8pm - 12 wks/$42.  Instructor: Lindsay Whalen.  Wed., Jan. 11, 10-12 noon - 12 wks/$42.  Instructor: Gillian O'Brien.  Ongoing Level: Tues., Jan. 10, 10 - 12  noon, 12 wks/$42.  Level I; Thurs., Jan. 12, 6-8pm - 12 wks/  $42. Instructor: Claudia MacDonald.  Columbia Centre for Pain & Stress Management, 645 West 8th Ave., 873-1315.  Ongoing Level: Tues., Jan. 10, 7:30-9:30  pm - 10 wks/$45. Instructor: Anne Gregory.  Introductory Level: Tues., Jan. 10, 5:30-  7:30pm - 10 wks./$45. Instructor: Anne  Gregory.  Marpole Oakridge Community Centre, 990  West 59th Ave., 327-8371. Introductory  Level'. Thurs., Jan. 19, 7:30-9:30pm -  10 wks/$30. Instructor: Susan Sutherland.  CLASSIFIED  CYRUS 5 HANG GLIDER FOR SALE.  150 lbs. Call 873-2949.  Between 135-  THE VANCOUVER FOLK MUSIC FESTIVAL CALENDAR  will make 1984 a bit easier to get  through. It offers twelve great scenes  from festivals over the years (8 1/2 x  11" images). The price is $8 per calendar; add $1.50 for postage and handling  for one, $1 more for each additional  ^calendar. Write to The Vancouver Folk  Music Festival, 3271 Main St., Van. B.C.  V5V 3M6. All calendars sent via first  class mail.  UNION WOMEN! Writers, artists, photographers interested in labour issues!  Kinesis  is preparing a supplement for  our February issue on women in labour  movements. If you have expertise or interest in this area, story ideas or  photographs, contact Kinesis  at 873-1427.  Deadline for the February issue is January 15 th.  "FOR THE YOUNG OF AGE AND YOUNG AT HEART",  a cassette of original songs by local  Vancouver Musicians/Songwriters, produced by Co-op Radio. Features: Devon  Hanley, Chris Cairo, Denise Larson and  many more. Price: $7.50. Write: CFRO or  call 684-8494.  BOOKKEEPING SERVICES AVAILABLE on a freelance basis. Help with setting up, payables, receivables, payroll, financial  statements, and year-end adjustments.  Alex Maas 874-4665.  INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S DAY COMMITTEE is  looking for women volunteers. The theme  is "Women Speak Out" and we will focus  on critiques of what we have and visions  of what we want. Please show up at Britannia Centre, Seniors Room, Dec. 6,  13 and January 10th. Welcome.  IN 1984 KINESIS will be expanding its book  review section. We want to continue to  reveiw works from the feminist presses,  books on politics and women's issues  such as technological change and health.  However, we will also be reveiwing best-  selling fiction aimed at the "female  market" to find out what women are reading and how the mass media is responding  to the impact of the women's movement;  more international literature; more  books from the "straight" presses.  We also want to encourage readers to get  involved in reviewing. If you would like  to be added to the list of reviewers, or  have or know of a book that you would  like to review, please contact Linda  Grant, 255-1914.  HYSTERIA  IS PLANNING A SPECIAL ISSUE on  media images of violence against women.  They plan to publish this special issue  in time for International Women's Day '84.  Send ideas, suggestions, and proposals  for contributions to Hysteria,  P.O. Box  2481, Station B, Kitchener, Ont. N2H 6M3  Copy deadline will be Jan. 1, 1984.  THE VANCOUVER WOMEN'S BOOKSTORE will be  open Fridays until 8pm from Dec. 2  through the 23rd.  KARATE FOR WOMEN. Develop strength and  confidence, increase your awareness,  learn to defend yourself. Karate was  developed for self-defense against a  stronger opponent. Come train with other  women! A woman black-belt instructor is  starting classes soon in the Vancouver  area. For more info, call 685-2747.  GAZEBO CONNECTION is a member-supported  organization of 160 gay women in careers.  We organize monthly dinner meetings and  other social events, and provide opportunities for members to form small interest groups (eg. hiking, book discussion, women's chorus and bridge). For  more info call (604) 984-8744 or write  #382 - 810 W. Broadway, Van., B.C.  V5Z 4C9.  I AM A 15 year old feminist male interested  in doing child care work.  I have experience with groups as well as individuals. Fees negotiable. Call Troy Roberts  at 874-1968. References available.  Vancouver  Kidsbooks  PHYLLIS SIMON, M.L.S.  2868 West Fourth Ave.  Vancouver,-B.C.,Canada V6K 1R2  Telephone(604)738-5335  Rally for  HUMAN RIGHTS IN B.C.  December 10th is International Human Rights Day.  Make B.C. Hue up to Canada's commitment to the United  Nations Declaration of Human Rights.  Rally at Old Court House  (Robson Square)  Noon, December 10, 1983  Followed by events and displays on international human  rights at Robson Square Media Centre.  Sponsored by  B.C. Hunan Rights Coalition (Vancouver Region)  Lower Mainland  Solidarity Coalition  ARIEL BOOKS and TALONBOOKS  invite you to meet  MARY MEIGS  (Lily Briscoe: A Self-Portrait)  Mary will be autographing copies  of her new book, THE MEDUSA HEAD,  on Saturday, December 10, 2-3 p.m.  at Ariel Books, 2766 W. 4th Ave.  SEE YOU THERE!