 eft May  1992  Special Collections ferial  Outlawing laws against lesbians - pg 7  News About Women That's Not In The Dailies  NDP:  Showing they  care with  childcare  Native women  taking on the feds  • Talking about talking about AIDS •  • Our take on the budget •  Living With the Enemy • A coming out story ■  plus much more <k  Kinesis welcomes volunteers  to work on all aspects of the  paper. Call us at 255-5499.  lr next Writer's Meetings"  > Tues. May 5 and Tues.  June 2 at 7 pm at Kine-  ! #301-1720 Grant St. All  women welcome even if you  don't have experience.  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE:  Miche Hill, Angie Lala, Eunice  Brook, Lisa Valencia-Svens-  son, Fatima Jaffer, Anne Jew,  Kathy March, Diana Baptiste,  lisse Browning, Christine  Cosby, Brenda Wong, Sally  White, Robyn Hall-new, Kathy March, Frances Suski, Libbie Morin, Gladys We, Frances  Wasserlein,   Charmaine  Saul-  , Marsha Arbour, Chris  Meyer, Gabrielle Cordelia-Chew, Luce Kannen, Kate Battle, Sarah Hutcheson, Eileen  Louie, Kelly O'Brien, Harriet  Fancott.  FRONT COVER: A collective  effort from Kinesis volunteers  celebrating spring.  PRESS DATE: April 28, 1992  EDITORIAL BOARD: Agnes  Huang, Christine Cosby, Sandra Gillespie, Gladys We, Fat-  a Jaffer, Anne Jew, Kelly  O'Brien.  CIRCULATION AND DISTRIBUTION: Jennifer Johnstone,  Birgit Schinke, Tory Johnstone, Cat L'Hirondelle.  ADVERTISING:  Birgit Schinke  OFFICE: Jennifer Johnstone  Kinesis Is published 10 times  a year by the Vancouver Status of Women. Its objectives  are to be a non-sectarian feminist voice for women and  to work actively for social  change, specifically combatting sexism, racism, homophobia and imperialism.  Views expressed in Kinesis  are those of the writer and  do not necessarily reflect VSW  policy. All unsigned material is  the responsibility of the Kinesis Editorial Board.  SUBSCRIPTIONS: Individual  subscriptions to Kinesis are  $20 per year (+ $1.40 GST)  or what you can afford. Membership in the Vancouver Status of Women is $30 (+ $1.40  GST) or what you can afford,  includes subscription to Kinesis. Please mail in your order (see back cover). For more  information, call (604) 255-  5499.  SUBMISSIONS: Women and  girls are welcome to make submissions. We reserve the right  to edit and submission does  not guarantee publication. If  possible, submissions should  be typed double spaced and  must be signed and include  an address and phone number.  Please note: Kinesis does not  accept poetry or fiction contributions. For material to be  returned, a SASE must be included. Editorial guidelines are  available on request.  ADVERTISING: For information about display advertising  rates, please contact Kinesis.  For information about classifieds, please see the classified  page in this issue.  DEADLINE: For features and  reviews: the 10th of the  nth preceding publication.  News copy: 15th. Letters and  Bulletin Board listings: 18th.  Display advertising—camera  ready: 18th; design required:  16th.  V  I IN ESI S   MMNStWtfMW  News About Women That's Not In The Dailies  Pandora, Halifax's feminist newspaper defeats the  challenge to its women only editorial policy 3  Lesbians and AIDS—a panel discussion  INSIDE  London, Ontario comes out of the closet and into  the theatre, with its first film festival 13  pFPULA$>  y i**" ^Pandora wins fight to be women only   ...3  by Agnes Huang  /y/Pw^1  Native women appeal for constitution table seat.  ...3  iv   /  by Miche Hill  What's in BC's budget for women?   ....4  by Kelly O'Brien and Fatima Jaffer  NDP's childcare initiative   ....5  by Fatima Jaffer  Inside Kinesis 2  Women's employment counselling unit canned...  ....5  by Lissa J. Geller  Human rights legislation for lesbians   ...7  Movement Matters 2  by barbara findlay  New voice on women's health   .. .8  by Ria Bleumer  by Raine McKay  What's News 6  Review: Living With The Enemy   [ / V 1   by Penelope Hutchinson and Jane Watch  ....9  by Heidi Walsh and  Gladys We  Talking about AIDS and lesbians   .10  by Nikola Marin and Ollne Lulnenburg  Review: Angel At My Table   ..12  by Lois Leveen  Paging Women 16  Lesbian film festival in London   ..13  by Gabriella Cordelia-Chew  Kathleen Oliver  Review: When the Day Comes   .14  by Pearl Kirby  Bulletin Board 17  Review: Dating Violence   by Mercedes Baines  ..15  compiled by Cathy Griffin  Review: Whitewash   ..15  by Gladys We  Review: Hawkwings   .16  by Lissa J. Geller  I  Kinesis is indexed in the  Canadian Women's Periodicals Index, and the Alternative  Press Index.  Kinesis is produced on an  IBM PC using PC Tex and an  LC-800 laser printer. Camera  work by The Peak. Printing  by Web Press Graphics  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status  Women, 301-1720 Grant St.  Vancouver BC V5L 2Y6  of  Kinesis is a member of the  Canadian Magazine Publishers  Association. ISSN 0317-9095  Second class mail #6426 Movement Matters  Xxxxxx^x\\>S^^ ?>SS$XX\\X^**SS$^^  N^^^^^^SS^XX  Movement  Matters  listings information  Movement Matters is designed to be  a network of news, updates and information of special interest to the  women's movement. Submissions to  Movement Matters should be no  more than 500 words, typed, double-  spaced on eight and a half by eleven  paper. Submissions may be edited for  length. Deadline is the 18th of the  month preceding publication.  by Ria Bleumer  ^ss^ss^s^ssssssss^^  Getting there,  building unity  Getting There: Minority Experiences  the Corporate Sector is put together  by a non-profit organization, the Women  of Colour Collective. It's a comprehensive  tudy of the employment experiences of  women, Aboriginal people, people of colour,  and people with disabihties working with  major federal contractors and federally regulated organizations in Calgary.  The study concentrates on employment  opportunities of women and minorities who  are already working in the corporate sector.  Getting There bases analysis on face-to-  face interviews, identifies bottle necks and  ceilings which restrict career advancement,  outlines implications for employment equity  policy and provides direction for future action.  The Women of Colour Collective was  formed in 1987 after the Status of Women  Action Committee's "Women of Colour:  Racism and Sexism" series. The main objective of the Collective is to build unity  among women of colour through self education, and in doing so, create a support  system and develop strategies in the fight  against racism and sexism. The Collective  addresses issues affecting women of colour  in employment, education, violence, immigration, culture, youth, and other issues.  To order Getting There (incl. Uterature review) send $32.00 plus $3.50 (postage  handUng) in cheque/money order to:  Women of Colour CoUective, 319-22312 Avenue SW, Calgary, Alberta, T2R 0G9, Tel.  (403) 232-8458.  Visions of  flight  Visions of Flight: a journey of positive thought by and about women with  disabilities is a book by artists, writers and poets united by two common  threads—womanhood and disabihty. This  self-pubUshed volume reveals how over fifty  women from across Canada with disabiUties  cope, grow and thrive.  This compilation, edited by KeUy Wheeler  and Gem Wirszilas, goes straight to the  heart and mind with strength, hope and an  urgency about the need to educate the pubUc. The honesty of each piece carries determination to achieve and pass the barriers  imposed by society and by oneself.  The book mixes cartoons, drawings, poetry and fiction and is also available on ;  audio-cassette. To order send $9.50 or  $13.50 for cassette (postage incl.) to: G.  Wirszilas and K. Wheeler, 15165 88th Avenue, Surrey, BC, V3S 2S6, Tel: (604) 582-  9591.  Taking action  on violence  Taking Action: A Union Guide to  Ending Violence Against Women is a  new publication from the Women's Research Centre and the BC Federation of  Labour's 1991 Women's Conference on violence against women.  Taking Action offers a resource for  workers to get information they require to  take action on violence against women in  the home, the workplace and the community. In addition to local, provincial and national unions, women's organizations and  community groups may find the handbook  helpful in developing a workplace response  to violence against women.  The book has chapters on wife assault,  sexual harassment, violence in the workplace, chUd abuse, rape and sexual assault.  A chapter on drug and alcohol abuse and  eating disorders looks at some common consequences of violence on women's Uves.  Taking Action contains anecdotes documenting women's experiences as weU as  examples of programs that unions across  Canada have implemented to address violence. Also included is a resource Ust for  more information on specific issues.  Taking Action costs $10.00 plus $2.50  for postage and handUng ($0.75 for each additional item); To order: send payment to  Women's Research Centre, 101-2245 West  Broadway, Vancouver, BC, V6K 2E4.  Homophobia,  heterosexism  and AIDS  The Canadian AIDS Society (CAS) announces the release of Homophobia, Heterosexism and AIDS, a document to help  people confront discrimination and prejudice when dehvering AIDS programs. CAS  is a coaUtion of over 70 community groups  from Victoria to St. Johns.  "Front-Une AIDS workers and people Uving with HIV and ADDS know that to confront HIV and AIDS one must also confront  homophobia and heterosexism because they  are so intertwined," writes Brian Finch, an  AIDS educator and member of the national  working group which created the document.  Finch writes that Homophobia, Heteror  sexism and AIDS is the first document of  its kind and is " ... ground breaking as it  not only analyzes the issues that people affected by and Uving with HIV/AIDS face  on a daily basis, but also provides practical  tools to confront the barriers of homophobia and heterosexism in the dehvery of programs and services."  Mary Robertson, a tront-Une AIDS counseUor, also with the Homophobia and AIDS  Working Group, writes that the report wUl  give anyone working in the AIDS field a better understanding of the cultural Unks between HIV/AIDS and homosexuaUty, and  how societal values govern the response to  the disease in Canada.  Copies of Homophobia, Heterosexism  and AIDS are available in EngUsh or  French for $10.00 plus G.S.T. To order, send  money order, cheque or purchase order to:  the Canadian AIDS Society, Suite 701, 100  Sparks Street, Ottawa, Ont, KIP 5B7, Tel:  (613) 230-3580.  %ma  Inside  Kinesis  This column has become a revolving  door of sorts in the last few months with  heUos and goodbyes as the main theme.  WeU, just to be different this month, we'll  start off by announcing the upcoming Event  Of The Year. Yes, the raffle and benefit  you've ah been waiting for is coming in  June. We've started organizing our annual  fundraising party for aU Kinesis' supporters and thought we'd forewarn you. Details  such as the date, entertainment (music and  stuff), and raffle prizes (an espresso machine?) wUl be announced in next month's  issue—so keep your eyes peeled.  The big story in production this month  is our new typesetter, Diana Baptiste. She's  made it through an intense ten-day scramble to get the paper out—we provided Dee  with a time warp button taking her back  in time to our archaic typesetting program,  PCTex and promised her that some day  soon, Kinesis wUl jump into the 90s and  go desktop. Dee's experience includes working on the newspaper Kahtou and assisting  with production at Theytus Books. We're  lucky to have her on board.  KeUy O'Brien joined the Kinesis Editorial Board this month after putting in the  pre-requisite 2,870,430 volunteer hours of  proofreading—just kidding. She's a fun gal  who brings to Kinesis more than a good  eye for copy. We're looking forward to her  ideas in shaping the paper.  New voices in the paper this month  are Miche HiU, Mercedes Baines, Penelope  Hutchison, Lissa GaUer, Kathleen OUver,  and Jane Watch. Don't forget, if you want  to join the roster of names in this column,  write for Kinesis—detaUs of our next Writers' Meeting is in Bulletin Board.  First-time production volunteers are Chris Rahim, Lisa Valencia- Svensson, Sally  WMte, Robyn HaU, Frances Suski, and Libbie Morin. These prestigious volunteer positions come with ceremonial red pen and x-  acto knife. CaU Anne at Kinesis (255-5499)  to sign on.  WeU, the goodbyes cannot be avoided any  longer. We hate this part of Inside Kinesis. Janisse Browning is leaving the typesetting chair and Vancouver to cycle across  Canada to family in Ontario for a long overdue rest. Janisse's contribution to Kinesis goes beyond her job description—she  was writer, typesetter, played a pivotal role  in Not Just Another Page CoUective, the  Women of Colour and First Nations caucus  at Kinesis, and was a wiz with the Turkey  Une-tape. We'll miss her valuable input and  the raspberry leaf tea she always brought to  production. Heck, we'll just plain miss her.  Also leaving Kinesis and Vancouver  is Heidi Walsh, Ed. Board member and  writer—and a wiz with the Une tape when  pressed. Longtime member of the freelance  Uberation army, Heidi's off to Germany with  pen, paper and fax machine. She carved a  niche at Kinesis covering health issues and  we hope she'U take her new title to heart—  Kinesis' European Bureau. We'll miss you  Heidi.  Although Lizanne Foster hasn't been  around the Kinesis Ed. Board for a whUe  (we're sometimes amazed women have Uves  outside Kinesis that take them away from  us), we stiU want to say goodbye. We're hoping to nag her into writing for us though.  WeU, the door is spinning off its hinges,  so this is Inside Kinesis signing off.  Our thanks also to Vancouver Status of Women members who support us year 'round  with memberships and donations. Our appreciation to the foUowing supporters who became members, renewed their memberships or donated to VSW in AprU:  LOUISE ALLEN • KATHARINE ALMAS • B.M.O.C. • KATE BRAID • ROBERTA  CENEDESE • RITA CHUDNOVSKY • C.R.S. WORKERS CO-OP • ANNE DAGG •  SHELAGH DAY • CAROLYN DELHEIJ-JOYCE • MARIAN DODDS • ANN DYBLE  • CATHARINE ESSON • HEATHER GEORGE • NAOMI KATZ • W. KRAYENHOFF  • BARBARA KUHNE • PAT LANDRECHT • VETT LLOYD • JUDITH LYNNE •  JOANNE MARVEN • SHEILA MCFADZEAN • SWEDAHL MCPHERSON • ADRIENNE MONTANI • JANET PATTERSON • NEIL POWER • P.S.A.C. LOCAL 20029 •  NORMA ROBERTS • ROSEMARIE RUPPS • SHEILAGH THOMPSON • MAUREEN  TROTTER • A.M.S. - U.B.C. • WORKING DESIGN  Break  the Cycle  "Break the Cycle: across Canada sexual abuse awareness and fundraiser campaign" is being launched on May 14. Two  women-survivors of chUd sexual abuse from  Canmore, Alberta, wUl embark on a cross-  Canada cycle tour called "Break the Cycle." The tour begins in St. John's, Nfld,  and ends on September 11 in Victoria, BC.  Terry Smith and Alyson Lockwood wUl  tell their stories from coast to coast. They  intend to raise pubUc awareness of the pain  and terror experienced by victims of child  sexual abuse from the point of view of the  chUd, the impact chUd sexual abuse has on  them as adolescents and adult survivors,  and the need for on-going support, treatment and education programs.  The women say they hope their part in  breaking the sUence publicly on this cycle  tour wUl help reUeve chUd victims and adult  survivors of the shame and guilt that is unjustly cast upon them, while abusers mostly  go free.  The cycle tour is also a fund-raiser to  raise money for the national Break The Cycle Foundation which is already in place.  While the social, human, and economic  costs of chUd sexual abuse are staggering,  programs for children and adult survivors  suffer from cutbacks in funding from government and other funding sources.  For information and to send support to  the campaign contact: Break the Cycle,  Box 697, Canmore, Alberta, T0L 0M0, Tel:  (403) 678-6371, Fax: (403) 678-4728.  KINESIS      May92 ///////////////////^^^^^  //////////////////////^^^^^  NEWS  Victory bittersweet  for Pandora  by Agnes Huang  Halifax's feminist newspaper has defeated the challenge against its women only  editorial pohcy. In March, a Nova Scotia Human Rights Commission (NSHRC)  Board of Inquiry dismissed charges of  sex discrimination against Pandora. The  NSHRC has said it wUl not appeal.  For Pandora this ends a two year battle  to protect its right to exist as a newspaper  for, by and about women that began with  a complaint filed with the NSHRC by Gene  Keyes, a white male with a PhD in poUtical science. Keyes was angry that the collective would not publish a letter he intended  to write in response to a Pandora article  (see Kinesis Sept 1991).  A member of Pandora's editorial collective says that the Tribunal's decision is  the best victory the newspaper could have  hoped for. "It means we can continue to  do what we've always done; we've been  vindicated—we have never discriminated  against men."  In clearing Pandora of any wrongdoing,  adjudicator David MiUer ruled that Pandora 's editorial poUcy does not constitute a  violation of the Nova Scotia Human Rights  Act. In his decision, MiUer wrote that "the  denial of access by Pandora to men does  not cause material or substantial harm to  men, particularly in comparison to the benefit to women of having a women's only publication."  "The ruhng has reaffirmed that women  have a right to work in a single-sex context, and that abihty is central to women's  fight against discrimination." says Pandora 's lawyer Anne Derrick.  Pandora's victory on the grounds that  their activities are not discriminatory, and  v basis of freedom of expression, has positive implications for the rights  of aU equahty seeking groups. "This case  does more than speak to single-sex activities; it also speaks to the activities of other  disadvantaged groups," says Derrick.  The NSHRC's executive director, Bridgl-  al Pachai, disagrees that the Tribunal's ruling is a precedent setting case. "Pandora's  case is not a watershed; it is just one of the  cases we deal with."  The strong ruhng in favour of Pandora raises questions about the role of the  NSHRC in removing barriers that disadvantage women's and other equahty seeking  groups.  Pachai says that the NSHRC has the responsibihty of serving the public interest  by bringing forward conflicting areas of discrimination.  But Anne Derrick points to the ruhng of  the Ontario Human Rights Commission in  dismissing as vexatious a complaint against  the women only pohcy of WenDo (women's  self defense). Derrick feels that the NSHRC  should have done the same.  "It was entirely avaUable to the NSHRC  to dismiss the case against Pandora. No  greater public interest was served going  through with the complaint."  "If the NSHRC wanted to best serve pubUc interest, the Commission should have  raised public awareness around real discrimination and oppression," says Derrick. "The  NSHRC should have taken a firm and principled stance and said that 'we know what  discrimination is and this is not discrimination', and dismissed Gene Keyes' complaint."  Pandora's victory did not come without  costs. The final bUl was far more than the  $10,000 originaUy estimated. "The ironic  side (of the case) is that we've spent $40,000  to do the things we've always done," says  the Pandora spokesperson.  FoUowing the decision, the Pandora collective wrote a formal letter to the NSHRC  complaining about the Commission's handUng of the case.  Pandora asked to be reimbursed for its  costs arguing that, as the NSHRC views the  case as having served an important pubUc  interest, "it is not appropriate that Pandora, a smaU, struggling volunteer paper  should have to pay for this public service."  It is unUkely that Pandora wUl receive  any money from the Commission. In dismissing Pandora's request for financial  compensation, Bridglal Pachai said, "'Pandora knew what it was getting into and had  choices throughout the process to continue  with the case or not."  But Susan O'DonneU of the BC Human  Rights Coalition agrees that the NSHRC  should shoulder some of the financial burden. "If public interest is at stake, then the  public should pay."  In its letter to the Commission, Pandora  also demanded a public apology for the demeaning characterization of women in the  written rebuttal submission of the NSHRC.  The Commission's counsel, Randall Du-  plak, tried to discredit both Pandora and  its witnesses as hysterical and crazy. Duplak  made references to the "hysteria of extremism", and condemned an argument by Pandora as being "so ludicrous that it far out-  reaches the furthermost boundaries of reason or sanity".  Duplak also likened Pandora's reasoning to that of'white supremacists', and took  issue with the fact that Pandora's wit-  Native women and the constitution:  For the right to a seat  by Miche Hill  The Native Women's Association of  Canada (NWAC) is appealing a federal  court ruhng made early in AprU that blocks  NWAC's bid for a seat at the constitutional  table. The women's organization launched a  court battle in March to block government  funding to four male-dominated Aboriginal  groups untU NWAC received equal funding  and participation in constitutional talks on  Aboriginal self-government.  NWAC was concerned that they wouldn't  be able to appeal the ruhng because the  federal court challenges program was cut in  February's federal budget. It was funding  from this program that enabled NWAC to  make the initial court challenge. However,  as Kinesis goes to press, NWAC spokesperson Sharon McGivor says they have received enough donations from individuals to  launch an appeal.  McGivor says NWAC was disappointed  the court ruled against them "even though  we presented a really good statement of  facts ... and the court accepted as fact that  the four national organizations were male-  dominated and that they received 95% of  the funding ... ."  Federal Court Justice Alhson Walsh dismissed NWAC's case on the basis that the  federal government's exclusion of NWAC  from equal access to constitutional negotiations doesn't constitute sex discrimination  or a violation of free speech. The federal  government continues to hold that the four  Native groups receiving funding offer adequate representation to both Native women  and men.  The four national organizations—the Assembly of First Nations, the Native CouncU of Canada, the Inuit Tapirisat of Canada  and the Metis National CouncU—have re-  cieved $10 miUion to enable their participation in the constitutional process, whUe  NWAC has only received $260,000 and is  being left out of direct negotiations.  NWAC is concerned that Native women's  voices are not being heard in the constitutional debate. They say there is good reason  to be concerned as Native women have run  into opposition from male-dominated organizations such as the AFN before.  In 1974, Jeannette LavaU chaUenged the  Indian Act, Section 12(1)B, which took  away Indian status from Native women and  their chUdren if they married non-Native  men, whUe Native men were aUowed to pass  their status on to their non-native wives.  LavaU lost her case when the Supreme  Court ruled that the federal government,  specificaUy parliament, had the right to decide who was and who was not Indian.  When the Canadian Charter of Rights  and Freedoms was passed in 1985, NWAC  chaUenged this sex discrimination under  Charter provisions guaranteeing rights to  equahty, and forced an amendment to the  Indian Act. There was httle support from  the national Native organizations during  this battle. Among other Native groups, the  AFN (then the National Indian Brotherhood), sided with the federal government  and even received money from the Department of Justice to oppose LavaU and  NWAC.  Despite their opposition, BiU C-31 was  eventuaUy passed and women and their chUdren who had lost their status were aUowed  to apply for reinstatement.  NWAC and the Charter  McGivor says the battle for BiU C-31 is  merely one reason why NWAC is suspicious  of current efforts by the four Native organizations to not have the Charter apply  to self-government. Their main argument is  that the Charter puts individual rights first,  whereas traditional native values emphasize  collective rights.  NWAC says they want the Canadian  Charter to apply to self-government because they are worried that, without the  Charter's protection and untU an Aboriginal charter of rights is developed, Native  women's interests wUl not be protected.  Both the AFN and NWAC are working on  an Aboriginal charter of rights but it could  take many years to complete and set in  place.  "We support the inherent right to self-  government but because we know what kind  of power [the chiefs] are talking about, we  know we need the Charter. [Native women]  cannot go without human rights on Indian  lands in this country. Nor should we be  asked to make that sacrifice." NWAC con-  nesses did not swear on the Bible or any  other holy scripture before presenting their  evidence.  After the decision was handed down,  Bridglal Pachai phoned Pandora's lawyer  to personaUy apologize for the offensive language used. Pachai told Anne Derrick that  the NSHRC was disturbed by the language  in the written submission and that it considered this issue serious. But the NSHRC's  pubhc response contained no apology. The  Commission issued a news release stating  only that "... the Human Rights Commission regrets that remarks in the written  submission have been construed as stereotyping women or Pandora Publishing and  its publication."  The NSHRC did not even inform Pandora that it was releasing a public statement. Pandora learned of the news release  from a reporter who had approached Anne  Derrick for comment.  As far as the Commission is concerned,  it has dealt with the issue of the offensive  language through its press release.  But Anne Derrick doesn't think that the  NSHRC should be let off so easily. "How  does the NSHRC characterize the people  they are supposed to protect?" asks Derrick. "CaUing women hysterical does nothing but compound the negative stereotyping and disadvantage of women."  WhUe the Tribunal's decision in favour of  Pandora is significant in its reaffirmation  of the activities of single-sex organizations,  See PANDORA page 4  stitutional co-ordinator, Theresa Nahanee,  recently told reporters.  NWAC says the need to have the Charter  apply to self-government is understandable  when you look at the situation women are  faced with on the reserves, where poverty,  substance abuse and male violence are a  daily threat.  The 1991 report by Manitoba's Aboriginal Justice Inquiry found that "... the un-  wUUngness of chiefs and councils to address  this phght of women and chUdren suffering  abuse at the hands of husbands and fathers  is quite alarming."  "The whole history (of male leadership)  has been one of opposition to sexual equality and the rights of Indian women," Nahanee said.  Further, Nahanee points out that chiefs  of the AFN are elected through a system  that was set up and imposed by the Indian  Act. "They admit to being products of the  boarding schools, they admit to being products of colonialism and oppression, but they  do not admit at aU that they are in power  because of the Indian Act," said Nahanee.  Nahanee said that NWAC is also lobbying the federal justice department to amend  the Human Rights Act. They want a repeal  of Section 67 which says the Human Rights  Act does not apply to the Indian Act. Section 67 was brought in in 1978 to block Indian women from making claims of sex discrimination.  Miche Hill is a First Nations freelance writer.  KINESIS sssssmjss^^  NEWS  BC's NDP budget:  What's in it  for women?  by Kelly O'Brien and Fatima Jaffer  BC's first NDP budget in almost 17  years is out, and is getting a mixed review from women's groups. For many feminist organizations, it is still too early to  teU whether the March 26th budget reflects  the NDP's election campaign commitment  to make women's equahty one of its highest  priorities.  "We don't yet know what it aU means"  says Regina Lorek of the Lower Mainland  Women's Lobby Group, a loose coaUtion  of 43 women's organizations. "We'U probably have to wait untU June to see what  transpires." Lorek, is also critical of the  vague and ambiguous wording of the budget. "There are no clear straightforward  promises to women's groups," she says.  The Lower Mainland Women's Lobby  Group sees the government's commitment  reflected in some aspects of the budget,  but noticeably absent in others. Kinesis offers a summary and comments from some  women's organizations on what is and isn't  in the budget for women.  Violence Against Women  The Ministry of Women's Equahty received  $10 miUion to address the issue of violence  against women. The funding is to enable the  ministry to take "direct action" hi response  to recommendations contained in the BC  Report of the Task Force on Family Violence and the Report on Family Violence in Aboriginal Communities.  The budget does not specify where  this funding wUl go. The Lower Mainland  Women's Lobby Group says it is concerned  about the omission in the budget. It opens  up the possibility, says Lorek, of a 'law and  order' agenda that focuses on funding pohce and court-based victim assistance programs instead of front-line women's services, such as sexual assault centres and  transition houses. Considering that only 15  to 20 percent of abused women have any involvement with the pohce or courts, this allocation of funds would be better spent if it  went to places that serve more women more  effectively.  Linda Schultz of WAVAW (Women Against Violence Against Women) says it's  Ukely the $10 miUion wiU go into grants  for new programming initiatives and not  core-funding for women's organizations Uke  WAVAW for the essential service they provide to the community. Schultz says they  should not have to create new pUot projects  in order to receive funding.  On the other hand, Greta Smith, Coordinator of the BC/Yukon Society of Transition Houses, says she is optimistic that  core funding wiU be distributed to transition houses. "HopefuUy these funds wiU be  equitably distributed," says Mircy Thomas,  Executive Director of Helping Spirit Lodge.  Welfare  There are no cuts to social assistance rates  in the budget. Pam Flemming at End Legislated Poverty says she's relieved the government maintained the rates but, as they are  currently 40 to 60 percent below the poverty  hne, would have been happier if they had  increasing them.  Welfare earning exemptions have been  doubled to $100 for single persons and $200  for persons with chUdren, which wUl put  some more money in women's pockets.  Housing  The budget does not mention low cost housing, a noticeable omission considering the  recent federal cuts to housing.  Pay Equity  In BC, women earn about 66.8 cents for  each doUar earned by men. In an attempt  to bridge that income disparity, the government is allocating $32 miUion to improve pay equity in the pubUc sector and  $29 miUion to help achieve wage parity between low-paid employees in the Ministry of  Health and Social Services and those in the  public sector.  The scope of the budget regarding pay  equity is too narrow, says Jean Swanson  because it only seems to address pay equity  in the pubUc sector. There was no mention  of raising the minimum wage. Labour Minister Moe Sihota's verbal agreement to raise  the minimum wage to $8.26 within the next  four years should have been mentioned in  the budget.  Abortion  The NDP's stand on reproductive rights is  being haUed as commendable (see Kinesis,  April 1992) "Opening up access to abortion across the province is a very bold step,"  says Brown of the Lobby Group.  Jackie Larkin, of the BC CoaUtion for  Abortion CUnics, says she wants to see  a commitment on their part to expanding the access to abortions throughout the  province, and in the long term the establishment of province-wide, community-based  women's health centres.  Childcare  ChUd care support programs have received  an increase in doUars of $17 miUion, a 32  percent increase over last year (see story  this issue).  Prostitution  $600,000 is spent on running a 6-member  vice squad to deal with prostitution, which  some say is a tremendous legal expense.  While attorney general Cohn Gableman  has called for a focus on finding "more  creative solutions" than simply using legal mechanisms, the Lobby Group says  the money should be diverted now from  "harassing street prostitutes" to ensuring  women's safety from further attack and disease on the streets.  Education and Training  The budget does not sufficiently address the  issue of education and training equity. The  Women's Ministry has been given funding  for additional staff to look into an action  plan to address these concerns.  However, Swanson of ELP says that the  NDP's emphasis on employment training  programs over job creation programs is worrisome because it means that "... there  wUl be a lot more women competing for the  same number of jobs."  Free Trade  Ellen Woodsworth, a member of Woman to  Woman Global Strategies, says she is concerned that there was no reference in the  budget to the free trade agreement and  the impact it has on women. "The job  losses, especially for immigrant and aboriginal women, is a serious consequence of free  trade that should have been addressed,"  says Woodsworth.  About 30 demonstrators chanting 'City of Joy is a racist toy' marched by long  line-ups to see the film City of Joy at the Royal Centre Cinemas in Vancouver,  April 21. The demonstration's organizers, the South Asian Women's Action Network (SAWAN), handed out leaflets calling for a boycott of the Hollywood film's  "ugly and blatant romanticizing of poverty." SAWAN held the demonstration  in solidarity with protests in India and in response to the filmmakers' refusal to  listen to objections to the filming by local government, Indian filmmakers and the  people of Calcutta. A spokeswoman for SAWAN, Farhat Khan, said that "the  demonstration was an empowering way for South Asians to let people know how  we feel about the immorality of spending $27 million on creating a film on poverty  using artificial slums and on the colonialist/imperialist portrayal of Indian people  as poor 'victims' who are 'saved' by a rich white man."  Employment equity  The Minister of Women's EquaUty has also  been given $1 miUion in new funds to begin implementing the government's employment equity program, with a view to increasing opportunities within the pubUc sector for women, persons with disabihties,  Aboriginal people and visible minority people. However, the budget does not adequately express the racism experienced by  Native women and Women of Colour and  marginalizes them in budget decisions, says  Jackie Brown of the Lobby Group. These  groups deal with violence against women,  women's poverty and racism but have to depend on the work of established women's  groups to secure their work, says Brown.  OveraU, most of the budget decisions are  being welcomed as an overdue change from  the previous Social Credit government's  agenda. But they should be expected from  an NDP government. Perhaps had the government been more wUling to consult with  women's organizations before budget negotiations, the budget's shortcomings could  have been avoided. At this point, however,  women's groups are anxiously waiting for  clarification on the disbursement of funds  and a response to their concerns.  Kelly O'Brien & Fatima Jaffer are  both writers for Kinesis.  PANDORA from page 3  the ruhng doesn't mean that there won't  be other simUar complaints against equality seeking groups.  Bridglal Pachai says that the public debate on the issue of discrimination is not  resolved. "Human rights are ever-changing  and ever-evolving. H a matter of this nature  were to arise again 5 months or 5 years from  now, who knows how the adjudicator would  rule."  Anne Derrick agrees that whUe this is  an important victory, it doesn't mean there  won't be other struggles. "In a world and  climate in which we exist, it wouldn't surprise me if there was backlash against other  women's and other disadvantaged groups."  The victory has been bittersweet for  Pandora's coUective members. "We are  happy that we won, but we are disgusted  with the NSHRC for advancing the case and  for not looking at its own substantive law  and at the case law. We are disgusted with  the attitude of RandaU Duplak and with  Gene Keyes."  But at least for now, Pandora's collective can focus their energies back on  what they do best—writing and publishing  a damn fine femimst paper.  Pandora urgently needs money to pay  for its case. Please send donations to:  Pandora, PO Box 8418 Stn A, Halifax NS, BSK 5M1. A benefit is being  planned in Vancouver to raise money  for Pandora. For more information or  to help organize the event, please contact Agnes at 875-1640.  Agnes Huang wishes that Halifax wa  n the same time zone as Vancouver.  KINESIS News  /^^^^^^^^^^^^  NDP's childcare  iniative:  Showing they care  As Kinesis goes to press, the news looks  good for single moms, working parents and  kids in BC—at least according to chUd  care advocates in BC. They gave BC's new  chUdcare initiative a standing ovation when  Penny Priddy, Minister of Women's Equality announced the NDP's "strategy with  committed dollars" at a conference on chUd  care on AprU 23.  FoUowing on the heels the federal government's refusal to address the nation's chUd  care crisis in its last budget, the province's  commitment is an impressive first step in  the right direction.  "Certainly, on one level, people were excited, surprised, elated ... perhaps even  overwhelmed when the strategy was announced," said Peter Ashmore of the West  Coast ChUd Care Resource Centre.  "When it became clearer that many of  the [chUdcare] programs are not of the 'we'll  fiU you in on the detaUs later' kind, it was  even better," said Ashmore. "They've done  a wonderful job of providing those detaUs.  It's a great start."  "With the creation of a ChUd Care Development Branch, there has been a structural change which now gives chUd care an  identifiable and permanent place in government, in stark contrast to the previous ad  hoc approach which has characterized planning for chUd care in the past," said Sandra  Griffin, of the Early ChUd Educators of BC.  Penny Coates agrees. "The [government]  is acknowledging their provincial responsi-  bUity for chUdcare." Coates is civic cluld-  Women and employment:  care coordinator for the City of Vancouver.  She says that one "important thing is that  cluld care has been taken out of [Ministry  of] Social Services; that is, out of the welfare  angle, and put squarely within the mandate  of the Ministry of Women's Equahty ...  recognizing chUd care as a women's equality issue."  The income assistance approach taken  by the previous provincial government—  perhaps its only ongoing contribution to  chUd care—took the form of subsidies to  eligible parents. These subsidies have remained intact, says Coates, and the NDP  initiative has added gains on a variety of  fronts.  "The strategy has recognized we have to  move forward on a range of issues simultaneously. In the long term, this broad strategy wUl improve many things. They are  showing strong commitment and a level of  understanding," says Ashmore.  A key structural change is the creation of  an Inter-Ministry ChUd Care Coordinating  Committee, involving nine ministries, with  the Ministry for Women's Equahty in the  central role. "Before there were four ministries involved with chUd care and none  took a coordinating role. With eight different ministries looking at cluld care in different ways, and [ministry of] women's equality coordinating, it's going to be harder to  lose the gains in chUd care when it's spread  out hke that," said Coates.  "It's exciting and very much in hne with  Showing We Care [the report of the BC  Task Force on ChUdcare]," says Coates. The  report offered a comprehensive look at existing chUd care and chaUenged the then Social Credit government to establish new initiatives to create, develop and fund a system  that would meet the needs of BC parents.  The NDP's initiative, says Coates, "shows  a very strong commitment to addressing  [those] recommendations." Key recommendations called for a system of pubUcly  funded, quahty cluld care options, stressing  training, fair wages for caregivers, afford-  abiUty and accessibiUty.  In the NDP initiative, Priddy announced  the creation of 5,000 more cluld care spaces  and expansion to 16 chUd care programs  for the first year at a cost of $17 miUion.  The plan includes funds for: existing licensed infant and toddler day care centres;  spaces for school-aged chUdren and chUdren  from low income famiUes; more family day  care spaces; setting up new chUd care centres throughout BC; a provincial chUd care  council giving BC communities continued  input into chUd care initiatives; and the establishment of an Aboriginal ChUd Care  Working Committee to meet the specific  needs of Aboriginal families.  Money wUl also be applied towards developing a curricula to provide training opportunities to informal and Ucensed day care  staff and to increase avaUabUity of caregiver  training in provinciaUy funded community  colleges.  The chUd care strategy, however, faUs to  address one of the key concerns in the report: low pay. About 98 percent of aU day  care workers are women. A national survey released the day before the NDP's announcement found chUd care workers draw  one of the lowest salaries going. In BC, the  average hourly wage ranked below the national average, at $7-9.  Pay equity may be one of those problems  that is not being addressed now, says Ed  Barrie of the BC Daycare Action Coalition.  "It's not happening now in any sector—it's  a lower priority perhaps because of budget  constraints." However, Barrie adds, Priddy  made a committment to chUd care workers  to address the issue of fair wages within the  next two years.  "The premier said that this is the first  year and these are only the first steps," said  Ashmore. "I think the government does recognize and is indeed supportive of the need  for long-term strategy."  Coates agrees. "They've announced it as  a five-year plan. That's as permanent a  commitment as we're hkely to get from any  government. Whue doUars are not the only  thing needed in chUd care, if the money is  there, we can at least prevent a backward  step. The question is, can the government  come up with the money. The proof is in the  pudding whether we'll move forward fast  enough in the next three years to make a  difference."  The NDP's response to the cluld care crisis is having a tremendous impact on the  morale of the chUd care community—for  now. "And for parents who have to use day  care month-in month- out, it offers some relief across the board."  Counselling unit canned  by Lissa J. Geller  Women are among four targetted groups  to be left out in the cold for labour counseUing, foUowing the federal government's  decision to close the specialized Women's  Employment CounseUing Unit (WECU) in  Vancouver. Other targetted programs are  special needs, Native and youth groups.  The program is slated for closure within  the next six months, according to a federal  government announcement made March 12.  For about ten years, WECU has provided  employment counselhng and a resource centre for low income women, including UI recipients.  The effect on unemployed women wUl be  absolutely devastating, says Shauna Butter-  wick, BC Director of the Canadian Centre for Learning Opportunities for Women  (CCLOW). "There is so httle left for women  out there, and there are no other long-term  programs with the same resources," says  Butterwick.  WECU served approximately 40 to 60  unemployed and underemployed women  each week and held both individual and  workshop counselhng sessions to assess  women's employment needs, evaluate their  interests and skiU levels and refer them to  labour training programs. The counselhng  unit was 'a ray of hope' to chent Mildred  MacLeUan who says she was referred to it  by U.L after being underemployed and unemployed since October, 1991.  "It [WECU's service] was self-timed and  self-directed and taught me a lot about my  own interests and skiUs," says MacLeUan.  "Without this counseUing, women end up  in traditional female job ghettos hke clerical work." MacLeUan said she didn't receive proper evaluation through the general  Canada Employment and Immigration Centre (CEIC) office and as a result the training and jobs she was referred to were inappropriate to her interests and aptitudes.  MacLeUan wUl Ukely be finished with her  program before WECU shuts its doors but  "The government has been questioning  enhanced employment counselhng services  for some time," she said. "It's been increasingly impossible for us to provide services  to people in need, we've been forced to focus specificaUy on U.I. recipients.  Now we'U just be providing information  to them." she said.  Butterwick agrees, saying she beheves  this closure is yet another indication of the  federal government's move away from equity towards efficiency. She lays part of  The decision to close WECU was ill planned  and poorly carried out  iTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTrm^^  to her, there is no doubt that a greater proportion of women wUl be missed by the system after WECU is gone.  One counsellor, who has worked for three  years with the Employment CounseUing  Units' resource centre and who asked not  to be identified, said she beheved these closures are part of a move by the federal government to shift services for the unemployed  away from counselling and towards merely  providing information.  the blame for the cuts to WECU on the  federal government's Labour Force Development Strategy announced in 1989. The  LFDS, which made UI harder to obtain and  withdrew aU federal funding from UI programming, focused on training UI and Social Assistance recipients rather than counseUing unemployed women.  IronicaUy, when members of a Vancouver women's group working towards safeguarding employment training and oppor  tunities for women met with CEIC managers in February, they were told WECU  was not in danger of being closed. The  Women's Employment and Training Coalition (WETC) asked Labour Market Area  Manager BiU Ross specificaUy about the future of WECU. Ross insisted the program  was safe. Less than two weeks later, the government made its announcement.  The decision to close WECU was UI  planned and poorly carried out with no attempt made to redirect chents or determine  whether other services were avaUable in the  community, according to the resource centre counsellor.  "It wasn't untU after the office was|  swamped with letters and faxes demanding to know what happened to the programl  that officials asked staff to develop a strategy to deal with displaced chents," she said,  adding that WECU staff are talking about  refusing to cooperate to make the government 'look good.'  Community groups associated with WECU and the WETC are mounting a letter-  writing campaign to reinstate the Unit. A  similar campaign last year to prevent cuts  to Toronto's WECU was successful. To date  officials at CEIC have given no indication oil  when or if they wUl meet with the WETC  to discuss the matter.   Lissa J. Geller is a first-time Kinesis  writer who has just moved to Vancouver from Saskatchewan.  KINESIS sassxsssa^^  WHAT'S   NEWS?  Moratorium  on implants  by Heidi Walsh  The moratorium on sUicone breast implants has been extended for a further  six months. Federal Health Minister Benoit  Bouchard has also announced a $1 miUion  study on the health risks of the implants,  the establishment of a toU-free implant hotline, and an Angus Reid survey to look at  the experiences of implant wearers.  Two months ago, Bouchard struck a  committee to study the implant controversy, but has rejected one of its key  recommendations—to aUow sUcone implants in women over 40 and mastectomy  patients—saying this would discriminate  among women.  The committee also recommended better  medical education for physicians, improved  screening for implant-related health problems and the establishment of a national  registry for implant wearers.  MeanwhUe, the American Food and Drug  Administration has partiaUy Ufted its moratorium, authorizing the use of sUicone implants in women undergoing reconstructive  surgery. Many women faU to understand  why the implants would be considered 'safe'  for cancer patients, but not for generaUy  healthy women.  The implant moratorium was imposed  in both Canada and the US in January  1992 foUowing FDA hearings which revealed  grave concerns about the safety of the  product. Approximately 150,000 Canadian  women have received sUicone implants.  Return of  the doctor  At a time when the BC CoUege of Physicians and Surgeons is under attack for fail-  ing to act on the issue of sexual abuse by  doctors, the BC Supreme Court has managed to make the CoUege look relatively  progressive.  Eight years ago, Vancouver gynecologist  Dr. John Wakeford was suspended from  practising medicine in BC after the CoUege  found him guilty of sexual misconduct involving four female patients.  Wakeford recently sought a court order  to have his fuU registration reinstated. And  whUe BC Supreme Court Justice John Anderson refused, he has instructed the College to reconsider its conditions to aUow  Wakeford back on the temporary register.  The CoUege advocated banning Wakeford  from practice involving the physical examination of female patients.  Anderson, who said Wakeford's sexual  misconduct was "disgusting and repulsive,"  also said "it is patently unreasonable that  [Wakeford] should be denied the right to  carry on the general practice of medicine,  surgery or midwifery." He said Wakeford's  behaviour should be monitored, and suggested he not be permitted "to make a physical examination of any female patient without an appropriate chaperone."  In the original CoUege hearings, three  of the complainants said Dr. John Wakeford had fondled their genitals and other  areas. The fourth woman told the CoUege  she had gone to Wakeford for an examination shortly after having had a vaginal  hysterectomy from which she'd almost died.  Wakeford had performed sex on her during  the check-up. Wakeford admitted the last  charge but denied the others.  Menchu for  peace prize  by Gladys We  Rigoberta Menchu has been nominated  for the 1992 Nobel Peace Prize. Born in  Guatemala and self-exiled in 1981 foUowing  death threats and the murder of her family  by the Guatemala's Armed Forces, Menchu  has since become a voice for indigenous people in her homeland and in the Americas  (see Kinesis, March, 1992).  Menchu's nomination for the Peace Prize  was made by the CUC Canadian Support  Committee. The CUC or the Committee for  Peasant Unity is an organization founded  by peasants in the Guatemalan highlands.  Menchu has been a member of CUC since  1979.  Her work in the United Nations has exposed human rights violations in Guatemala, bringing organizations forward to help  her people. Adolfo Perez Esquivel, an Argentinian humanitarian and Nobel Prize  laureate in 1980, writes, "Rigoberta has become the representative of the people. She  demands the right to truth, justice, identity  and hfe for the indigenous peoples and their  cultures."  In 1990, she received the Education for  Peace award from UNESCO, and in 1991,  the annual award given by the French Committee for the Defence of Human Rights and  Freedom.  To get more information on how to support the candidacy of Rigoberta Menchu for  the 1992 Nobel Peace Prize, write to Patricio Sanz No. 449, Colonia del VaUe, Zona  Postal 12, Mexico DF.  -| A    |     Consignment  A^   i     Clothing  "Clothes   Shouldn't  Hurt"  * Specializing in size plus fashions  * Recycle your wardrobe for cash  4235 Dunbar Street  Vancouver, BC  222-1895  Ask about our " home shopping" service  Native women  fight harassment  A member of Manitoba's Aboriginal  Women's Unity Coalition is being sued by  Peguis Chief Louis Stevenson for defamation of character. Kathy MaUet is under attack for comments she made concerning suspicious chUd deaths on reserves. Stevenson  has refused the Unity Coalition's offer to  have the dispute settled by elders in traditional mediation.  Aboriginal women in Manitoba are call-  ing the suit another attempt as part of a  continuing harassment campaign to intimidate and sUence any questioning or criticism  of Aboriginal poUtical leadership. "[Stevenson] wants to sUence and intimidate us, so  he's using this suit to keep us quiet," said  Sandi Funk, a Coalition member.  Aboriginal women have joined together  to ask for protection under the Canadian  Charter of Rights in the event of self-  government. There is a feehng that women  and chUdren on reserves are treated as  second-class citizens, and that under self-  government and without an Aboriginal  charter of rights, the situation may worsen.  "If this goes through, [the chiefs] wUl  have virtuaUy unlimited autonomy—they'll  be able to do whatever they want to  whomever they want," said Grace Meconse  at a grievance meeting in Manitoba. She  added that people "were denied jobs, others had their welfare benefits cut and others  have been told they're not going to be given  housing or have their university fees paid,  simply because the chief didn't hke them,  wanted to give their job to a relative or just  didn't feel hke it."  VIEW festival  under attack  BC Reports, a weekly newsmagazine, has  accused Vancouver's Women in VIEW Festival of being "a festival of lesbian love" and  is calling for a stop to funding from sponsors  of the annual aU-woman festival of the arts.  The publication, a right-wing paper that  often targets women's organizations and lesbian and gay communities in Vancouver,  published numerous stories and an editorial  on the festival, which took place over January and February.  In February, the pubhcation ran a review focusing on VIEW's lesbian shows, and  talked about VIEW's use of tax dollars to  fight heterosexism in the arts. An editorial  in March asked readers to write to the sponsors of VIEW urging withdrawl of their support for the festival. The editorial says one  reader's response to the story praised the  reporter, who surely "deserves an award for  her descent into the nightmare world of lesbianism."  Women in VIEW is asking women to  write letters of support to their sponsors to  fight this attack. CaU the Women in VIEW  office for more information.  Rites publishes  its last  After eight years in pubhcation, Rites,  the Canadian lesbian and gay magazine,  published its last issue this year. Founded in  May, 1984 and published by an aU-volunteer  collective, the January/February issue of  Rites was its last.  Billed as a progressive, intelUgent and  sex-positive magazine, Rites was one of few  lesbian and gay magazines to publish explicit lesbian imagery. The magazine folded  partly due to increasing production and distribution costs and a continually growing  debt.  Rites provided a home for poetry and fiction by noted Canadian authors such as Ingrid MacDonald.  The radical feminist magazine  CD  Issue 23 Spring 1992  Hail Mary Robinson!  * Anita Hill speaks out  * Southall Black Sisters  * Fat Lesbian in art  —"A formidable feminist magazine -  not for the faint-hearted." The  Guardian  Subs for one year (3 jssl  . £9.50  ...£13  ...£14  Airmail: N&S America  Australasia   For your free sample copy send to  Trouble & Strife (free) at the address  below.  Distributed to all gonci US bookshops  Inlmnl Hook Company Tel: (20.1)  7-4257  Trouble and Strife, PO Box 8, Diss,  Norfolk, UK 1P22 3XG  UPRI&ING BREADS  BAKERY  Makers of Vancouvers Finest Wholegrain Dreads.  Sourdough Pumpernlckel-daily  Non-yeasted with wholewheat and rye flour  Heavy and satisfying  Soda Bread-daily  Non-yeasted. handmolded made with coarse wholewheat flour  Flour Bread-Thurs. Fri. Sat  Laden with dates and sunflower seeds in a yeasted wholewheat bread  Sante Fe Combread-daily  Small loaf filled w/onions, cheese, corn kernels  with an edge of jalapenos  and more  Mon.-Fri. 8:30 am - 5:40 pm • Sat. 9:00 am - 5:30 pm  1697 Venables Street Vancouver 254-5635  A part of CRS Workers' Co-op  KINESIS /vvvvvv>v7vy'x^.'vy>vv>^^^  /////////////////////^^^^^  FEATURE  Human rights legislation:  On equality for lesbians  by barbara findlay  After extensive pressure from lesbian and  gay communities, federal and BC governments are talking about extending human  rights protection to include protection from  discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation.  The moves have been a long time in coming. The federal government made a commitment in 1986 to amend the Canadian  Human Rights Act to make discrimination  against lesbians and gays illegal.  In BC, the newly-elected NDP government pledged protection on the basis of sexual orientation in the March budget speech.  The previous Social Credit government actually reduced human rights protection, restricting it to claims based only on a list  prohibiting grounds of discrimination. The  Hst did not include protection for lesbians.  Says Susan O'Donnell of the Human  Rights Coalition, who is drafting a new Human Rights Code for consideration by this  government: "If the legislation is enacted  in the way we have recommended, BC will  have the best protection for lesbians and gay  men in the country."  Federally, however, when justice minister  Kim Campbell recently canvased Conservative MPs for their views on the proposed  amendments, she met with strong opposition from some members of the Tory caucus. Some say they are morally opposed to  protections for lesbians and gay men. Others have said that if sexual orientation is  written into the Act, a section defining the  "traditional family" in terms of a husband,  wife and child, should be included.  MPs argue that a definition is required to  protect "family values." However, the federal government is also worried that legal  protection of lesbians' rights will make it  impossible to prevent claims by lesbians for  "spousal benefits" such as pension plans,  currently available to straight partners, at  great cost to government coffers.  To date, lesbians have been using the  courts in expensive battles to claim equal  rights under the Charter of Rights, arguing  that equality guarantees under the Charter  extend to protect lesbians and gay men.  While the Charter does not specifically  include sexual orientation under its protections, some courts maintain that 1  the Charter is open-ended, discrimination  against lesbians is in fact a violation of  equality rights.  The problem is that when cases do make  it to court, the courts are divided about  just what that protection might mean. In  the case Egan and Nesbit v the Queen, for  example, the court held that, although sexual orientation can be seen as a protected  ground under the Charter of Rights, the  laws do not discriminate by conferring old  age pension benefits on heterosexual married or common-law partners but refusing  them to same-sex partners.  The court maintained that the law is con-  crimination on the basis of "family status"  because he was denied bereavement leave to  attend the funeral of his male partner's father. The tribunal recognized that same-sex  partnerships are "family relationships".  The Federal Court of Appeal reversed  that decision. Rejecting evidence of the different kinds of families in Canadian society,  the court wrote in their judgement: "Is it  not to be acknowledged that the basic concept signified by the word [family] has always been a group of individuals with common genes, common blood, common ancestors?"  The question of how lesbians want to be  recognized by the law has not received  extensive discussion in the lesbian  community  ferring a benefit on heterosexual partnerships which have "traditionally been treated  as the basic unit of a society upon which society depends for its continued existence."  How to argue equality for lesbians under the Charter is currently being debated  among lesbian feminists. Should lesbians'  claims be made on the basis of sex equality or as sexual orientation? Or perhaps on  other grounds?  Gwen Brodsky, a Vancouver equality  rights lawyer, says "At this stage, it is premature to rule out the possibility of any  ground. One of the things we need to establish in the courts is the overlapping characters of discrimination. It should be recognized that any one discriminatory behaviour may affect a woman on a number  of grounds including her sex, family status, marital status, and sexual orientation  or sexual identity, as some women prefer to  call it. The challenge is not to be artificially  confined into any one category where that  is not fully descriptive of the discrimination  that women face," she says.  Brodsky is counsel for EGALE, an Ontario lesbian and gay rights group. EGALE  is intervening in a case called Mossop  currently before Canada's supreme court.  Mossop argued successfully before a federal  human rights tribunal that he suffered dis-  Now, the Supreme Court will have to decide if Mossop has a right to "family". According to Brodsky, "the issue before the  Supreme Court of Canada is whether the  law will recognize that lesbians and gay men  have people in their lives who they regard  as family members."  Indeed, the Mossop case is being watched  with interest by all levels of government.  The consequences of Mossop, says Brodsky,  will be profound. "If the position of EGALE  prevails," she says, "it will mean that, in the  employment context, family benefit schemes  will have to be changed so that family-based  criteria are eliminated ... so a worker could  take leave to attend the funeral of anyone  important to her, regardless of any purported family connection."  If the Supreme Court of Canada ultimately holds that Charter equality guarantees protect lesbians and gay men, all areas  of the law will be open for re-examination.  Lesbians and gay men would be able to  sponsor same-sex partners as immigrants  the way straight partners now do. Laws conferring benefits on heterosexual couples or  families could be open to challenge if they  do not extend to same-sex partnerships.  In BC, Medical Services Plan legislation  has already been successfully challenged under the Charter in a case called Knodel. As a  0$&*fr &j&V<Arui«&   ^ ltfen£*Jto^J^hi&  result, same-sex partners get the same premium break as heterosexual partners do.  The Charter of Rights has, so far, seemed  the only hope for challenging laws that discriminate against lesbians without protection in human rights law. But the federal  government recently cut the Court Challenges program that had enabled some disadvantaged groups to fund challenges to discriminatory legislation.  The Ontaxio government is also currently  reviewing all of its legislation, policy and  programs which create distinctions based  on spousal status in an attempt to eliminate discrimination against same-sex partnerships. Such a review could have radical consequences for lesbians. It could mean  that lesbians and gay men will be subject  to the same matrimonial laws regarding,  for example, custody, maintenance, and division of property as common-law heterosexual couples. Lesbians could register their  relationships with the government and be  treated as if they were married.  The question of how lesbians want to be  recognized by the law has not received extensive discussion in the lesbian community because the likelihood of change has  seemed remote and unreal. Questions that  may need to be discussed among lesbians  before federal and provincial laws are decided for us include, for starters, the following:  Do lesbians want to be treated as 'family' or as 'spouses' under provincial legislation? Do we want to become 'common-law  spouses' after hving together for a period  of time? Is it possible to pick and choose—  to argue for example, that lesbians should  be able to sponsor their partners under  immigration law without being treated  spouses in other circumstances?  Should lesbians be lobbying for inclusion  of protection on the basis of 'sexual orientation,' or is that an inappropriate protection because it will cloak lesbian oppression by lumping it together with discrimination against gay men? In arguing on behalf of lesbians under the Charter, should  we be advancing lesbians' equality claims as  sex equality or as equality for lesbians? And  what difference, if any, will all this make in  the long run?  LEAF (Legal Action and Education  Fund) is conducting a three-city consultation to hear what lesbians want from the  law and the strategies they want to adopt. A  day-long consultation, Taking The Law Into  Our Own Hands, will take place in Vancouver in May co-sponsored by LEAF, the Vancouver Lesbian Connection and the Lesbian  Working Group will take place in Vancouver  in May (see Bulletin Board for details).  Hazel Hazelton of the Lesbian Working Group says that "the Lesbian Working  Group is very excited about the [consultation] because it will give Vancouver lesbians  a chance to hear what the issues are and to  participate in developing the position of our  community."  She noted that the consultation leads up  to the Outrights conference, the 2nd pan-  Canadian Conference on Lesbian and Gay  Rights, planned for Thanksgiving in Vancouver.  "The law is catching up with lesbians. If  lesbians are to have a say in how the law  develops, the time is now," says Hazelton.  barbarba  findlay   is   a   member   of  Working With Lesbians.  KINESIS sss*s****sssss**s***ss^  FEATURE  University Hospital Women's Health Centre:  New voice on women's health  by Raine McKay  "Come on Raine, just start writing about  what is actually offered at the Women's  Health Centre ..."  After much procrastination, I was able  to get beyond frustration, anger and exhaustion and to appreciate the absurdity of  my situation. In the midst of desperately  trying to find a way to keep the Vancouver Women's Health Collective from closing her doors, I am writing about the new  1.2 miUion dollar Women's Health Centre in  Vancouver so that women can learn a Httle  about the facifities it offers.  The Vancouver Women's Health CoUective is an underfunded, grass roots resource  and reference centre that set out about 20  years ago to provide women with alternative  health care models. The Women's Health  Centre (WHC) is a government-funded fa-  ciHty at University Hospital, one of the  largest health care organizations in Canada,  that is looking into better wages to dehver  women's health care in BC.  My temptation to criticize the WHC, its  structure, those who run it and those who  fund it, is great and not completely without  merit. Yet experience working in the medical arena and respect for the efforts of the  women presently working at the WHC, prevent me from doing so.  As an outpatient cUnic that offers spe-  iaHzed medical services for women, what  makes the Women's Health Centre so different from what already exists in BC's health  system? What is its potential impact  on health care for women in BC?  The Women's Health Centre provides  technologically oriented programs dealing with osteoporosis, infertUity, sexual  medicine, colposcopy, assisted reproductive  programs (IVF), sexual assault, reproductive endocrinology, PMS, mammography,  hysteroscopy and adolescent gynecology.  That these programs exist under one roof  unique but its bigger selhng points are  its multi-disciphnary approach, being Hnked  with a teaching hospital, 'leading edge' research, patient education and a Community  Advisory Committee. All this sounds great  but how wUl they be actualized?  Penny Ballem, Medical Director of the  Women's Health Centre, is quite clear about  the direction she would Uke the WHC to  take. As a feminist, Ballem beUeves in  many of the same approaches to health  care for women as the Health CoUective  does—informed choice, access to education and comprehensive treatment. Unfortunately, she is presently locked into the traditional medical model which means that  While Ballem certainly has at least one  strong advocate for this approach on staff,  it wUl certainly be a challenge to faciHtate  this approach to teamwork.  Being Unked with a teaching hospital  could serve to better educate young practitioners about women's health. Whether  it wUl depends not only on working with  the latest technological breakthroughs but  also on the example the resident specialists set for outside practitioners. This impact on outside practitioners and the qual-  From the cover of the University Hospital  Women's Health Centre brochure  the potential impact of these approaches to  women's health care wiU be very different.  A multi-discipUnary approach requires  more than housing various specialties under  one roof. It requires a commitment to assessing a woman's health as she Hves it, taking into account, in addition to physiological aspects, the social and cultural aspects  of her weUbeing. It calls for meaningful communication between the doctors themselves  and open and respectful doctor-patient relationships, something a woman does not usuaUy find.  ity of women'-s health care they offer is directly related to how weU Ballem is able to  instill a feminist approach to health care in  the Centre's specialists. If these specialists  continue to follow the traditional model of  health care, so wUl the students and outside  practitioners who Haise with them.  It is exciting that the WHC wUl conduct  much-needed research on women's health  needs. It is stiU unclear how this research  wUl be decided upon. WiU the researchers  act according to the community's identi  fied issues or wUl the community merely  be asked to have input on the topics researchers select? And who wUl select what  constitutes 'the community' ?  The Vancouver Women's Health CoUective is not presently a part of 'the community', which at WHC is taking the form  of their Community Advisory Committee.  Twenty years of working in the grassroots femimst health movement is being dismissed because there wasn't 'room' on the  committee. So make the committee larger.  Surely, many voices must be heard for a  more accurate picture of women's health  care issues to be drawn.  The patient education program at the  Women's Health Centre started off with a  series of lectures by several of the women  working at the chnic. The Hbrary and informational programs presently being developed could prove to be interesting in both  their approach and content.  How and to what extent the patients are  encouraged to take an active part in their  health care is intricately connected to the  support Ballem receives from her health  care team. How they treat a patient informed about the various treatment options  avaUable to her, especially ones outside the  physician's preferred mode of treatment, remains to be seen. Our experience as women  and that gained from the work an organization Hke the Health CoUective does is that  physicians react adversely to knowledgeable  patients.  The extent to which Ballem is able to  push the boundaries of traditional medical  models wUl determine the ultimate impact  the Women's Health Centre wUl have on  women's health care in BC.  By developing active partnerships between strong advocacy groups, such as  the Vancouver Women's Health CoUective,  who work outside the system, Ballem may  be able to use the poUtical clout of the  Women's Health Centre to enact some  change.  Raine McKay works at the Vancouver Women's Health Collective and is  a passionate advocate of feminist health  \fc  ...*  vus  5766 Fraser    Street  Vancouver, B.C.  U5W 2Z5  Sarah-Jane  C604J  322-0107  CCEC Credit Union  L,0(ITIS available for...  • a car  or recreational vehicle  a well-deserved  vacation        ^  Spring &     JZ * reasonable rates  7r       6 ..      ^x • flexible terms  home renOVatlOm   % . automatic deductions  or...  free life ii  no pre-payment penalty  Try us first  Let's talk about it... call us at 254-4100  I   *f>-**W|t 'H,  CCEC Credit Union  KINESIS        May9 //////////////////^^^^^  /////////////////////^^^^^  ARTS  Survivors or victims?  Living with the enemy  LIVING WITH THE ENEMY  Photographs by Donna Ferrato  Presentation House GaUery, N. Vancouver  March 13 to April 26  by Penelope Hutchison  Rita came home one morning after her  nursing shift to a jealous husband waiting  for her behind a door. He pounced on her  and brutaUy beat her in front of their chUdren. Rita later pressed charges. Her husband was arrested. She vowed never to go  back to him and said she didn't know if she  would ever be able to love again. She said  when somebody you love does something  Hke that to you, it is hard to ever beUeve  in love again.  This is not a scene from a movie. It's  one of many photographs taken by Donna  Ferrato on her ten-year quest to portray  the reality of domestic violence as part of  the show, Living With the Enemy: Photographs by Donna Ferrato at Presentation House GaUery in North Vancouver.  Ferrato is an award winning photo journalist who has worked with women survivors of  male domestic violence and currently Hves  in New York.  Ferrato was in Vancouver in AprU to  take part in a panel discussion on violence  against women. The panel, Voices Against  Violence, took place in conjunction with  her show Living With The Enemy. The  discussion centred around Ferrato's photographs, which depict the pain and horror  women endure when they "Hve with the enemy."  by Jane Watch  "Lifers" inside the Renz maximum security prison for women in  Jefferson City, Missouri for the "crime" of self-preservation  At the panel, the discussion addressed  what is being done in response to male violence against women and what needs to be  done to support women victims of male violence in the home. Ferrato showed shdes  of her works, describing some of the brutal  stories behind her photographs.  In the exhibit, Living With the Enemy, Donna Ferrato's deeply disturbing photographs depict women victims. Her work bluntly Ulustrates the brutality of male violence,  the compUcity of the state and judicial system, and the pain that women are forced to endure. GaUery patrons at North Vancouver's Presentation House have been confronted with  explicit details of gut-wrenching violence forced upon women—violence captured with Ferrato's camera.  It's almost impossible to witness Ferrato's exhibit and leave emotionaUy unscathed. She  portrays the harsh reaUty. But this harsh reality is exhibited in a manner which drastically  contrasts the photo subject matter. Expensively framed, carefully arranged, and neatly—  seemingly displaced—bloodied women's images are positioned on a clean, white gallery  waU backdrop. As such, the cries of the women in the photos are very far away.  Women featured in the photos at the gallery entrance are mostly poor or working class,  and many are women of colour. This situation created a power relationship that, for the  most part, remained unacknowledged. A reception held in the gallery after a panel discussion was attended mostly by women who appeared to be upper or middle-class and white.  These more privUeged women, then, were Uke spectators of abuse, witnessing the results  of less privUeged women being battered and brutalized.  In Ferrato's photographs, we saw acts of violence—some in the heat of the moment—  but the violence was not going to stop merely by us viewing it. I wondered how Ferrato  was able to take photographs in some situations instead of dropping her camera and trying  to get help or assist the woman in trouble.  Several gallery patrons asked Ferrato some vital questions at a reception. What does  this exhibit hope to achieve? Who is the intended audience? Might some privUeged gallery  patrons (Hke those who aren't survivors of racism, poverty or more blatant forms of violence) apathetically leave the exhibit thinking, "I'm glad it's not me"? Is the work supposed to be empowering for women in the photos? If so, then how? Where are images created by survivors of these kinds of brutal violence? Must we always see images created by  advocates instead? How can this exhibit implore male perpetrators of violence to help create solutions and stop these crimes? Are audiences supposed to be shocked into action to  help prevent further violence as a result of seeing this show, or might people leave feeUng  overwhelmed and disempowered?  There are no fast and easy answers to the questions raised by this exhibit but it is imperative we question the role of art in a violent society, as we seek to understand the nature of violence in its many forms and work to defend ourselves and loved ones. Ferrato's  images raise many questions, since her chosen subject matter is real and volatile, and careful debate over these forms of representation are necessary.  HopefuUy, the panel discussion staged at Presentation House wUl draw more attention  to the reality of violence against women, poverty as violence, and institutionaHzed violence  that permeates male-dominated "justice" and punitive systems. And hopefuUy we can continue to constructively and sensitively critique representations of this vital subject matter.  Jane Watch is a Vancouver-based freelance writer.  The photographs are painful to look at,  often I found myself instinctively closing my  eyes at shots of women's stab wounds or the  pain in Rita's blackened eyes. Like Ferrato,  I have never experienced domestic violence  in my own Ufe, but her photographs bring  home a reaUty that is impossible to deny.  The following is a list of support services and transition houses available tc  women in the Vancouver area:  • Munroe House (YWCA and 2nd stage  transition house), PO Box 33904, Stn. D.  Van., BC, 734-5722.  • Rape Relief & Women's Shelter,  77 E. 20th Ave., Van., BC, 872-8212.  • Act II Safe Choice Program (2nd stage).  301- 402 W. Pender, Van., BC, 254-3479!  • EmUy Murphy House, c/o North Shore  Crisis Society, 600 West Queen's Rd..  North Van, BC, 987-3374.  • Kate Booth House (Salvation Army),  PO Box 35361, crisis #: 872-7774.  • PoweU Place Sanctuary for Women,  St. James Social Service, 331 PoweU St..  Van., BC, 683-0919.  • Owl House Society (for Native women).  736-2423.  • W.A.V.A.W. (Women Against Violence  Against Women), 24-hour crisis Hne for  rape/incest survivors, 255-6344.  • Battered Women's Support Service,  Box 1098, Postal Stn. "A", 757 W. Hastings, Van., BC, 687-1867.  • Congress of Black Women, c/o Barbara  London, 2724 Chesterfield Ave., North  Van., BC, 987-3807.  • Aries Day & Evening Program, for street-  involved Native youth, 255-1326.  • Indian Homemakers Association, 201-64C  W. Broadway, Van., BC, 876-0944.  • PhiUipine Women's Centre, 2964 E. 41st  Ave., Van., BC, V5R 2X5, 432-7783.  • SUCCESS (Vancouver) 5836 Fraser St.,  253-5561 (or Richmond) 8191 Westminster Hwy., 273-9878.  • Lu'ma Native Housing, 201-4720 Main  St., Van., BC, 876-0811.  • United Native Nations, 300-33 E. Broadway, Van., BC, 879-2420.  Ferrato began photographing domestic  violence by accident. On assignment for  Life Magazine, she had moved into the  house of a self-made miUionaire and his wife.  One night, she discovered the couple in the  bathroom, the man beating his wife for hiding his cocaine pipe. She photographed the  scene and thus began her determination to  attempt to portray the real face of violence.  "This was at a time when I was very  naive about men who beat women and it  profoundly changed me," Ferrato told the  audience.  Abuse is the power and control of one human being over another, says Carol Ward  HaU, executive director of EmUy Murphy  House and a member of the panel. Most of  "the abuse is by men on women and it is the  women who pay for that violence. Women  who have the strength to leave escape to  shelters, often to be turned away because of  lack of space.  There are only 40 transition houses  in BC, Ward HaU told us, and for every women she admits to EmUy Murphy  House, she has to turn away two due to  lack of space. Those who get in often find  themselves Uving in underfunded, poorly-  equipped conditions.  Ferrato talked about the horrors of some  inner city shelters in the US. She said things  have to change. "Women should not have  to go and hide out in these shelters and Uve  without their dignity. Their chUdren get sick  from being thrown together and they're crying and having terrible nightmares."  "Women should have the right to stay in  their homes and the men who are violent  and who wiU not stop being violent, they  have to be arrested, to be made to Uve in  these places ... to do what women do in  these shelters; scrub the walls, clean out the  toilets, cook for each other, for their chUdren," said Ferrato.  On top of this, women in shelters are  struggling to find places to Hve. They learn  about the legal aspects of abuse and child  custody, doing aU this whUe worrying about  being hunted down and kiUed by their husband who's looking for them.  Judi, a paneUst and an adult survivor of  chUd sexual abuse, said secrecy and shame  are foundations of abuse. Too many women  blame themselves for the abuse, sUenced by  farmly and even friends. "We need to let  people know that help is avaUable ... That  help comes from love not judgement," she  said.  And when the judgement comes, it is particularly harsh. Ferrato spoke about how,  in the U.S. women who kUl their abusers  in self-defense get the longest sentences the  courts can give them. "If you cop a plea and  say 'no, no I'm innocent, I had a right to  do what I did,' that's when they throw the  book at you," she said.  She added that the average murderer  in the U.S. gets about six years. Women  who kill in self-defense get approximately  50 years with no chance of parole.  There appears to be Httle that is being done to halt the near epidemic proportions of violence against women and chUdren. Lack of government funding for shelters, poor pohce protection and men's beUef that they have an inherent right to  hit/beat/kiU women fuel society's denial of  the problem.  Penelope Hutchinson is a very busy  first-time Kinesis writer.  KINESIS Talking  about  AIDS  Nikola Marin is a student at the University of British Columbia doing research  on women and AIDS and is interested in networking with other lesbians and People of Colour to discuss HIV/AIDS issues. Oline Luinenburg is a lesbian activist,  working on a Masters degree in Communications at Simon Fraser University, and  organizes pre and post-HIV test counselling for lesbians at the Vancouver Lesbian  Connection. The following are excerpts of speeches they made at a panel discussion on lesbians and HIV/AIDS in Vancouver on January 16.  Nikola Marin: I should start by saying that my interest in discussing HIV/AIDS is because I am both gay-identified and a Woman of Colour. When talking about AIDS, I feel  a lot of pressure to be either one or the other. But I speak as both today.  What I want to talk about is AIDS and the issue of denial when it comes to sex between  women. When I came out, I got the Hne that sex with lesbians was inherently safe, that  lesbians were penis pure. The areas of risk of transmission for lesbians are often those situations that we are most Hkely to deny exist. For example, having sex with men or being  IV [intravenous] drug users.  In terms of who constitutes 'the real lesbian,' I think it can sometimes become a kind  of horizontal violence among women. It is insinuated that if you sleep with men you are  not a real lesbian. I think, in a way, it's common knowledge that bisexuaHty is actually  more prevalent than exclusive homosexuality. I find that this is not necessarUy recognized  in the lesbian community. Acknowledging that you have had, or stiU have, sex with men is  unpopular.  Certainly in AIDS education it is clear people do not behave according to the labels  they give themselves. For example, I came across an amazing statistic about the number of  lesbians who have anal sex with men and do not use protection. They think that because  they are lesbians—the 'low-risk' group— they are not at risk.  What I'm talking about are barriers that might prevent lesbians from thinking about  HIV/AIDS as an issue affecting them. The medical establishment, which is a bastion of  sexism, heterosexism and racism. About 60 percent of women who have died of AIDS were  not diagnosed as having AIDS.  The manifestations of sero [HIV] positivity in women are often gynecological. Yet women  have a hard enough time being diagnosed for gynecological disease, such as cervical cancer and pelvic inflammatory disease. The CDC's [US Centres for Disease Control] definition of AIDS is based on male symptoms. Basic women's health problems go undiagnosed  most of the time. It is only a keen doctor who may see a recurring yeast infection as perhaps a sign of sero positivity.  Then again, in the medical discourse of women and AIDS material, you come across  terms Hke 'vaginal juices.' This term alone suggests a certain kind of misogyny. After aU,  we do not talk about semen as 'penUe juices.' There is a real lack of vocabulary on a basic  level.  Numerous women have talked to me about asking their doctors about testing for HIV.  Their doctors asked them why they thought they would be at risk. H they seem Uke 'good  girl' types, their concern is invahdated. I was tested recently by a doctor who is also a lesbian. I was reaUy surprised that she too had this same behaviour.  Women, and lesbians more so, have to be assertive as consumers of the medical  health system, because their best interests are not necessarUy looked after. InvisibUity in  HIV/AIDS education material is a problem. Lesbians, or women who have sex with women,  may often not recognize themselves in the material that is around. Women are discussed  specificaUy only in footnote references to lesbians or woman-to-woman transmission.  For lesbians or bisexuals, homophobia further complicates this. Think of heterosexually  constructed concepts of lesbian sex, such as lesbians holding hands and the guy from the  centre for disease control saying lesbians do not have much sex and that is why they do  not collect statistics on lesbian transmission. Think of The Joy of Sex which mentions  that lesbians wUl occasionaUy practice mutual genital friction. Heterosexuals occasionaUy  practice mutual genital friction. Lesbians fuck.  In talking to different women about the risk of oral sex and the need for dental dams,  various issues about lesbian sex came up. Sex is an emotional, sensual and erotic activity,  and using a latex barrier can effectively cut out certain sensations. You have to keep on  top of how to keep sex interesting.  H you have thought about safe sex with women, the next step is to actually acquire the  equipment. This can also be quite a barrier. The unlubricated condom is not bad, if you  can find one. Places that seU condoms often cater to gay men and straight people so condoms are often lubricated. Generally, access to safe sex equipment is a bit of a problem.  However, some doctors and the Vancouver Lesbian Connection do carry unlubricated condoms and other things.  Coming to a place of re-orienting yourself towards safe sex is an emotional and mental process. Using condoms or barriers is not simply a matter of snapping it on. A lot of  vulnerabUity and emotion goes along with sex.  Sometimes in the heat of the moment, or when drugs and alcohol are involved, it is easy  not to take responsibiUty for our sexuaUty. There are also power dynamics in relationships.  For example, a woman in a heterosexual relationship demanding that her partner use a  condom may open herself up to be raped and beaten. That is not safe at all. Battering can  also happen in lesbian relationships. If sex was not safe to start with, it can be really hard  to start practicing safe sex.  "...lesbian sex is not without risk."  -Nikola Marin  There is a lot of contradictory information out there. I read that lesbian oral sex is low  risk. What I would Hke to emphasize is that lesbian sex is not without risk. There is a real  lack of medical information. We have to do our own research, talk among ourselves and  not wait for someone else to give us the answers.  We should also keep in mind the direct correlation between the length of time one has  left to Hve after having been diagnosed with AIDS and where a woman is positioned socio-  economically. Women with AIDS often Hve half the time men do. People of Colour Hve  shorter than that. Whereas a white man with AIDS can expect to Hve about three years,  a black woman with AIDS can expect to Hve two to three weeks. The actual figures have  changed in the last year or so but the ratio remains about the same. Also, 80 percent of  babies born with AIDS are of colour.  To summarize, I'd Hke to stress that lesbians are not homogeneous. They work in the  sex trade, they are married, they have chUdren, they have penetrative sex, they are IV  drug users, they are homeless. A lot of People of Colour experience chronic Ulnesses. Hypertension is two to three times as pervasive among black people as it is among white people. Lesbians of Colour can be ahenated in their own ethnic community and therefore not  have support. They can also be ahenated in white-oriented gay communities. And that's  why this fucking concerns me both as a Woman of Colour and a lesbian.  Oline Luinenberg: I want to talk about how to talk about sex. In talking about sex, I  want to begin with stating why it is important to be able to talk. If we do not buUd our  theories and ideas out of our own experiences of lesbian sexuaUty, someone wUl do it for us  and that is trouble. The CDC definition [see above] indicates this. H we can't talk about  sex, it is unlikely we wUl do a good job talking about other experiences and positions intersecting with sex, such as race, class and ableism. If we can't talk about sex, we axe forfeiting a way to strengthen our community, to being able to identify our differences and  our similarities. If we can't talk about sex, we can't learn about HIV and AIDS . We wUl  not be able to manage the AIDS crisis very effectively.  "...lesbian SM sex has radical,  erotic and political potential."  -Olene Luinenberg  If we look at the state of femimst debates over pornography and lesbian SM, we can  see that, as lesbians and feminists, we have rather flopped in talking about sex. The anti-  pornography movement has established a context in which women's fantasies, eroticism,  our sexual feehngs and behaviour are to be ashamed of. Lesbians do not need any more  guilt or shame over sex. This is especially true in this time of ADDS.  I am a lesbian, I am an activist, my parents are immigrants, I come from a working to  middle-class background, I am a co-parent, I am university educated, I have experienced  incest and rape. I beheve that lesbian SM sex has radical, erotic and pohtical potential. All  of these aspects affect what I say and what I choose not to say. As a white woman, I can't  very weU speak to the issue of HIV and Aboriginal women, although I strongly beUeve it  should be front and centre.  The pohtical and cultural framework we have today influences the way we deal with the  topic of sex. I would Hke to talk about some patriarchal and heterosexist definitions of who  we are as lesbians. According to these definitions, we mimic the worst of male behaviour,  we are dangerous to girls and chUdren, we are sexless except for when we are avaUable to  men for their pleasure. Most of aU, patriarchal culture has erased us. At times we have colluded with this sUence by not coming out or by coming out strategicaUy,or we do not come  out, because it is dangerous.  Against this backdrop, we have also absorbed a lot of ideas from feminism of the 70s  which says that heterosexuality equals violence. That oppressive and unequal relations of  power are reproduced in bed. According to this particular feminist framework, lesbianism  is a sexual practice of pohtical equahty, a personal place in which oppressive relations of  power are not acted out or produced.  We inherited many of these feminist myths of lesbian sex. Some of these representations  imply lesbian sex is spontaneous, it is equal, it is in resistance to phalhc notions of female  pleasure, which means lesbians do not need penetration, we do not need to be fucked and  we do not need sex toys. Lesbians are monogamous. The kind of feminist thinking that says  we do not sleep with men is problematic because it assumes lesbians are not sex trade workers and lesbians deal with personal issues through some kind of process. It trivializes lesbians. It suggests that lesbianism is some kind of informed choice you make. Indeed, many  of the women who defined lesbianism in the 70s are now intimately involved with men.  Lesbians do have different degrees of power. We use, we negotiate, we abuse. There is  such a thing as lesbian battering. Furthermore, it depicts us as aU being the same regardless of race, class, age, ableism and sexual preference. Some lesbians do sleep with men for  pleasure and/or for money. Some lesbians do practice SM sex. Some lesbians are more invisible than others. In spite of the gains feminism has made, it has also established new  boundaries about what is permissible to talk about. So in different ways, both patriarchal  and feminist discourse have created a sUence about lesbian sexuaUty.  We have to start asking ourselves questions about how that has colonized our minds.  When is it going to be okay for a woman who identifies herself as a lesbian to teU other  lesbians she recently fucked a man? What if it was unsafe sex? What kind of social risk do  we have to take when we say things hke this to each other? WiU we be ostracized from the  only community that has excepted us and somewhat protected us?  These kinds of questions are directly Hnked to how we manage the AIDS crisis. Our  counselhng group must be completely accessible to aU kinds of women. H it is not, we must  find out what we can do about it. I do beheve that lesbians have made a lot of progress in  dealing with sexuahty constructively.  AIDS is a double edged sword for us. On one hand, it makes us concerned, informs us  and causes a lot of pain. On the other hand, AIDS education gives us a context in which  we can talk about sex and deal with other problems in our community that we should be  dealing with anyway.  As an HIV counsellor, I can't simply say to a woman it is safe to teU me aU about her  sexual practice and history when it is not safe outside the room, and when these kinds  of stigmas are attached to certain kinds of lesbian behaviour even within our community.  What I wanted to do was help break down some of those barriers, so that our community  becomes a safer place to talk. We depend a lot on each other. We certainly do now in this  time of AIDS.   Thanks to Ria Bleumer for hours of isolation and transcribing.  "KINESIS  (INESIS      May 92 sasssss^sassass^^  Arts  An Angel At My Table  dLxdmJBi          J^^B  MtfE      klNa^  /  1   ^ 1#  Still from Angre/ af My Tao/e  by Lois Leveen  In the early 1940s, a teenage Janet  Frame is misdiagnosed as schizophrenic.  Like many people committed to mental  institutions, she Hves in devastating conditions and is forced to undergo electric  shock treatment—more than 200 'treat-,  ments' over a period of eight years.  Janet Frame is also a gifted writer and,  during that same period, writes a book of  short stories that receives much critical acclaim. The publication of her book leads to  her release from the institution days before  she is to undergo forced psychosurgery. She  goes on to write 11 novels, three more collections of stories, a volume of poetry, and a  chUdren's book. She wins almost every Hterary award in her native New Zealand and  publishes three volumes of her autobiography. The film An Angel At My Table is  based on those volumes.  Jane Campion, who directed Angel and  whose previous work includes Sweetie, attempts to reveal the woman behind both  the acclaimed authorship and the mythical madness. Thus, Angel is somewhat of a  bildingsroman, telhng the story not just of  her diagnosis and treatment, but of the development of the character from chUdhood  to adulthood.  The first section of the film traces  Frame's chUdhood and early adolescence in  rural New Zealand and focuses on her relationship with her family and early introduction to reading and writing. The second  section depicts the adult Janet's entrance  into coUege, her misdiagnosis, and her time  in institutions. The final section deals with  Frame's hfe immediately after her release,  most notably her travels in Europe on a  writer's grant.  WhUe the film does not make any explicit  statements about insanity or the treatment  of mental Ulness, it does give context to  Frame's experience and explores how her  behaviour was taken to be symptomatic of  schizophrenia. Campion's cinematic narrative aUows the audience to see the impressions that events and experiences make on  young Frame.  For example, Campion shows us, in the  first section, how Frame's interaction with  teachers and the school doctor results not  in the learning of concrete lessons but in  her awareness of how she is judged and rejected by those within the established system. Her informal teachers—her sisters and  two friends—do teach her things, introducing her to everything from fairy tales to the  word 'fuck'. Frame absorbs it aU, just as  she later absorbs experiences such as electric shock and Hterary acclaim.  Just as she had  instantly become  schizophrenic for  life, she now  becomes free of  schizophrenia  As Janet grows older, however, her sisters  remain her only close friends. Her growing  bookishness and introversion is contrasted  with her sisters' growing sexuahty and independence. While her earliest experiences  amazed and awed her, her experiences at  coUege begin to overwhelm her.  A surprisingly smaU amount of time is  devoted to Frame's years in an institution.  Without overdramatizing or preaching, the  filmmaker aUows the audience to fill in much  of the detaU of Frame's horror during this  period.  This subtlety does not prevent significant  issues from being raised. One such issue is  the subjectivity of diagnosis.  A coUege professor reads an autobiographical essay submitted by Frame and becomes convinced that she is mentaUy unstable. Without consulting her, he discusses  her "case" with some friends, which leads  to Frame being diagnosed as schizophrenic.  Frame, who has a crush on the professor,  accepts his appraisal, mistaking his interest  in her as romantic interest.  As she and her sister read the dictionary  definition of schizophrenia aloud, they are  disheartened to learn that it is incurable.  They accept this fact much as they accept  the diagnosis. There seems to be no option  but for Janet to be committed and undergo  whatever treatment the doctors deem fit.  Years later, whUe traveUing in Britain,  Janet decides to seek psychiatric counselhng  on her own. She finds a more receptive doctor who reverses the original diagnoses. Just  as she had instantly become schizophrenic  for Hfe, she now becomes free of schizophrenia. The film seems to comment on the arbitrariness of the medical profession that  renders patients hke Jane and their families  helpless.  Frame never loses her early naivete and  impressionabUity. The third section of the  film echoes the first, for Janet is once again  awed by her experiences and instructed by  her friends. During this period, however, she  begins to be more self-assured, as a writer  and as a woman. By the time she returns  to New Zealand, she has changed. In one of  the final scenes, she pulls on a pair of her father's old boots, ready to confront the world  not as the cluld of her intense famUy but as  her own person.  Unfortunately, the movie can be difficult  to foUow for someone who, Hke me, has  not read Frame's autobiography. Often it  is hard to pick up on characters' names or  to understand events that are described but  not depicted. Sometimes the script does not  give enough information. In one such sequence, a character's pregnancy is suddenly  ended, but it is unclear whether she had a  miscarriage or an abortion.  In addition, there is a lack of continuity  between the performances of the three actresses playing Frame. The youngest, Alexia  Keogh, portrays a petulant girl who doesn't  seem interested in the company of most  other chUdren. Kerry Fox, who plays the  adult Frame, from her college years on, acts  the part of a timid and naive young woman,  who yearns for companionship but is too shy  and unsophisticated to know how to get it.  The teenage Frame, Karen Fergusson, is  onscreen for the shortest amount of time  and does not make much of an impression.  Rather than providing a Hnk between the  chUd and the adult, her scenes mostly convey information about developments in the  family and Frame's career plans. This is an  unfortunate omission and sticks out in a film  where most of the characters are weU fleshed  out and charmingly presented.  Despite these flaws, An Angel At My  Table is a wonderful film to watch. It  has attention to detaU, fine writing and  does justice to Frame's journals. The cinematography is exceUent. The film is long—  158 minutes—but because the plot remains  evenly balanced throughout, it does not feel  belabored at any point.  An Angel At My Table is both tragic  and comic, as any Ufe story would be. It is a  visuaUy rich and interesting work, even for  those unfamiHar with Janet Frame's writings, and particularly for those famihar with  Campion's work.  Lois Leveen is a feminist pop culture  junkie living in Vancouver.  12 KINESIS  May 92 Arts  ////////////////////^^^  Lesbian film festival:  Coming out in London  by Kathleen Oliver  I confess I was a bit skeptical when  friends told me they were organizing a Lesbian Film Festival in London, Ontario. After aU, it was less than a year ago, coming back from Pride Day celebrations in  Toronto, that we joked about what such a  march would look Hke in London: a handful  of us walking timidly down the main drag,  Richmond Street, with bags over our heads,  perhaps?  So when Projecting Ourselves, three  nights of screenings of lesbian films and  videos at the London Regional Art GaUery.  was set for early AprU, I had to see it for myself. It wasn't easy to leave Vancouver during my first West Coast spring (those cherry  blossoms!) but this was a special occasion.  That the event was organized over merely  three months entirely by volunteers and  without government funding is extraordinary enough, but that it could take place in  London is even more remarkable.  For those unfamUiar with London, it's  a city of about 300,000 people a couple  of hours' drive southwest of Toronto. The  cornerstones of the local economy are insurance, banking, and numerous shopping  maUs—I was once told that London boasts  more square feet of shopping space per  capita than any other city in North America.  This is not to say that there isn't a  strong, close-knit, and active dyke community in London: it's just that they don't usuaUy engage in activities as public as, say, a  lesbian film festival.  But Projecting Ourselves, one of very  few lesbian-only film festivals worldwide,  appears to be just the sort of thing the  London community had been waiting for.  Not only did each screening seU out, but on  two of the three nights, an extra 50 chairs  were added to accommodate the demand.  Women attending the festival came from as  far afield as Toronto, HamUton, and even  Ottawa.  Many agree that the festival would never  have happened without the vision and untiring efforts of Monica McQueen, who came  up with the idea for Projecting Ourselves  after attending Montreal's Image & Nation festival last November. As she put it in  the London festival's program guide, 'why  not?' was the question that initiaUy got  things rolUng and it was the London community that enabled her to make it work.  McQueen says she was surprised at the  lack of resistance from the community to  the festival and just how few obstacles she  encountered. Her initial call for volunteers  was met with great enthusiasm and commitment, equipment loans were arranged, and a  decision to seU advertising space in the festival program made up for the lack of pubHc funding. And the sponsorship of Wom-  ansline Books, London's feminist bookstore  and de facto women's drop-in centre, gave  the festival a soHd base of community support.  StiU, there were moments: McQueen relates that when she went to open a festival  bank account, the teller froze for a moment  upon hearing 'London Lesbian Film Festival' and replied with a chUly, "And how do  you speU that?"  Projecting Ourselves was made up of  about 20 short films and videos screened  over the three evenings. This programming  strategy aUowed for a wide range of films to  be shown, grouped under broad themes.  The opening night's theme was "Reel  Out: Pushing the Limits of Lesbian Vis-  ibihty." Offerings ranged from a straightforward celebration of dyke smooching (J  Got this Way From Kissing Girls) to  a documentary about pohtical repression  in Nicaragua and queer resistance through  popular education (Sex and the Sandinistas) and a peek into a Barbie doll's  boudoir - with some surprising revelations  (She Gets It).  Montreal filmmaker Marusia Bociurkiw  was on hand to introduce her recent video,  Bodies in Trouble, a story of two women  seeking to define their relationship juxtaposed with footage of poUce violence against  gays and lesbians in Montreal. The video offers a multi-layered examination of the implications of borders and border crossings.  Bociurkiw, known for her features Playing  with Fire and Night Visions, spoke after  the screening about the difficulty of finding lesbian actors wUUng to do sex scenes—  seemingly one border some women are reluctant to cross.  The foUowing afternoon, the University  of Western Ontario (UWO) hosted the  festival's only feature-length presentation:  Lizzie Borden's Born In Flames. The film  was introduced by UWO FUm Studies Professor Angela Stukator, who explained that  it had been banned for years in Ontario,  weak script and poor pacing. Nevertheless,  it is an important document as there is Httle discussion on lesbians and AIDS.  Women Like That, a recent British  video, was the favourite of Friday night's  program. This film is the sequel to Women  Like Us, which examines the Hves of lesbians over 50. In the sequel, these amazingly diverse and spirited women talk about  how their participation in the first project  has affected them. This is a warm, uphfting  film and the good news for Vancouver dykes  is that both videos are slated to be shown  as part of a program on older lesbians at  Out on Screen, Vancouver's Gay and Lesbian Film Festival, to be held in May.  The final evening's theme on the last  evening was "Context and Subtext: So  What Is a Lesbian Film Anyway?" In a  woman-only space, once again packed to the  rafters, we were treated to a dazzhng array  of possible answers.  Veteran filmmaker Barbara Hammer's  Dyketactics, is a (very 70s) lesbian 'erotic  commercial' featuring 110 images packed  into a mere four minutes.  In contrast to Hammer's technical wizardry, was a short film by Sadie Benning, an  18-year old who works with a plastic Fisher-  Price Camera. If Every Girl Had a Diary is a stark, gritty self-portrait, in which  Benning's primitive technology adds layers  apparently mainly because of a two-second  shot of an erect penis.  Ontario censors were probably equaUy  wary of the film's radical feminist stance:  Born in Flames depicts a post-revolutionary America in which officially, women are  men's equals, but in reality, they continue  to be oppressed and exploited. The women's  resistance movement operates pirate radio  stations and bicycle patrols, and ultimately  opts for armed struggle. Now ten years old,  the film is a wonderful sUce of lesbian film  history and raises questions that remain  crucially relevant.  Issue-oriented films were the main focus  of the program, "We Are Everywoman: Diversity in the Lesbian Community." Guest  speakers from the AIDS Committee of  London, Ontario, provided an introduction  to Another Love Story: Women and  AIDS, a 1990 video by Toronto's GabrieUe  MicaUef and Debbie Douglas.  The video examines the questions confronting a young West Indian woman when  her white lesbian lover is being tested for  HIV. Though the video provides some valuable information and chaUenges a number  of myths and stereotypes, it suffers from a  of texture to the claustrophobic images.  Orgasme a la Crime Fouette, by  Montrealers Diane Heffernan and Patrizia  Tavormina, is essentiaUy 30 minutes of ex-  phcit sex that explores role-playing, fantasies, Hngerie, and food (including the unforgettable banana split a la cht). Heffernan and Tavormina's onscreen antics are interrupted periodically by title cards bearing  questions Hke, "Is Hngerie poHticaUy correct?" and warnings about unsafe sex.  WhUe I'm told these questions were intended in earnest (a Montreal acquaintance  confided that she lost Mends over the Hngerie debates that raged there for a full year  after this video was first shown), the London  audience took them as ironic and howled  with dehght. So perhaps "what is a lesbian  film?" ultimately depends, at least in part,  on who's watching.  The evening's final video was L is for  the Way You Look, a joyous, playful, and  pohtical tour-de-force that manages to combine readings from Audre Lorde and Marilyn Frye with footage from women's prison  movies in a way that makes perfect, giddy  sense.  Director of Bodies in Trouble  Marusia Bociurkiw  The director, Jean Carlomusto's theoretical meditations on lesbian identity are  brought firmly home in a brUUantly edited  sequence of interviews with a group of  young lesbians playing spot-the-dyke among  the rich and famous in New York City. A  sense of community is evident in the breathless way their stories weave together—I  found them so Ukeable that I had to resist the overwhelming urge to hop on the  next bus to New York and go hang out with  them.  The video was a delightful way to round  out the festival, leaving the audience both  satisfied and hungry for more.  So, is this Hkely to become an annual  event in London?  As McQueen is already talking about the  need for a larger venue the 'next time'  and many women at the event were buzzing  about wanting to make their own videos,  it wouldn't surprise me if next year's festival featured an evening devoted to local  projects. McQueen notes that "when you  have an opportunity to see what other lesbians are doing, you also have the opportunity to say, T could do that,' and not only  that, but T could do that better."  Vancouver women have the opportunity  to be similarly inspired when Out on  Screen, Vancouver's 4th Annual Lesbian  and Gay Film Festival, hits the Robson  Square Media Centre and Pacific Cinematheque, May 22-26. Highhghts of lesbian programming include Too Hot to Handle,  a program of shorts including two videos  by the Kiss and TeU CoUective, along with  How to Have a Sex Party.  One program not to be missed includes  Bociurkiw's Bodies in Trouble and Carlomusto's L Is for the Way You Look,  reviewed above, along with Can You See  Me Now?, a video featuring a number of  Vancouver women.  Features include the BBC-TV production  of Jeanette Winterson's novel Oranges Are  Not the Only Fruit (an absolute must-  see), Women of Gold, about Asian-Pacific  women who participated in Celebration '90,  and The Changer, which charts the beginnings of Olivia Records, the label that virtually created 'women's music' as a genre.  Kathleen Oliver is a new Kinesis'  writer who finds it easier to say nice  things about London now that she lives  in Vancouver.  KINESIS     May9 asasssssssssss^^  Arts  When the Day Comes:  Taking care of our own  WHEN THE DAY COMES  Directed by Sharon Ann McGowan  NFB Production, 1991  by Pearl Kirby  It's quiet now. The clock says 5:30 am  and the ambulance just left ten minutes ago.  My mother wUl probably stay at the hospital for eight hours and then come home long  enough to eat and sleep and tomorrow she'U  probably phone an ambulance again. This is  a typical day for my mother. This is a typical day for a lot of seniors. We had to call  an ambulance five times last week. It costs  42 dollars every time and I don't know how  we wUl manage to pay for it.  My mother is sixty four years old. She has  inoperable heart disease, severe diabetes,  and is going bUnd. The hospital doesn't  know what to do with her and neither do I.  They don't have the staff or money to keep  her. She reaUy should be in a nursing home  but we just can't afford it.  The National Film Board and the Vancouver YWCA celebrated International  Women's week in March with their fourth  annual film series, which included 17 films.  On March 8, at the Pacific Cinematheque  in Vancouver, I saw a film called When the  Day Comes. The subject: adult chUdren  and their ailing parents.  Still from When the Day Comes  I felt both sad and happy when I saw the  film—sad to see four women out there in  the same situation as me but, at the same  time, happy to know I'm not alone.  Sharon Ann McGowan, the director of  the film, said, "We're really not brought up  to take care of ourselves. We're conditioned  to take care of others," and: "Eight out of  ten women wUl have to deal with [having  aUing parents] at some point in their Hves.  One out of three Canadian women wUl have  to take care of an elderly relative who becomes chronicaUy disabled."  The four women in the film were in their  late forties, which terrifies me—I'm only in  my twenties. One woman in the film said  she had been caring for her father for 17  years. I've been looking after my mother  for 5 years and my father for one year before that but if I had to continue to care  for my mother for another twelve years, I'd  go insane. This would be a high stress situation for anyone. I'm usuaUy up aU night  with my mother; the ambulance comes every other day; I'm a student; I work part-  time; I spend at least four hours daily doing errands for my mother. Food and sleep  have become luxuries.  Sharon also commented that, "They  (caregivers) suffer from aU types of stress-  related disease and it's very common for  caregivers to look after someone untU they  are hospitahzed or break down themselves.  The bottom Hne is that women are dying  from their caregiving."  StiU, whatever the caregiver does is often not enough. Most families in this situation may need at least four additional people to get aU the work done: a doctor, nurse,  a homeworker, and at least one volunteer.  And doctors...let me tell you about doctors. My mother has a doctor to cut her toenails (she's a diabetic so it's extremely dangerous to cut her nails), two heart specialists, two eye surgeons, a diabetic specialist, and a general practitioner to keep track  of "the" 14 different medications she's taking. What's really ironic is that my mother  is lucky. There are elderly people out there  who have no chUdren to help them. Many  seniors can't afford medication.  When I started writing this article, I was  thinking about my mother and her needs.  After watching the film and reading some  related articles, I started to think about my  needs. At first, I thought about my present  situation and about how I needed to take  care of my own physical and emotional welfare. Then graduaUy, I began to think about  my own retirement.  I read in the Cinematheque's program  that, "One out of ten Canadians is over  the age of 65. By the year 2021, the ratio  wUl be one in five. The vast majority of elderly Canadians are cared for at home by  a family member—usuaUy a wife, daughter  or mother. There is an urgent need to increase the community and government support given these caregivers,*who constitute  an essential, yet unofficial, part of our national health care system."  In the year 2011, I'U be almost 60 years  old. If there isn't enough staff in the hospitals now to take care of my mother, and not  enough funding to increase staff and facUities, who's going to take care of me when I  get old? And where wUl the funding for the  care required come from?  Canada spends 50 bUUon dollars every year on our healthcare system. That's  roughly one-third of each province's budget. I know the money is there and yet our  healthcare system is shpping away from us.  There's a possibihty that there may be no  social security when I turn 65. Every year  the government shirks more and more of it's  responsibihty. WiU it someday shirk aU responsibiUty? WUl Canadians aUow it?  Pearl Kirby is a student at Langara  Community College working towards a  diploma in Women's Studies.  The \^ncouver Folk Music Festival presents  They have been called The Lesbian Beatles;  released a cassette of cover tunes called  "Like A "Version"; and one of their  most requested songs Is "I Spent My  Last $10 On Birth Control &? Beer".  This Is their Vancouver debut,  long awaited by anyone who has  ever heard them or heard of them.  Wednesday  May 13 • 8pm  \ancouver East Cultural Centre • 1895 Venables  Tickets are $15 including gst at Black Swan Records, HighUfe Records, the  Vancouver Folk Music Festival office at 879-2931 or by caUing 254-9578 to reserve.  Two  Nice  Girls  KINESIS Arts  ////////////////////////^^^^^  Teens and violence:  Young women in danger  DATING VIOLENCE: YOUNG WOMEN IN DANGER  Edited by Barrie Levy  Seattle Seal Press, 1991  by Mercedes Baines  Brother  I don't want to hear  about  how my real enemy  is the system.  I'm no genius,  but i do know  that system  you hit me with  is called  a fist.—Pat Parker  "... if you can't tell the difference between romance and rape, you've got a problem."  That's a Hne from the North American TV show Cagney and Lacey, quoted  by Py Bateman in "The Context of Date  Rape.", Bateman's essay is one of many  collated by Barrie Levy in Dating Violence: Young Women in Danger.  It's a telling Hne: we have a problem if  we, as a culture, continue to associate sex  with violence, especially within intimate relationships. The messages adults give young  people can become especially confusing because, as teenagers get older, they internalize the violence and pass it on to the next  generation in subtle and not so subtle ways.  Dating Violence is a comprehensive  study of how violence in intimate relationships affects younger women between the  ages of 13 to 20. Many voices are represented in this book, which is divided into  three sections: "Teens and Parents TeU  Their Stories ","The Context of Dating Violence." and "Intervention Strategies and  Education and Prevention Projects ",  In Dating Violence, editor Barrie Levy  brings together some 30 writings by survivors of abuse, counsellors and women  working in the school system. Contributors  come from diverse backgrounds, and almost  aU are women; only two pieces are by men.  Chapter titles include "The Abused  Black Woman: Challenging a Legacy of  Pain" by Chain, Chain, Change writer  Evelyn C. White, "Lesbian Teens in Abusive Relationships" by Kerry Lobel and  the editor herself, and "Dating Violence  in Asian/Pacific Communities" by Mieko  Yoshihama, Asha L. Parekh and Doris  Boynton.  Levy says she sees younger women at  greater risk for dating violence. She stresses  that problems of violence in intimate relationships have been ignored by those working on youth and domestic violence.  Factors such as younger women's inexperience with relationships and the fact that  many adults tend not to take teenagers seriously, potentiaUy put younger women at  risk.  slavery in which they have been violently  forced to have sex or have been coerced by  threats of losing the relationship or by powerful accusations of being unacceptable as  women or as lovers. The bonds of the relationship and the feeUngs of worthlessness,  degradation, hurmliation and shame that result from sexual coercion graduaUy undermine the victim's abiHty to escape. Their  vulnerabUity is magnified because they are  young and their sense of themselves as sexual beings may be relatively fragUe."  While Dating Violence focuses on heterosexual dynamics in intimate relationships, there are two chapters on violence in  young lesbian relationships. In one, Kerry  Lobel and Barrie Levy write that young lesbians may feel more isolated than heterosexual teens because of their non-conformity to  problems of violence in intimate  relationships have been ignored by those  working on youth and domestic violence  As adolescence is often a time of emotional moving away from parents, a teenager  under pressure to fit in with her peers may  find herself unable to confide in an adult for  fear of losing her autonomy.  Levy writes: "Peer pressure can be intense, and the fear of being different or  of violating peer group norms can create  rigid conformity." This desire to conform to  peer norms comes at a great price for some  young women. Levy estimates one-third of  aU youth in high schools and colleges experience violence in relationships.  "PubHc attention has centered on the  serious problem of campus rapes," writes  Levy, "... in the context of a date or a beginning relationship. The sexual abuse described by the young women of this book is  different.  "They describe a form of ongoing sexual  heterosexual norms and homophobic reactions from friends and teachers.  "Without role models for lesbian relationships, the control and abuse of the other  may be accepted as 'natural' to a lesbian relationship," they write.  The specific issues of young women in  Black and Asian/Pacific communities are  also addressed. The psychological changes  that happen to all adolescents are seen in  context of added layers of specific cultural  messages within certain communities. The  feehng of isolation—indeed the reality of  this isolation— can be overwhelming for  young women trying to balance family expectations, both perceived and actual, whUe  keeping everyone happy, including her partner.  Evelyn C. White writes in "The Abused  Black Woman:  Challenging a Legacy of  Pain ";"this is the road to heaHng; we must  change how we see ourselves, and we must  break the image imposed on black people  that violence and being black are synonymous."  The messages repeated in these chapters  is that there is a need for understanding,  supportive, positive adult role models, peer  support intervention and education to convey that violence is not an acceptable part  of intimate relationships.  None of the authors address the affects of  media images on young people. This is unfortunate because media, especiaUy TV and  film, continue to pair violence and sex and  to depict women as accepting violence  part her role.  On screen, then, male/female sexuaUty  focuses on the man's pleasure. Sex scenes  show Uttle foreplay and move very quickly  to penetration-an extremely limited view  of sexual interaction. There is no mention  of the woman's discomfort, which is very  Hkely. A young woman exposed to media images that focus on genital fixations is being  told she should be enjoying this fast food  brand of sex. If she does not, the implication is something's wrong with her.  Abuse is sometimes seen as an expression  of love and young women often don't know  that "relationships without violence can be  a reaUty," as Judith McFarlane puts it in  "Violence During Teen Pregnancy." Girls  need models of healthy and nurturing relationships, not those of male violence.  In the chapter "Addictive Love and  Abuse: A Course for Teenage Women,"  Ginny Ni Carthy writes about her prevention program that teaches young women  the difference between addictive love, which  does not honour the individual as an autonomous person, and nurturing love, which  allows both people in a relationship to grow.  Dating Violence is a caU for recognition  of a problem that cannot be dismissed. Ignoring the problem can only mean the continuation of cycles of violence from generation to generation.  Book review:  Preaching  on bleaching  WHITEWASH:  Exposing the sanitary products  by Liz Armstrong and Adrienne Scott  Harper CoUins PubUshers Ltd.,  Toronto, 1992 $12.95  by Gladys We  Ever wonder why there's such a fuss  being made about environmentally unfriendly disposable products but very Uttle  of it is about women's sanitary products—  menstrual pads and tampons? Perhaps it's  because pads and tampons are seen as too  'necessary' and are too marketable to criticize. Perhaps it's because it's not profitable  for companies to seU or market recyclable  sanitary products.  It's been talked about but not very  loudly—tampons are associated with toxic  shock syndrome, and have been since 1980  when manufacturers started making super-  absorbent tampons. Chances of getting  toxic shock syndrome rise by 37 percent  for each additional gram of Hquid that your  tampon can absorb.  Then there are the health problems associated with the use of scented tampons, the  flushing into our environment of the plastic  applicators, the chlorine-bleaching of rayon  and the spraying of cotton with pesticides.  You can't get toxic shock syndrome from  disposable menstrual pads but there are  other side effects. The deodorant in scented  pads is actually perfume, which causes allergic reactions in some women. And then  there are the dioxins. As the book says,  "Nearly aU disposable sanitary products on  the North American market are made from  chlorine gas or chlorine dioxide bleached  kraft pulps."  That's a technical way of saying that,  since it's impossible to get rid of all the  dioxins, you're wearing trace levels of dioxins next to your skin for hours at a time  when you use a disposable pad. And then  there are the 'maxi' products (Sure & Natu  ral and Always Ultra), which are made with  synthetic gelling crystals (neither Hsted on  the packages nor weU-known as contents).  Then again, the book offers alternatives  to these products. Whitewash suggests using reusables and Hsts companies and places  in Canada where you can find them. If for  no other reason, Whitewash is a buy for  some of the resources it offers. See box for  a sample of one such list.  Gladys We is a regular contributor to  Kinesis.  Mercedes Baines made her newspaper  writing debut   in this issue.  Whitewash offers a useful list of some  of the companies currently producing  reusable sanitary products:  • Harmony Naturwear (reusable sanitary  pads, incontinence pads): 8-190 AUen  Street East, Waterloo, Ont., N2J 1K1  • Many Moons (reusable sanitary pads):  14—130 Dallas Road, Victoria, BC, V8V  1A3  • Moon Pads (resuable sanitary pads): Tu-  mamas Products, PO Box 166, Boulder  Creek, CA, 95006  • New Cycle (reusable sanitary pads): c/o  Menstrual Health Foundation, PO Box  3248, Santa Rosa, CA, 95402  • Saratech Inc. (a full hne of reusable adult  incontinence products and baby diapers):  RR #3, King City Ont., LOG 1K0  • Sisterly Works (sea sponges, reusable  sanitary pads): RR #3, Box 107, Port  Lavaca, Texas, 77979  • The Keeper ( reusable menstrual cup)  Box 20023, Cincinnati, OH 45220  • Waddles in White (reusable diapers) and  We Care (reusable sanitary pads): 28  Fairleigh Ave., S., HamUton, Ont., L8M  2K2  • Women's Choice (reusable sanitary pads,  incontinence pads): PO Box 245, Gabriola, BC, VOR 1X0  For other reusable diapers companies,  check parenting magazines, and for diaper  sevices, try your local YeUow Pages  KINESIS      May£ SSSSSSSS**S£SSSS^^  ARTS  HAWKWINGS  by Karen Lee Osborne  Chicago: Third Side Press, 1991  by Lissa J. Geller  Book review:  The Flight of Emily Hawk  It has been said that in love, as in many  things, we get what we settle for. While that  is certainly not universally true, it is in the  case of the central figure in Karen Lee Osborne's first novel, Hawkwings.  Set in Chicago amid the squalor of urban  America, the novel is bUled as a story of personal growth and development for its principal character, EmUy Hawk. In the end, it  may prove to be a circular journey.  EmUy is a white lesbian social worker and  a recovering co-dependent—recovering from  the death of her best friend George to AIDS,  recovering from the demise of her relationship with a younger woman, and attempting to recover her sense of self in a classist  and homophobic world.  Aching with lonehness, EmUy embarks on  a relationship with Catherine, a reserved,  independent, upper-middle class woman  with no connections, spiritual or physical,  to the lesbian community. EmUy spends a  great deal of energy justifying her relationship with a woman who wiU not dance at  a gay bar, refuses to meet EmUy's lesbian  and gay friends and won't march in a pride  parade.  These things may or may not have any  cosmic importance but they are certainly  important enough to cause a rift between  Catherine and EmUy. A couple of steamy  love scenes later, their relationship dissolves  under the weight of these conflicts.  MeanwhUe, intertwined with the tale  of EmUy and Catherine's relationship are  the wide array of friends who intersperse  EmUy's Hfe with everything from homelessness to smaU business poUtics. EmUy embarks, as weU, on a search for the ex-lover  of another friend who is dying of AIDS.  It is Paul's last wish that EmUy make  amends to his ex-lover and this sub-plot  serves to underscore the profound separation between the realities of Catherine's and  EmUy's Hves.  In the end, the same justifications that  led EmUy to Catherine initiaUy—"I'U slowly  immerse her in the community untU she's  comfortable,"and "Who cares if I have to  go everywhere alone, I know I have a lover"  etc,— draw the two back together again.  The story may be complete, but it left  me wondering whether EmUy has actually  grown or whether it is merely her abihty to  rationalize that has developed.  The title, then, is highly ironic—The  Hawk may get her wings but is she flying  anywhere or just in circles? EmUy gets what  she settles for.  In my opinion, Osborne's novel rings  most true when she is engaged in the complex thoughts that accompany many love relationships. The need for calm, the desire  'IhisMagjazine  "Some of the most  energetic political  commentary in the  country."  - Richard Gwyn,  syndicated national  newspaper columnist  I For just $2.50 you can sample This Magazine, Canada's fiercely  I independent journal of politics, society and culture. Our articles are  I written with wit and insight we're winning awards for. Send your  I cheque or money order payable to: Chaos Consulting, 4-1825 Nelson  I Street, Vancouver, BC V6G 1M9.  Don't forget your address!  l-mmm  OCTOPUS EAST  1146 Commercial § Phone: 253-0913  ill  new and  gently used books  ^IfesM  Feminist  Philosophy - Poetry  Native - General  no GST  |v yw  Open daily 11am-7pm  Coffee Bar  1020 Commercial Drive  Vancouver BC V5L 3W9  (604) 253-1099  Bonnie Murray  Cynthia Brooke  for passion, the agonizing over every word,  every look, every phrase. As weU, Osborne  clearly and torturously expresses the grief  of the loss of a loved one and the unique  sense of betrayal of AIDS.  I think the novel is at its weakest  when Osborne attempts to intersperse it  with a myriad of references to, among  other 'isms', classism, racism, separatism,  feminism, homelessness, woman abuse and  ableism. It seems as though she's trying  very hard to be aU things to aU people but  it comes across more as superficial pohtical  correctness than something intrinsic to the  work. There's an artificial quality to her efforts that cannot be ignored or overlooked  and it Hmits an otherwise outstanding book.  In aU, Hawkwings is a powerful novel  0 about love and rationahzation, grief and re-  I E covery. In the future, however, Karen Lee  •8 Osborne might do weU to spend less time  U making passing references to various issues  -   and more time exploring the dimensions of  these issues and their impact on her Hfe as  -c weU as the Hves of those around her.  Karen Lee Osborne  Lissa J. Geller is a first time Kinesis writer who has just moved from  Saskatchewan to Vancouver.  PAqiNq Women  by Gabrielle Cordelia-Chew  Looking for a new read? The Hne-up of recent pubUcations for May includes a range of  fiction and poetry. In case we haven't already mentioned this, anyone who reviews a piece  of fiction or poetry from Paging Women may keep the book. For those who were struck  by the urge to review a title from a previous Paging Women, terrific! We encourage both  budding and established feminist book reviewers to contact us. The foUowing books merit  further attention, so call 255-5499 if you want to review one.  Long Shadows by Marie Luise Kaschnitz translated from the German by Donald Macrae.  Almost twenty years after her death, Kaschnitz makes her first appearance in a  Canadian translation with Long Shadows, a collection of short stories with an autobiographical slant. Her work is highly respected and.widely recognized in her native Germany. (Moonstone Press, Goderich, Ont. 1991)  Body Rain by J.A. HamUton. A small book full of loud poems. Body Rain contains  poems described as flowers and thorns, where the bad .and the devastating are expressed without flinching, but affirmation and passion are just as powerful. (Brick  Books, London, Ont. 1991)  South Hill Girls by Barbara Sapergia. Ten interconnecting stories trace the lives  of several women growing up in post-war, prairie Canada. From the 40s to the  present, girls and women grow, change, and touch each other's limes through the  generations. (Fifth House, Saskatoon 1992)  Yellow Boots a novel by Vera Lysenko. Through her experiences growing up as a  working-class Ukranian-Canadian, Lysenko developed a strong awareness of the  exploitation of immigrants, women, labourers and farmers. Set in a Ukranian-  Canadian farming community in the 1930's, YeUow Boots tells the story of a girl's  efforts to free herself from the shackles of superstition and a tyrannical father,  while preserving her heritage through song. (NeWest, Edmonton 1992)  Hitclihiking: Twelve German Tales by Gabriele Eckart, translated by Wayne Kvam.  This collection of short prose offers a panorama of East German life as it was before 1990. Her vignettes sketch the all-too-familiar alongside the bizarre, and describe experiences of East German people that may long affect the reunified country. (University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln and London 1992)  1988 W 4th & Maple  Vancouver, B.C.  V6J 1M5  733-3511  L  VANCOUVER  WOMEN'S  BOOKSTORE  315 Cambie Street  Vancouver, B.C. V6B 2N4  (604) 684-0523  Hours: Monday - Saturday  T\  11:00-5:30 pm  J  KINESIS //////S//S////////S/////////S//////S//////S///////////SS.  ////////////////////^^^^^  ///////////////////////^^^^  BULLETIN BOARD  READ THIS  AU Hstings must be received no later than  the 18th of the month preceding pubhcation. Listings are limited to 50 words and  should include a contact name and telephone number for any clarification that may  be required. Listings should be typed or  neatly handwritten, double-spaced on 8 1/2  by 11 paper. Listings wiU not be accepted  over the telephone. Groups, organizations  and individuals eligible for free space in the  BuUetin Board must be, or have, non-profit  objectives. Other free notices wUl be items  of general pubHc interest and wiU appear at  the discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $8 (plus $0.56 GST) for  the first 50 words or portion thereof, $4  (plus $0.28 GST) for each additional 25  words or portion thereot Deadline for classifieds is the 18th of the month preceding  pubHcation. Kinesis wiU not accept classifieds over the telephone. AU classifieds must  be prepaid.  For BuUetin Board submissions send  copy to Kinesis Attn: BuUetin Board,  #301-1720 Grant Street, Vancouver, B.C.  V5L 2Y6. For more information caU 255-  5499...  ..  EVENT  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis? We want to get involved  with you too. rTelp plan our next issues.  Come to the Writers' Meetings on Tues.,  May 5 (for the June issue) and Tues.,  June 2 (for the July/August issue) at  7 pm at our office, #301-1720 Grant St.  If you can't make the meeting, call 255-  5499. No experience necessary, all women  welcome  NOT JUST ANOTHER PAGE  The Not Just Another Page Collective  welcomes all First Nations women and  women of colour who are past, present  and possibly future Kinesis volunteers to  our next meeting on Thur., May 28 at  7:30 pm. For info on location and to arrange childcare subsidies, please contact  Agnes Huang at 875-1640  VSW WANTS YOU!  Want to get more involved but not sure  where to begin? Join us ... become a volunteer at Vancouver Status of Women.  VSW volunteers plan events, lead groups,  raise funds, answer the phone lines and  help to connect women with the community resources they need, organize the library and other exciting tasks! The next  volunteer potluck and orientation will be  on Tues., May 26, 7 pm at VSW #301-  1720 Grant Street. For more info call Jennifer at 255-5511  VSW RESOURCE CENTRE  Vancouver Status of Women's Resource  Centre is open Mondays 10 am to 8 pm  and Tues. to Thurs., 10 am to 5pm.  Check out our collection of periodicals  and books. Volunteers are needed to help  catalogue the library. Contact Christine  255-5511 for info  MIDSUMMER FESTIVAL  The 9th annual Bulkley Valley Folk Music Society presents the Midsummer Festival June 26-28, 1992, at the Fall Fair  Grounds, Smithers BC. Weekend Pass  $30, early bird pass (before June 1,  $25.) Rough camping pass $5. For more  info call George or Norma Stokes (604)  846-9265, Stephanie Smart (846-9331) or  Kevin Walden and Lindley Frank (847-  9682)  OUT ON SCREEN If you'd like to volunteer, call 290-0741  MIDWIVES RALLY  Celebrate   International   Midwives   Day  Tues., May 5, 12 noon at Grace Hospital, 4490 Oak Street  TWO NICE GIRLS  Vancouver Folk Music Festival presents  Two Nice Girls. Tix $15 general. May 13,  8 pm., at the VECC 1895 Venables St., at  Victoria. Tel: (604) 254-9578 Fax: (604)  251-7002  OUT FOR LAUGHS  The first gay and lesbian TV comedy  show will have its Vancouver premiere at  Celebrities Mon., May 18th at 9 pm. Tix  sliding scale $5-10 at the Gay and Lesbian Centre, Book Mantel, and venue. For  more info contact Mary Brookes at GLC,  1170 Bute St., 684-5307  SING OUT  Thur., Fri., May 21 & 22 Sing Out!  The third concert by the Vancouver Lesbian and Gay Choir with guest artist Lin-  nea Good, Vancouver East Cultural Centre, 8 pm. The Fri. performance will be  interpreted in American Sign Language.  Tix $12 at Little Sisters, Ariel Books and  VECC  HEALTH STATEGIES  The workshops will focus on community  development and primary health care.  Emphasis on local application and primary international examples. Sponsored  by the Canadian Society for International  Health, May 22-24, Rocky Mountain  House, Alta. Contact: Kathy King (OXFAM) 736-7678  ECUMENICAL CONFERENCE  Roman Catholics and Anglicans committed to full inclusion of gay and lesbian  Christians in the Church are having a conference July 31, Aug. 1 & 2. For further info: write Dignity/Integrity Conference, 1130 Jervis, Vane, BC, V6E 2C7  CANADA'S WOMEN'S CHOIR  Vancouver Men's Chorus presents City  Folk with guests Elektra Canada's Women's Choir on Sun., May 10 at 8 pm in  the Orpheum. Tix at VTC/Ticket Master  280-3311 or Chorus Info 669-SING  LESBIAN LAW  Come to "Taking The Law Into Our Own  Hands" if you are concerned with lesbian rights. Co-sponsored by LEAF. Sat.,  May 30, 9:30-4:30 at the Hastings Community Centre, 3096 E. Hastings. Call  251-4356 for free registration package  FISHING DAY  Friends in the Valley (Gay and Lesbian  Support Group in Abbotsford) are having  a Bar-B-Q/fishing day in Derouche June  6. Come and meet the women in the valley. For info call Val 1-850-1368  HARRISON ARTS FESTIVAL  Harrison Festival of the Arts July 4-12,  1992 at Harrison Hot Springs BC, will  focus on the rich cultures of Africa. For  info: Box 399,160 Esplanade Ave., Harrison Hot Springs BC V0M 1K0. Tel (604)  796-3664 or Vane, 681-2771  KIKI YEE  Vancouver artist Kiki Yee will present  "Excerpts from a Diary," April 7-May 8,  at The Front Gallery, 303 E 8 Ave., Van.  876-9343. Gallery Hours Tues-Sat., 1-5  pm  SELF ESTEEM WORKSHOP  Sponsored by The Family Services of  Greater Vancouver, "A Woman's Journey to Herself: Further Explorations in  Self Esteem." Sat., May 23, 10 am-4  pm. Cost $25. Call Geraldine Sawin, New  West Co-ordinator 525-9144  PRO CHOICE DEMO  Break The Chain Of Hate Counter  Demonstration. Defend a woman's right  to choose. May 10 Join Coalition United  to Fight Oppression, feminist, lesbian and  gay groups in a fight-back. Contact 874-  9090 or 254-9440 for more details  MOVIE NIGHT  Global Assembly Line will be screened at  La Quena on Tues., May 26, 7:30 pm.  This film looks at the impact of free trade  on the lives of women in Mexico and the  Philippines. Co-sponsored by: VSW and  Woman to Woman Global Stategies. Donations are welcome. Call Cecilia 255-  5511 for details  TEEN PREGNANCY NEEDS  International Day of Action for Women's  Health—The Women's Health Collective  & the BC Abortion Coalition present a  Community Panel Discussion on Teenage  Pregnancy: The Teenage Women's Special Needs—Community & Government  Action. YWCA Boardroom Thur., May  28, 7pm—Call 255-8284 for info  ininiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiAiiHiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiinin  VLC SERVES YOU  You're not only wanted, you're needed  at the Vancouver Lesbian Connection.  Help keep the centre open, put on events  or workshops, update resources, organize  the library or clean up the filing system.  Call Ginger 11 am-4 pm, Wed., and Fri.,  at 254-8458 for details. Group meetings  at the VLC now include: a support group  for lesbians who have been involved in  psychiatry; a group for lesbians who want  casual social contact and discussion; a  women of colour support group; legal advice; free massage and counselling; a Sex,  Love and Addiction support group, and  Coming Out groups for women exploring  their sexuality and trying to accept themselves as lesbians. Call 254-8458 to sign  up for these or to find out about other  lesbian groups and events.  DR. PAULETTE ROSCOE  NATUROPATHIC PHYSICIAN  HOMEOPATHY  COUNSELLING  DETOXIFICATION  HYCROFT MEDICAL CENTER  108-3195 GRANVILLE ST.  VANCOUVER, B.C. V6H 3K2  731-4183  Music Festival  July 17,18,19  Jericho Beach  Park  A weekend of some of the  world's finest and most  interesting music, a  chance to meet up with  friends you see once a  year, and a feeling of community you can  only wish for throughout the rest of the year  in a setting that has to be one of the most  beautiful in the world.  Old friends Heather Bishop, Teresa Doyle,  Laurie lewis & Kathy Kallick, Eileen  McGann, Jackie Torrence, Shari Ulrich, and  Cris Williamson, appear along side first-time  Festival performers Ani DiFranco from N.Y.,  the wonderful trio of Priscilla Herdman,  Anne Hills & Cindy Mangsen, Vancouver's  own Veda Hille, pianist/vocalist Lee Pui  Ming, ex-Vancouverites Rachel Melas &  Conny Nowe in Mother Tongue, singer/  storyteller Rhiannon, Saffire The Uppity  Blues Women, Peggy Seeger & Irene Scott -  "No Spring Chickens", and many, many  more, including guys!  For complete information please write, call or (ax  The Vancouver Folk Music Festival, 3271 Main Street  Vancouver, B.C. V5V3M6  (604) 879-2931 Fax: (604) 879-4315  Group rate (or 15 or more also available.  VOLUNTEERS NEEDED  Have some time to spare? Rape Relief and  Women's Shelter can put you to work, on  the crisis line, in the transition house or  fundraising. Interested? Call 872-8212  WOMEN AND RECOVERY  A monthly newsletter for women who  have been, or are in the process of recovery, as well as women providing recovery  services specializing in the special uniqueness of recovering women. Sample issues  available for $1 from Women and Recovery, Women to Women Communications,  PO Box 161775, Cupertino CA 95016  HARRISON FESTIVAL  OF THE ARTS  tes  The Most  Colourful Beats  Under the Sun  Celebrate the  rich cultures of  Africa  Music - 3 stages  Art Exhibit & Market  .Children's/Seniors' Day  Featuring:  • Four The Moment  •Aya  • Melanie DeMore  • Laurette Langille  • Ahdri Mandiela  • Winsom  Lecture & Discussion Series:  • global development  • South Africa today  • racism & art in Canada  For more information: Box 399  Harrison Hot Springs, BC VOM IKO  (604) 796-3664 or Vancouver 681-2771  Fax (604) 796-3188  JULY 4 -12,1992  Harrison Hot Springs, BC  KINESIS >^^5^^^S^^^^^^^  BULLETIN BOARD  EATING DISORDER CENTRE  The Eating Disorder Resource Centre of  BC, Saint Paul's Hospital 1081 Burrard  St., Vane, BC, V6Z 1Y6 will open May  7 Tel: (604) 631-3137, Fax: (604) 631-  5461, toll free telephone 1-800-665-1822.  For more info contact co-ordinator Cynthia Johnston  FREE LEGAL EDUCATION  The Public Legal Education Society offers a wide range of legal education seminars. Upcoming classes include computer  law, wills and estates, and much more.  Classes are FREE. Contact Joanne Taylor or Jean Cooke at 150-900 Howe St.,  Vane, BC, V6Z 2M4, Tel: (604) 688-  2565, Fax: (604) 688-2566  LESBIAN BATTERING  Peer support group for victims of verbal,  physical, psychological or sexual abuse in  lesbian relationships. Confidential, inclusive, accessible. No cost, drop-in basis every Thur., night until June 11. For more  info on time and location call: VLC at  254-8458  VCL SERVES YOU  You're not only wanted, you're needed  at the Vancouver Lesbian Connection.  Help keep the centre open, put on events  or workshops, update resources, organize  the library or clean up the filing system.  Call Ginger llam-4pm, Wed. and Fri. at  254-8458 for details. Services and groups  include: HIV testing, a group for lesbians  who want social contact and discussion;  a women of colour support group; legal  advice; free massage and counselling; a  Sex, Love and Addiction support group,  and Coming Out groups for exploring and  accepting lesbian sexuality  EATING DISORDER GROUP  Do you have a push-pull relationship with  food? Difficulty loving your body? Join a  support group facilitated by a therapist  who's been there. Learn the facts about  dieting, express your hopes & fears, end  the isolation. Group starts May 11th.  Call Reisa Stone for details. 732-9753  TM3ffift*L<!L!H  VIOLENCE PREVENTION  Women's Education des Femmes. The  Journal of the Canadian Congress of  Learning Opportunities for Women (CCLOW) a special issue on Violence Prevention. Send articles, art, book reviews, poetry, etc., in English or French. Deadline  June 30 1992. Women's Education des  Femmes, PO Box 237, Station Place du  Pare, Montreal, PQ, H2W 2M9  BROTHER AND SISTER INCEST  Looking for writings, drawings, and works  on paper by women of our experiences of  our brothers' inability to keep their hands  and organs away from us—for an anthology talking about brother-sister incest.  Send artwork, poems, or stories to: Risa  Shaw, PO Box 5723, Takoma Park, MD,  20913-0723. USA  GLOBAL STRATEGIES  Women to Women Global Strategies  needs information on how free trade has,  and is, affecting women in BC. Please assess, analyze and clip anything relevant  and mail to c/o 1426 Napier St., Vane,  BC, V5L 2M5  MARGARET BENSTON  Canadian Women Studies/les cahiers de  la femme (CWS/cf) is dedicating its Winter 1993 issue to the life and work of  Margaret Benston. Contributions stimulated by any aspect of her life are welcome, as well as poetry and artwork. Inquiries and submissions to: CWS or Hannah Gay, Dept. of History SFU, Bby., BC,  V5A 1S6 Tel (604) 291-3648 or Fax (604)  291-5837. Deadline Sept 20, 1992  SOUTH ASIAN WOMEN  Canadian Women Studies (CWS/cf) Fall  1992 issue, will focus on the lives and experiences of South Asian women living  outside of, and within. South Asia. The  aim is to construct an anti-imperialist,  anti-racist, feminist, view of South Asian  women's experiences and histories. English or French, double spaced 7-12  pages. Send to: CWS, 212 Founders College, York University, 4700 Keele St.,  Downsview Ont., M3J 1P3. Tel: (416)  736-5356, Fax: (416) 736-5700, Ext.,  55356. Deadline June 30, 1992  VALLEY GALS  Break isolation! A new gay/lesbian support group is functioning in Abbotsford.  Monthly meetings, social events, networking. For information call Val 1-850-  1368  CLASS FED  ajEKfflamE  Eastside DataGraphics  1460 Commercial Drive  tel: 255-9559 fax: 253-3073  ORGANIZE!  With office supplies  from Eastside DataGraphics  aka Eastside Pencils and Paints  •<^^te. Onion Shop  Call or fax and we'll send you our monthly  flyer of great office supply specials.  Free next-day delivery.  COUNSELLING NOW  Experiencing difficulties? Feminist counselling in a supportive, confidential atmosphere. For crises, personal growth,  parent/teen issues, gay and lesbian issues,  coming out and life passages. Individuals, couples, families. Sliding scale fees.  For free consultation call Eleanor Brock-  enshire, BHEC, MSW, 876-9475  SAILING FOR WOMEN  Herizen (TM) New Age Sailing for  Women. Personalized sailing and self-  awareness immersion courses for women,  in BC and Mexico. Herizen (TM) is about  sailing and about women's reality, self-  confidence, self-esteem, and belief in ourselves in a concrete way that is transferable to all parts of our lives. Call Trish  741-1753  A WOMEN'S PLACE  Emotional Fitness Centre: New counselling, educational and consulting service on the North Shore. Offers feminist and lesbian affirmative counselling,  workshops, support groups and information. Areas of specialization: low self-  esteem, depression, anxiety, communication, relationship difficulties, addiction,  sexual abuse recovery, coming out. Call  Lou Moreau, Registered counsellor, 922-  7930  BED & BREAKFAST  Rocking Horse Inn, Seattle: Unique bed  and breakfast on Capital Hill. Great  views, hot tub, warm hospitality. Tel:  (206) 322-0206  SURROGACY RESEARCH  I am a female researcher interested in the  question of surrogacy. I am interested in  contacting women who have been or who  are surrogate mothers. Please contact:  Fiona Green, Women's Studies, University of Winnipeg, Winnipeg, Man., R3B  2E9. (204) 786-9295  SEXUAL ABUSE  The Vancouver Art Therapy Institute will  be holding a two-weekend art therapy  workshop for women and men who have  been sexually abused in childhood,June  13 &. 14 and June 27 & 28, fee: $200,  at the Vancouver Art Therapy Institute,  #335-1425 Marine Drive, W. Vane, BC,  Phone: (604) 926-9381  WOMYN'S COMMUNITY  Womyn interested in creating a wholis-  tic and she-volution-oriented womyn's  community/land trust in W., Kootenays  contact Waxing Moon Healing Village  c/o 58A, C5, RR1, Crescent Valley, BC,  VOG 1H0  OCEAN KAYAKING  Ecomarine Coastal Kayaking School is  offering courses for women. "BASIC  OCEAN KAYAKING" is a 4 1/2 hou  course. First evening session introduces  participants to tourny equipment and  safety. Second evening includes basic  stroke instruction and a relaxing paddle  on False Creek. Cost: $58—all kayaking  equipment included. Prerequisite: None.  BASC Cl June 2 & 4, BASC C2 July  28 & 30. Call Helen at Ecomarine at 689-  7575  The Vancouver  Lesbian and Gay Choir  SING  OUT!  Thursday & Friday,  May 21 & 22, 8 p.m.  Vancouver East Cultural Centre  With Special Guest  UNNEA GOOD  Tickets: $12, available at Little Sister's  Ariel Books and V.E.C.C.  Friday's performance will be signed.  ! KINESIS BULLETIN BOARD  ///////////////////////^^^^^  MfAiii ji an r«r.vnuM»i M^vMiaM»ir«<y.raui=i»]  BED &. BREAKFAST  Rocking Horse Inn, Seattle: Unique bed  and breakfast on Capitol Hill. Great  views, hot tub, warm hospitality. (206)  322-0206  HOUSING  How much do you need to buy your own?  What will your monthly payments be?  How much of a downpayment is necessary? Where can you afford to buy? Today interest rates are the lowest they have  been in 25 years. Variable rates are about  8 percent. If you are thinking about buying or selling, let me put 14 years experience to work for you: Linda McNeill (298-  0795); Seasons Realty Ltd., (435-8893)  FREE THE SINGER WITHIN!  Singers of all levels can increase range,  tone and power while developing confidence to sing out and speak up! Expert  vocal coaching in a supportive, accepting environment. A holistic and effective  method for personal empowerment, joyful creative expression and a great voice!  On Commercial Drive. $30/session or 6  sessions/ $150. Penny Sidor 251-4715  KAYAK TOURING WORKSHOP  In the Sechelt Inlet on the Sunshine  Coast. For women who have basic paddling skills and want to try Kayak touring.  The trip includes instruction on methods  for loading, paddling techniques, marine  ecology, natural history, outdoor cooking, minimum impact camping, navigation techniques, weather interpretation  and contingency planning. The focus of  this course is to encourage experiential  learning. Cost $190-all Kayak equipment  provided. $160-own equipment. Prerequisite: any novice Kayak course or equivalent experience. August 9, 17, 18. Private lessons, custom courses and Guiding  also available. For more info call Helen at  Ecomarine 689-7575  SITKA CO-OP  Sitka Housing Co-operative is a 26 unit  housing complex created and designed  by women for women and children. Our  priority is to provide housing for sole-  support women, single mothers, women  of colour, women over 55 years of age  and women with environmental allergies.  Located in the East End of Vancouver,  we are near shopping, schools, and community centres. Participation in operation  of the co-op is required of all members.  At present our one-bedroom waiting list  is closed. Applications from women needing two and three-bedroom units are be  ing accepted. Please write: Membership  Committee, Sitka Housing Co-op, 1550  Woodland Drive, Vancouver, BC, V5L  5A5  AVAILABLE MAY 15  Two women are looking for another quiet  N/S N/D vegetarian woman to share a  large east side house. Cheap rent in exchange for house and garden chores. No  pets (we have a F/T cat and a P/T dog).  Call Monica 327-0390  HERIZEN SAILING  Herizen New Age Sailing for Women. Personal sailing and self- awareness immersion courses for women, in BC and Mexico. Herizen is about sailing and about  women's reality, self-confidence, self esteem, and belief in ourselves in a concrete  way that is transferable to all parts of our  lives. Call Trish 741-1753  COUNSELLING  Supportive, confidential counselling if you  want to go deeper with issues you've already identified, or if you don't know  where to start. Your comfort is important.  Sliding fee scale. Paula Newman, Masters, Counselling Psychology. Phone 738-  9990 for more info or appointment  SILENT THOUGHTS  Silent Thoughts and Silhouettes, poetry  and scissors cut ill., by Lini Richarda  Grol, 60 pages. Hardcover $12 incl. p/h  and tax. For your autographed copy send  your cheque or money order to Ms. Lini  Richarda Grol, 1431 Pelhamst, PO Box  1069, Fonthill, Ont., LOS 1E0  PET/GARDEN LOVER  For rent: Private 1 bedroom apt. on  ground floor with enclosed patio. Ideal for  pet and/or gardener. Available June 1  (or possibly sooner). Located on Franklin  near Lakewood. $625. Call Millie at 255-  0235  SHIATSU  A Japanese form of accupressure. Great  for physical discomforts, emotional release, or stress relief. To relax, comfort  or energise. Phone Astarte Sands at 251-  5409  WINNING WOMEN  Seminar—"How To Get That Appointment" Tues.. May 12—Holiday  Inn Downtown, 1110 Howe St., Vane,  BC. Increasingly governments, corporations and non-profit organizations are  looking to increase the representation  of women   on   their   boards  and   com-  ARE YOU SURE YOU CANNOT  AFFORD THAT HOUSE?  Is a large downpayment stopping you  or are huge prices just out of sight?  With only 5% down or less  you may be able to buy that house!  Harprit Husband  Res: 522-3756  Pager: 844-8494  Call for more details  Carol Cantafio  Res: 520-6346  Pager: 844-8735  REALTY WORLD..  REALTY WORLDtm - Empire  *219 - Weslminster Mall  555 6lh Slreel, New Weslminster, B.C. V3L 5H1  Bus. (604) 525 8641    Fax: (604) 525-0626  Winning Women, a committee  for political skills, is pleased to present  a discussion and information session on  the variety of boards and commissions  and the importance of ensuring qualified  women are represented at all levels. This  panel discussion will feature four speakers: Barbara Rae, President and C.E.O.,  Adia Canada Ltd.; Linda Baker, Principal  Secretary, Office of the Premier; Lynne  Kennedy, Chair, Heritage Advisory Committee, City of Vancouver; Jane Frost,  Vice Chairman, Vancouver Port Corporation. Registration will begin at 6:30 pm.  The Panel Discussion will start at 7 pm  and light refreshment will be served at approximately 9:30 pm. Cost for members is  $15 and $20 for non members which will  include membership to Winning Women.  Mail, Fax, or Phone: Winning Women at  #708-1755 Robson St., Van., BC, V6G  3B7. Phone: 688-8584, Fax 669-9611  ISIS PHOTOGRAPHY  Lifestyle portraits of individuals, families,  children, pets. Take the time with me to  create a portrait of lasting value utilizing the natural surroundings of Vancouver. All sessions taken on location with  patience and care (B/W or colour). Business portraits also available. For uniquely  expressive natural images. Call 873-6646  BODY THERAPY  The Trager Approach gently encourages  relaxation, self-acceptance and respectful  change. Chris Bruels will share the theory  supporting this non-intrusive approach,  Mentastics and samples of tablework. No  charge. For women. Mon., May 11, 7:30  pm at Women's Counselling Services of  Vancouver, 1662 W. 8th Ave., 738- 4298  RETREAT FOR WOMEN  Judith Duerk, author of The Circle of  Stones, will lead a retreat for women the  evening of June 23 and all day June 24  at the N. Vancouver Outdoor School conference centre near Squamish, BC. Accommodation is available on site or billet  ing can be found. Bring sleeping bag and  pillow; and a drum if you have one. Cost  is $10-25 on June 23 and $40-75 on June  24. Sliding scale. For more info write to  Mary Billy at Box 2047, Squamish, BC,  VON 3G0, or call 892-5723. Sponsored by  Herspectives magazine   JOSEPHINE'S  Josephine's 1716 Charles (off Commercial Dr.,) Sun., May 3. Menu: huevos  rancheros, fruit salad and more. Doors  open 11 am, brunch menu served to 2 pm.  Josephine's: a womyn owned/operated  cappucino bar retailing wimmin-made  arts & crafts and a special events venue  for your organization, private party, what  have you. Brunches to be held 1st Sunday of the month, May through August.  Call 253-3142  AFFORDABLE COUNSELLING  I am Carol Vialogos, a Feminist Registered Professional Counsellor. I work with  individuals, couples or groups. My priorities are promoting healthy relationships,  whether bi-sexual, lesbian or straight,  and providing support to increase skills  and self-awareness. Your mental and  emotional health is your right. For my  brochure call Carol 731-0758  CHAMELEON PAINTERS  Women owned and operated. Interior  and exterior painting. Customized faux  flushes. Environmentally friendly products. Call Zena at 733-3551 or Susan at  733-2949  rr=Jr=Jr=Jr=Jr=Jf=  Jr^JF^F^r^Mt^f  ROBIN QOLDFARB rm  Registered   Massage   Therapist  lr=Jr=Jr=Jr=Jr=Jf=Jr=ir=Jr=ir=Jr=Jr=3r^  Single Mother's Day in the Park  It promises to be a beautiful, sunny Sunday on May 10th. There will be free  snacks and entertainment and clowns, puppeteers, and more excitement for the  kids. Come to Grandview Park (William St. on Commercial) between 1 and 5pm  to join the festivities. Sponsored by Vancouver Status of Women. Call 255- 5511  for more info.  KINESIS LIBRARY PROChSSINb CTR - SERIALS  mb EAST MftLL, U.B.C.  VHNCOUvER, BC %1 1ZB  -^£r  I want my Kinesis  I want my Kinesis  I want my Kinesis  I wa...  Make her happy.  Buy a sub.  flVSW Membership (includes Kinesis subscription): $30 plus $1.40 GST  KINESIS Subscription;  ~]l year: $20 plus $1.40 GST Q2 years: #6" plus $2.52 GST □institutions/Groups: ^ plus $3J5 GST  [Cheque enclosed      □Bill me □ New □Renewal DGift □Donation  Please m  I  rr