 SEPTEMBER1995 UBC attempts damage control CMPA $2.25 Inside  KINESIS  #301-1720 Grant Street  Vancouver, BC V5L 2Y6  Tel: (604)255-5499  Fax:(604)255-5511  Kinesis welcomes volunteers to work  on all aspects of the paper. Our next  Writers' Meeting is Sept 5 for the  October issue, and Oct 3 for the  November issue, at 7 pm at Kinesis.  All women welcome even if you don't  have experience.  Kinesis is published ten times a year  by the Vancouver Status of Women.Its  objectives are to be a non-sectarian  feminist voice for women and to work  actively for social change, specifically  combatting sexism, racism,classism,  homophobia, ableism, and imperialism. Views expressed in Kinesis are  those of the writer and do not  necessarily reflect VSW policy. All  unsigned material is the responsibility  of the Kinesis Editorial Board.  EDITORIAL BOARD  Fatima Jaffer, Lissa Geller, wendy lee  kenward, Agnes Huang, Robyn Hall,  Liawan, Alex Hennig  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE  fer, wendy lee kenward,  [enzie, Agnes Huang,  Zeleke, Robyn Hall,  ilissa Haynes, Christine  thy Elias, Erin Graham,  idrea Imada  ertising: Sur Mehat  it L'Hirondelle, Jennifer  tone.Renee Chalut  v. Carolina Ro  n Co-ordinator: t  r: Sur Meha  DNT COVER  s Night, 1994. Women in  sr march against rape,  o by Denise Howard  RESS DATE  JSt 23. 1995  BSCRIPTION  0 per year (+$1A  /hat you can affoi  stitutions/Groups:  tr (+$3,15 0  aership (includes 1 year  >sis subscription):  >ryear(+$t.40GST)  UBMISSIONS  d girls are welcome  missions. We rest  lit and submission i  e publication. If |  s should be typed,  d must be signed and  idress, telephone number  E. Kinesis does not accept  ction. Editorial guidelines  ailable upon request.  EADLINES  News About Women that's Not in the Dailies  News  Women in Canada Take Back the Night 3  by Tamara Gorin  UBC cited for racism and sexism 4  by Ezekiel Samuels RaclSm & Sex,sm * UBC  UN silences Iranian women 5  by Fatima Jaffer  Problems preparing for Beijing 5  by Andrea Imada  Features  Support for the  allegations of  pervasive  racism and  sexism is found  in the fact that  Organizing in the Caribbean   by D. Michelle Cave, as told to Fatima Jaffer  Centrespread  180 Days/180 Ways:  International Day of Actions   compiled by Agnes Huang  Arts  Book review: Reading between the lines 12  by Janet Nicol  Review of Lawexsa Wa—Strength of the River 13  by Renae Morriseau  Review of the novel, The Frontiers of Love 14  by Rita Wong  Review of Jean Stewart's The Body's Memory 15  by Emma Kivisild  Regulars  As Kinesis Goes to Press 2  Inside Kinesis 2  What's News 6  by wendy lee kenward and Jackie Brown  Movement Matters 7  by Robyn Hall  Letters 16  Bulletin Board 17  compiled by Alex Hennig  Got an itch to write?  Then drop by to one of  our next writers' meetings  September 5 & October 3  at 7 pm at VSW  #301-1720 Grant St.  MAY 1995     <; As Kinesis goes to press, lots of  women are heading off to China for the  UN 4th World Conference on Women  and NGO Women's Forum. But, as the  conference date quickly approaches, it  looks as if many women may not be  going after all.  At this late date—just one week before the start of the NGO Forum—there  are reports that women are still having  problems securing hotel accomodations  and visas. And some women—in particular, Iranian and Tibetan women living in exile—are definitely not going to  get to the Beijing Conference. The UN  effectively shut Iranian and Tibetan  women out when it denied them accreditation to attend the conference [see  story, page 5.]  Here on the national front...Looks  like Human Resources Minister Lloyd  Axworthy is getting back on track with  his social policy "reform"...uh...cuts.  Even though his government has already cut back the unemployment insurance system, Axworthy's seems to  feel that people on UI should bear more  of the brunt of his government's "deficit  cutting" measures. Now he's been talking about shutting down UI offices across  the country, and replacing the 3,000 human bodies that work in them with automated terminals.  Axworthy also just delivered a major blow to post-secondary students,  announcing that the government will be  passing on the responsibility of collecting on student loans onto the big bad  banks. And if that's not enough, he's also  been suggesting that his government  might withhold tax returns from people  who have outstanding student loan payments.  But hey, If we think we're having a  bad day...we should be happy we're not  living in Ontario right now. Not that we  have anything against living in Ontario,  it's just that...well with a really right  wing government in power there..,we  must say, we're glad we live over here.  He's only been in office for two  months, but Ontario's conservative premier Mike Harris has already started his  major slash-and-burn campaign on all  social programs. And he's aiming for  everything: healthcare, government jobs,  education, non-profit housing, social  assistance... In our October issue, we'll  be bringing you an overview and analysis of Harris' budget cuts and how they  affect the lives of women.  And now, here is the Kinesis quiz of  the month, designed to help keep our  dear readers' minds fresh and sharp.  This month's questions are pretty easy,  and actually, they're "fill in the blank"  types. So are you ready? Okay. From the  world of "surprising statistics"...  Statistics Canada recently released  a survey that says, more and more  women are finding themselves employed in the paid labour force...but  most are stuck in part-time jobs and  moststillget...(fillintheblank)...money  than men do. [Don't worry, this is not a  trick question.]  And for the second part of the quiz,  we'll move on to another survey—this  one by the UN. It seems that once again  the UN has decided that Canada is still  iVSW THANKS  WOMEN  Our thanks to Vancouver Status of Women members who support us year  'round with memberships and donations. Our appreciation to the following  supporters who became members, renewed their memberships or donated to VSW  in July & August:  Sherry Baker * Barbara Curran * Tanya de Haan * Karen Egger * Gloria Filax  * S.L. Fletcher * Michael & Connie Geller * Kylie Goeldner * Ursula Hecht * Faune  Johnson * Barbara Lebrasseur * Karen Litzcke * Leanne MacDonnell * Alyson  Martin * Trish Matson * Jane McCartney * Shirley McCrea * Bea McKenzie * Gail  Mountain * Judi Piggott * Nadene Rehnby * Jean Scott * Debra Shogan * Dawn  Simpson * Lisa Turner * Christina Waymark * Lynne Werker  We would like to say a very special thank you to all of our supporters who  responded so generously to our recent fundraising letters:  Janet Altshool * Janie Cawley * Paula Clancy * Sharon Costello * Mary Frey  * Teresa Gibson * Julia Goulden * Judith Hall * Hospital Employees' Union *  Ursula Litzcke * Diane Mercy * Anne Miles * Leah Minuk * Neil Power * Helen  Purkis * Ruth Roach Pierson * Edna Rolston * Linda Sperling * Theodor & Nora  Sterling * Joy Thome * Sue Vohanka  A very special thank you to the following supporters whose gifts will support  our efforts to send delegates to the UN 4th World Conference on Women in Beijing  this fall:  B.C. Federation of Labour * Kumvana Gomani * Anna Terrana * Vancouver  Newspaper Guild, Local 115 * Oxfam Canada  Finally, we would like to acknowledge the dedication of the following  volunteers who worked the long hours to make our recent two night casino at Great  Canadian Casino in Richmond a success:  Erin Graham * Agnes Huang * Hilary Mason * Joy Dixon * Renee Chalut *  Victoria Johnstone * Heidi Henkenhaf * Andrea Imada  be the best place to live...but only if you  so happen to be a...(fill in the blank).  How'd you do? Did you pass the quiz?  We'll try to make it a bit more challenging next month.  So where will you be on September  6th? Well, millions of women will be out  and about participating in an International Day of Action for Women's Rights  all over the world [see centrespread, page  10.] In Canada, women will be out in  force on the streets to Take Back the  Night—the marches and rallies against  rape will take place over 50 Canadian  towns and cities [see page 3.]  Next month, we'll have a first-hand  account from our very own Fati ma Jaffer  on all the happenings at the Beijing world  conference on women. And as we had  promised for this month...(things got a  bit behind, to put it mildly)...in our October issue, we'll be highlighting issues  concerning education throughout the  pages of Kinesis. So please, stay tuned.  In some parts of the country summer is coming to an end, but here on the  west coast, the sun is still shining...uh,  sometimes...uh, well...whenit'snot raining. But always, looking outside the  windows of Kinesis' office, the sunsets  are just absolutely fabulous. (Not that  we have had much time to ponder sunsets.)  As we mentioned in July/August  issue,our wonderful and delightful past  editor, Kinesis Ed Board member, and  feministjournalistextroadinaire, Fatima  Jaffer, is on her way to Beijing. Fatima is  going to the United Nations' Non-government Organization Women's Forum  as a member of the official Canadian  NGO delegation.  We'll have original on-the scene reports from Fatima in our next issue,  followed by two special supplements on  the NGO Forum/World conference.  Good luck Fatima! Have some fun! Send  us postcards! Bring us back presents...  Sadly, Kinesis editor Agnes Huang  will not be joining Fatima in China, as we  had originally planned. Unfortunately,  we were unable to raise enough funds  necessary to send Agnes to Beijing and  to set up a system to ensure that the  October issue made it to the printers on  time and in good shape.  Thanks to all those who sent us  donations because they supported our  efforts to get Agnes to Beijing: Ellen  Woodsworth, Kumvana Gomani,  Mummy and Daddy Huang, Moira  Keigher, Marcie Cohen, Anna Terrana,  BC Federation of Labour, Vancouver  Newspaper Guild local 115, Public Service Alliance of Canada, Oxfam Canada,  and the Women's Research Centre.  So guess what—it's time  again...Time again for what? you ask.  For the annual Kinesis Benefit, that's  what. What is the Benefit? you say. It's a  fun-filled evening of performances, food,  laughs, and lots and lots of prizes...and  best of all, it brings together women who  volunteer with Kinesis, who support  Kinesis, and who just want to partake in  a lively social extravaganza. The Benefit  is our chance to celebrate one more year  of bringing you all the news about  women that's not in the dailies, and to  say thank you to all the women who help  keep Kinesis alive and growing.  The general plan is to hold the Benefit some time in the third week in  October...soplease...keepyourdatebook  free. We'll let you know in our October  issue the exact date and place...in the  meantime keep your eyes peeled for  posters or give the office a call—255-  5499—to find out the details. And hey,  don't forget about the raffle tickets...we  always get some great prizes to give  away-  Well we did it! Our subscription  drive is now complete, and we had an  amazingly good response from women  interested in becoming new subscribers!  So, welcome to all our new subscribers!  Hope you enjoy reading Kinesis.  And now for the new writers who  contributed to this issue...Thanks and  welcome to: Tamara Gorin, D. Michelle  Cave, Renae Morriseau, and Ezekiel  Samuels.  Okay, so tell us, are there any women  out there who are creative, like to have  fun, draw, write, or are computer  'geeks'? No this isn'tapersonalsad...we  want you to come and be a part of the fun  here at Kinesisl We're always looking for  volunteers to bring in new story ideas,  graphics, editing skills, or who just  wanna come and learn how a feminist  newspaper is put together. If any of this  refers to you, call us at 255-5499.  Well, that's about all for this month.  We'll be back again in two weeks to get  moving on the October issue. If you are  interested in writing for the October  issue call Agnes or come to our writer's  meeting on Tuesday, September 5 at  7pm. Or if you are want to join in on the  excitementof production (fromSeptember 19-26), give Laiwan a call, 255-5499.  Until October...Happy Fall!!!  SEPTEMBER 1995 News  Canadian women Take Back the Night:  For walking safely at night  by Tamara Gorin  Women across Canada will take to  the streets on September 6th to protest  violence against women, joining women  all over the world in an International Day  of Action to continue the fight for women's rights.  The planning for the worldwide actions started over a year ago. In May  1994, women gathered in Vancouver at  an international gender and development  conference agreed to start planning an  International Day of Action for Women's  Equality after they returned home. September 6th was chosen as the date because itcoincided with the UN 4th World  Conference on Women and the corresponding NGO Women's Forum in  China.  The plan is for women to hold feminist actions the world over, which will  highlight that while international governments meet in Beijing to discuss  "women's rights," women still continue  to live our lives, continue to resist and  demand change. September 6th will be a  moment for us to show the scale of our  solidarity with each other, and to indicate the diverse and complex nature of  our actions.  In response to this call for action,  Vancouver Rape Relief and Women's  Shelter set about organizing Take Back  the Night as a Canada-wide action. Take  Back the Night is a street demonstration  at night organized by women for women  to demand an end to violence against  women, and specifically rape. There was  quick agreement, as 50 to 60 women's  groups nationally—including 17 in British Columbia—began organizing local  Take Back the Nights for September 6th.  At Take Back the Night, women can  gather safely after dark and take to the  streets, free from violence and the threat  of being attacked. Over the years, Take  Back the Night actions have addressed  key issues concerning violence against  women — including the links between  pornography and rape; state response to  violence done to women; women's strategies to fight back; and, networking local, national, and international women  organizing to end violence against us.  Many women spontaneouslyjoin in from  the street or from their homes as the  demonstration passes by.  The action is notoriously loud and  vibrant, as women make their demands  and march though towns and cities with  banners, placards and creative props to  get their points across. Almost always,  signs that the women have been there are  left behind—such as spray painted slogans or posters or stickers on street poles  and offending businesses and institutions.  Women have been organizing and  participating in Take Back the Night actions for almost twenty years all over the  world. In 1976, the first night marches to  protest violence against women were held  in New York; Leeds, England; and Germany. Canadian women's own Take Back  the Night herstory is rich and full; a good  body of ideas, images and activity regarding violence against women, espe  cially rape, have been built upon Take  Back the Night actions.  In 1978, the first Reclaim the Night  march in Vancouver was organized by  the Fly By Night Collective. Take Back  the Night spread to more places and  drew more women in 1981 as the Canadian Association of Sexual Assault Centres (CASAC) helped organize the first  North America-wide demonstrations.  Since then, both Canadian and Ameri-  Back the Night has always been held at  various parts of Vancouver, with organizers picking a particular location because of a significant event occurring in  the area, or simply because the violence  women face is everywhere.  Participatory actions are being  planned for pre-rally and during the  march. "Rage Whistles" will be available for women to purchase for a dollar  each. While they are noise makers and  can feminists have held Take Back the  Night or Reclaim the Night marches  every year. Women around the world  continue to organize night marches to  protest violence against women.  Locally, Vancouver Rape Relief and  Women's Shelter, as a member of  CASAC, has organized Take Back the  Night since 1981, with increasing numbers of women in the streets in recent  years. In the Vancouver area, both Surrey Women's Resource Centre and  Ridge-Meadows Women's Centre held  Take Back the Night marches for the  first time in 1994 and 1993, respectively.  This year, Mission-Abbotsford Women's Support Services are organizing  for the first time.  Taking back Vancouver  The theme of this year's Take Back  the Night in Vancouver is "Canadian  Feminist Action to Fight Back Against  Rape, part of an International Day of  Action to Demand Women's Rights."  The emphasis is on the roleof rape crisis  centres in developing strategies for  change and aiding women to carry out  their own plans for fighting back from  violence, and on making clear the connections with women acting the world  over to protest our continued oppression.  The march and rally—which for  three years was held in downtown Vancouver—has been moved to a different  location: Granville and Broadway. Take  Photos by Denise Howard  souvenirs for this night, they can also be  blown to debunk the idea that "Rape  Whistles" can possibly protect women  from being raped.  One of the principles behind Vancouver's Take Back the Night has always been that women do not need  permission to take to the streets. Vancouver Rape Relief has held this principle intact, and has herstorically not applied to city hall for a permit. However,  for the first time last year, the organization received a bill from the city for  "policing costs." Several meetings between Rape Relief organizers and city  officials did not resolve the dispute over  the bill and the requirement for a permit.  By this time, it was too late to change  plans for this year's march. To by-pass  an escalation of harassment from the  city and police, the decision was made to  negotiate for a permit.  One of the most exciting aspects of  this year's Take Back the Night actions  in Canada is the fact that we not only  have the first nationally coordinated date  in many years, but we are also acting at  the same time as so many other women  around the world. Altogether, more than  10,000 women will be on Canadian streets  this September 6th, demanding an end  to rape and all violence against women,  demanding every woman's freedom!  The Take Back the Night march and  rally in Vancouver will begin at the Vancouver School Board Parking lot (Broadway and  Fir) at 7:30pm. Women trained as attendants to women in zuheelchairs will be available at the march, an area will be available at  the rally for women who require seating, and  sign language interpretation will be provided. For more information and to pre-  register for childcare, call Rape Relief at  (604) 872-8212.   Tamara Gorin works at Vancouver Rape  Relief and Women's Shelter, has been a  collective member for 5 years and is  organizing Take Back the Night in  Vancouver this year. She looks forward  zuith anticipation to another record  turnout and is excited to hear about other  loomen's actions on September 6th.  Across the country on September 6th, women will be Taking Back  the Night. Canada-wide, women are organizing Take Back the Night  in Calgary, Regina, Saskatoon, Winnipeg, Ontario (coalition of Rape  Crisis Centres), Montreal, Fredericton, St. John's, to name only a  few places. The Ontario Coalition of Rape Crisis Centres coordinating the organizing of Take Back the Nights in almost 20 towns and  cities in Ontario.  In BC, the women of the following organizations or coalitions  have organized Take Back The Night, some for the first time!  •Vancouver Rape Relief and Women's Shelter  •Victoria Status of Women Action Group & Take Back the Night  Committee  •Surrey Women's Resource Centre  •Ridge-Meadows Women's Centre  •Mission-Abbotsford Women's Support Services  •Kelowna Women's Resource Centre  •Vernon and District Women's Centre  •K'san House and Terrace Take Back the Night Committee  •Kamloops Women's Resource Centre  •Campbell River Area Women's Centre  •Fort Nelson Women's Resource Centre  •Prince Rupert Transition House  •Cranbrook Women's Resource Centre  •100 Mile House Women's Centre  •Quesnel Women's Centre  •Boundary Women's Centre, Grand Forks  •Prince George Take Back The Night Organizing Committee  SEPTEMBER 1995 News  Raciai & sexuai harassment at UBC:  Strange ways  of damage control  by Ezekiel Samuels  A report issued on June 15th has  concluded that there is "a basis for allegations of pervasive racism and sexism"  in the Political Science (PoliSci) department at the University of British Columbia.  Last August, the head of UBC's Political Science department, the Dean of  Arts, and other university administrators commissioned Vancouver lawyer  Joan McEwen to inquire into allegations  of sexism and racism in the PoliSci department. Complaints from students  have plagued the department since 1990.  Students did try to resolve issues of  racist and sexist harrassment and discrimination internally within the department, but those efforts proved to be  unfruitful. This led to 12 graduate students coming together to send a memorandum detailing episodes of sexism  and racism to the Dean of Graduate  Studies in June 1992. Again, there was  no serious response from the university's administration, so the students followed up with another memorandum in  November 1993.  Collectively, the two memoranda  enumerate instances of both overt harassment and systemic discrimination.  Some of the complaints concerned issues such as:  • unwarranted and unprofessional  put downs of women, regarding their  academic ability and interests;  • instances of sexual and racial harassment experienced by women of colour, including the use of racist metaphors by professors;  • the dramatic decline in the number  of female PhD students in the department, as compared to the number of  women enrolled in its undergraduate  and masters program (an example of  institutional discrimination);  • the uni-perspective intellectual climate where critical, race and feminist  theory is marginalized or otherwise penalized;  • bias against female candidates  applying for faculty positions;  • the lack of effective action taken by  the department when students raised  their concerns; and  • students' fear of retaliation by  professors if they made their complaints  known.  Thedirector of UBC'sGraduate Students Society (GSS) says more complaints continued to be lodged against  the department in 1994, before the inquiry was called. But the director asserts  that the inquiry was not called for by  students, but rather it was called for by  the university's administration asa way  to shut down any further charges.  Other students interviewed also say  that many students did not want the  inquiry because they feared retaliation  and some were being threatened by professors with possible law suits if they  participated in the inquiry.  The head of the Political Science  department had previously stated he  would not "support a charge of sexual  terrorism or systemic racism." Donald  Blake felt the problem was started by a  couple of radical feminists who would  never be satisfied, according the GSS'  director. Although Blake got the ball  rolling in setting up the inquiry, he only  expected it to last for six weeks. Blake  also believed the outcome would be a  finding that there was no problem of  racism or sexism, and that the department had done everything to address  individual complaints, says the GSS' director.  Contrary to this point of view, the  inquiry took 10 months and concluded  that there was a serious problem. During the ten months, Joan McEwen conducted 225 interviews, 100 of which were  with former and present PoliSci students, and the rest were with faculty  members and university administrators  who were available.  McEwen presented her final report  to the university on June 15th. But Albert  McLean, the university's lawyer, did  not release the report to the public or  media until the following week—even  though the terms of reference for the  inquiry called for an immediate release  of the report—and only after students  protested for the release. Meanwhile,  McLean had already shown the report  to the Dean of Arts so the university's  administration had extra time to prepare its response.  The initial response of the university was overwhelmingly against the  report. The president of the University,  David Strangway, first said that there  would be no compensation, no disciplinary action, and no apology. These had  been par t of the non-negotiable requests  from some of students who had lodged  complaints against the Political Science  department.  Later, Strangway somewhat  changed his tune. In an August 4th  memorandum, he issued a partial apology. "I apologize to the students involved in this inquiry for the tardiness of  the administration in dealing with their  concerns..." the president wrote.  Kelly White, an M. A. student in the  department says that the president issued the statementbecause of mounting  student pressures. While she takes some  encouragement from the apology, still  she says, "it is not enough."  McEwen's report has also been condemned by some membersof the faculty  association and by the Dean of Arts,  Patricia Marchak. In a July 13th open  letter to the university community,  Marchak tried to delegitimize the inquiry's report on a number of grounds.  She criticized the report, saying that  McEwen "failed to distinguish between  taking offense and probable harm related to systemic discrimination," and  that while McEwen was mandated to  determine if there was any basis for the  allegations, "she chose instead to repeat  the allegations and treat them as if they  were proof."  The condemnation of the report by  some members of the faculty association  hasbeen popularized in the mainstream  media, but not all faculty members support their association's position. 22 faculty members signed a letter distancing  themselves from any condemnation of  the report.  Jean Barmen, a professor in the Faculty of Education, says that "while the  report may not be as well argued as it  might have been, it does point out that  there is much discontent among graduate students." Barmen also says that as  graduate advisor in her department, she  is "aware of how little power graduate  students have. She says it was a gutsy  and serious thing for graduate students  tocome forward with complaints. Asked  why she felt more faculty members did  not sign the dissenting letter, Barmen  said, "it is not the kind of letter you want  to be signing unless you have tenure."  ^Sharon Campbell, another former  student at UBC, is unsure why there has  been so much emphasis on discrediting  the report as lacking in evidence.  Campbell says that McEwen's mandate  was clear: she was to conduct an investigation to determine whether there was  a basis for allegations of sexist and racist  discrimination. She was not conducting  a legal case, Campbell adds.  "Throughout the interviews  McEwen had with students, she accumulated a large number of accounts of  discrimination and harassment, [many  of] which were reinforced when talking  to faculty. If this does not constitute  enough evidence, then we need to question whether there can ever be enough  evidence in a case like this or even who  gets to define what evidence is," says  Campbell.  Emily Coulter, a former UBC PoliSci  student, feels the McEwen report is being delegitimized because it is progressive and tries to address systemic discrimination. But Coulter says that the  inquiry was destined to be flawed because the language dealing with racism  and sexism is incapable of conceptualizing problems beyond individual acts  and consequences.  In the terms of reference of the inquiry specified to Joan McEwen by the  university administration, her report was  not to suggest any disciplinary action  against faculty members or the administration. However, she was allowed to  make recommendations.  WONDE*  IF I C0ULT>  POSSIBLY  TROUBLE YOU,  F0J\A    _  UTTCEBIT    y  OSYDUiV   /  POWERS  Graphic from Trouble & Strife, 1994  The university administration said  it will move on McEwen's recommendations. One recommendation the university agreed to was to suspend any  further admissions into the PoliSci department's graduate program. No more  students will be admitted until such  time that a learning and working environment has been created which is harassment and discrimination free, as determined by the Dean of Graduate Studies. However, students who had been  accepted into the program before the  report came out will still be allowed to  enter the program. The university has  said it will provide each of them with a  copy of the report.  The university also promised an  assurance that none of the students who  participated in the report would suffer  retaliation; an amendment to the university's mission statement that guarantees an environment free from discrimination and harassment; and the creation  of an ombudsperson's office.  The Alma Mater Society and the  Graduate Students Society say they are  pleased with the university's action so  far, but add that they have more demands. Most importantly, they have  called for an investigation into all documented and outstanding allegations;  reimbursement of legal costs to the GSS;  student involvement in any and all committees arising out of the report; an investigation into incidents of retaliation;  and the establishment of a scholarship  fund to support research into issues of  discrimination and harassment.  Even though the university has  promised to act on McEwen's recommendations, nothing much has really  changed. The onus still remains on individual students to bring forward their  complaints to their department, UBC's  equity office, or the provincial human  rights commission—publicly identifying themselves and leaving themselves  vulnerable.  Ezekiel Samuels is a Vancouver zoriter.  SEPTEMBER 1995 News  Beijing Conference:  Iranian women in Vancouver  protest UN decision  by Fatima Jaffer  Women who fled their country because of fundamentalist religious persecution and political oppression and who  now live in exile in the West have been  silenced from speaking out against their  former country-this time by the United  Nations.  Iranian women living in exile in the  West have been denied conference accreditation for the 4th World Conference  on Women in Beijing, September 4-15,  because the Iranian government does not  want them there.  The UN decision to deny accreditation to Iranian women's groups in  Canada, the US and Europe was made  just six weeks before the conference.  In total, the UN Economic and Social  Council (ECOSOC) denied accreditation  to 11 groups. Three were groups the  Chinese government had demanded be  refused accreditation—organizations  working to end the Chinese government's  occupation of Tibet and / or human rights  violations in China. Two groups opposed  by the Chinese government did receive  accreditation, including the US-based  Human Rights Watch in China.  Iran opposed ten groups of Iranian  women living in exile-groups that speak  ou t against the Iranian government's violations of women's and human rights.  Eight were banned. One US-based group  and another from Denmark were granted  accreditation.  Of the groups denied accreditation,  one-the Organization of Iranian Women  for the Defence of Human Rights and  Democracy-is based in Toronto.  The Western and Japanese delegates  at the ECOSOC hearing apparently expressed concern about denying these  groups accreditation, but did not oppose  the decision, which was made by consensus.  About 50 women gathered outside a  federal office building in Vancouver  August 18th to demand a reversal of the  United Nations' decision. "I wanted to  attend this conference but can't because the Iranian  government—the  government I fled  in the first place because I wouldn't  shut up-is going to  shut me up, even  though I live outside Iran," said  Firoozah Radjai, a  refugee of Iran and  an organizer of the  protest action.  Radjai pointed  out that the UN decision means that  the official delegation from Iran will  be allowed to participate at the conference, but Iranian  women will not be  permitted to speak  about their experiences living under  a fundamentalist  regime for 16 years.  "The government of Iran will get  to whitewashall the  atrocities they com-  mitanddrawarosy  picture of women's condition in  Iran...The women of Iran need a voice  to speak of their continuing oppression,  torture and persecution. Let their sisters in exile speak to the women of the  world," said Radjai.  Radjai also said it is "sheer hypocrisy for a subsidiary body of the UN to  oppose the attendance of women from  speaking out against a government that  has been condemned by the UN General Assembly year after year for systematic and severe violations of human  rights in general and women's rights in  particular."  Photos by Fatima Jaffer.  Conspicuously present at the demonstration were five representatives from  Status of Women Canada who spoke  and rallied in support for the demonstrators. "Your demonstration today has  been brought to the attention of our  department of foreign affairs and to the  minister of the Status of Women, Sheila  Finestone," Lorraine Cameron of Status  of Women Canada told protestors.  Cameron pointed out that the Canadian government, among other governments, is on record for criticizing the UN  decision, calling it a political move.  "I'm hoping that as a result of these  small demonstrations, something  will be done," Radjai told Kinesis.  "We've asked women's organizations and Canadian government delegates to invite us to join  their delegations, but we have  not heard whether this will indeed happen."  Following the rally, the  protestors took to the street,  marching to a downtown office  of the United Nations. There,  most protesters tied strips of  white cloth around their mouths  and faces to symbolize the silencing of the Iranian women by the  UN. We observed a minute of  silence outside the UN office, after which, Radjai spokeagain and  women handed out leaflets to the  large numbers of people on the  streets.  NGO Women's Forum:  Problems plaguing  participation  by Andrea Imada   Women planning to attend the  United Nations 4th World Conference on Women and Non-government Organization Women's  Forum in China are criticizing the  UN for allowing the conference to  fall into a bureaucratic and political mess.  It had been anticipated that  the NGO Women's Forum would  attract some 35,000 participants--  the largest ever international gathering of women. However, as the  Forum date approaches, expectations for a landmark attendance  are fading.  With less than a week to go  before the start of the Forum, many  women are still encountering difficulties in obtaining visas. As  Kinesis goes to press-just one week  before the Forum is to begin-it  appears that only a quarter of the  800 Canadian women planning to  attend had received their travel  visas.  While some women have  pointed the finger at the Chinese  government, many Canadian  women are blaming the UN and  its member countries which have  done little to ensure women get to  China.  "There are culpable governments standing back and not doing anything," says Miche Hill,  who will be representing the National Action Committee on the  Status of Women in Beijing.  Earlier this spring, women became alarmed when the site of the  NGO Forum was moved to  Huairou, 55 kilometres from  Beijing (the site of the official government conference). Participants  says they are concerned there will  be inadequate travel links between  the two conference sites. And recent reports from China suggest  that construction on the buildings  housing the NGO Forum still has  not been finished, and that vital  communications facilities have not  been fully installed.  Fatima Jaffer, who will be covering the NGO Forum for Kinesis,  stresses that the political and  logistical problems are not unique  to China. Many of the problems  are a repeat performance of those  that prevailed at the last UN World  Conference on Women, which  took place in Nairobi, Kenya ten  years ago, she said. There, visas  were also hard to secure and  women were threatened with deportation if they participated in  political demonstrations.  "The people we need to be  holding accountable for this is the  United Nations," says Jaffer. "It is  the UN that is holding this conference, not China."  SEPTEMBER 1995 What's News  by wendy lee kenward  Review for  women in prison  Women incarcerated inCanadian prisons for killing their abusive partners will  soon have their cases reviewed. Federal  Justice Minister Allan Rock has agreed to  appoint an independent panel to review  the cases of over a dozen women who  were convicted of murdering their male  partners.  That a process of review is finally  being set up is encouraging, says the Elizabeth Fry Society (E. Fry). E. Fry, a national  advocacy and service organization for incarcerated women, has been lobbying for  the past several years for an en bloc review  of all the cases of women convicted of  killing their abusive partners. In the past,  government response to the idea has not  been very supportive.  After a 1990 ruling in the Supreme  Court of Canada recognizing "battered  women's syndrome," E. Fry increased its  campaign for an en bloc review. The ruling  concerned the case of Angelique Lavallee,  who was convicted at trial of murdering  her abusive boyfriend. In writing for the  majority of the Supreme Court, Justice  Bertha Wilson recognized the idea of "battered women's syndrome," and said that a  woman's history of abuse should be taken  into account in determining her innocence  or guilt.  Justice Minister Rock says the independent review will start by looking at the  cases of women who arecurrently in prison  for killing their abusive partners, but adds  that there is a possibility the review will  later be expanded to women who have  already served their sentences and are no  longer in prison.  How and by what standards the review will be conducted has yet to be decided. For women whose cases will come  under review, there may be several possible outcomes—they may be given a complete or conditional pardon or a shortened  sentence, or a new trial may be ordered.  Prozac for PMS  Women who suffer from severe premenstrual syndrome (PMS) may soon have  a drug currently used to treat depression  marketed to them. Eli Lilly and Co., a  multinational pharmaceutical company,  says that the drug, Prozac—which it manufactures—could be a good treatment for  problems relating to premenstrual syndrome. The company commissioned and  sponsored the research study which came  up with this conclusion.  Another researcher also says that PMS  is a real disorder, different from ordinary  depression, and tha t this disorder responds  to Prozac. Recognition of PMS as a disorder has two opposing effects.  On the one hand, having PMS finally  acknowledged as something that is real  for women—and not just a figment of their  imaginations—is a positive step.  On the other hand, calling PMS a mental disorder that can be treated with mind  altering drugs is not a progressive step  towards a better understanding of women's health issues. Rather, it creates yet  another area of women's health which can  be manipulated by the biomedical industries.  When PMS becomes viewed as a disorder that needs medical attention, the  focus then shifts to a search for a medical  solution. But women have been dealing  with and creating their own solutions for  PMS for many millennia. For example,  many women use herbal remedies such as  oil of evening primrose or chamomile tea  to ease PMS; yet these are not commonly  prescribed by physicians.  Whether Prozac can help women with  severe PMS without harming their health  is not known. No one is sure what the side  effects or long term effects of Prozac are,  and in fact the medical profession still  does not even have a clear understanding  of what causes various levels of PMS.  Italian housewives  unionize  Housewives in Italy have joined together to form a housewives union. Members of the National Housewives Federation, an Italian pressure group formed in  1982 to fight for housewive rights and  recognition, recently voted to turn itself  from a pressure group into a union.  The Federation, which consists of over  800,000 housewives decided to form a  union after Italy's Constitutional Court  ruled earlier this year that housework had  as much economic value as work done  outside of the home.  Rossi Gasparrini, the Federation's  founder noted that the popular idea that  housework is somehow different from  work away from the home—and therefore  should be valued differently—was struck  down by the court's ruling.  The housewive's union hopes that  now that they have union status they will  also have more political power and influence on politicians, and will be able to  campaign more successfully for the rights  of housewives in Italy.  Lesbian couple wins  Al case  Two years after a Vancouver doctor  denied artifical insemination (Al) services  to a lesbian couple, the BC Human Rights  Council has ordered him to pay the women  compensation for emotional injuries and  expenses.  Dr. Gerald Korn was ordered to pay  Sandra Benson and Tracy Potter more than  $3,000 for refusing to provide artifical insemination to Potter in 1993. At the time,  he told Benson and Potter that he did not  provide artifical inseminations for lesbians.  Korn justified his decision by arguing  that physicians were not required to provide services to everyone who comes  through their door. He also said that he  did not want to get involved in a possible  custody battle should the lesbian couple  break up. However, he didn't seem to  have this same concern with his heterosexual clients.  The Council rejected Korn's arguments, stating that although a physician  has the right to limit their practices, they  are required to comply with the BC Human Rights Act and therefore could not  deny a service regularly available to the  public on the grounds of sexual orientation.  Alberta abortion  services under threat  Abortion services for women in Alberta may soon become even less accessible. Premier Ralph Klein has indicated  that his Conservative government is considering eliminating public money for  abortion services, except in cases where a  woman's life is at risk. Klein plans to set  up a governmental committee look into  the issue. The proposed change will then  be voted on by the government's caucus.  This is not the first time a conservative, anti-choice provincial government  has tried stop funding for abortion services. In 1988, the Social Credit government  in British Columbia tried to remove abortions from medical insurance coverage.  The move was defeated when the BC Supreme Court ruled that the government  did not have the right to withold medical  services from the public.  In Alberta, pro-choice advocates are  gearing up to fight against the Klein government's proposed change. They say that  even though abortion in Alberta would  still be 'legal,' the effect of this proposed  change would be similar to making abortions illegal— abortions would become  inaccessible for most women. If women  had to pay fully for abortions in Alberta, it  would cost between $600-$700.  On a related note, Dr. Henry  Morgentaler recently won a court case  allowing him to keep open his free-standing abortion clinic in New Brunswick.  However, it is not certain whether or not  the province's conservative government  will follow this defeat by launching new  opposition to insurance coverage for abortion services in the province.  by Jackie Brown   User fees for Legal  aid in BC  Women in British Columbia seeking  legal aid may now have to pay up to $150  in user fees for a lawyer's services. In BC,  the majority of legal aid users are women,  and the majority of cases handled by legal  aid lawyers deal with custody, child support and other family law matters.  Legal Services Society (LSS), which  administers legal aid in the province, says  it had to set up a new user fee system  because the province cut $6.5 million from  its budget this year. The fee schedule is  based on household size and monthly  household income. For example, the user  fee ranges from $30 for a single person  with a monthy income between $675 and  $779, to $150 for a single person with a  monthly income over $970. LSS estimates  that approximately 6500 clients will pay  the $30 and nearly 5,000 the $150.  The fee schedule, which went into  effect in August, is based on a flat rate  system that does not take into account the  percentage of income that goes toward  household and other living expenses. A  single mother with higher childcare expenses, or a woman who pays a high percentage of her income toward medical  expenses, is still expected to pay the same  fee as someone who has less of those expenses.  Dave Duncan, chief executive officer  of the society, says the LSS will run out of  money by the fall unless the provincial  government comes through with $5.7 million in promised funding. LSS has an annual budget of around $100 million.  In all, LSS says it expects user  fees—which it calls "contributions"—to  bring in a total of around $1.2 million this  year. The society says it will also save  almost $2.2 million by holding back a percentage of tariffs paid to legal aid  lawyers—many of whom are women.  NRTs still not  regulated  Despite a four-year long, $28 million  Royal Commission which concluded that  the federal government must closely monitor and control the development and use  of new reproductive technologies (NRTs),  the government failed to follow the Royal  Commission's recommendation and introduce strong regulations the research  and use of NRTs.  Instead, Health Minister Diane  Marleau called only for a voluntary moratorium on nine NRTs the government considers "unacceptable." These include practices such as gender (primarily male) selection; payments to "surrogate" mothers;  buying or selling eggs, sperm and embryos; and egg donations in return for in  vitro fertilzation services.  The government also said it frowns  on the development of artificial wombs,  altering genetic material, cloning, forming animal-human hybrids, and retrieving eggs from fetuses or cadavers (dead  bodies).  The call for a voluntary moratorium  was surprising given the Liberal government's apparent condemnation of these  types of reproductive technologies. Responding to the Royal Commission report  this July—almost two years after the commission submitted its report—Marleau  said that "the application of these nine  technologies in humans is unacceptable  and does not reflect Canadian values,"  and that the technologies "threaten human dignity;" present serious social, ethical and health risks and "treat reproduction, women and children as commodities."  According to Patricia Baird, the University of British Columbia geneticist who  chaired the Royal Commission, most of  the technologies listed aren't even used in  Canada. Still, she thinks Marleau's response to the commission's report represents a "limited" step in the right direction.  Baird noted, however, that the government failed to respond to key recommendations in the report. For example,  the commission recommended that  women who carry a fetus to term be declared the legal mother regardless of their  genetic relationship, and that in vitro fertilization be used only in cases of blocked  fallopian tubes as evidence shows it is  generally unsuccessful in other instances.  Marleau said that while she wanted to  take stronger measures, the NRT issue is  too complex and involves too many players to move too quickly. She says she  supports legislation and that government  plans to establish a "permanent management regime" early next year.  SEPTEMBER 1995 Movement Matters  listings informatioi  Movement Matters is designed to  be a network of news, updates and  information of special interest to  the women's movement.  Submissions to Movement Matters  should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double spaced and may be  edited for length. Deadline is the  18th of the month preceding  publication.   by Robyn Hall  Salvadoran lesbians  organize  Lesbians in El Salvador have formed  a new group aimed at demystifying "lesbians' dirty image." To date about 25  women have joined Media Luna (Half  Moon).  Media Luna says they formed the  grou p to ensure there i s an organized gay  movement "where women and men  struggle from the legal political platform  for their right to a sexuality free from  prejudice." The group adds that the family, community, school, church and even  the government try to hide, 'sanitize,'  and repress the reality of many  Salvadoran lesbians and gay men.  For more information about Media  Luna, write to Mujeres por la Dignidad y  la Vida, Calle Gabriela Mistral #224, San  Salvador, El Salvador; or call 011-503-  226-1879.  Camp SiS needs you  This summer the Camp SiS Collective, a non-profit cultural, political and  education centre for womyn and children, has been opening up their land site  in the Haliburton area of Ontario. Camp  SiS is a space for womyn to develop  creatively, network and share information, educate ourselves on political issues, learn non-traditional job skills, and  retreat from poverty, violence and the  concrete jungle.  Camp SiS is community owned and  operated by Multicultural Womyn in  Concert (MWIC). MWIC supports the  advancement and rights of womyn in  struggle through organizing and providing venues for womyn cultural workers,  artists, musicians, writers, film and video  makers, dancers and womyn's cultural  and political organizations.  Camp SiS is asking womyn to help  with the ongoing costs of running the  camp by making donations. The total  price of the land purchase was $35,000,  and the monthly mortgage payment is  $360. A tax receipt will be issued for  donations over $10. Other ways to get  involved include providing transportation and donating/lending tools.  Womyn are also invited to help clear  land, put up fences, and hammer the  structures for the camp's main buildings.  For more information contact min  sook or lisa at Multicultural Womyn in  Concert, PO Box 266, Stn E, Toronto,  Ontario,M6H2X0;telephone/fax:(416)  532-9642.  Vancouver Aboriginal  Justice Centre  Last September, the Vancouver  Aboriginal Justice Centre opened its  doors as a legal resource centre, staffed  by Aboriginal people who provide legal information and services to Aboriginal people in the Greater Vancouver  The purposes of the Vancouver  Aboriginal Justice Centre Society are  diverse. The Justice Centre, in part,  works to advocate for and provide quality legal representation to Aboriginal  people in the Lower Mainland, to assist  Aboriginal people who are incarcerated, to focus on Aboriginal youth to  keep them out of the justice system, to  seek the assistance of Elders in resolving conflicts, and to assist in forwarding cases that will have positive  precedential impact on the law.  Some of the Centre's services include: qualifying people for legal aid,  referrals to lawyers, the development  of alternative dispute resolution models, and public legal information and  cross-cultural training for people employed in the justice system.  The Justice Centre also operates a  Native Law Clinic Program to provide  services to people who cannot afford a  lawyer and do not qualify for legal aid.  The supervising lawyer and students  work Monday, Tuesday and Thursday  8:30am to 5:00pm.  The Justice Centre's Vancouver office is located at 73 Water Street, Main  Floor (in Gastown) and is open Mondays, Tuesdays, Thursdaysand Fridays  9:00am to noon and 1:00pm to 4:30pm,  and Wednesdays 1:00 to 4:30pm. For  more information call (604) 684-2121.  Children, reading,  and more reading  Mothers who are worried their kids  are overdosing on Mighty Morphin  Power Rangers and other mindless TV  programs have an alternative. Frontier  College Family Learning is offering resources and training for mothers interested in starting a reading circle for  children ages 0 to 12. Frontier College  (formerly known as Read Canada) is a  Canada-wide, volunteer-based literacy  organization.  The reading circles are like clubs  which meet once a week and are run by  parents and volunteers who do reading  activities with the children. The circles  are designed to help motivate kids to  read and to help them improve their  reading skills. The circles givechildrena  chance to see reading as an exciting  activity, and not just one connected with  school and studying. Reading circles  can be designed to fit many cultures and  languages.  Frontier College also provides resources and training to anyone interested in setting up a reading circle. As  well, theprogram offers childrenchances  to win book prizes and create their own  libraries at home.  For more informationaboutthe reading circles and training programs, contact Frontier College Family Learning.  In Vancouver: c/o Britannia Commu-  nityCentre, 1661 Napier Street, Vancouver, B.C., V5L 4X4, telephone (604) 253-  4391, fax (604) 253-4361. In Toronto: 35  Jackes Ave, Toronto, Ont, M4T 1E2,  phone (416) 923-3591. Or call toll free 1-  800-555-6523.  Vancouver Lesbian  Connection update  The Vancouver Lesbian Connection  is 'Workin' It.' Following a public meeting held at the Native Friendship Centre  in October 1994 in which the VLC sought  feedback from the community, two  working groups were formed to effect  changes towards making the VLC reflect the diversity of the lesbian community.  The two groups are now working  directly with the VLC's collective, looking at not only the structure of membership, but also the structure of how business is carried out and connecting these  to accessibility of the Centre. The goal is  to be bare-bones-honest about the organization so that women have the information they need to make informed  decisions about their involvement with  the VLC.  Watch future issues of Kinesis for  updates on the VLC.  Beyond Transition  All women who have left—or are in  the process of freeing themselves from—  abusive situations are invited to participate in a grassroots conference, Beyond  Transition.  The purposes of the conference, to  be held in ap proximately one year in the  Lower Mainland, are to celebrate the  journey of every woman from abuse to  safety, and to identify issues that survivors of abuse must grapple with in order  to reach safety, and to name what works  and what must be changed.  The steering committee of the conference envisions it to be a grassroots  happening, where all women leaving  abuse can come together to support each  other, and make things better for themselves and those coming down the road  later.  Women interested in joining the  Steering Committee or one of the working committees (still to be formed) to  help plan the event, can write to: Beyond  Transition c/o Emily Murphy Transition House, 3095 Lonsdale Avenue,  North Vancouver, BC, V7N 3J6; fax 987-  1623.  Cancer resources for  lesbians  Women looking for resource information on lesbians and cancer can contact the Women's Cancer Resource  Center (WCRC) in Berkeley, California,  or the Lesbian Community Cancer  Project (LCCP) in Chicago, Illinois.  The Women's Cancer Resource  Center, founded by a small group of  lesbian cancer survivors in 1986, provides a referral hotline, support groups,  and practical help, such as transportation, shopping, and housekeeping chores  for cancer survivors.  Diane Estrin of WCRC explained  that the focus on lesbians with cancer  comes from the center's recognition of  the way homophobia exacerbates the  difficulties of being diagnosed with the  disease. WCRC has recently finished  training volunteers to focus specifically  on the needs of lesbians surviving cancer. The center is also producing a brochure for health care professionals who  may be treating lesbians with cancer.  The Lesbian Community Cancer  Project, founded in 1990, has produced  a pamphlet toaddress the most pressing  needs of lesbians with cancer. The pamphlet suggests that lesbians experience a  higher prevalence of breast, cervical,  and ovarian cancer than their heterosexual counterparts because lesbians are  less likely to have children before the age  of 30, do not conduct regular breast  exams on themselves, and often do not  aggressively advocate for their day-today care-often because of inadequate  health insurance or homophobia of medical professionals.  To contact WCRC or LCCP, both of  which are members of the National Coalition of Lesbian and Feminist Cancer  projects, write or call: Lesbian Community Cancer Project, 4753 North Broadway, #602, Chicago, II 60640, tel (312)  508-9225; and the Women's Cancer Resource Center, 323 Shattuck Avenue,  Berkeley, CA 94703. (510) 763-8921.  [Information from Sojourner June 1995]  SEPTEMBER 1995 Movement Matters  Women in prison  project  The Women In Prison Project  (WIPP), sponsored by Woman's Way  magazine of Boulder, Colorado, offers  incarcerated women the chance to publish their writing and art as a way to heal  from their pain.  Begun two years ago, the project  publishes two to four pages of work by  incarcerated women, offering them "the  opportunity to read and write about  their lives and take an assertive approach  to their problems and challenges." Dissemination of the prisoners' work is also  being used to educate and inform the  women's community about issues affecting incarcerated women.  Some of the many components of  WIPP include:  • a pen pal exchange so that women  inmates have the opportunity to correspond with women outside of the prison;  • creative journal-writing workshops held in prisons;  • free workbooks that teach journal  writing for women unable to attend  WIPP workshops; and  • a transition fund that will offer  money and goods to help newly released women to re-enter society.  For more information about the  project or to send donation, write to  Woman's Way, PO Box 19614 Boulder,  Colorado 80308, or call (303) 530-7617.  [Information from Sojourner June 1995]  Newspaper for world  conference on women  During the United Nations 4th  World Conference on Women, Women's Feature Service (WFS), an international news-feature service, will be publishing Beijing Watch, an independent  daily newspaper of events and issues  debated at the UN conference. Thirty  women reporters, editors, and translators from Asia, Africa, Latin America,  Europe and the United States will report  on the conference for WFS. Coverage of  events will be printed in English, with  selected materials in Spanish, French,  Chinese, and Arabic.  WFS was founded in 1987asa project  of the Rome-based Inter Press Service to  give the voices and views of women  greater access to the world's media. Since  1991, it has been an independent nonprofit news agency based in New Delhi,  India, with bureaus in the United States,  Philippines, South Africa and Costa Rica.  Its network of freelance women journalists reports from some 40 countries  worldwide, producing more than 400  features a year.  For more information about Women's Feature Service or Beijing Watch,  contact Margaret Bald, Marketing Director, WFS, 20 West 20th Street Suite  1003, New York, New York, 10011; tel:  (212) 807-9192.  [Informatinfrom Sojourner, August 1995]  London forum of  Chinese women  The London Forum of Chinese  Women works to alleviate the isolation  of women who work with Chinese  women and of individual Chinese  women.  The purpose of the Forum is to give  Chinese women a public and united  voice to fight for the eradication of the  prejudices commonly experienced by  all women, misconceptions directed toward foreigners, and the resistance to  women's equality from within the Chinese community.  At the Forum's inaugural meeting  held in November 1993, women in attendance—most of whom who work  within the Chinese community- identified a variety of issues that needed to be  addressed. The issues included, domestic violence, homophobia, and racism.  The Forum intends to bring these and  other issues onto the public agenda.  For more information about the London Forum of Chinese Women contact  them care of the Chinese Information  Service, 68 Shaftesbury Avenue, London, England, Wl. Or call Wah-Yin  Rixon at 0171-494-3273.  [Information from Feminist Library Neius-  letter, Spring 1995)  Help support  London s feminist  library  The Feminist Library in London,  England houses an unique collection of  writings for and about women. The library collection is maintained by volunteers who are also available to answer  queries and to give advice.  The library also keeps a list of courses  and classes for women, and maintains  an index of research projects relating to  women in the United Kingdom. The  Feminist Library publishes a quarterly  newsletter, also produced by volunteers,  which contains book reviews, features, a  book catalogue and events.  The Feminist Library is looking for  financial support to enable it to continue  offering its services and to secure the  futureof the library collection. Currently,  the library receives a grant from South-  wark Council, but the grant is only  enough to cover their rent.  For more information or to send a  financial donation to the library, write  to: The Feminist Library, 5A Westminster Bridge Road, London, SE1 7XW.  Bed & Breakfast  A Beautiful Place  Centre yourself  in the comfort and tranquility  of B.C.'s Super Natural  Gulf Islands.  Healthy Breakfasts  Hot Tub & Sauna  5 acres of forested  foot paths with ponds  ocean and mountain views  A Memorable Escape  (604) 537-9344  1207 Beddis Road,  Salt Spring Island, B.C. V8K 2C8  The 14th ANNUAL VANCOUVER  INTERNATIONAL FILM FESTIVAL PRESENTS  MORE   FILMS THAN   EVER  BY WOMEN   DIRECTORS  Angela (USA) Rebecca Miller's award-winning story of two young girls'  attempt to save their mentally ill mother with ritual acts • Awakening  (Hungary) Judit Elek follows a I 3-year-old Jewish girl in the Stalinist era as  she copes with the death of her mother • Blush (China) Li Shaohong  won the Silver Bear Award at the Berlin Film Festival with her look at the  intertwining lives of two prostitutes during the Cultural Revolution • Thin  Ice (Great Britain) Fiona Cunningham Reid's sly tale of a lesbian figure  skater and her search for a new skating partner; featuring scenes from the  Gay Games • The War Between Us (Canada) Anne Wheeler takes her  audience back to the Japanese internment camps in B.C. during WW II.  War Stories (New Zealand) Gaylene Preston presents a surprising mix  of WW II recollections from seven very different women • Portrait of a  Young Girl at the End of the '60s, in Brussels (France) Chantal  Akerman chronicles the awakening sexuality of a young lesbian in an era of  social and political change • Two Brothers, My Sister (Portugal) Teresa  Villaverde explores the struggle of a young woman to survive in her explosive family environment • Rosine (France) Christine Carriere exposes the  dark heart of family abuse as a long-missing father suddenly rejoins his 14-  year-old daughter and her young mother • And many more...  PROGRAMME & TICKET INFORMATION  Sept. 16      16 page Viacom Guide available all over town  Sept. 18      Passes on sale at 2 Box Offices: Pacific Cinematheque (1131 Howe St)  & ROGERS Video (Broadway & Arbutus)  Charge by phone (Mastercard/VISA) 685-8297  B.C.Tel Film Festival Hotline 685-8352  Sept 22      Advance tickets on sale at all advance outlets  16 page Vancouver Sun Guide in Friday paper  Sept. 23      Souvenir Programme available at Box Offices, select Starbucks,  all Duthie Books &Videomatica (Free Sept 23-24 while supplies last!)  250 Films from 40 Countries  September 29 - October 15,1995  0 «L  Tk Women's (jvisthust  —In(Ik%poten(Ujs-  Just for a rest  or for skilled  support in your  recovery from  burnout,  addiction,  abuse,  trauma or  unfriendly  environments  Kathleen Shannon  (604) 229-5325  S41    C23    RR#3  Nelson BC VIL5P6  SEPTEMBER 1995 Feature  Interview with D. Michelle Cave:  Young women organising  in Barbados ....  by D. Michelle Cave  as told to Fatima Jaffer  At last March's International Symposium on Women and the Media in Toronto,  Michelle Cave represented two organizations: CAFRA (the Caribbean Association  of Feminist Research and Action); and  GLOW (Growing, Learning, Organizing  Women), an organization foryoung women  in Barbados. Cave defines herself as a journalist by training, and a political scientist  and a historian by practice. She spoke with  Kinesis in March about lesbian organizing  in Barbados, and Caribbean participation at  the upcoming United Nations 4th World  Conference on Women in Beijing, ivhere  Cave will represent CAFRA and GLOW.  jaffer: Could you tell us a little about  CAFRA, which I believe is a coalition of  organizations in the Caribbean?  Cave: Yes. We have members in all of  the Caribbean territories—Spanish,  Dutch, English and French-speaking.  CAFRA is involved in numerous  projects, such as women and agriculture, women and war, women and other  development issues. It currently intends  to embark on a youth and gender project.  CAFRA basically starts with where  women are at—how women do the  things they do and what they need to do  them better.  Jaffer: Could you tell us about  GLOW?  Cave: We're a group of 17 young  women who saw the need for a group  specifically for young women. We focus  on two areas. Sexuality in all spheres of  life is one. We're doing a lot of research  and workshops and are looking at video  productions on the issue of young women's sexuality.  The second area is youth training  and [addressing the issue of] delinquency. We do research, workshops and  video production but we also use radio,  story-telling, other traditional women's  communication and dramatizations. It's  an amazingly successful project in terms  of public education. We target people  under 30 in schools. We work in groups  of five to ten people.  Because most of the groupsare dominated by young women, it has made our  work very challenging in that there's  this new phenomenon here in the Caribbean called "male marginalization"  where the fact women are progressing  and succeeding marginalizes the men.  It's based on the notion that women  "must bring along the men."  It's incredible. For eons the doors  were not open to women. Now that  they're opening, women are entering.  But on top of these new opportunities,  they are also doing all the other things  they did in the past. Instead of three jobs,  they have six. They're succeeding at a  phenomenal rate and the men can't handle that so crime is up, aggression is up,  and so on.  jaffer: Could you tell us about  CAFRA and GLOW's agenda at the  upcoming conference in Beijing?  Cave: One thing CAFRA wants is to  add our media strategy to the overall  Beijing document [the Platform for Action]. CAFRA's media [coordinator],  Thelma Henderson, is particularly interested in public education and traditional communication, and in how new  technology can fit in with traditional  communication mechanisms. CAFRA's  work at this conference is emphasizing  the importance of traditional communication.  CAFRA also greatly influenced the  Caribbean non-governmental organization (NGO) document we are taking to  Beijing, which focuses on women and  decision-making. On the other hand, the  areas GLOW will focus on are sexual  orientation, youth and media.  I think the Caribbean NGO delegation as a whole has the strength to make  the space in Beijing to get their points  through.  Before the NGO Women's Forum  begins on August 30th, we'll be doing  work on the ground at the local level  with local people. We have to get the  Barbadian ministers who are going to  Beijing as part of the governmental delegation to understand the NGO point of  view. Some ministers are open to hearing from NGOs like CAFRA. We have  some wonderful women in Parliament  in Barbados who have proven to be  friendly to the NGOs.  jaffer: Even if these women attend  the Beijing conference on behalf of Barbados, how effective do you think they  will be in terms of bringing abou t change  upon their return?  Cave: It depends on the work we do  between now and August 30. If we do a  fantastic job in terms of publiceducation  as well as getting the ministers to take on  our issues, they are not going to be able  to come back from Beijing and do nothing.  jaffer: One of the areas you personally concentrate on is lesbian organizing. Could you talk a bit about lesbian  organizing in Barbados?  Cave: GLOW is interested in exploring sexual orientation. There were only  seven of us in GLOW in 1993 when we  first started out. Now there are 17. GLOW  grew out of something extremely  unprogressive called Ladies In Transition. Most of us think it's okay to be out  lesbians but do not know how to do that  in a society that says women are not  sexual. GLOW tries to link up with other  organizations all over the world to find  ways to make i t okay to be something the  world says is a "disease."  Most of usat GLOW do notbuy into  the sexual bullshit that is considered the  norm—that Caribbean people are extremely sexual. We may be sexual in the  D. Michelle Cave. Photo by Fatima Jaffer  sense of being extremely comfortable  with their outer bodies, but we are not  really comfortable with what it means to  love, have sex, pray, eat and think sensually. When you say "penis" or "vagina,"  there's an immediate hush. I guess that  happens all over the world. You just  don't talk about this stuff. Then up comes  a young woman who decides her vagina  is as incredible as her mind or her eyes,  and that it works just as well and that, if  she didn't have it, if she doesn't control  who touches and uses it, she would lack  something really important.  So GLOW is interested in public  education around the issue of sexuality  in general, but specifically in researching what it means to be lesbian. We want  to demystify this thing called "lesbianism."  jaffer: Do you use the term "lesbian"  in Barbados?  Cave: Actually, "lesbian" is a problematic term. At GLOW, we are women  who love women. As we ask in some of  our radio messages, "If we think it's  okay for us to love each othe—platoni-  cally or sexually—why do you think it's  not?" Why is it not okay for women and  girls to walk down the street holding  hands, or to live together? And how  come the laws in the Caribbean—and in  Barbados specifically—say it is not legal  for two women to be a family, to raise a  family, to will property to each other.  We're trying to get the point across  that women are sexual beings and that  sexuality is the norm. Heterosexuality is  not.  We do this by talking to large numbers of women of our grandmother's  generation. We talk to women who have  beensleepingwith women forages. Even  though it's not "normal," it is tolerated.  Loving women is rational—we're ra  tional beings and there's really nothing  you can rationally argue against women  loving women. Most of the resistance  we deal with comes from Christians  who talk about how homosexuality is  evil and wicked and bad for your body.  How can you argue with something so  irrational?  jaffer: Apart from GLOW, are there  other groups that organize lesbians or  women loving women?  Cave: Not that we know of.  jaffer: How do other organizations  in the women's movement respond ? Are  you out to these groups?  Cave: Well, after pretty much beating our heads against the wall until the  blood ran out, for the first time last  November, when the the Caribbean human rights movement and the Caribbean feminist movement came together,  sexuality got on the agenda. Still I don't  know whether the women's movement  fully accepts the reality of lesbian organizing or lesbian existence in the Caribbean.  jaffer: So the women's movement is  another front that GLOW fights?  Cave: I don't know whether we'll  fight it. We will definitely be raising hell  [laughs].  jaffer: Are there lesbians from the  Caribbean attending the Beijing conference/forum?  Cave: Yes. CAFRA will also be pushing to put the issue of sexuality on the  agenda. Sexual choice is not included in  our regional document but I believe the  people going to Beijing from the Caribbean are in favour of sexual choice being  on the agenda. It is an extremely important topic and they're no longer going to  be able to put it under a bushel, so to  speak.   Fatima jaffer is a feminist lesbian activist.  SEPTEMBER 1995 180 Days/180 Ways:  Campaigning around the world for women's rights  compiled by Agnes Huang   On March 8th—International  Women's Day—women worldwide took  part in events, rallies, marches, and  actions kicking off a campaign to  advance and support the rights of  women everywhere.  Since then, hundreds of women's  organizations in every region of the  world have been participating in the 180  Days/180 Ways Women's Action  Campaign. The Campaign was spearheaded by New York-based  WEDO—the Women's Environment  and Development Organization—and  was initiated to call attention to the  United Nations 4th World Conference  on Women and the parallel non-government organization Forum, and to  catalyze local, national, regional and  international actions for women's  equality and gender justice.  The 180 Days/180 Ways Campaign  was intended to use the 180 days  leading up lo the UN Conference in  Beijing to make governments, the UN  system and the world more responsive  and accountable to the critical needs  and agendas of women. The Campaign  has also been an opportunity for  women to call for a 180 degree reversal  of negative trends that threaten  progress for women's equality; to  highlight the growing strength and  diversity of women's networks and  groups around the world as we work  together to advance the status of  women; and to build momentum and  support for demands to make local and  national governments more responsive  to women, increase their financial  support for women's needs beyond the  180 days of this Campaign, and pledge  to implement the Platform for Action  adopted at the Beijing Conference.  The Campaign will officially culminate on September 6th—during the  Beijing Conference—with women  around the world mobilizing on an  International Day of Action for Women's  Equality [see box]. However, many  women's groups have already indicated  that they plan to continue organizing  special actions for women's rights well  beyond the 180 days.  Many of the actions were organized  to support women in preparing for the  Beijing Conference. Activities included:  meetings and forums to examine the  drafts of the Platform for Action for  Equality, Development and Peace [the  document to be discussed and adopted  by national governments]; events to  raise funds to ensure grassroots  women can participate in the conference; and lobbying of national governments to support women's demands  and adopt the Platform for Action.  Many women's organizations have  also held events and workshops and  have initiated projects to address the  multitude of issues concerning the  rights of women.  An outline of some of these activities folbws:  AFRICA  Cameroun:  The League for Woman and Child  Education (LEWCE), the Federation of  Women's Associations in Cameroun  (FAFCM/FWAC) and other groups  have organized actions and events,  including the launch of a women's  savings bank on August 9th (African  Women's Day); the launch of the "Plant  2000 Trees" campaign, which coincided  with African Child's Day; and activities  to promote a sustainable planet, and  women's economic and political empowerment. The National Professional  Media Women (NAPMEW) also produced a Radio Network Program to  raise issues concerning poverty,  unemployment and social  disintegration—issues that were addressed at the World Summit on Social  Development held in Copenhagen,  Denmark in March.  Gabon:  Women in Gabon have been using  mass media and community meetings  to educate women about the implications of the Beijing Conference for their  daily lives. They have also been mobilizing to build up opposition to national  legislation that would legalize polygamy  for men. In July, women held a march  in Libreville to protest the legislation  which began at the National Assembly  building and ended at the President's  house.  Kenya:  The Education Centre for Women  in Democracy (ECWD) coordinated a  number of information seminars highlighting the importance of the Beijing  Conference for grassroots community-  based organizations, and focussing  primarily on priority areas relevant to  the concerns of rural women. In May  and June, Family Life Promotion and  Services, a member of the Network of  the African Rural Women Association  (NARWA), lobbied the National Council  of Women of Kenya (NCWK)—Kenya's  national NGO focal point—to solicit its  commitment to the critical issues in the  Platform of Action both at a national  and grassroots level.  Mozambique:  Rural and urban women's organizations have been actively preparing for  the Beijing Conference. As part of their  activities, the Associacao Mocambicana  Para O Desenvolvimento Da Mulher  Rural (AMRU) prepared a video on the  history of rural women which will be  taken to Beijing.  Nigeria:  The Country Woman Association of  Nigeria and the Network of African  Rural Women's Associations held  week-long activities in each of the  Nigerian states aimed at the eradication  of poverty.  Senegal:  Dakar-based ENDA (Environment  and Development in the Third World), in  collaboration with the network Women  Living Under Muslim Laws, organized a  meeting on health, sexuality, culture  and religion in the Islamic world. ENDA  also has coordinated a training workshop on women, technology, information and communication on E-mail  techniques for women's groups in  francophone Africa.  South Africa:  In July, South Africa women held a  pre-Beijing national conference, out of  which came a pledge froth Deputy  President Mbeki that until gender parity  is achieved, ministerial and deputy  ministerial appointments should go to  women, and that an Office on the  Status of Women in the President's  office would be established. South  African women also took part in a  media workshop exploring the portrayal  of women in mainstream media and  practical strategies for covering the  Beijing Conference.  Tanzania:  TAMWA (Tanzania Media Women's Association) coordinated a women's television (WE-TV) initiative  covering the lives of women in the  media. The initiative includes 5 minute  excerpts from 20 other countries  besides Tanzania and will be taken to  Beijing.  ASIA AND  THE PACIFIC  Bangladesh:  Women in Bangladesh maintained  a campaign to "send a sister" to Beijing  to ensure that at least four grassroots  level rural women who work in organizing women in poverty situations in  Bangladesh would be able to participate  in the NGO Women's Forum. The  Helen Keller International in Bangladesh organized the Visually Impaired  Women's Forum. In June, blind women,  with the support of a theatre group and  Naripokhho, a women's organization,  presented a play focussing on the  problems and concerns of the blind,  especially blind women.  Cambodia:  Khemara, a Cambodian women's  organization, coordinated the international "Women Weaving the World  Together" campaign. Women attending  the NGO Women's Forum will be  bringing weavings from their home  countries to Beijing, so that all  weavings can be sewn together to form  a giant banner.  India:  The Centre for Social Research,  which runs two family counselling units  in south Delhi, organized a national  seminar on April 8th condemning  violence against women and calling tor  women and men to refuse to condone  or participate in abuse through "custom,  tradition or religion".  Japan:  Several activities were organized  by the Pacific Asia Resource Center,  some of which focussed on issues  concerning comfort women, war, part-  time labour, and violence against  women.  Malaysia:  The group, Sisters in Islam waged  a "Women's Agenda for Equality  Campaign," calling for the ratification of  Convention for the Elimination of all  Forms of Discrimination Against  Women (CEDAW) without exceptions  based on culture and religion.  Nepal:  Organizations of women, youth,  workers and environmental activists in  Nepal formed a National Committee for  180 Days/180 Ways Campaign to press  their government to implement the  Platform for Action. In July, the Committee held a national seminar in  Kathmandu and a handicraft exhibit to  raise funds to "send a sister to Beijing."  Pakistan:  Shirkat Gah initiated a signature  campaign calling on the Pakistan  government to ratify CEDAW without  reservation, as welt as a campaign to  network and collaborate with community based organizations to raise  awareness about issues of violence,  health and legal rights.  Philippines:  The Coalition Against Trafficking in  Women-Asia has coordinated the  creation of a visual tool for information  and advocacy work on the issue of  trafficking in women, which will be  displayed at the Beijing Conference.  Countries which contributed countries  to the visual materials are Australia,  Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Japan,  Pakistan, Sri Lanka and Thailand.  EUROPE  England:  In late August, thousands of  women gathered for a two day  festival—What Women Want: a Global  Celebration—with workshops, seminars, comedy and music. Women in  England also participated in the "What  Women Want" postcard campaign,  which surveyed women's feeling and    -  opinions via postcards.  LATIN   AMERICA/  CARIBBEAN  Argentina:  Encuentro Nacional Mujeres  Mendoza held accountable on International Women's Day to discuss the  feminization of poverty, reproductive  rights/and women's access to participation in the definition of political  structures, politics and economic  processes. As well, the organization in  collaboration with other women's  groups produced a weekly FM radio  show.  Brazil:  A network of women radio communicators was established to produce  four radio spots—concerning women's  unpaid work, peace, the meaning of the  Beijing Conference, and equality  between girls and boys—which aired  nationally on more than 30 radio  stations. The network has its roots in a  1993 project launched by CEMINA, the  Brazilian Centre for Women's Projects,  to train women in radio techniques.  Colombia:  Women's organizations launched  the 180 Days campaign on March 8th  by delivering a proclamation to the  President of the Republic, with demands to be addressed before the  Beijing Conference. As a result of  women's activism, the government  appointed a Commission for the Women's Movement, and created a Department for Women's Equality.  Nicaragua:  Centro de Informacion y Servicios  de Asesoria en Salud (CISAS), a NGO  dedicated to popular health education  and communication, organized over 70  Nicaraguan organizations to join the  180 Days Campaign. Events organized  by CISAS focussed on its priority areas  of working with women, adolescents  and children—mostly girls.  St. Vincent:  The Committee for the Development of Women based in St. Vincent,  West Indies called on women to hold a  fast on the 8th day of every month  between International Women's Day,  March 8th and the International Day of  Action, September 6th to raise attention  to world poverty. The campaign was  inspired by the four day hunger strike  led by more than 100 women at the  Copenhagen Social Summit in March.  Trinidad and Tobago:  The Network of NGOs of Trinidad  and Tobago for the Advancement of  Women launched its first Women's  Parliament and a campaign to increase  the participation of women in political  decision-making positions. The Parliament was held at the end of May and  first two weeks of June to address the  core issues raised at the Copenhagen  Social Summit: poverty, unemployment,  and social disintegration.  MIDDLE EAST  Egypt:  The Beijing Trust Fund in Egypt  has supported over 20 different activities, case studies, and workshops in  preparation for the Conference on  Women. Some topics were: women's  legal and reproductive rights, roles of  women in environmental protection,  violence against women, and women in  decision-making.  Lebanon:  In May, the Lebanese Association  for Business Management organized a  workshop to support women in their  decision-making skills.  NORTH AMERICA  United States:  The Harlem Women's Committee  organized several events during the  180 days in order to create an "action  plan" for sustainable and economic  development for the 'Harlems of the  World.' Women in the state of Iowa  mobilized and convinced the local city  council to ratify CEDAW (Convention  on the Elimination of Discrimination  Against Women) on August 2nd. In  July, a city-wide forum was held in Iowa  City to discuss strategies for  combatting poverty among women. And  public hearings and conferences on  women, health and the environment  were held in New Orleans and San  Francisco.   The information listed on this page zuas  taken from materials prepared by the  Women's Environment and Development  Organization (WEDO) in Nexu York.  Thanks to Joo-Hyun Kang of WEDO for  faxing and couriering the pages and pages  of information. As Kinesis goes to press,  listings of 180 Days/180 Ways campaign  in Canada was not available.  Graphics from The Tribune: a Women & Development  Quarterly, The International Women's Tribune Centre  International Day of Action for Women's Equality  I September 6,1995  f In solidarity with the thousands of  X women who will be participating in the  i: UN 4th World Conference on Women and  I NGO Forum and with our sisters every-  l where, millions of women worldwldewill  | celebrate an International Day of Action  Nor Women's Equality on September6th,  l linking our struggles and our strategies.  As Kinesis was going to press, a full  I listing of September 6th actions was not  I yet available. Below are some of the  actions we are aware of:  The League for Woman and Child  \ Education (LEWCE) in the Cameroun  \ will hold a day of information at their  centre on women's equality issues and  I the 180 Days/180 Ways Campaign.  In Ghana, the Network of Ghanaian  Women (NEGWOM) will hold a forum and  panel discussion on "Women's Rights  and Sustainable Development."  The Network of African Rural Women  Association and Country Women Association of Nigeria will be launchinga women's bank to cap off their campaign to  eradicate poverty In every Nigerian state.  In South Africa, women will hold ral-  liestofurtherthecallforthe ratification by  the South African government of  CEDAW—the Convention for the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against  Women. Earlier, the South African government had promised to ratify CEDAW  by August 9th—South African Women's  Day—but that date passed without any  action by the government.  In Colombia, women's organizations  are planningtounitewith marches nationwide.  Women in Bangladesh will gather for  a national rally calling for gender justice.  In Nepal, women will hold a Rally for  Women's Rights in Janakpur, while a  memorandum of women's demands is  delivered to the Prime Minister in  Kathmandu.  A festival of women's videos will be  shown in Delhi, India.  10,000 women in over 50 towns and  cities are expected to be out on the streets  marching against rape at Take Back the  Night rallies across Canada. [See article,  page 3.]  In Toronto, women will set up a 24  hour Tent City on the lawns of Queen's  Park, the home to the provincial legislature.  Women in Peterborough, Ontario  will set up a display at Victoria Park of  the colourful t-shirts—many with powerful slogans—that they painted as part  of their 180 Days Campaign activities.  As well, many women and women's  organizations who will be participating  in the Beijing conference will launch  numerous actions—from workshops to  video screening to photo displays—at  the NGO Women's Forum in Huairou on  September 6th. Arts  Book review: Reading Between the Lines: The Diaries of Women:  Discoveries of internal worlds  by Janet Nicol  READING BETWEEN THE LINES:  THE DIARIES OF WOMEN  by Betty Jane Wylie  Key Porter Books Limited,  Toronto, 1995.  Betty Jane Wylie developed a passion for collecting and reading women's  diaries. They "shatter your heart and  stagger you with their truth," says the  author of Reading Between the Lines: Diaries of Women.  Wylie's passion was partly triggered  by her own enjoyment of keeping a journal which she describes as "my closest  companion, my confidante, my commonplace book, and my constant renewable resource." And now Wylie offers readers an entertaining and informative account of ordinary and famous  English-speaking womens' journals,  from the 16th century to the present day  in Reading Between the Lines.  Wylie arranges the diary excerpts  and commentary thematically, illustrating the common patterns of women's  lives in their relationships with men and  women, within traditional situations or  alternate lifestyles.  It is the "accidental mavericks, outside the system for whatever reason"  who write more introspective diaries,  Wylie observes, because, "it is easier for  the mavericks to find their way to an  inner landscape." Yet, Wylie notes that  "the other—the 'safe' ones—the ones  who seem never to be alone, can't afford  to withdraw their investment in their  life's work. These ones stay where they  are and are 'quiet,' unknown women,  the 'home-concealed' women attempting to define themselves with a scrap of  paper and a scratchy pen."  One of the many quiet, unknown  women Wylie writes about is Maria M.  Fifield (1800-1861), from New England.  Fifield wrote in March 1860: "Monday,  7th: At home sewing patchwork. Thursday, 8th: ditto. Friday, 9th, ditto." By  keeping records, no matter how simple,  Wylie suggests women were attempting  tovalidatetheirdailyactivities.Itisonly  in recent years, with a push from feminists and social historians, that the recent historic domestic duties of women  have gained interest and recognition.  Among the more unconventional  women Wylie researches is Gladys  Roberts, an English suffragette who  wrote from prison in 1913: "I lie on the  bed—I feel so weak—breakfast has just  been put in. I said I didn't want any. God  help me! I wonder if those outside are  thinking about us? I am a coward..."  Wylie clarifies a few misconceptions—such as, Queen Victoria was not  "Victorian" in her attitudes, but as her  Author Betty Jane Wylie.  Photo by Peter Caton.  diary indicates, emotionally and sexually very happy with her husband Prince  Albert. And Anais Nin, the famed twentieth century diary writer, was not a  groundbreaker among "introspective"  women diarists. Other women before  the turn of the century had written and  in some cases published, similar types  of diaries.  The journey "inward" provides  many themes for diarists which Wylie  extracts, such as love, suffering, aging,  loneliness and dying. A primary quest  for women, Wylie observes, is the di sen-  tanglement from others and the search  for self-identity. French novelist George  Sand (1804-1876), wrote at age 65: "Can  one know one's self? Is one ever somebody? I don't know anything about it  any more. It now seems to me that one  changes from day to day and that every  few years one becomes a new being."  Wylie suggests that many journal  writers make discoveries about themselves after the fact, when they re-read  their diaries and think, "did I say that,"  or "did I mean that?" These discoveries  for both the writer and the reader of  diaries, are part of the process of reading between the lines. They are a way  women discover more about themselves  and their place in society. Through careful reading, Wylie believes we can "interpret earlier messages and find the  thread of continuity" in our own life.  Numerous journals of women are  available and Wylie offers an extensive  bibliography, but only a few analytical  collections of diary writing have been  published, most notably, Revelations:  Diaries of Women (1975) and Ariadne's  Thread: A Collection of Contemporary Women's journals by Lyn Lifshin (1982).  Wylie'scontribution further extends  our knowledge and understanding of  the past and present lives of women.  The reader might be inspired to explore  women's diaries further and may also  consider preserving her own diary for  future generations of women to find  connections.   Janet Nicol is a teacher and freelance  writer living in Vancouver.  JANET LICHTY  B.A., M.Ed. Counselling Psychology, R.C.C.  COUNSELLOR  1-296 W18 Ave, Vancouver, B.C., V5Y 2A7  872-2611  games puzzles toys animals cards books  paints checkers trivial pursuit travel games  crossword puzzles cribl  teddy bears juggling  backgammon  dark stars payday  by numbers  and crafts si  party sup]  It's All Fun & Games  1417 Commercial Drive  253-6727  | Homesharing Network For Single Mothers  I «Free Service for single mother families interested in living together.  | »The Network assists in matching families throughout the greater  i Vancouver area.  ¥  YWCA    ?or more m^°ca"me  of Vancouver       Single Mothers' Homesharing Network  873-1189  LIBERTY THRIFT  a thrift store with a difference  ...women helping women  1009 Commercial Drive  telephone: 255-3080  Hours: 12-6pm Tuesday to Saturday  closed Sunday and Monday  SEPTEMBER 1995 Arts  Review of taxwesa Wa - Strength of the River;  Traditional wisdom  & fishing  by Renae Morriseau  tAXWESA WA -  STRENGTH OF THE RIVER  Nimpkish Wind Productions, Inc.  Vancouver, BC, 1995  The BC salmon fishery is in a state of  crisis—salmon stocks have continually  declined over the years. Although the  statistics on the level of the fish stocks  provide different figures, the bottom  line message is always conservation.  That's also the message that comes  through in Barb Cranmer's new film.  haxwesa Wa - Strength of the River  explores the traditional fishing practices  of three Aboriginal communities on the  west coast of BC. Written and directed  by Cranmer, the one hour film documentary gives us a view of the 'Najngis,  Heiltsuk and Storlo First Nations' traditional fishing practices that have sustained them for thousands of years...until  now.  Barb Cranmer has fished BC's  Johnstone Strait with her father for 15  years. A member of the 'Namgis First  Nation, her people have a long fishing  tradition that stresses respect for the  ocean's resources. Cranmer believes that  it's time for people to listen to what  Natives have to say about maintaining a  sustainable fishing industry.  "It's important that Native people  become involved in the decision making  process" says Cranmer. "Native people  here have practised conservation for  thousands of years; their survival depended on it. Unfortunately, government hasn't listened to this grassroots  knowledge when setting fishing policies."  For the Heiltsuk First Nation on the  central coast 'grassroots knowledge' is  conservation and community economic  development. They have created a community-based management team that  monitors the various species of fish that  swim through their traditional territory.  About seven years ago, the Heiltsuk  opened up Bella Bella Fisheries Ltd., a  food fish processing plant that has created numerous jobs for their community.  "Pride of ownership for anybody,  whether they are white or Indian, the  fishermen, they're very proud that  they're able to deliver to their own fish  plant, put their own people to work,"  states Edwin Newman, a leading voice  in Laxwesa Wa - Strength of the River.  Cranmer utilizes a non-linear style  in her film, interweaving pasfand present  circumstances that the 'Namgis, Heiltsuk  and Sto:Lo people have experienced.  One of the highlights of the film is  the portrayal of the role Aboriginal  women played in the formation of the  commercial fishing industry. Archival  Stills from Laxwesa Wa — Strength of the River, a new documentary  written and directed by Barb Cranmer.  footage and photos show Aboriginal  women working in the fish processing  plants filling tin cans with fish. Their  children, stand ing beside them, help their  mothers make their quota for the day.  Stories from Elder women pull the black  and white photos through time, speaking about the change of lifestyle when  the commercial fishing industry and  canneries came to the coast.  "They were hard workers," says  Donna Cranmer who appears in the  documentary. "Because they already  knew, they had the knowledge of cutting fish and cleaning it and preparing it  and they were fast. They worked long  hours for very little money. They got  paid not by the hour, they got paid by the  number of flats they could fill in a day.  And the more flats you filled, the more  money you got."  Aboriginal women from up and  down the coast would make their way  to the canneries; sometimes waiting for  the barge load of fish to arrive. In harsh  working conditions they would cut,  clean, and fill their cans with fish.  There have been films made in the  past about the west coast commercial  fishery—films that spent much of their  time explaining why government policies should work and in reality don't. In  haxwesa Wa - Strength of the River,  Cranmer keeps her approach simple,  yet direct. We are not bombarded with  the politics of fishing; we are not awash  with sorrow for the injustices of the  past. We are simply given a perception  that is continually denied in our local  media—that there is a lifestyle that can  maintain and has maintained a sustainable fishery.  The current federal Fisheries Minister, Brian Tobin, joins a long line of  politicians who have vowed to make  reductions to the amount of fish that are  harvested. We now hear words of 'killing capacity,' and of 'natural causes' to  describe the shortfall of salmon projections. First Nations people have been  stressing these points for several years.  Barb Cranmer's film presents us with an  alternative.  Cranmer and her people have  watched governments 'manage' the  salmon stocks into a state of crisis.  Laxwesa Wa - Strength of the River gives us  an ultimatum. If we continue to treat the  salmon fishery with disrespect, greed,  and carelessness, all of us will pay the  price: the devastation of our natural  resource.  "I'm hoping that, in some way, this  film will help people discover the traditional wisdom that Native people have  about managing our natural resouces,"  says Cranmer.  Laxwesa Wa - Strength of the River  will be premiered in Vancouver on September 2 at 8pm at the Vogue Theatre, 918  Granville St. The evening will feature traditional songs and dances from the 'Namgis,  St6:loand Heiltsuk First Nations. Advance  tickets are $10 for adults and $6 for students  and seniors, and are available from CBO  (604) 280-2801. Tickets at the door are $12  for adults and $8 for students and seniors.  The screening is a benefit for the Native  Brotherhood of BC.  -Laxwesa Wa - Strength of the River  will also be available on video from the  National Film Board this fall. To order, call  toll-free 1-800-267-7710.   Renae Morriseau is a member of the Cree  and Saultaux First Nations. She works  within the Native community and owns a  company called Coyote Collective: First  Nations Productions. She writes mostly  for television and has a regular role on the  television series, North of 60.  Like seeing movies... theatre...  music? Like keeping up to date  with cultural issues? Seen  interesting art about which you  want to wax theory? Love  reading books?  By writing for Kinesis you will  have access to movies, plays,  music and various arts for which  we receive passes. There is also  a very good choice of books for  reviewing.  Call us today. Become a  volunteer writer and see your  favourite arts covered in Kinesis.  255-5499  SEPTEMBER 1995 Arts  Book review: The Frontiers of Love:  In between  in race and culture  by Rita Wong  THE FRONTIERS OF LOVE  by Diana Chang  University of Washington Press,  Seattle, Washington, 1994  First published in 1956, Diana  Chang's novel follows the experiences  of three Eurasian characters—Sylvia  Chen, Mimi Lambert and Feng Huang.  Living in Japanese-occupied and westernized Shanghai around the end of  World War II, these three characters are  alienated to various degrees from both  Chinese and Western cultures.  This novel should be read in its  historical context. However, as Shirley  Geok-lin Lim points out in the preface  [of the University of Washington Press  edition], "both as analogue and precursor, The Frontiers of Love speaks to the  most contemporary debates on  biculturality and biraciality." [Chang  herself is the daughter of a Chinese father and European mother.]  The individual loneliness of each  character plays out in different ways.  For Syliva and Feng there is a brief consolation to be found in their relationship, which develops quickly after both  are caughtby Japanese soldiers for breaking curfew (while celebrating the end of  the war). Called "white Chinese" by the  soldiers, Sylvia and Feng are put in an  different group than the "pure" Chinese  or the foreigners. Underlying this scene  is an implicit linking of race with paternity; both Sylvia and Feng have Chinese  fathers.  The other Eurasian, Mimi Lambert,  whose father was Australian, is grouped  with the foreigners, despite her mixed  race features. Sylvia's later words to  Feng reveal the depth of her isolation:  "No one has ever said 'we' to me before.  I never thought there would be a 'we' in  the world for me, that I might be half of  one 'we'."  However, love does not conquer all;  indeed, it is clearly inadequate to deal  with the political and social forces which  shape the characters' lives. The title of  the novel reverberates with irony if we  read it in relation to romantic love.  Whether the title could apply to other  kinds of love is left open.  Feng eventually ends up sacrificing  his humanity, his ability to care about  individual people, ostensibly for the sake  of politics. Sylvia, on the other hand,  while apolitical, retains her humanity  and her openness. It is unfortunate that  there is no character to bridge those two  solitudes, which urgently need to be  united.  My personal wishes aside, the novel  does strive for a great deal of complexity  within its historical context and raises  issues which continue to demand attention today.  Chang's turn of phrase often catch  the nuances of power and hidden assumptions that course through the characters' lives, as in the following passage:  "AH the hybrids and cosmopolitans, all  that were left in China, all that were not  in internment camps, still moving, she  knew, with the subtle authority of foreigners. Colonialism was still a perfume  behind their ears, still the wick of their  unconscious spirits. They moved among  the Chinese and left blondness in their  wakes, even when they were brunettes.  They did not live among the Chinese,  but felt superimposed on them like a  montage, as though they displaced another dimension in the city, as though  the Chinese were somehow invisible."  Having lived for a year among and  as a foreigner in China myself, albeit  more than 40 years after this book's time  period, I recognize some of Chang's  descriptions all too well.  While a political consciousness informs some of the characters, there is  also a certain sense of immobility or  helplessness, as expressed by Sylvia's  father: "We liberals have too many eyes  and no hands. That's the tragedy."  The third character, Mimi, is a tragic  figure, trapped in constructions of femi-  ninity, doomed to believing the images  that society has imposed upon her, stuck  as sex symbol rather than as a person in  her own right. Rejected by her lover  Eastside DataGraphics  We're Moving!  June 12  1938 Commercial Drive  tel: 255-9559 fax: 253-3073  Office Supplies    •    ArtSupplies  because she is Eurasian, Mimi lacks the  self esteem to assert herself in a meaningful way: "She is a willing victim as  she leaned against the column, making  her body pliant, asking any man to punish her and to find her beautiful," writes  Chang. Needless to say, I found her fate  hard to stomach. While Mimi can be  read as symbolic of women's oppression, Chang's attention to the details of  Mimi's consciousness, her thoughts and  feelings, gives Mimi the characterization necessary to make her (unfortunately) believable.  Indeed, Chang lets us get into the  heads of all three of the main characters,  and whether or not we like them as  people, the rhythms and turns of their  ideas and emotions undoubtedly have a  contrast and style to them. The dynamics in Sylvia's family were of particular  interest to me, in contrast to the somewhat limited portrayal of Feng's mother  and Mimi's aunt. At times, Chang's work  reminds me of Virginia Woolf's stream  of consciousness, both yielding insight  and requiring patience on the part of the  reader.   Rita Wong is on the editorial board of  Absinthe, a literary journal out of  Calgary.  JSaibaia -LeJjzt  cAffoida&Cz BooUtspng Svtvies*  ^Jox JSmaLL !Buiinei.i£i. & <£eLf EmfiLoyzd  • Monthly Financial Statements  • Government Remittances  • Payroll, A/P, A/R, Budgets  I Will Transform Your Paperwork!  (604) 737-1824      email:barb.l@deepcove.com  Western Canada's  Lesbian & Gay  Bookstore  Open Daily 10am to 11pm  Our Books/Our Issues  Gay Fiction  Lesbian Fiction  Our Magazines & Journals  AIDS/Health  Humour  Erotica  Queer Theory  Feminist Theory  Biographies, Essays, Poetry  Religion & Spirituality  Art & Photography  Community  1221 Thurlow(at Davie), Vancouver, B.C.  Xel:(604)669-1753 or   Fax:(604)685-0252  SEPTEMBER 1995 Arts  Book review: The Body's Memory;  The body's allies  by Emma Kivisild  THE BODY'S MEMORY  by Jean Stewart  St. Martin's Press, New York, 1989  "It may be the first real novel of our  movement," reads back cover praise for  The Body Memory. High praise indeed,  coming from The Disability Rag, the most  vocal periodical chronicling disability  activism.  Author Jean Stewart is a disability  activist in the US, arrested more than  once for her civil disobedience. Most  recently, she was involved in documenting the struggles of disabled prisoners in  the US. At her reading in Vancouver at  the University of British Columbia this  summer, one audience member remarked: "we need occasions like this to  hear each others' visions."  The Body Memory, Stewart's first  novel, is an activist book, a classic book  about a consciousness being transformed, as the lead character Kate  Meredith slowly learns to see herself as  part of a community of people with  disabilities. It is not an easy journey for  her, fighting physical pain, her own  prejudices, and the assumptions of  friends and family. But the strength of  the book lies in Stewart expressing our  unstated fears and opinions, and working through them with Kate, one by one,  until she emerges triumphant. Not able-  bodied, triumphant.  The book opens as Kate is facing  surgery for the third time for a tumor in  her hip. She begins a diary, leaving the  novel open to a strange and effective  structure of diary entries, poems, letters  and straightforward third-person narrative. Stewart guides us through the  haze and pain of extended hospital stays,  and post-op home recovery. Kate's pain  and her inability to move her leg without  it are overwhelming at first.  Gradually, however, the other elements of the book also insert themselves.  Kate is surrounded by a supportive and  tangled network of friends and lovers,  and her relationships with them are part  of coping with her disability. First she  must cope with her own self-pity, then  with her frustration at being 'babysat.'  Then she confronts the push for assimilation, the assumption that she would  prefer to be apparently able-bodied, no  matter how much pain it causes.  For me, the most powerful revelations of the book came around Kate's  growing acceptance of using a wheelchair: "contrary to popular opinion, it is  not a fate worse than death." It does  mean the end of 'passing' as able-bodied, and the beginning of a new set of  difficulties.  One particularly grueling chapter is  the account of a trip to the city, where  Kate is trapped in a parking garage, with  a broken elevator, and steep car ramps.  And wheelchairs are expensive—she has  to travel the circuit of social service  agencies that lend ancient chairs, or that  request an assurance that this is a onetime only request. It is around these  struggles that Kate starts to see the people with disabilities around her as comrades, rather than 'them.'  Interwoven with all of these struggles are Kate's (hetero)sexuality and love  relationships. Kate is likeable because  she is strong willed, a feminist. Her  sexual desires are strong, and Stewart  writes well about the complicated nature of attraction, and also about the  horror of sexual violence. I was glad that  she did not shy away from these inexorable parts of women's lives.  Kate's final revelation comes when  she realizes that her strong will is not  enough on its own, and that other women  with disabilities are invaluable role mod -  els: "It had to do with how they held  their heads. How some women in manual  ODY'S  > k v  chairsjumped curbs, practical, preoccupied with getting from here to there.  How they entered rooms full of non-  disabled people sitting straight, as if  they had a right. How, breathing into  fat-ribbed respirator tubes,certainquadriplegic women paused to smile."  Jean Stewart is currently completing an anthology of short stories.  Emma Kivisild is an artist and writer  living in Vancouver.  Lynn Redenbach, r.p.m  Therapy for  Adult & Adolescent Women  > weight preoccupation & eating disorders  > trauma & abuse issues  INA DENNEKAMP  Piano Service  VANCOUVER  WOMENS  BOOKSTORE  315CAMBIEST.  VANCOUVER, B.C. HOURS:  V6B 2N4 MONDAY - SATURDAY  TEL: (604) 684.0523 10 AM - 6 PM  |lt  "   -  • •  OUR COMMUNITIES!  OUR PUBLIC SERVICES!  A message from the Public Service Alliance of Canada   •   (604) 430-5631  SEPTEMBER 1995 Letters  Women in transformation  Dear Kinesis,  Re: "When Dykes are Stalking" [a  review by Sandra McPherson, Kinesis,  July/August 1995]  To me, Patricia Rozema's When  Night is Falling is a story of one  woman's sexual transformation. As a  dyke, I could relate to Camille's  struggle with Church over Sexuality,  societal expectation over personal  desire, and subverted attachment  (Camille's dog) over direct expression  (Petra). The film makes stunning use  of visual metaphors, however I wish  Rozema had made greater use of the  water ballet that opens the film. It  could have served as the perfect  vehicle for exposing the audience to  the inner process of Camille's  transformation. For lesbians, her  struggle needs little explanation.  Perhaps though, for straight members  watching, more explanation was  necessary to prevent lesbianism from  seeming like—as Sandra McPherson  puts it— "something that happens to a  het when she's being stalked by a  dyke."  Pheonix Wisebone,  Vancouver, BC  Will Patricia Rozema ever  come out?  Dear Kinesis,  I agree with [Sandra McPherson]  about the problems with When Night is  Falling [see Kinesis, July/August 1995].  When I first saw the ad [for the film],  it was the small black-and-white  version in the local newspaper.  Rather, I did not perceive it as Black-  and-white: it was not clear to me that  'Petra' is Black, only that she was  dark-haired (like me, a white gentile),  and, I thought, possibly  Mediterranean. I said to my  partner/'Look at this: guess who's the  aggressor!"  It was that "dark is evil, dark is  seductive, dark is aggressor-  temptress" stereotype that I picked up  on. Definitely racist. Also the one  about women never discovering  lesbian sexuality without being  'recruited' by an experienced,'real'  lesbian who is the one 'responsible' for  the first woman's falling in love with  her.  Nevertheless, of course, we did  see the film. The stalking theme  alarmed me because it reinforced the  stereotypes and was at the same time  so unlikely! I kept identifying with  Petra, the 'real' lesbian, and thinking,  "this is not worth it for her. She would  not spy on Camille. She would not let  Camille make love to her after Camille  has treated her so badly. Camille's  behaviour may be understandable, but  who would put up with it?"  As for Patricia Rozema not  being known as a 'lesbian film-  maker'.-.sorry Patricia, the word went  around after Mermaids, which  certainly has enough lesbian content to  bring dyke audiences to see it over  and over. (Yes, we are starved.) I  actually preferred the couple in  Mermaids, weird as they were. But  after When Night Is Falling we have to  wonder about the blame and  dishonesty that are central to the  Mermaids story, and the closetedness  of the main character—clearly a pre-  wannabe if we ever saw one.  Both films are so artful,  strikingly beautiful at times, and  powerful (because, I think, of the  lesbian material) that I agree that the  inherent racism and homophobia are  terribly important. I hope Rozema gets  it worked out. Thank-you [Sandra] for  articulating the problems so well in  Kinesis.  Nora Fras  Edmonton, Alberta  DR. PAULETTE ROSCOE  NA TUROPA THIC PHYSICIAN  HOMEOPATHY  COUNSELLING  DETOXIFICATION  HY CROFT MEDICAL CENTER  108-319S GRANVILLE ST.  VANCOUVER, B.C. V6H 3K2  WOMEN  IN PRINT  BOOKS & OTHER MEDIA  3566 West 4th Avenue  Vancouver BC  Voice   604 732-1128  Fax      604 732-4129  10-6 Daily ♦  12-5 Sunday  !  Discounts for  book clubs  Special orders  welcome  Operine  Banton  Counsellor  202 -1807 Burrard St.  Vancouver, BC V6J 3G9  Tel: (604) 736-8087  MUNRO • PARFITT  LAWYE R S  quality legal services in a  woman friendly atmosphere  labour/employment,  human rights, '  criminal law and  public interest advocacy.  401-825 granville street,  Vancouver, b.c. v6z 1 k9  689-7778(ph)     689-5572 (fax)  barbara findlay  is delighted to announce  that she is now practising law  with the law firm of  Smith and Hughes  321-1525 Robson St.  phone 683-4176  Smith and Hushes offer a full range of  le?al ser.'ices to the lesbian, gay and  bisexual communities of Vancouver.  Initial consultations are without charge.  SEPTEMBER 1995 Bulletin Board  read    this!    INVOLVEMENT        INVOLVEMENT  EVENTS  Bulletin Board listings have a  maximum of 50 words. Groups,  organizations and individuals eligible  for free space in the Bulletin Board  must be, or have, non-profit  objectives.  Other free notices will be items of  general public interest and will appear  at the discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $8 (+$0.56 GST) for  the first 50 words or portion thereof,  $4 (+$0.28 GST) for each additional 25  words or portion thereof and must be  prepaid.  Deadline for all submissions is  the 18th of the month preceding  publication. Note: Kinesis is  published ten times a year. Jul/Aug  and Dec/Jan are double issues.  All submissions should include a  contact name and telephone number  for any clarification that may be  required.  Listings will not be accepted over the  telephone.  Kinesis encourages readers to  research the goods and services  advertised in Bulletin Board. Kinesis  cannot guarantee the accuracy of the  information provided or the safety  and effectiveness of the services and  products listed.  Send submissions to Bulletin Board,  Kinesis, #301-1720 Grant Street,  Vancouver, BC, V5L 2Y6. For more  information call 255-5499.  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis'? We want to get involved with  you too. Help plan our next issue. Come to  ou r Writers' Meeting on Tues Sep 5,7pm at  our office, 301 -1720 Grant St, Vancouver. If  you can't make the meeting, but still want to  write, call us at (604) 255-5499. No experience is necessary, and all women are welcome. Childcare subsidies available.  CALLING ALL VOLUNTEERS  Are you interested in finding out how Kinesis  is put together? Well...just drop by during  our next production dates and help us design and lay out Canada's national feminist  newspaper. Production for the October issue is from Sep 20-27. No experience is  necessary. Training and support will be  provided. If this notice intrigues you, call  Laiwan at (604) 255-5499. Childcare subsidies available.  ASSERTIVENESS TRAINING  The Vancouver Status of Women's Assertiveness Training Program will be starting  soon. If you would like to volunteer as a  workshop facilitator or participate in the  program, please call (604) 255-5511.  WOMEN IN BUSINESS DIRECTORY  Seeking women in business with an eye for  the social—as well as financial—bottom  line. The Vancouver Status of Women is  compiling a directory of women in business  who incorporate their social principles into  their business practices. For more infoorfor  our self-audit questionnaire, call (604) 255-  5511 or write VSW at 301-1720 Grant St,  Vancouver, BC, V5L 2Y6.  VSW WANTS YOU!  Want to get more involved but not sure where  to begin? Join us—become a volunteer at  Vancouver Status of Women. VSW volunteers plan events, lead groups, raise funds,  answer the phone lines, organize the library,  help connect women with the community  resourcesthey need, and otherexcitingtasks!  The next volunteer potluck and orientation  will be on Thurs Set 21, 7 pm at VSW, 301 -  1720 Grant St. For more info, call (604) 255-  5511. Childcare subsidies available.  HEY VSW VOLUNTEERS  All VSW and K//VES/Svolunteers are invited  to gather at VSW, 301-1720 Grant St,  Vancouver, on the first Thursday of every  month to share stories, make new friends,  and listen to interesting speakers from our  communities. Invite other women who may  beinterestedtojoinus. Hey VSW volunteers,  the next gathering will be on a special date:  Wed Sep 6. Join VSW at this year's Vancouver Take Back the night rally beginning at  7:30 pm at Broadway and Granville. Look for  the VSW banner. For more info call Andrea  at (604) 255-5511.  POLITICAL ACTION GROUP  The Women of Colour and First Nations  Women's Political Action Group meets once  a month. For more info please call Miche at  (604)255-5511.  FEMINIST NETWORKING  Meets once a month. Call Miche for more info  at 255-5511.  NOW OPEN  Position Available  Program Coordinator  Vancouver Status of Women has an opening for a Program Coordinator  beginning October 1995. This is a full-time core staff position (40 hours per  week, Monday to Thursday) with a salary of $31,400/year plus benefits.Women  of colour and First Nations women are strongly encouraged to apply as  Affirmative Action principles will be in effect for this hiring.  Primary Responsibilities:  •organize and carry out education  programs such as discussion evenings  or public events on issues of  importance to women.  •organize assertiveness training groups  for women and train the volunteer  leaders for those groups.  •keep up to date on political events of  importance to women and share the  media work such as writing press  releases and doing interviews.  •work with VSW staff and volunteer  committees to develop issues.  •act as a liaison to other women's and  community groups.  •participate in lobbying efforts at all  governmental levels in meetings,  presentations and by preparing written  briefs.  •work with other staff and grant workers  to develop community resources and  projects.  •share the daily phone shifts,  correspondence, public assistance and  inquiries as well as the collective  meetings and activity reports.  •contribute to the development of the  resource centre and encourage  involvement of and share training of  volunteers.  Qualifications:  •experience leading groups and some  knowledge of assertiveness.  •skill in planning and coordinating  programs and events.  •ability to prepare and deliver  information tothe public, media and  government.  •knowledge of women's issues and  familiarity with women's organizations,  social services and community  organizations.  •knowledge and willingness to work as  part of a collective as well as ability to  work alone.  Deadline for Applications:  Thursday, September 21st, 1995  at 5:00 p.m  To apply, please send a resume and  covering letter to:  Hiring Committee,  Vancouver Status of Women  301-1720 Grant Street  Vancouver, B.C. V5L 2Y6  Fax:(604)255-5511  We're sorry, but only those applicants  selected for an interview will be contacted.  Not Your  Common  Wares  896 Commercial  Drive  (at Venables)  Vancouver  B.C.  V5L 3Y5  Canada  Tel: (604) 254-2543  SHEILA NORGATE  Artist Sheila Norgate announces an exhibition of new work entitled, It's More Fun When  You Know the Rules: Etiquette Problems for  Girls to run from Sep 21 to Oct 26 at the  Community Arts Council Gallery, 837 Davie  St. Hours are Tues-Fri 10am-4pm and Sats  1-4pm. Opening reception Thurs Sep 28  from 7-9pm. Norgate has extracted text from  etiquette books from the 40s and 50s and  combined them with images from women's  magazines from the same period. The result  is at once both poignant and hilarious; guaranteed to tickle the most weary of feminist  funny bones.  A CUT ABOVE  A Cut Above, "The Classiest Act in Town."  Try the same fabulous location with a line  dance lesson and a dessert buffet. Nonsmoking venue with ample seating and  undergound parking (enter off of W. 7th): the  4th Floor Restaurant, 1495 W. 8th Ave. Sat  Sep 16. Doors open at 7:30pm. A dance for  women. Tickets in advance: $16 each or 2for  $30. Available at Women in Print and Harry's  Off Commercial. At the door: $18. Produced  by 1 in 10 Events.  REEL CHANGE  Reel Change, the Women's Monument  Filmathon, will be an extraordinary day of  films, videos and speakers to address the  experiences of women in a violent society in  an inspiring and provocative way. Please  consider participating as a seatholder to  raise funds through pledges to the Project.  Reel Change takes place Sat Dec 2 9am-  5pm at Vancouver Pacific Cinematheque. It  is the major fundraiser for the Women's  Monument, anationalmemorialdedicatedto  all women who have been murdered. Donors  will receive tax receipts and all consenting  contributors will be named atthe Monument  site. Contact Loreen Bennett, the Women's  Monument Project, c/o Capilano College,  2055 Purcell Way, North Vancouver, BC,  V7J 3H5; or call (604) 986-1911, local 2078.  TAKE BACK THE NIGHT  This year's Take Back the Night march and  rally against rape will be held across Canada  on Wed Sep 6. In Vancouver, the march and  rally will take place at Granville and Broadway beginning at 7:30pm. For more info call  Rape Relief at 872-8212. The march and  rally in Surrey, organized by Surrey Women's Resource Centre, will begin at 7pm at  the parking lot behind Surrey Place mall. For  more info call 951 -6910. For a list of some of  the other Take Back the Night rallies, see  page 5.  TAKING BACK EDMONTON  Take Back the Night, an annual march and  rally against violence against women, will be  held in Edmonton on Fri Sep 15 at 8pm. The  action will take place at Sir Winston Churchill  Square and will include speakers, entertainment, and a candlelight vigil.  HEART, SOUL & FUNK  Heart, Soul & Funk, a party and dance for  brown skin chykx and friends will be happening Fri Sep 8from 9pm to dawn at 837 Beatty  St, Van. There'll be women DJs, a fashion  show, cabaret, door prizes, and lots of dancing. The event is dedicated to women of  colour and Native women-to our endeavours and survival. Tickets are $6 or 2 for $10  in advance from Burcu funky clothing etcetera, 3685 Main St, or $7 atthe door. For more  info call (604) 258-3677 or 874-9773.  THE SISTERS ROSENSWEIG  The Sisters Rosensweig, a play by Wendy  Wasserstein, will be performed in Vancouver  at the Arts Club Theatre, 1585 Johnston  SEPTEMBER 1995 Bulletin Board  EVENTS  EVENTS  EVENTS  GROUPS  Street in Vancouver, Sep 21-Oct 28. Join  three colourful and opinionated sisters as  they gather in London for a long overdue  family reunion and try tochange--and under-  stand-everyone's lives. Special two for one  performances as well. For more info and  tickets, call (604) 687-1644.  HOT FLASHES CAFE  Women are invited to a new hangout in  Victoria, Hot Flashes Women's Cafe, to be  open for women-only on the last Friday of the  month from 8-11 pm. (Next date is Sep29.)  The Cafe features outrageous desserts and  fresh coffee and is located at St. Alban's  Church, 1468 Ryan St. Admission is $2.  BUMBERSHOOT  Bumbershoot, the Seattle Arts Festival's 25th  an n iversary celebration will be h eld from Sep  1-4 at the Seattle Centre. The festival will  feature fifteen outdoor and indoor stages  with over 500 Northwest, national and international artists in all genres of performing,  literary and visual arts. Amazing roster includes 10,000 Maniacs, Michelle Shocked,  Ani DiFranco, and many more. Tickets are  affordable and accessible. For more information call (206) 682-4-FUN.  POETRY READINGS  Judith Copithorne and Maxine Gadd will be  reading their poetry Fri Sep 15 at 8pm at the  Western Front Gallery, 303 E. 8lh Ave, Van.  Free admission. For more info call (604) 731 -  8299.  AMAZING GREYS III  Amazing Greys lit celebrating the adventure of aging, will be held from Sep 29-Oct 1  at the Island Hall Beach Resort in Parksville,  8C. This is a cooperative festival featuring  workshops, networking, a Croning Ceremony,  and more. To register or for more info write  Else Kennedy, RR #1, Chemainus, BC V0R  1K0, or call or fax her at (604) 246-3347.  Registration is limited.  MOM'S THE WORD  Mom's the Word, a play produced by the  Mom's the Word Collective, will be performed  at the Arts Club Revue Theatre, 1585  Johnston Street in Vancouver, until Oct 7.  The double Jessie Award winning comedy  about navigating the mystical maze of early  motherhood was created by six of the funniest actor/moms you'll ever meet. Show  times Mon-Sat. Two for one matinees  Wednesdays at 5pm. For tickets, call (604)  687-1644.  LABOUR LAW CONFERENCE  Trends and Issues in Labour Law, a conference sponsored by the Labour Studies Program at Capilano College, is being held Sep  29-30 at the Plaza 500 Hotel, 500 W. 12th  Ave, Van. The conference includes an open  ing overview and commentary on new developments in the law at the Labour Relations  Board and in the courts, as well as workshops and panels on current trends and  issues. For more information call 986-1911.  FRINGE FESTIVAL  Vancouver's 11th annual Fringe Festival will  take place Sep 7-17 at venues along Commercial Drive. This year's Fringe features  500 shows, in 11 theatres and outdoor venues which showcase theatre, dance, art and  music. All tickets are under $10, and program guides are available around town. For  more info call (604) 251-6754.  LORRAINE BOWEN  Direct from England, The Lorraine Bowen  Experienced be coming to Vancouver Sep  7-17 at the WISE Hall, 1882 Adanac Street.  Bowen will be performing as part of the  Fringe Festival line-up. If you want originality,  charm, biting humour and some right good  tunes, then this is the experience for you.  Pick-up a program guide around town or call  (604) 251 -6754 for more info.  BOOK LAUNCH  Arsenal Pulp Press will be holding a launch  for Queer View Mirror, a new collection of  lesbian and gay short fiction, edited by James  C. Johnstone and Karen X. Tulchinsky Sat  Sep 30 at 7:30pm at the Lotus, 455 Abbott St  Vancouver.  celebrating older women's power and wisdom. Admission is $5 ($2 for students). Call  (604) 527-5440 to reserve seating.  GRRRRLS WITH GUITARS  Grrrrls With Guitars, featuring Marcia  Thompson and Kym Brown, will be held Sat  Sep 2, 9pm at Cafe Deux Soleils, 2096  Commercial Drive, Van. No cover. Another  show featuring Helen Gone/Sue Leon,  Marjorie Cardwell, Michelle Gooding, and  the Robyn Carrigan Band will take place Mon  Sep 25, 10pm at the Railway Club, 579  Dunsmuir Street, Van. Tickets are $3-5. Call  (604) 685-3623 for info or bookings.  IN THE BEGINNING  The Shavian Cream Company presents In  the Beginning, a comedy-drama by George  Bernard Shaw, atthis year's Vancouver Fringe  Festival. The play is a radical re-working of  the biblical story of Adam and Eve. Show  dates are Sep 7, 8, 15, 16, and 17 at the  Britannia High School Auditorium, 1001 Cotton Drive. Call (604) 873-3646 for more info.  LAXWESA WA  Written and directed by Barb Cranmer  taxwesa Wa-Stength of the Riverls a documentary film which explores the rich fishing  traditions of three First Nations communities  on the West Coast of BC. The film will  premiere in Vancouver on Sat Sep 2 at 8pm  at the Vogue Theatre, 918 Granville St. For  tickets and info call CBO at (604) 280-2801.  The screening is a benefit for the Native  Brotherhood of BC.  WOMEN'S STUDIES ANNIVERSARY  The Women's Studies Program at Simon  Fraser University will celebrate its twentieth  anniversary Fri Sep 29,1 -8pm at the Halpern  Centre at SFU's Burnaby campus. Come  celebrate twenty years of survival, growth,  continued change, and challenge with videos, displays, speakers, performances, and  a buffet. Everyone is welcome. Call Roberta  McGinn at (604) 291-3333 for more info.  THE WALTONSTEINS  The Waltonsteins is a brand new one-woman  show written and performed by Frannie  Sheridan. Afeel good/feel kaka-poopoo Jewish/Catholic tale of love, hate, and leftovers.  Playing Aug 29-Sep 2 at the Gastown Theatre, 36 Powell Street, Vancouver. For more  info call (604) 684-6275.  HONOURING OUR ELDERS  Womenspeak Institute presents Honouring  Our Elders Oct 5th from 7-9pm at Douglas  College, New Westminister. Become more  attuned to the contributions, accomplishments, and significance of women in mid-life  and beyond. Join grandmothers Barbara  Wyss, historian and First Nations activist,  Ingrid Parsons, therapeutic recreation practitioner, and others as they describe ways for  Annual General Meeting  Wednesday, September 20th, 1995  6pm  at Vancouver Status of Women  #301-1720 Grant Street  Vancouver, BC  All members and supporters are invited to join us! |  Our agenda includes the presentation of our Annual Report for 1994-95 and |  reports from VSW representatives attending the UN 4th World Conference and       |  Forum on Women in August 1995.  RSVP by September 14th, 1995  (604)255-5511  Refreshments will be served  GROUPS  CONTACT POINT  Contact Point is a group for mature lesbians  and double-spirited women (the present age  range in the group is 39 to 72) who are  mainstream with many and varied interests.  The group meets every Thursdayfrom5:30-  6:30pm at the Vancouver Women's Health  Collective, 219-1675 W. 8th Ave. Your 'anchor woman' is Rhodea and if you desire  further info, please leave your name and  number with Raine at the Health Collective,  (604) 736-4234 or fax (604) 736-2152 and  Rhodea will get back to you.  COME SING WITH US!  A Vancouver Women's Chorus welcomes  new members for their 1995-96 season beginning Thurs Sep 7. Open rehearsals will  be held the first two Thursdays of September. New members must be able the carry a  tune and will have a short interview with the  director. All lesbians or lesbian-positive  women are welcome, especially altos! Rehearsals are held every Thursday evening at  7pm at St. John's United, 1401 Comox St,  Van. For more info call (604) 263-7675.  WOMYN OF COLOR GROUP  A womyn of color group is looking for members. The group is involved in theatre, reading group, anti-racism work, community education and various otherthings. Please phone  Taylor for more information at 876-5840.  DROP-IN BASKETBALL  Women's Drop-in Basketball will be held on  Sats from 10:30-12:30 pm at Britannia Gym  B, 1661 Napier St, Van. Games will be held  from Sep 9 to Dec 16 (except Sep 23 and Oct  28). Cost is $3 to drop-in or $35 for all 13  sessions.  L'ARC-EN-CIEL  L'Arc-En-Ciel, Les Francophones et  Francophiles des Communautes Gaies et  Lesbiennes, vous invitent Le Samedi 9  septembre, on organise une excursion de  canot a Wedgeon Creek. Le Vendredi 22  documentaire de la serie "Miaimes-tu?" sur  I'homosexualite sera suivi d'une discussion  sur les points souleves par le film. Le  visionnement aura lieu a 7:30 pm au Centre  des Gais et Lesbiennes de Vancouver, 1170,  rue Bute. Pour de plus amples informations,  n'hesitez pas a composer le 688-9378,  poste#1, boite vocale #2120.   WAVAW TRAINING  WAV AW—Women Against Violence Against  Women Rape Crisis Centre—needs women  to do rape crisis work. Are you pro-woman?  Doyouwantto end violence against women?  WAVAW offers extensive training in counselling and crisis intervention, advocacy and  liaison work, and providing information on  medical, police, and legal procedures for  rape crisis work. The next extensive volun-  teertraining begins in September for twelve  weeks, Weds 7-10pm and Suns 11 am-5pm.  WAVAW encourages ALL women to join.  Childcare and transportation subsidies available. Sign language interpreters will be provided if needed. For more info call TTY 258-  0110 or voice (604) 255-6228.   RADICAL WOMEN  Radical Women in Seattle is holding an  ongoing study group on Rosa Luxemburg's  book, Reform or Revolution on Mondays, 7-  8:30pm. Luxemburg was a Polish Jew, born  in 1871, who became an orator, writer and  internationally recognized leader of the socialist movement. The group will meet at  1903 N E 82nd St, Seattle, WA. For more info  call (206) 722-6157 or 722-2453.  VLC  The Vancouver Lesbian Connection is starting two coming-out groups in September.  The groups will meet weekly from 7:30-  9:30pm for 11 weeks. Also starting in September, the VLC centre will have new hours:  Thurs & Fridays 11 am-6pm and Sats noon-  5pm. To register for the coming-out groups  or to find out about the VLC's other groups  and upcoming events, call (604) 254-8458.  The VLC is located at 876 Commercial Drive.  SUBMISSIONS  WOMEN'S MONUMENT  FILMATHON  Reel Change: Towards a Day Without Violence seeks donations of one-time screenings of positive and provocative productions  which address women and oppression. Recent shows are encouraged (after 1990),  especially about the experiences of Native  women, women of colour, eco-feminism,  men against sexism, and workplace harassment. Deadline for submissions is Sep 29.  Contributors will be publicized and, with consent, named at the Monument site. Reel  Change takes place Dec 2 at Vancouver's  Pacific Cinematheque. It is the major  fundraiser for the Women's Monument  Project, a national memorial dedicated to all  women who have been murdered. Contact  Loreen Bennett, the Women's Monument  Project, c/o Capilano College, 2055 Purcell  Way, North Vancouver, BC, V7J 3H5; or call  (604) 986-1911, local 2078.  HIV/AIDS WRITING  PLUS magazine, a new magazine for the  Canadian HIV/AIDS community is lookingfor  submissions for its publication. Anything related to HIV/AIDS, written by Canadians, will  be accepted. Poetry, life stories, cartoons,  comic strips, news, information, and pictures  are welcome. Financial compensation upon  publication. Please write for submission criteria to, PLUS Magazine, PO Box 53218,  Ottawa, ON, K1N 1C5, or call (613) 749-  2693 or fax (613) 749-5030.  SEPTEMBER 1995 Bulletin Board  SUBMISSIONS SUBMISSIONS  WET BEHIND THE EARS  Wet Behind the Ears: An Anthology About  Young Lesbian and Bisexual Women is the  first collection compiled by and for young  lesbian and bisexual women. If you're a  woman 26 years old or younger, we want  your poetry, erotica, photography, art, essays, comics, prose and short stories on  'opics such as coming out/developing identity, dealing with family, political struggles,  youth and power, and physical and mental  health issues. No longerthan 2500 words or  ten pages. Please do not send originals as  we will be unable to return them. Send your  submission and a short biography to the In  Your Space Collective c/o Women's Press,  517 College St, Suite 233, Toronto, ON,  M6G 4A2. Deadline is Oct 15.  FIRST NATIONS ON RADIO  In celebration of the United Nations' Decade of Indigenous Peoples, CJSF 93.9 FM  Cable, the campus radio station of Simon  Fraser University in Burnaby, BC, and other  Canadian campus/community radio stations will be dedicating airtime throughout  September to First Nations programming.  Anyone interested in participating or contributing in any way to this project, please  contact Sharon at CJSF, tel (604) 291-  4423 or fax (604) 291-3695.  YOUNG WOMEN  Seeking published and unpublished short  stories, poetry, non-fiction and creative non-  fiction on any subject for an anthology of  young women writers under the age of 30.  This book will examine the issues important  to the daughters of the second wave of the  women's movement. Send work, short bio,  including age, and a SASE to Daughters of  the Revolution, Sarah Katherine Brown, PO  Box 385. Kinaston. On. K7L 4W2. Deadline  is Sun Oct 15.  ASIAN PACIFIC LESBIANS  Asian Pacific lesbians and bisexual women  are invited to submit work to Wild/Rice, a  forthcoming anthology of erotica by Asian  Pacific Lesbian and Bisexual Women. "Suzy  Wong, geisha, Jungle girl, dragon lady, submissive slave, Madame Butterfly, Miss Saigon, mail order bride, wanted: docile, demure Oriental girl to please white master"-  these are the words that have been used to  describe us. Take back the words and use  the power of the erotic to tell YOUR story.  Seeking steamy, stunning, wild, tender, fierce,  passionate, funny, stormy stories that seduce and scream. Double-spaced, typed or  good quality printer, 3-10 pages. Enclose  SASE. Submissions will not be returned.  Direct submissions and queries to the editor:  Kitty Tsui, PO Box 13081, Chicago, Illinois,  USA 60613. Deadline is Oct 30.  CALLING DYKE PLAYWRIGHTS  Margo Charlton, a lesbian theatre director  and producer, has received a Manitoba Arts  Council grant to do research on lesbian  theatre and is looking for scripts. Charlton is  interested in any genre: drama, comedy,  satire, collective creations, performance art,  etc. Her plan is to write an article on her  findings, to compile a list of writers, to  distribute this to all of the women who send  scripts, and to produce some of these scripts  in 1997. For more info, contact Margo  Charlton, 1 -895 Palmerston Ave. Winnipeg,  MB, R3G1J6; tel (204) 775-5320 orf ax (204)  775-3664.  QUEER PRESS  Queer Press is a volunteer-run, community-  based micro press dedicated to providing  opportunities for lesbians, gays and bisexu-  als to experience the power of the written  word; and especially for women, people of  colour and queers living in rural areas. If you  have a manuscript, or if you're a community  group interested in putting a manuscript together, tell us about your work. Write to  Queer Press, PO Box 485 Station P, Toronto, ON, M5S 2T1. For info or to order our  writer's guidelines, call (416) 978-8201.  MAKE US LAUGH  The Federation of BC Writers is holding its  annual Canada-wide literary competition,  Literary Writes IX. Thisyear'sfocus is "Make  us Laugh". The Federation invites submissions of up to 2000 words of humourous  fiction or nonf iction, or a maximum 36 lines of  comic poetry. First prize is $500 and publication in Wordworks. For a complete list of  competition rules, send a SASE to Federation of BC Writers, 4th FI-905 W Pender St,  Vancouver, BC, V6C1L6. Deadline is Sep8.  LESBIANS AND POLITICS  Canadian Women's Studies/Les Cahiers de  la Femme is calling for submissions for their  Winter 1995 issuefocussing on the question:  "Is there a lesbian politic?" Essays, research  reports, true stories, poetry, cartoons, drawings and other artwork are welcome. For  more info and submission requirements write  or call Canadian Women's, Studies, 212  Founders College, York University, 4700  Keele St., North York, ON, M3J 1P3, (416)  736-5356, fax (416) 736-5765. Deadline is  Sep 15.    WOMEN OF COLOUR  Sister Vision Press is invitina women of  colour under 30 to submit poetry, stories or  journal entries on experiences of incest and  sexual abuse for a new anthology. Please  send hard copy or work on IBM disk with  SASE to Sister Vision Press, PO Box 217,  Stn E, Toronto, Ont, M6H 4E2. Deadline is  Sep 30.  CLASSIFIEDS  JOB OPPORTUNITY  A full time position is available as an office  manager at Video In studios. Hours of work  would be Monday-Thursday, 11am-6pm.  Employment begins Monday Sept 11,1995,  11 am. Salary: $11.25/hour. Duties include  answering phones and handling incoming  mail, booking equipment and edit suites,  registering new members and workshop  participants, providing information about  Video In Studios, updating information sheets,  motivating newsletter 3-4 times per year,  conducting drop-in tours, invoicing and collecting payment from producing members,  updating database and working towards  computerizing all front office systems. Qualifications are: a friendly and professional  manner, organizational skills and the ability  to handle multiple tasks, problem solving,  conflict negotiating, desktop publishing on  Macintosh (Quark XPress), appreciation for  the collective process, willing to learn the  background and history of Video In and basic  book-keeping and responsible in handling  cash. Deadline for application is Fri, Sept 1,  1995,11 am. Video In Studios is a collective,  non-profit, artist-run-centre that provides  training and access to video production and  post-production equipment, holds regularly  scheduled video screenings, distributes independent video internationally and holds a  twenty year print and tape archive. For more  info call (604) 872-8337.  RAGING GRANNIES  The National Unconvention of Canada's Raging Grannies is being held September  8-10 in Edmonton. The organizers particularly want to contact any prairie groups  or potential Raging Grannies. They have a great program lined up for the weekend.  For more information, contact Betty Mardiros, 8902-120th St, Edmonton, Alberta,  T6G 1X5; telephone (403) 439-0445. Billeting is available. Photo by Joni Miller.  CLASSIFIEDS CLASSIFIEDS  GENERAL PRACTITIONER  Joan Robillard, MD, Obstetrics, General  Practitioner for all kinds of families is now  located at 203-1750 E10th Ave, Van. Phone  872-1454, fax 872-3510.  KARATE FOR WOMEN  Shito-ryutaughtbyfemaleblackbelts. Learn  a martial art for self defense, fitness, self  confidence! Atthe YWCA, 535 Hornby. Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, 7:15-9 pm. $45/  month. Beginner groups start Sep 5, Oct 2.  Call 872-7846.  SPINSTERVALE  Are you travelling on Vancouver Island or  need a country retreat? Rustic cabin for rent;  sleeps two. $7.50 per person/ night. Also,  work exchange offered; food and accommodation for three hours/day. Workshop space  available. Call Sunshine or Liberty at (604)  248-8809.  GUEST HOUSE FOR WOMEN  The back hills - Come retreat to 10 private  hillside acres. Enjoy delicious breakfasts and  cozy woodfires. We are only a half hour drive  from Victoria, minutes from ocean beaches,  and a short hike to a spectacular view from  the Strait of Juan de Fuca starts at our back  door. So now that you've heard of us...Why  not come see us? Very reasonable rates.  Call us soon. (604)478-9648.  WOMENFRIENDS MUSIC CAMP  Enjoy a weekend with women where your  infinite creativity and musicality can find expression. Play, sing, chant, jam, perform,  compose, meditate, give ortake a workshop,  orsimply relax. Nov3,4,5, Camp Alexandra,  Crescent Beach. Sliding fee $150-$250 including catered meals and accommodations.  For more information and registration call  Penny Sidor at 251 -4715.  LYDIA KWA, PSYCHOLOGIST  I'm pleased to announce the opening of my  private practice in clinical psychology  (Granville Island office). I'm a feminist therapist and I work with clients on a variety of  issues. I welcome new clients, especially  survivors, gays and lesbians, women of colour, artists and writers. Call 255-1709.  LESBIAN HOUSEHOLD  I am a German lesbian new to Vancouver  looking for a lesbian household for Nov 1  preferably one with a mix of ages (I am 32).  Also willing to search for a house with like-  minded women. Call Sabine at 251-4010.  MANUAL FOR TEACHERS  Teachers: new curriculum on world trade  and alternatives. Includes modules on sustainable agriculture, World Bank/IMF, international debt, garment industry, and consumer awareness. Attractive, easy to use,  grade 11 level. Also idealforchurch/commu-  nity study groups. Available through BCTF  Lesson Aids or from OXFAM-Canada, (604)  736-7678.  SEPTEMBER 1995 Postal code_  Fax   Published ten times a year by the Vancouver Status of Women  #301 -1720 Grant Street Vancouver, BC V5L 2Y6