 Special Collections Seiial  BC budget  Philippines  Street kids Kinesis welcomes volunteers to work on all aspects of the paper. Call  us at 873-5925. Our next  News Group meeting Is  Wed. April 8, 1:30 pm at  Kinesis, 400 W 5th Ave.  All women welcome even If  you don't have experience.  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE: Isis, Aletta Jacobs,  Alllsa McDonald, Esther  Shannon, Na.ncy Pollak,  Noreen Howes, Ann Doyle,  Jody McMurray, Maura  Volante, Marsha Arbour,  Lucy Morelra, Patty Gibson, Ruth Wood, Lisa Hale,  Patty Moore, Deborah  Prleur, Jan Skeldon, Kathee Muzln, Lenna Jones,  Karen Shave.  FRONT COVER: Photo  by Jan Skeldon.  EDITORIAL     BOARD:  Esther Shannon, Isis, Lisa  Hebert,  Kim  Irving,  Maura Volante, Noreen Howes,  Sharon   Hounsell,   Patty  Gibson, Alllsa McDonald.  CIRCULATION AND DISTRIBUTION: Cat L'Hirondelle, Nancy Pollak, Noreen Howes, Ann Doyle.  ADVERTISING:  Marsha Arbour  OFFICE: Cat L'Hirondelle.  Kinesis Is published 10  times a year by the Vancouver Status of Women.  Its objectives are to be  a non-sectarlan feminist  voice for women and to  work actively for social  change, specifically by  combatting sexism, racism, homophobia and Imperialism.  Views expressed In Kinesis are those of the writer  and do not necessarily reflect VSW policy. All unsigned material Is the responsibility of the Kinesis  Editorial Board.  SUBSCRIPTIONS: Individual subscriptions to Kinesis are $17.50 per year or  what you can afford. Membership In the Vancouver  Status of Women Is $25.50  or what you can afford, Includes subscription to Kinesis.  SUBMISSIONS: All submissions are welcome. We  reserve the right to edit  and submission does not  guarantee publication. All  submissions should be typed double spaced and must  be signed and Include an  address and phone number. Please note that Kinesis does not accept poetry or fiction contributions. For material to be returned, a SASE must be Included. Editorial guidelines  are available on request.  DEADLINE: For features  and reviews the 10th of  the month preceding publication; news copy, 15th;  letters and Bulletin Board  listings, 18th. Display advertising: camera ready,  18th; design required, 12th.  ADVERTISING: For Information about display advertising rates, please contact Kinesis For Information about classifieds,  please see the classified  page In this Issue.  KINESIS  >.  Street Kids: Vancouver's juvenile prostitutes on film .. 17  International Women's Day photo spread 11  INSIDE  0IS  Red Door's future uncertain    3  Parks Board moves right    4  Coalition to open abortion clinic    5  Doing the Vander Zalm shuffle  6  The Safe, the Tube, and the Ugly     7  Yukon protects rights     8  El Salvador: $2.5 billion for bombs 10  FtfTU&S  Vancouver IWD: photo highlights  ..11  by Jan Skeldon  IWD in the Philippines: a first       9  by Linda Erwin  Lesbian Abuse    12  by Jane Smith  Power of Attorney and Committee  14  by Gillian Andrew  ARTS  Street Kids    16  by Sharon Knapp  The Fat Woman: beginning   17  by Deb Thomas, and by Maura Volante  CORRESPONDENCE:  Kinesis, Vancouver Status  of Women, 400A West 5th  Ave., Vancouver, B.C. V5Y  1J8.  Kinesis Is a member of the  Canadian Periodicals Publishers Association.  ISEfflM/SS  Movement Matters       2  A Little Night Reading    18  Periodicals in Review 1£  Commentary    20  Typesetting and camera  work by Baseline Type  and Graphics Cooperative.  Laser printing by Vancouver Desktop Publishing  Bulletin Board 22  by Jody McMurray  Printing   by   Webb   Press  Graphics.  Second class mall #6426  KINESIS Movement Matters  Movement Matters is designed to be a  network of news, updates and information of special interest to the women's  movement. Submissions to Movement Matters should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double-spaced on eight and a half by  eleven paper. Submissions may be edited for  length. Deadline is the 18th of the month  preceding publication.  Peace march  action  We are happy to let you know that we are  now supporters of the new united movement  of Salvadorean women. The six former associations of Salvadorean women have accomplished the difficult work of forming a federation, and have ceased to exist as separate  entities. Until they choose a final name they  will be known as the Constitutive Committee of the Women's Federation of El Salvador and we will be (appropriately enough)  Friends of the Co istitutive Committee.  hi many countries relatives of victims of  violent repression form groups to support  each other. These groups, who have been  made politically conscious in such a painful  way, take on an important role in the strug-  gle.  hi Latin America this movement began with the "Mothers of the Plaza de  Mayo" in Argentina in the early 70's. At a  time when repression was at its most fierce  these women reintroduced public protest,  demanding information about their missing  children. Their fine work led to the uncovering of large amounts of information about  death squad activity and military repression. In El Salvador a group formed in 1979.  They have a very long official name, but  most people know them as the "Mothers".  Because we respect and admire their  work this year we decided to symbolically  represent them at this years Vancouver  peace march.(Slated for April 25) Our objective is to inform people about their work  in particular, and this level of struggle in  general. We plan to dress as they do for  marches, carry a banner reading "Mothers  of the Disappeared—El Salvador"and give  out information on their issues and struggles.  In the course of planning this action we  thought groups or individuals would be interested in joining this action, bringing to  public attention the existence of these brave  people. We feel it's important to remind  people that real war exists now, not in a hypothetical future, and that real people are  feeling the loss of real loved ones, but that  they are still acting in an inspiring and constructive way.  If you or your group is interested in  participating in' this action contact the  Friends of the Constitutive Committee of  the Women's Federation of El Salvador, Box  65782, Station F, Vancouver, B.C. V5N 5K7  or come to the peace march and look for  us. We will be wearing black dresses and  white scarves and encourage you to adopt  the same dress if you wish to join us.  Come to IWD  evaluation  The IWD '87 committee invites all members of the womens' movement to attend a  special evaluation and planning meeting on  April 15 at the Britannia Community Centre.  Starting time is 7:30 pm in room L-5,  which is wheelchair accessible and located  between the information centre and the library in the old coffee shop.  The meeting will provide an opportunity  to express views on this year's parade, rally,  posters and brochures, and the committee's  performance in general. While all comments  are welcome, the meeting should not be seen  as simply a forum for criticism. Constructive suggestions should be included with  a view to making next year's celebrations  even better.  The April meeting will also be used to  begin planning for IWD '88 with topics for  discussion to include:  1. whether or not the committee should  obtain a permit and the consequences  thereof  2. fund raising and publicity strategies  3. meeting schedule and format  Organizing IWD events is a difficult and  time consuming task. The committee hopes  that those attending the meeting will be  prepared to volunteer their time as well as  their comments.  Lesbian and gay  conference  The Vancouver Gay and Lesbian Community Centre (VGLCC) will hold its 4th  Annual B.C. Regional Lesbian and Gay  Conference from May 16 to 18, at the University of British Columbia's Student Union  Building.  Over two hundred people from across the  province and beyond are expected to come  and explore this year's theme, "Breaking  Barriers". There will be over twenty different workshops, as well as forums, and panel  discussions dealing with a wide range of issues concerning the lesbian and gay community.  This year's conference committee is a new  team, with a new approach. We are committed to making this the most inclusive,  most accessible, most relevant conference  ever. We have introduced a conference registration fee on a sliding scale based on ability to pay. Special attention has been paid  to ensure that there is equal representation  and input from lesbians and gay men in the  conference content.  To date, confirmed workshops include:  Sexual Orientation Legislation in Canada,  Gays and Lesbians and the Law, Living  With AIDS, The Worried Well, Unlearning  Racism, Integrating the Disabled into the  Community, Lesbian SM, Gay and Lesbian  Youth, Personal and Community Mobilization, Spirituality and Ritual in the Gay and  Lesbian Community, Feminism for Men,  Communication in Lesbian Relationships,  Financial Planning, and Making Money—  From Rent Parties to Major Fundraisers. A  more detailed list of workshops will be published in early May.  All events are wheelchair accessible.  Childcare and signing for the hearing impaired are also available. Participants with  special needs are requested to pre-register  by May 1st.    '  For registration forms write: VGLCC  Conference, 1-1170 Bute St., Vancouver,  B.C. V6E 1Z6. For further information call  VGLCC at 684-6869 or Vancouver Lesbian  Connection at 254-8458.  Apologies  A number of errors were made in the listing in the March staff box. Our apologies  to Nancy Pollak whose work in distribution  was not credited, to Marsha Arbour whose  work in advertising was not credited and  to Cat L'Hirondelle whose work in the office department was not credited. Apologies  are also due to Lucy Moreira whose name  was mis-spelled in the Production This Issue section and to Sue Harris whose research  work on Colleen Tillmyn's "City Budget  May Limit Community Grants" article was  not credited.  KINESIS /SS/SSSfSS//S/SSSS/SSSSSSSSSSSS//SSi  //////////////////////^^^^^  /////////////////////^^^^  Across B.C.  Red Door's  future unsure  by Jackie Brown  The Red Door Rental Agency  could lose its funding from Vancouver if city Council approves a  Social Planning Department proposal for a comprehensive housing  registry and tenant relocation service.  Under the proposal, the Handicapped Resource Centre and the  Seniors Housing branch of Information Services Vancouver would  also lose their grants and roughly  $60,000 would be set aside for  the new registry—to be partially  funded by the Ministry of Social  Services and Housing.  At press time, council was being  asked to put funding on hold until the planning department completes a detailed report on its  proposal—expected in a matter of  weeks. Red Door, which is asking  for roughly $80,000 for 1987, was  scheduled to present a brief challenging the recommendation.  According to Red Door Administrator Pat McClain, the agency  is under the knife for what the  planning department calls an tin-  acceptable response to the Expo  eviction problem last summer.  "We said we would get involved  (in helping evictees), but we also  said there needed to be a coordinated effort between groups  like the First United Church,  DERA and St. James Social Service," said McClain, who has run  Red Door for the past twelve  years. "We also had a huge Expo  caseload and it didn't make sense  to drop them and duplicate services being offered elsewhere."  McClain says if the planning department's proposal is accepted, <  many of Red Door's clients will be ~  left out in the cold. Noting that the «  agency is as much a social service i  as it is a housing registry, she says .  clients regularly include the men- J  tally or socially disabled who lack "<  the necessary skills to deal withl  landlords and often cannot live on  their own, as well as many others  who need help in different areas.  Should council approve the new  registry service, Red Door could  stay open until September, thanks  to a three month extension of  provincial funding based on last  year's $49,000 grant from the Ministry of Social Services and Housing. McClain adds that council  could also approve funding on a  monthly basis until a final decision  is made.  Max Beck, Director of Social  Planning, says while the Expo situation was a contributing factor in  the development of the proposal,  it was not the first time Red Door  failed to provide emergency relocation services as required by its  funding mandate from the city.  "Li the past two years, for one  reason or another, they haven't  been able to provide that service,"  Beck said. "So there's not much  point in providing a grant for that  if we have to hire someone else."  Beck also says there is an urgent need for a computerized registry and says Red Door and other  groups are free to submit proposals to run it. That would not guarantee, however, that Red Door  would be able to provide its current level of services, he said.  ~~L. Beck says the city's funding to  -L Red Door has always been for an  __.     emergency relocation service and   ■     housing registry only. If the agency       wants to offer other services, it can  still apply for funding from other  sources, he said.  Anti apartheid protestors rally against the sulfur trade at the Pan Pacific Hotel.  Anti-apartheid  Mobilize against sulfur trade  by Emma Kivisild  Canada's ongoing economic relations with South Africa came under fire last month as Vancouver  groups began to mobilize against  the sulfur trade.  Two demonstrations in late  March targeted companies that  have major links through the sulfur industry with Pieter Botha's  apartheid system. On March 20th,  a rally outside the Pan Pacific  complex focussed on the Cansulex corporation. On March 26th,  protesters gathered outside Federal Trade Minister Pat Carney's  Vancouver office to protest the involvement of Petro Canada.  At the rallies, demonstrators  delivered letters to Canulex and  Pat Carney, demanding an end to  the sulfur trade. David Arnott of  Cansulex said his company would  be calling a board meeting to discuss the issue. No word was available from Pat Carney at press  time.  At present Canada supplies almost one hundred percent of South  African sulfur. The Canada Development Corporation is the single largest shareholder in the Calgary company Canterra, which in  turn controls forty-nine percent of  Cansulex. Cansulex is the marketing group for twenty-two Alberta  sulfur companies. Petro Canada is  the marketer of Pet rosulcan, which  in turn controls a company which  sells sulfur to South Africa. The  sulfur is mixed with a phosphate  and made into fertilizer.  The major issue around the sulfur trade is the federal government's unwillingness to move on  the sanctions issue. According to  Feds revoke grant to right wing women 9s group  by Esther Shannon  The federal government has  backtracked on its decision to  grant an Alberta based right wing  women's group funding because  the organization did not intend to  use the money for the proper purpose.  The Alberta Federation of Women United for the Family  (AFWUF) lost an $8,000 grant  from the Secretary of State after  Minister David Crombie ordered'a  review because of media reports  that the money would be used  to fund pro-life advertising. The  AFWUF, which is affiliated with  Realistic Equal and Active for Life  (RE.A.L.) women, is pro-life and  is opposed to pay equity, universal  daycare and other feminist issues.  "I think it's only natural"  said Lorna Lagrange, the group's  spokesperson   "that we're  disap  pointed with the decision. We believe that it reflects badly on the  Secretary of State and the Minister."  According to Lagrange the  money was to pay expenses associated with the group's November, 1986 conference on pornography. Lagrange said that the media misrepresented remarks by former AFWUF president, Janice  Ellington who was quoted as saying the money would be used for  "pro-life advertising."  "Mrs Ellington only told reporters that the money would be  used for advertising, she didn't say  anything about pro-life", said Lagrange.  The reports led to an investigation by Ruth Grant, special assistant to David Crombie. Her review  concluded that the group should  not receive the grant.  According to Grant what the  AFWUF intended to do with the  money was "immaterial* once it  was established that the group  "did not want it for the purposes  they applied for."  Jane Wiley, a board member  of the Alberta Status of Women  Action Committee (ASWAC), said  that while "We are very pleased  that the Secretary of State is  sticking to its criteria regarding  funding only groups devoted to  women's equahty we don't think  the decision is decisive.  "The grant to AFWUF was  a misuse of public money", said  Wiley, "because the funds are  there to promote women's equality ... AFWUF does not support  women's equahty."  The AFWUF grant, provided  in late January, had garnered a  great deal of media and feminist attention because it came at  the height of a controversy on  whether the Secretary of State  Women's Program should fund  R.E.A.L. women, which had applied to the Program for operations funding. Their application  was turned down.  The decision to withdraw the  AFWUF grant marks the third  time the group has been unsuccessful in its applications to  the Women's Program. Rejections, however, have not changed  AFWUF's intention to apply for  federal funds. According to Lagrange the group will apply in the  fall for a grant to fund their conference entitled—Good Citizens-  Good Government.  R.E.A.L. has also been invited  by Crombie to submit applications  for project grants in order to help  establish whether the group merits ongoing operational funding.  Cut Off the Sulfur Trade (COST),  which organized the rallies, the  government is stalling and using  the excuse that sulfur is a component of fertiliser and is essential to  the food process. Sanctions againsl  the sulfur trade would hurt food  production and only make conditions worse, they say. Canada has  imposed limited trade sanctions on  South Africa, but anti-apartheic  groups there demand mil trade  sanctions.  Both rallies saw a variety ol  groups give voice to their outrage  at federal policy and address related issues as well. Lee Maracle  stressed the solidarity between Native people in Canada and black  people in South Africa. Specifically, she pointed out the similarity between Bantustan policies and  the positions of aboriginal people in Australia and native people in Canada. She assured the  March 20th rally that Native people would "deal with their leaders" soon, referring to the recent  visit by South African Ambassador Glen Babb to a reserve on  the prairies at the invitation ol  chiefs there.  Louie Ettling of South African  Women Against Apartheid saic  that the time to try and reform  apartheid is long past. It must be  dismantled,  John Graham expressed the  support of the Anti-Aparthek  Network, a Lower Mainland Coalition that represents groups with a  combined membership of 500,000.  COST members say they wil  continue to draw attention to the  sulfur trade until something is  done. Carolyn Jerome of the group  says, "A lot depends on what Cansulex tells us, and what Pat Carney's office tells us. But we're going to continue protesting."  KINESIS  April '87 ^^^^^^\  ACROSS  B.C.  In Stanley Park, Vancouver's  new Parks Board has been at work  over the past few months. While  there are some new faces around  the big solid table, they all belong to the Non Partisan Associ-  Furor  over  film choice  by Jackie Brown  Parks board moves right  by Sue Harris  The showing of two lesbian films  has prompted an attack on the  Women's Forum of the Vancouver  Municipal and Regional Employees Union (VMREU).  In a strongly-worded letter to  the editor in the March Members'  Voice (the union's newsletter),  over thirty women VMREU members have expressed their "complete and total revulsion" at the  Forum for screening Liana and  Desert Hearts.  They also condemn the union  executive for providing space to  view the films and the Members'  Voice for advertising the movies.  Stating that lesbian love movies  are not "relevant" to VMREU objectives, the letter also says they  do not represent the views or  morals of "the overwhelming majority of the women who comprise  the VMREU membership."  Another letter in the same issue  charges that the Women's Forum  has been choosing films that appeal "only to our gay sisters" and  as such, do not meet criteria for  use of the union hall. In the interest of unity, the letter says any  group wishing to promote its special interest should rent another  hall.  "The word union means concord in agreement, being united,"  the letter says. "We should not encourage any activity that divides  this union into groups—be that  gay, straight or ethnic. To divide  is to weaken."  Maureen Beck, a parks board  worker who signed both letters,  said she is concerned about any  activity that promotes individual  sections of the union. Events in  the union hall should be limited to  those "that every member would  choose to go to," she said.  "What Pm afraid of is, how  would the Women's Forum feel  if some of the men got together  and said 'let's have blue movies'.  They'd be the first ones to object.  So I say, let's keep the union hall  for union business."  When asked if lesbian films can  be compared to blue movies, Beck  reiterated her concern about any  activity that divides the union into  groups. She also said that while  she has no objection to the exploration of women's issues, topics  should be those that appeal to the  majority of women.  Carol Ann Heuman, another  parks board worker who signed  both letters, said she and many  others did so with reservations. "I  Films continued page 5  ation (NPA). With the exception  of a minority of COPE candidates  being elected in the Board's 1984-  1986 term, the NPA has been synonymous with the Parks Board for  nearly half a century.  In just four months, the new  Board has overturned both people-  oriented policies and an accessible,  uncomplicated process which was  an invitation to ordinary citizens  to get involved in the Board's decisions. The media attention that  marked the previous Board's term  has all but vanished. The media  has gone back to its former style—  of almost no reporting at all. Unlike city hall, with Co-op Radio  and Cable 4's regular coverage,  the lack of media coverage of the  Parks Board ensures that the public will remain uninformed about  the Board's plans.  In December the Board approved a five percent fee increase  for such facility uses as swimming,  skating, childcare, golfing, and tennis. This increase is approved every year, a week to ten days before  Christmas. Inadequate information about the changes and poor  timing means that citizens rarely  lobby against these increases.  Farewell Fair Wages  The new Board, despite charges  of conflict of interest, also revoked  the fair wages policy of the previous Board. This policy set a minimum wage rate, based on prevailing union rates, for construction  projects over $30,000.  One of the strongest opponents  of this policy has been commissioner Allan Bennett. Bennett,  while serving on the Parks Board,  has also served as the executive director of the Amalgamated Construction Association, representing both union and non-union  firms. Two years ago, when one  of his association's companies was  being considered for a Parks Board  project, he did not vote due to  a possible conflict of interest. In  1987, however, as a Board member  and as a construction association's  director, Bennett did not abstain  from the vote which abolished the  fair wage policy.  His change of heart did not go  unnoticed by past COPE commissioner Pat Wilson, who has criticized Bennett on this issue in the  past. At a recent Board meeting on  the issue Wilson told Bennett: "It  seems to me, Commissioner Bennett, that you can't have it both  ways. It can't have been a conflict  in the past and not a conflict now.  I urge Mr. Bennett to excuse himself from the debate on this matter."  Whither Carnegie?  Within just weeks of their term,  -the Board was embroiled in a battle to take over control of the  Carnegie Community Centre, the  livingroom of the Downtown East-  side.  The city's Social Planning Department was hoping to jettison  the Centre and turn it over to the  Parks Board. But Carnegie users  felt a five part agreement with  Parks, School and Library Boards,  the Social Planning Department  and the Carnegie Community Association would be the best way  to guarantee a flexible administration that would meet the needs  of  Downtown  Eastsiders.   Parks  Board commissioners found themselves in the middle of a battleground between Carnegie's Association Board members who didn't  agree with each other.  This battle is not over and  Carnegie users are still pushing fpr  a five part agreement.  Wrecked Beach  In other areas, the Board has  agreed to hand over the University Endowment Lands, including  Wreck Beach, to the Greater Vancouver Regional District making it  into a regional park. Such a pact  may eliminate the Wreck Beach  that is a Vancouver tradition. In  past years Wreck Beach users had  been highly critical of Board policy that was aimed at trying to  freeze out some users.  A major issue with the previous Board was the Parks Board  policy of using chemicals such as  Killex, which contains the hazardous chemical 2-4-D, on playing  fields. It was not until a concerned  group of parents—whose children  had suffered from the effects of  Killex—protested, that the Board  considered stopping the spraying  program.  The new Board has the opportunity to develop a progressive pest management program, although at one point it seemed pre-  Parks continued page 5  Culture shock at DAWN  by Eunice Brooks  What happens to a disabled  woman attending her first conference of DAWN (DisAbled Women's Network)? For me, it was culture shock. Instead of being the  only special needs person in my  household and immediate neighborhood, I was just one of many.  That at first was scary, but within  hours it became liberating as I began to feel the bonds of unity and  the stocks of shared interest. Now  I am a part rather than apart.  There was a feast of workshops:  entrepreneurship, Shiatsu, gems  and colours, herbs, self-defence,  and healing through chanting affirmative statements led by the heart  beat of a drum. We swam, walked,  ate, and howled at the moon together. The howling was the first  time I have heard my own voice in  its fullness since I was in diapers.  I think it may have been the best  thing I brought away with me, this  knowledge that I can make voice.  The setting contributed an impression of the strength of nature,  which in the gems and colours  workshop I learned I could tap for  my own use. We are a part of the  planet, and the mountains which  had once intimidated me became  mine to use at will. I think before the conference I might have  laughed at such a notion. But before the conference I felt hke a flea  on the dog of the world. That notion died at Camp Squamish.  The all-day entrepreneurship  seminar, put on by the Federal Business Development Bank,  boosted my expectations of setting  up and running something that  will provide me with the means to  live free of dependency on family  or government. It started off with  how to collect one's talents, and  ended with a file of resource people.  I'm not sure how political this  is, but for many of us it was the  first all-woman dance we have participated in, and that too brings  new feelings. At the Saturday  party, no one played follow the  leader. I danced with a woman in  a wheelchair, and I will never forget the joy on her face as she threw  back her head and laughed.  Sunday morning the sun shone  on the second AGM, and the election of the board. When all the red  cards had been counted, I was secretary.  DAWN is one year old now,  and growing. We are an activist-  political group and plan to address  the feminist community, which for  so long has denied us access by  holding meetings in places the disabled cannot go. As feminists, we  have a right to sit with our  ters. No other minority has been  denied. When the voice of DAWN  was let loose, under the full moon,  it echoed among the mountains of  Squamish. Now listen for it in your  own ear. DAWN is on the move.  DAWN elects new board  by Eunice Brooks  From March 12-15, the DisAbled Womens' Network (DAWN)  B.C. held its second annual AGM  and conference, at Camp Squamish. Members elected to the board  include: Linda Wallbaum, Shirley  Masuda, Rawnie Dunn, Marita  Custauson, and Eunice Brooks.  Regional representatives are:  Glenys Snow, Wilma Shaver, Betty  Toews and Riva Hutkin.  There was a one-day workshop  on starting a cottage industry,  led by Lois Campbell of the Federal Business Development Bank.  Shorter workshops included: healing with music, Shiatsu, colours  and gems, kungfu and self-defence  for the disabled, as well as herbs  and iridology. The conference established that DAWN's major goal  in the upcoming year will be to focus on increasing accessibility for  disabled women in the feminist  movement.  Activities offered included forested walks, swimming, dancing, and  a time each day for confirming the  network. The network consists of  women from all parts of B.C. exchanging information of resources  for the disabled. DAWN is not a  social group.  The conference was sponsored  by the Secretary of State and Ministry of Labour. It was free to  all participants. Camp Squamish is  completely accessible to the handicapped. Women from various regions of the province and the  Yukon attended.  Persons wishing to join DAWN  may get more information by  phoning Eunice at 589-4088.  KINESIS across B.C.  /////////////////A  Coalition to open  free-standing  abortion clinic  in Vancouver  by Noreen Howes  The British Columbia pro-  choice movement has a new name,  a new face, and a clear goal. Formed in late March the B.C. Coalition of Abortion Clinics is mandated to establish a free-standing  abortion clinic in Vancouver.  Seventy members of the Coalition met on March 22 to vote  on resolutions presented by an interim steering committee established at an initial meeting in  late January. The resolutions dealt  with the Coalitions' membership,  structure, and role.  Membership is limited to groups  and individuals who support "the  establishment of women's reproductive health clinics throughout  the province that include abortion services..."and in the interim,  the establishment and support for  an ongoing abortion clinic in Vancouver.  The meeting's most contentious  resolution dealt with the Coalition's role in establishing an abortion clinic. The interim steering  committee presented two recom  mendations, opening the floor to  heated debate.  Recommendation one proposed  that the Coalition be responsible  for the clinic's location, staffing,  and operations, as well as building  community and political support.  Control of the clinic would rest entirely with the Coalition.  Recommendation two proposed  that the Coalition's role be to  organize community and political  support and endorsement for the  clinic. Implicit in this second recommendation was that control of  the clinic would ultimately rest  outside the Coalition's jurisdiction.  "Just who is doing what to  whom?" asked one Coalition member upon hearing these opposing  recommendations. "Clearly there  is great division in the interim  steering committee and I want  to know where these real political differences are coming from."  The second recommendation, she  added, contradicts the Coalition's  basis of unity.  "If we go with recommendation  number two we don't need a Coali-  TAC  WE THREE MALEPOLITICIANS  GATHER HERE TODAY  TGPQNDERTHE  UTERUSES  OF  CANADIAN WOMEN  OTTAWA  1986  Secret Meef in  THERAPEUTIC  FATHERHOOD  COHtVTTtt  .."WHATS GOOD  " foKlHl Goose  -OH HusWiiifc  T FC  WE     THREE  CRUEL  WENCHES  ARE  GATHERED  N THIS  DOCTOR'S  OFFICE  AT OTTAWA'S  HOLT COMMANO  TO SHUFFLE    PAPER  ADJUST OUR GIRDLES  AND  DICTATE  WHEN  MUST CARRY  THEIR  SPERM  TO TERM  4  s  I  tion", said a representative of the  NDP Women's Rights Committee.  An effort was then made by several  Coalition members to clear up this  confusion and to determine precisely what the Coalition's role is  to be.  Supporters of recommendation  two, predominantly CCCA members, argued that it's the physicians who are taking the greatest  risk, therefore they, not the Coalition, ought to have control over the  establishment and operation of the  clinic.  "The clinic should be a worker-  controlled environment", said a  CCCA representative, "as opposed  to a huge Coalition having control  over a tiny workplace." She added  that the Coalition could have some  say—"like no misogynists working  in the clinic, and no doctors there  just to make money" but primarily the Coalition's role would be to  support the clinic physicians.  A Physicians for Choice representative reiterated the CCCA position and said that "since it will  be the doctors who are arrested  and harassed, they must know that  broad-based community and legal  support is established, before they  put their names down ..."  The majority of Coalition members present at this meeting disagreed with the CCCA position.  A representative from the Vancouver Women's Health Collective  called it a make or break division,  which would determine her organi  zations' membership in the Coalition. "We'd be prepared to be involved in the Coalition only if the  Coalition has involvement with the  community," she said. "We don't  want doctors to have control over  our health care."  A representative of the Vancouver Status of Women (VSW)  voiced similar sentiments and  added, "It is the women of B.C.,  not the doctors, who have the  greatest risk in whether or not this  clinic is successful in increasing  access to abortion. The Coalition  must be in charge of political strategy and decisions because clinic  operations are ultimately political  strategy decisions."  The first resolution ultimately  carried with a majority and a clinic  sub-committee was delegated to  investigate options for opening a  clinic. This sub-committee, along  with the other working committees  (outreach and education, media, finance, and structure) will report  general meeting to be held within  three months.  Another contentious resolution  concerned whether or not individuals, as opposed to group representatives, should be allowed to serve  on the steering committee.  VSW argued for group representation on the committee, and  no individuals, calling it "good  political strategy" because group  representatives would at least be  accountable to their group.  Ac  cording to VSW the steering  committee would be safeguarded  against one group dominating the  committee with individuals who  could vote as a block and in this  way control the coalition strategy.  The Vancouver Women's Health  Collective supported this position  and said the Coalition would be  more forceful if only groups stood  on it.  Others argued that individual  representatives should be allowed  to serve on the committee as well  as groups, saying it allows for the  broadest possible coalition.  The resolution which was ultimately carried requires a majority of the steering committee members to be "women representatives  from feminist and/or pro-choice  groups", and also allowed individuals to serve.  A recommended twenty member steering committee, elected  from the general membership, was  unanimously agreed upon; the positions were filled by members  present at the meeting.  Thirteen group representatives  and seven individual representatives were elected including:  CCCA, CARAL, NDP Women's  Rights Committee, Feminist Counselling Association, Vancouver Women's Health Collective, Congress  of Canadian Women, Rape Relief,  B.C. Federation of Labour, and  the Vancouver Municipal and Regional Employees Union.  Parks from page 4  pared to accept the results of a  study by the Marrow Engineering Company which recommended  continuing current pest control  measures. Outraged citizens, including parents and environmental  groups, learned the report's results  and demanded that the study not  be accepted.  The Board has sent the report to the Bio Integral Resources  group in California for alternative  suggestions.  In April the commissioners will  have to face the electorate and  make a decision on spending priorities for the Parks Board. Mayor  Gordon Campbell has asked for  budget "reallocations" of between  five and ten percent. In a confidential memo from Parks Board  Chairman Malcolm Ashford, however, Campbell is warned of the  political fallout if programs and  services are reduced. Cuts could  include reductions in pool and  community centre hours and parks  maintenance, and could result in  lay-offs.  Lastly, the new Board has  been spending more time in private 'in camera' meetings than at  their public Board meetings. This  change could account for the lack  of media coverage of the Board.  Before you know it, the Monday  night Board meeting has convened  and adjourned. Almost missed it,  didn't you?  For information on agendas  and addressing the Parks Board  call 861-1141, 8:30 am - 4:80  pm Monday to Friday. After  hours call 68I-IS44.  Sue Harris is a member of  the Committee of Progressive  Electors and a former member  of the Vancouver Parks Board.  She currently works with the  Downtown Eastside Residents  Association (DERA)  Films from page 4  want to make it clear that most  of us did not agree with words  like "revulsion", Heuman said. She  added that most of the women who  signed did so on the basis that lesbian films do not appeal to the majority of women.  Heuman says she is not repulsed  by lesbianism, but feels it is better  to show films on the topic outside  of the union hall.  Judy Lynne, a member of the  Women's Forum, says the backlash is the result of homophobia,  adding that there had previously  been no complaints about the Forum's choice of films.  "It's a case of homophobia  brought on by Liana and Desert  Hearts. They even imply that the  films are pornographic," Lynne  said, referring to a letter to the editor by shop steward Jim Anderson as a case in point.  In the letter, Anderson says  if Women's Forum meetings were  open to men, heterosexual couples  would no longer have to drive to  Blaine's "infamous" Seaview theatre to see restricted movies. He  also suggests that a double bill  might include "Debbie Does Dallas" and "for those to whom the  preceding may have little appeal  ... Debbie Does the Dallas Cheerleaders."  Lynne says there is no substance to the charge that the Forum's films appeal to gay women  only, since the audiences are always mixed. "As far as I know, the  woman who asked for Liana in the  first place is a married woman,"  she said.  Other films the Forum has sponsored include The Atomic Cafe,  My Brilliant Career and Not a  Love Story. Lynne says women  who attend the films decide what  will be shown next, but that any  woman member of the union can  put in a request.  While Lynne says there could  be further problems, their reaction  won't change the way the Forum  operates. "As far as I'm concerned,  it wouldn't mean we won't show  another lesbian film."  VMREU President Pat Dav-  itt—also a member of the Forum—  concurs: "We'll continue to show  films people are interested in ...  whether it has lesbian content, is  on East Indian women, peace, or  whatever."  Because the issue has received  such a high profile, Davitt says the  executive and the Women's Forum  are taking it seriously. She adds,  however, that it probably won't  have that much overall effect.  "Those letters are not representative of probably ninety-nine  per cent of our membership—  women and men included—I think  the next issue (of the Member's  Voice will be filled with angry letters from people saying 'they (the  letters) don't represent our point  of view."'  KINESIS  April "87 BC budget  Doing the Vander Zalm shuffle  by Margaret J. Priestley Birrell  Basically, what we have in Premier Bill  Vander Zalm's first budget is a shuffling of  existing revenue sources. The Vander Zalm  budget is populist in that it is not rooted  a pohtical philosophy or economic theory. It is based on individualistic analysis—  what works or does not work for one should  hold true for all. Vander Zalm's populism is  based in his own personal business and life  experiences, it is his gut analysis of where  'things are at'.  The budget that results from this oversimplified view quickly becomes a potpourri of the latest good ideas mixed always  with some old ones. Isolated, some of the  good ideas may indeed have merit or specific group benefits. However, in our complicated economic environment, one good idea  often clashes with another. The result is either survival of only one or a 'no win' situation for both.  What we appear to have is a mass of  contradictions. The budget 'changes' readily lend themselves to the upbeat rhetoric of  Vander Zalm's "A Fresh Start". The reality is a stagnant British Columbia economy  where the middle and lower income groups  continue to carry a disproportionate share  of the burdens.  The budget is a patchwork of economic  and social programmes and has a tone of  let's fly a kite' in many of its proposals. But, there are definite areas that reflect Vander Zalm's personal convictions.  The small business community has had job  subsidy programmes cut. Vander Zalm has  consistently stated that real job creation  will come from unassisted entrepreneurial  forces and that dependency on subsidies  only weakens the drive to compete and alters the market forces.  The same rationale is applied to legal  'subsidies' for workers. We can expect the  proposed changes to the labour code will  be a move to de-organize the workforce—  to move toward a 'right to work' province.  With high unemployment amongst the organized workforce Vander Zalm's reading  is that the climate is right to move with  a strong employer oriented code. It will  more than likely be sold couched in positive sounding language such as 'a democratic right to a job and a democratic right  to employ'.  Other areas where the personal is reflected in the political, are funding to private schools and financing to combat freedom of choice on abortion.  Although funding to the public school  system was highlighted in the budget as  a commitment to quality education the  monies allocated in no way reflect the actual needs of a neglected public education  system. At the same time funds designated  to the private school system are completely  inappropriate. With this item Vander Zalm  states two positions: the custom designed  private school curriculum is preferable and  the public system should be gradually reduced. (An enthusiastic member of the government went so far as to point out that the  government gets better value for its dollar  in the private school system.)  The funds for educational and support  services for women to encourage them to  maintain unplanned pregnancies are so limited they're an insult but they represent  Vander Zalm's public commitment to the  so-called 'pro-life' movement.  Small business lobbyists, and activists in  labour, public education, and reproductive  rights will get little or no public debate with  Do typos turn you into  a raging monster?  There is a vocation for  you   - proofreading  Kinesis.  ^tr*^ Please call  873-5925.  KINESIS  m£L\f  Vander Zalm. The Premier has set his sails  and doesn't care what force the wind blows  from these quarters.  The budget places the New Democrat  (NDP) Opposition in a different position.  They are faced with the task of providing a  critique on a smorgasbord of budget items.  With the populist nature of the budget they  could easily find themselves defending one  sector of the electorate and at the same time  alienating another sector in the same economic bracket. With Vander Zalm's record  of policy making on the run, the Opposition  has the unenviable task of grappling with a  phantom. At the same time, Vander Zalm's  few non-debatable items will highlight NDP  positions on major issues that traditionally  have not been seen as 'vote-getters'.  This budget is very much Bill Vander  Zalm's budget, more style than substance.  It is designed to create a public perception  rather than change the British Columbia reality.  By now most of us have been bombarded  by the statistics and details of the 1987 Vander Zalm budget.  We have heard, too, from myriad of interest groups from the Real Estate Boards to  senior citizens on how specific parts of the  budget will affect them. At the same time  there has been a marked silence from the big  business sector and muted mumblings from  the poor.  If we stand back from the avalanche of  percentages, averages, user fees and numbing figures in the millions of dollars we can  perhaps see the political message of this  budget.  In the time immediately after the throne  speech and before the budget was brought  down, most political analysts were praising Vander Zalm's willingness to be specific.  This specificity, they said, would give us a  blueprint of where the government was going. The Vander Zalm style was contrasted  with the Bill Bennett style. It was argued  that Bennett's lack of specifics gave little or  no clue to where his government was moving  in economic and political terms. These arguments simply belie the facts. The Bennett  Throne Speeches and budgets of 1983 and  1984 were clear textbooks on radical right  wing political philosophy, economic analysis and social agenda. These documents  reflected that government's rapid move to  neo-conservatism and the overwhelming influence of the Fraser Institute. The Restraint Programme was clearly delineated.  And, Bennett held rigidly to his strategies  for three years.  By sharp contrast, Vander Zalm's first  Throne Speech and budget are statements  of classic liberal populism. The 1987 Budget is liberal in that it does not fundamentally alter the existing economic forces. The  major corporations and big businesses have  not been touched. No new major financial  resources have been designated. No radical  plans to lower the deficit have been outlined.  No serious attempt at long range employment has been initiated. The monies that  will be raised from increased taxes and user  fees, are within the scale of a provincial  economy, quite limited.  Margaret J. Priestly Birrell currently  works with the British Columbia Coalition for the Disabled. She was a candidate in the 1984 New Democratic Party  leadership race which was won by current NDP leader, Bob Skelly.  The good news is bad  by Kinesis Staff Writer  A number of recent statistical indicators  show that for women in the workforce in  British Columbia any good news is really  just more bad news.  Statistics Canada's monthly report on  the unemployment rate, released in March,  notes that while 30,000 new jobs were created across the country, 27,000 new people entered the workforce meaning that  unemployment decreased only a minuscule  amount. And, according to an economic  analysis prepared by the British Columbia Central Credit Union, unemployment in  B.C. is on the rise yet again.  ARIEL BOOKS  carries a large  selection of  titles  "Adult Children  of Alcoholics"  arid books for women  2766\v.4thak van.,b.c 733-3511  The report says that after the "hiatus afforded by Expo '86, the unemployment rate  in B.C. is on the rise. From a five year low  of twelve percent in mid-1986 to 13.6 percent in 1987, the number of unemployed has  risen to almost 200,000 people."  StatsCan's figures do show that most  of the 30,000 new jobs created were full-  time positions, 16,000 of which go to British Columbians. The greater number of full-  time positions reverses a trend that has  persisted since the 1970's of growing part-  time employment. A StatsCan spokesperson  noted that while this is encouraging there  shouldn't be too much emphasis placed on  a single month's figures.  Because most of the new jobs created  were in the service sector, women's unemployment dropped slightly across the country.  According to StatsCan service sector  jobs will continue to increase reflecting the  long term trend toward a service economy.  "Sadly, that's where the growth is," said a  spokesperson, "... people are taking their  unskilled resources and working at Mac-  Donalds." The increased work in the service sector may be the underlying reason for  women losing ground in the wage gap issue.  Statistics Canada's March report on the  wage gap notes that for the first time in  eighteen years the gap between men and  women's wages widened in all parts of the  country. The average income for women  working full-time in 1985 was $18,736, 64.9  percent of that of their male counterparts.  This is down from 65.5 percent in 1984.  British Columbia, which had the seventh  largest wage gap in StatsCan's 1984 report,  has now moved to the largest difference, at  61.6 percent, between men's and women's  earnings in any province. ///y////?///////////^^^^  Across Canada  Media self-censorship  The safe, the tube and the ugly  by Nancy Pollak  Public health officials may have finally  woken up to the threat ADDS poses to the  heterosexual population. As a result, condoms and some less-than-frank talk about  AIDS will be making an uneasy debut on  Canadian airwaves this spring.  The country's major television networks  have been forced to grapple with their  own prudish advertising standards policies  in determining whether to air a series of  four AIDS prevention messages produced  by the Canadian Public Health Association (CPHA). After careful review, the CBC  judged that the messages did not condone  casual sex and elected to broadcast all  four. Canada's private networks, CTV and  Global, will abide by the decision of then  advertising regulator, the Telecaster Committee of Canada (TCC) who evidently perceived the ads differently and rejected three  for their promotion of ... casual sex.  The ad accepted by the TCC depicts a  married couple discussing how their commitment to one another made them safe  and that the best thing they could do for  their teenaged children was provide information (which the ad does not provide) and  set an example. The remaining three ads  stress that AIDS, a fatal disease, can be prevented by avoiding sex with different partners or using a condom.  It was the reference to "sex with different  partners" that earned the TCC's condemnation. As spokesperson Pat Beatty said,  "We want to make sure we offend as few  people as possible."  Lezlie Wagman, Coordinator of Education, Information and Prevention at ADDS  Vancouver, was scornful of the TTC's approach. "By failing to run these ads, are we  ending up causing peoples' deaths?" Wagman was also critical of the monogamous  heterosexual family message. "It's a moral  statement and fallacious: get married and  you don't have to worry about AIDS. The  assumption cannot be made that if you're  monogamous you're free of risk. A person's  past sexual history is what counts." Wagman characterized the other three ads as  "soft sell—just not enough message, and too  judgmental."  The Canadian AIDS Society has urged  the public to let the networks know they  are unhappy with their decisions. Not all  private broadcasters will be following the  TTC's recommendation: Vancouver's VU13  will air all the messages because, as their  spokesperson Jack Tomik said, "We feel  AIDS is more of a problem here in Vancouver than other parts of the country, and  it's a far-reaching social and health issue  threatening us all."  The CBC's decision to broadcast the  AIDS messages came after a thorough review primarily concerned with ensuring  that any ads suggesting the use of condoms  also suggested the use of "self-restraint",  and in no way condoned casual or illicit  sex. Richard Chambers of the CBC was unable to articulate the CBC's vision of casual sex but stated, "In the context of society as a whole, casual sex is a controversial issue ... and our social responsibility  as a broadcaster is to respect our audience's  ethical concerns." The CBC did not consult  with any ADDS organizations when appraising the prevention messages.  According to Chambers, thirty-second  public service announcements are a small  part of CBC's effort to address the issue of  pie wince at the kitchen table, like feminine  hygiene products."  In the light of AIDS, the advertising  ground under condoms is shifting. Rubber  manufacturers do a $15 million a year business in Canada, and sales are expected to  grow by ten percent this year. CTV, the network which rejected AIDS prevention messages, recently decided to run paid condom  commercials which focus on an unspecified  risk that condoms somehow reduce.  The Canadian Public Health Association  was furious at the CTV's hypocrisy, stating that the ads' vagueness rendered them  virtually useless as health information. "I  would hate to think there is an economic  motive behind this," said Gerry Dafoe to  the CPHA.  11   he CBC is holding firm in its refusal to treat  birth control as a matter that rates as much  social recognition as cornflakes and jogging.  AIDS, and public affairs and news programs  will be the major sources of information.  He further stated that the AIDS messages  would be slotted into teenage viewing times.  Although public reaction was not a factor in  the CBC's decision to carry the messages,  Chambers was impressed by the number of  "ordinary citizens" who expended time and  money in reminding the corporation of its  social responsibility to accept ADDS prevention materials.  Controlling Birth Control  The networks' squeamishness about sex in  the context of real-life disease and death  is outstanding given television's tendency  to sexualize everything from soup to nuts  when the advertising dollar is at issue. The  squeamishness extends also to the realm of  sex and life: both public and private broadcasters in Canada have had longstanding  bans on birth control advertising and, indeed, on any product or service deemed controversial. According to the CBC's policy,  controversial means likely to "cause public  debate or confrontation": joining contraceptives on the list of proscribed products and  services are spiritualists, dating clubs and  massage parlours.  It was only in the last thirteen months  that the CBC followed CTV's lead in advertising previously controversial menstrual  products such as pads and tampons. Old  mindsets die hard: a spokesperson at CFUN  radio in Vancouver, when asked about  running ADDS prevention messages, said,  "We're a family station. We wouldn't want  to broadcast anything that might make peo-  The CBC is holding firm in its refusal to  treat birth control as a matter that rates  as much social recognition as cornflakes and  jogging. Manitoba has recently been the  scene of a major battle between the network  and the Committee on Unplanned Pregnancy (COUP), a body attempting to deal  with unwanted teen pregnancies. (COUP estimates that adolescent pregnancies occur  in Manitoba at a rate of sixty per week.)  They have produced three television spots  which invite teens to think and act responsibly about their sexuality, and encourage  them to call a toll free "facts of fife liner  where they can talk to a counsellor.  The ads, which use dialogue from actual  discussions among teens about sex and birth  control, have been aired by CTV and were  well-received by the public. The CBC's objection stems from their judgement that materials aimed at sexually active teens are  "very controversial and unacceptable."  COUP is particularly distressed by the  corporation's stance because the CBC is  the only network serving northern and rural Manitobans. To date, the CBC has been  unmoved by the public opinion drive that  COUP has mounted, citing the Catholic  church and "other people" as the source of  opposition.  The television establishment's unwillingness to deliver useful, clear messages about  sexuality issues is a serious stumbling block  for public educators in these fields. Misinformation about ADDS and contraception  is widespread, and part of the problem is  that sexuality itself remains a taboo subject. As Lezlie Wagman says, "It is difficult  to broach the topic of changes in sexual behaviour when we don't even talk about  ual behaviour."  Wagman's sense of the enormous work  ahead is based on her exposure to people's  attitudes: the current popular myth about  ADDS is that you can get it from kissing.  You can't, but don't expect your T.V. to  tell you so.  Help AIDS Vancouver  -AIDS Vancouver is looking for volunteers to work on the hotline  telephone service.  -Volunteers on the line will offer information on AIDS to the general  public and to people who may be at risk or may have AIDS related  conditions.  -AIDS Vancouver is looking for women and men with good communication skills who can work well in a team setting.  -A general knowledge of AIDS and previous experience with telephone counselling would be an asset.  -A training workshop will be held at the end of April.  -Please call Sean Stephenson at AIDS Vancouver, 687-5220, for  further information.  w>  AIDS Vancouver  KINESIS Across Canada  /^^%^^#*^  Yukon protects rights  by Sharon Hounsell  The new Act gives  Yukoners some of the most  progressive human rights  legislation in Canada.  Family conference  discusses childcare  by Pat Feindel  After more than a year of  fiery debate, the Yukon government passed a bill introducing human rights legislation. The new  act, passed in mid-February, replaces the antiquated 1963 Fair  Practices Act and gives Yukoners  some of the most progressive human rights legislation in Canada.  The most contentious areas of the  bill were the inclusion of sexual  orientation as a prohibited ground  for discrimination and the equal  pay for work of equal value clause.  Sexual orientation is one of  twelve prohibited grounds of discrimination. (Other grounds include pohtical association, criminal record, family status, and  sex—including pregnancy and  pregnancy related conditions.) The  act prohibits discrimination in the  areas of employment, accommodation and provision of goods and  services and makes the Yukon the  third jurisdiction in Canada where  gays and lesbians have gained human rights protection. (Ontario  and Quebec also include sexual  orientation in their human rights  codes.)  Response to the inclusion of sexual orientation was reactionary,  both from the Conservative opposition and from the public. Conservative opposition leader Willard  Phelps said the bill should have  a swastika stamped on it. (This  charge was later withdrawn—  presumably after realizing it made  no sense.) In a public hearing, one  man ripped off his shirt in a dramatic protest.  The local papers were flooded  with letters from writers promoting the usual homophobia. The  opposition claimed that the bill  would force public facilities to install a third washroom for homosexuals and argued that the  bill did more than protect minority rights—it gave "special rights"  to minorities. They also argued  that homosexuals from other parts  of Canada would flock to the  Yukon, bringing with them the  ADDS virus.  Fortunately, these attacks encouraged gay rights supporters to  come out in strong support of  the proposed legislation. The debate provided Yukoners  with  a  forum for a much needed (however painful) education about gay  rights.  The new legislation also provides for equal pay for work of  equal value within the public sector, hi the Yukon, this means  not only the territorial government  itself but also all municipalities,  their boards, commissions and corporations. The value of work is to  be assessed on the basis of skill, effort, responsibility and work conditions. The act also charges the  Human Rights Commission with  the responsibility to research implementing pay equity within the  private sector.  The Yukon Status of Women  Council has lobbied extensively for  human rights since 1983. Many  of their demands are reflected in  the NDP's new act, including: sexual orientation, equal pay for work  of equal value, the establishment  of an independent human rights  commission—accountable to the  legislature as a whole (as opposed  to the government or a particular  minister) and that the act be binding on the government as an employer and provider of services.  "The notion of publicly financed  childcare is no more anti- family than publicly financed health  care or old age security," says Barbara McDougall, Minister Responsible for the Status of Women.  Addressing a two day Symposium  on the Family sponsored by the  Canadian Advisory Council on the  Status of Women (CACSW), in  early March, McDougall reiterated  Prime Minister Brian Mulroney's  earlier commitment of federal support for "adequate, affordable, accessible, and flexible child care" in  Canada.  McDougall emphasized the need  for a "wide array of community-  based child care options to meet  the diverse needs of Canadian families". But neither she nor the Minister of Health and Welfare, Jake  Epp, who also addressed the symposium, put a concrete dollar figure on that commitment.  While Mulroney pledged to find  the "significant resources" that  quality child care will require, he  withheld further details pending  release of the Report of the Federal  Task Force on Child Care (to be  released in early April), and pending an agreement between federal  and provincial leaders on child  care funding.  Attended by over one hundred women's groups, the symposium addressed several family issues of concern to women, including the definition of the family itself.  New areas of concern received  attention as well. In her keynote  address Margrit Eichler, sociologist at the Ontario Institute of  Studies in Education, analyzed the  philosophy and strategies of what  she dubbed the "patriarchal family movement" and the "women's  submission movement" (including  R.E.A.L. women).  Eichler detailed the changes  the  family  has  undergone   over  the last twenty years and delved  at length into what she considers the real threat to today's families—reproductive technologies. She urged women to call  for a Royal Commission at the federal level into the repercussions of  reproductive technology before we  find that "medical and legal practitioners have created a nightmare  society where women are breeders and money determines who can  buy children."  The Council consists of up to  thirty federally appointed members across Canada, and holds a  symposium each year to which selected women's groups are invited.  A major part of CACSW work is  research and policy analysis, public education, and directly advising  the Minister Responsible for the  Status of Women and government  decision-makers.  Eatons  again  by Jean Rands  Becoming aware of the effects of exposure to DES  Thousands of women and men  in Canada between the ages of  sixteen and forty-six may still  not know that they were exposed  to the drug D.E.S. (diethylstilbe-  strol). The drug, given to women  during their pregnancies, has been  linked to various health complications in themselves and their  children. D.E.S. Awareness Week  (April 20-25) is being organized by  D.E.S. Action Canada, here and  in other countries, to educate both  women and men to the potential effects this may have on their  health. The project's goal is to  reach 1,000 people who are still unaware of their exposure to D.E.S.  D.E.S., a synthetic hormone,  was supposed to help women with  a previous history of miscarriage  carry their babies to term. The  drug was used around the world,  in Canada between 1941 and 1971.  Estimates set the world wide  D.E.S. exposure well into the millions. In Canada, it has been suggested that between 200,000 and  400,000 women were given the  drug.  When D.E.S. first appeared on  the market, it was touted as a wonder drug. Although early studies  did link D.E.S. to cancer in laboratory animals, testing during the  1950's indicated that it had no  measurable effect on carrying babies to term; the drug remained  available until a direct link to human cancer was made. Even then,  D.E.S. was only banned for use by  pregnant women.  For those who were directly exposed to D.E.S. while in utero,  the effects range from the benign  to the severe. These complications  tend to concentrate around the reproductive organs. Daughters may  develop a variety of uterine and  cervical abnormalities. Most of  these are benign, although they result in a significantly higher rate  of fertility problems and miscarriages than those faced by unexposed women. The most dangerous among these problems is the  greater risk of ectopic pregnancies.  A rare form of vaginal cancer has  also been linked to D.E.S. expo-  Sons are also more prone to  benign testicular cysts and abnormalities, as well as fertility  problems. The high incidence of  such complications has prompted  D.E.S. Action to produce a Fertility Guide for children exposed to  D.E.S. Finally, the women themselves who took D.E.S. run a  higher risk of developing breast  cancer in their later years.  Many of these complications  will respond to treatment, particularly if caught early and understood to be related to D.E.S. exposure.  It is often difficult to trace  D.E.S. use since the drug was  marketed in Canada under dozens  of brand names and in various  forms. Those who think that they  may have been exposed to D.E.S.  should first ask their mothers if  they had a history of miscarriage or if they took any medication during their pregnancies.  The next place to check is with  your mother's doctor or pharmacist. This often proves difficult as  doctors are under no legal obliga  tion to keep medical records more  than five or ten years after a patient's last visit. This time period is often too short since D.E.S.  related complications will appear  well after this time.  The Vancouver Women's Health  Collective is an active member of  D.E.S. Action Canada. The Health  Collective maintains lists of different brand names that D.E.S. appeared under as well as extensive  information on the drug's history,  side effects, warning signs, treatment, etc. As well, the Health Collective keeps a current list of doctors who are aware of the issue and  appropriate ways of testing and  monitoring D.E.S. exposure.  The Vancouver Women's  Health Collective is sponsoring  a public meeting, including a  screening ofD.E.S.: An Uncertain Legacy", a NFB documentary, on April 23, 7:30  pm., 888 Burrard St. Vancouver. This will coincide with  D.E.S. Awareness Week. For  more information call 682-  1633.  Two years ago Vancouver's  IWD march gathered in front of  Eatons at Georgia and Granville.  Hundreds chanted, "boycott Eatons" and cut up their Eatons  charge cards in response to appeals  from Linda McFawn, an Eatons  striker from Toronto.  In spite of the courage of the  strikers and the boycott campaign  by women's groups, unions and  church groups, the strike at six  Eatons stores in Ontario ended  in defeat in May 1985. After five  months on strike, the international  president of Retail Wholesale Department Store Union (RWDSU)  signed an agreement with Eatons  without allowing the members to  vote on it. The settlement was no  better than the offer Eatons workers rejected before the strike. It  generally preserved the wages and  working conditions that led to the  workers' decision to unionize in the  first place. (See Kinesis September, 1985).  hi late February, the Ontario Labour Relations Board conducted decertification votes in ten  bargaining units in five Eatons  stores. The union lost every vote.  The total vote was 647 to 301,  In Ontario, the union now represents less than fifty workers in four  small units—full-time and part-  time sales staff in a warehouse  store in London, full-time sales  staff at Yonge and Eglinton in Toronto, and office workers in Brain alea.  The loss of these votes is a big  setback in the fight of department  store workers for part-time benefits, job security, decent wages  and union recognition. But the  Eatons workers broke new ground  in challenging a notoriously antiunion employer in this unorganized industry and their struggle,  and even their defeat, should make  us stronger if we can learn from  it. The next issue of Kinesis will  have more information about how  Eatons won this round, including  the views of some union activists  at Eatons in Toronto.  KINESIS  April '87 ///////////////////^^^^^^  /////////////////////M^^^  International  A first in the  Philippines: IWD  in Dumaguete  by Linda Ervin  In 1985 I spent one month in the  Philippines on an exposure tour with  labour, church and community people.  At that time I made connections with  Gabriella, the national women's association which was formed in 1984- Since  my initial tour to the Philippines I've  become a member of the British Columbia Committee for Human Rights in  the Philippines. Recently I was asked  to return to participate in the Second Women's International Solidarity  Affair in the Philippines (WISAP),  February 25 to March 11, 1987.  In this article I want to relate what it  like to be in the Philippines on International  Women's Day (IWD).  After a five day exposure tour we travelled to Dumoguete city in Negroes Oriental to prepare for IWD celebrations there.  Nebia Sachos, Secretary General of Gabriella (formerly a beauty queen, model and,  friend of Imelda Marcos, who left that  lifestyle, served time as a political prisoner and is currently running for Congress)  spoke. She talked of the need to work together, to rid ourselves of capitalist values  and to be strong militant women fighting  for justice.  In the evening we had a cultural night  where we all shared something of our own  country. We pledged our solidarity with the  women and shared stories of the native land  claims, poverty in Canada, the drastic cuts  to women's programs, pay equity issues and  the threat of REAL women.  We had about two  hundred in the  parade to begin with a  and it quickly grew  to four hundred.  The Filipinos gave us great theatre and  song depicting their situation. At the cultural gathering we were also joined by  women from Chile, Nicaragua, and Viet  Nam. We started at eight and finally at midnight, after hearing more stories and singing  the Bayonko (the song of struggle and freedom which is sometimes banned by the government), we went home.  Next day, March 8, we were up at six for  breakfast as the parade was to begin at 8:00  am. We had a parade permit but this didn't  stop the trucks, cars, and tricycles on the  parade route. A woman from the military  joined the parade and helped us through the  traffic. We had a band, a male band augmented by majorettes at this, the first IWD  celebration in Negroes Oriental.  We had about two hundred in the parade to begin with and it quickly grew to  four hundred. We worked through the main  street and turned into the market area. The  organizer's plan was to ensure that the market vendors, mostly women, knew about  Gabriella and knew that March 8 is a day to  celebrate women. Some of the vendors gave  us flowers and some joined our parade. By  the time we reached the rally point six truck  loads of women had arrived. There were  about one hundred women on each truck increasing the rally total to 1,000.  These women had walked one to two  hours to the truck pick-up point and then  traveled anywhere from one to three hours  by truck to Dumaguete. They brought nursing children and some food. It was a remarkable sight to see.  Philippines continued page 10  Child wages: eight pesos a day  At one point on our tour we accompanied a union representative to the sugar cane fields  near Bois. We met several young children who work in the fields. Their job is cutting the  cane after it has been burned. They make eight pesos per day.  Children usually begin work at age seven but some begin at age six. Twelve year old  children are preferred because they have lots of energy and work quickly. These children  receive ten pesos if they are able to make fifty bundles of sugar cane per day, otherwise  they are paid ten centaboes per bundle. Children are given a quota of fifty bundles per  day. The bundles are approximately the width of a large douglas fir and about six feet in  length. (Seventeen pesos equals approximately $1 Canadian.)  Tessie is thirteen years old. She's been working in the sugar cane field since age seven.  She has seven brothers and sisters. She lives thirty kilometers away from the cane fields  and so must ride, by truck, down mountain highways to and from work each day. She leaves  her home at 6:00 am to begin work at 8:00 am.  She works in the fields six days a week and at the peak of the harvest season works  longer hours and seven days a week. Her skin is blackened by the smokey environment she  has to work in. The smoke is stinky and is difficult to get off the body. Tessie brings with  her a plate of rice and a dried fish for lunch. She is malnourished, her eyes and stomach  are bulged. She is tiny for her age. Her prize possession is her large and very sharp knife.  The knife is her only source of income.  Tessie has few choices in life. She will marry at age fifteen or sixteen and bear several  children or she'll travel to Manila to be a maid or bar girl which usually means prostitution. It's unlikely she'll be a mail order bride because she has not gone to school and she  can't read. She hopes to marry soon and have children. Tessie had not heard about IWD  and was not yet a part of the peasants organization called AMIHAN.  Women from rural areas arrive for Dumaguete IWD celebrations.  Standing upforthe land  We left the sugar cane fields and travelled by tricycles (eight people on one tricycle plus  baggage and food) to a small community up in the mountains called Liki. The last few kilometers we had to walk. We arrived at a small house where, after a long chat, we bunked  down on mats for a good night's sleep.  The next morning we were up at five eating our corn grits and rice, salt and dried fish  with corn coffee. The community of peasants gathered and we travelled up the mountain  further. Scouts had gone on before to check to see if the military was in the area.  This was Sunday, a day off, sort of. The peasants were going to rebuild houses that had  been demolished by the police and Elizelda's private army. (Elizelda is the minister of Cultural Minorities in the Philippines and claims to own the land the Liki peasants have been  living on. The peasants believe the land is rightfully theirs—"We have been farming the  land since our grandfather's time and before that." (They had just lost their case in court  but vowed to carry on their fight.)  Seven houses had been destroyed, banana trees cut down (they take a year to grow)  vegetables, eggs and animals taken by the police and Elizelda's army.  One woman told us that it was four in the afternoon when they tore her house down,  her husband was away and she was alone with the two youngest of her eleven children. She  said she stood up for her rights to the land and they threatened to put her in jail. She was  confronted by twenty-nine men armed with rifles. After her house was destroyed, she was  warned to tell no one who was responsible or they would come back. She, with the thirty  peasants, men, women and children, rebuilt the house and then journeyed up the mountain  to rebuild a second house. ■  KINESIS     Apr,. '87 ^^INTERNATIONAL  El Salvador  $2.5 billion for bombs  Prisoners win  conjugal rights  in Costa Rica  To Nicaragua Women, from Canada: Early this year, 3.5 million sanitary napkins were delivered to  Nicaragua by Tools For Peace, the result of a corporate donation. Pictured above are Anna Patricia  Elvir of the Nicaraguan Committee of Solidarity with the People (left). Sylvia McEwan of AMNLAE  (centre), and TFP's Barbara Stewart. The Nicaraguan people are seeking supplies of blankets,  rubber boots, medical supplies, hand tools, notebooks and pencils. Contact TFP at 879-7216 with  your donation.  by Kinesis Staff Writer  Two Costa Rican women who  are serving seventeen year sentences for 'subversive activity'  have spearheaded a drive and have  won conjugal visiting rights for  women prisoners in Costa Rica.  Magaly Salazar and Alejan-  dra Bonilla have been vociferous  in their criticism of the unequal  treatment women prisoners have  received and have carried out their  campaign openly in the press. Men  have had conjugal visiting rights  since 1975.  According to Liliana Arrieta, a  sociologist, inconsistencies in the  way men and women are treated  have nothing to do with the law.  Men, she says, were given the right  to conjugal visits in order to minimize conflicts between inmates  and take away fears that their  partners are being 'disloyal' on the  outside. Women on the other hand  were denied visits in case they fell  pregnant. Gerado Villobos, head  of the Social Rehabilitation programme for the Ministry of Justice said that women were finally  granted conjugal rights in order to  reduce the number of homosexual  relationships in women's prisons.  Elizabeth Odio, an active supporter of the campaign and a former justice minister, says an important battle has been won but  that the war needs to be fought  against the entire discriminatory  penal system.  Outwrite  by Kinesis Staff Writer  The Constitutive Committee  for the Salvadorean Women's  Federation, based in Managua,  Nicaragua, has launched a campaign against American military  aid to El Salvador. The United  States Congress will make a decision about more military aid to the  Salvadorean government on April  25th of this year and the Committee is urging people from around  the world to write Jim Wright,  leader of the House of Representatives, demanding that further aid  not be approved.  According to the Committee, in  the last seven years the Reagan  administration has sent $2.5 billion to El Salvador in support of  different regimes. At a time when  the situation of many Salvadoreans has worsened due to the effects  of the October earthquake the millions of dollars of aid has been used  to strengthen the armed forces and  purchase military supplies and armaments.  They note that the Salvadorean  armed forces have increased from  15,000 at the beginning of the  war to their present strength of  50,000. As well U.S. money has  been used to build up the Salvadorean Air Force, presently the  strongest in Central America, to  its current strength of one hundred  aircraft. The committee points out  that the Air Force is used by government to bomb civilians who  are hving in conflict zones. They  note that in 1986 there were 1821  civilians, forty-five of them children, killed by Salvadorean military forces. Since the beginning of  the war over 60,000 non-combat  civilians have been killed by military and covert military forces.  While the Salvadorean military  is flourishing with American support the Salvadorean people receive few benefits from American  aid. Despite an illiteracy rate of  sixty-five percent the national education budget has been reduced  from twenty-five percent in 1980  to seventeen percent in 1985. Two  thousand schools, mostly in rural areas, have been destroyed by  military attacks. Rural Salvadoreans have almost no access to med  ical care. Of every one hundred  children, seventy-five are malnourished and forty die before reaching  five years of age.  For five million inhabitants  there exist only fourteen hospitals,  seven of which were destroyed in  the recent earthquake. There is  only one doctor for each 100,000  inhabitants.  The committee believes that  continued American aid only  brings more bloodshed and further war. They are urging supporters to write and demand that: further aid to the Salvadorean government not be approved; that the  war not be continued to be deepened, and that violations of the human rights of the civilian population be brought to an end.  To support the campaign  against continued aid to El  Salvador write: Leader of the  House Jim Wright, House of  Representatives, Washington,  D.C. 20215, U.S.A.  Soviets plan to  force pregnant  addicts to abort  by Kinesis Staff Writer  Soviet health officials are calling  for enactment of a law that will  compel pregnant alcoholics and  drug addicts to have abortions and  to require applicants for marriage  licenses to have medical examinations to detect drug use.  The call for a new law was reported in Sovietskays Rossiya,  the daily government newspaper  for the Russian Federation, which  is the largest of the USSR's fifteen  republics. Deputy Health Minister  of the Russian Federation, Anton-  ina Gracheva, was quoted as saying that an increasing number of  unwanted babies are being born.  The number of babies born with  damage caused by their parents'  alcoholism or drug addiction has  doubled in the last ten years, she  said.  This increase in addicted and  injured newborns prompted the  region's Health Ministry to ask the  Justice Ministry to consider a law  requiring couples to undergo medical examinations before marriage,  she said.  Women the state diagnoses as  alcoholics or drug addicts would  be forbidden to have children and  required to have abortions if they  become pregnant, Gracheva said.  Abortion is the most common  form of birth control in the Soviet  Union; other forms often are unavailable.  Off Our Backs  Philippines from page 9  The rally consisted of the various sector  groups speaking. (Organizing in the Philippines is done on a sector basis.) Women in  Dumaguete are organized in teacher, professional, religious, peasant, farmer and urban  poor sectors. Each sector was able to speak  about their particular issues. One peasant  woman from Ste. Catelina spoke about the  recent severe militarization in her village:  the military had come in, straffed the village and destroyed homes.  I spoke on behalf of the WISAP delegates, pledged our support and promised  to tell the truth of the current situation  in the Philippines; the increased militarization, that no land reform has taken place  and that land reform requests have been ignored. Nelia Sachos concluded the speakers  list with a rousing speech to the women to  fight for justice.  After the rally we retired for lunch at the  Women's Centre. A woman who had seen  the rally and was deeply moved by the large  gathering of women, had gone home to cook  some chicken and brought it over for the organizers. She was so excited to be part of  the movement that she said her depression  was lifted. She had been wanting to connect  with women in this way for a long time.  Where Was Cory?  We left Dumaguete for Manila and arrived in time for the IWD rally. Again there  were several speeches and some theatre. Approximately 1,000 people were gathered. After over two hours of speeches, we marched  to Manila's Mendiola Bridge where peasants  protesting the lack of action on land reform  had been massacred by the military in early  February.  When we arrived at the bridge we were  confronted by two lines of armed military.  Nelia went to negotiate as we wanted to  cross the bridge and go to the presidential palace to present our demands to Cory  Aquino. They refused to allow us to go further.  One of the organizers spoke, claiming  Cory does not listen to women's voices  and then Nelia spoke, asking why a woman  won't meet with women to discuss women's  issues. Nelia also pleaded for land reform,  for equality of women, to stop human rights  violations and for democracy. After the  speeches the women took their posters and  placed them on the pavement in the hopes  they would be delivered to the President.  It was a great day with speeches, beautiful banners, balloons and theatre. It was  especially moving to be part of the IWD  celebration in Dumaguete. One thousand  women had travelled a great distance, in  uncomfortable transportation, in the heat  of the sun, to be part of the voice and  celebration of Women's Day. Women from  China, Viet Nam, Nicaragua, Netherlands,  Canada—had united in solidarity with the  women of the Philippines.  Linda Ervin lives in Vancouver and  is a community worker and a United  Church Deaconal Minister. In future issues she will explore the changes in the  Philippines between 1985 and 1987 and  will examine the Filipino people's organizing priorities and the implications of  the Philippines' new constitution.  l   ME PHILIPPINES.  » KINESIS  April '87 ********    *  *    *  VANCOUVER /WD  KINESIS  April "87 H by Jane Smith  / am writing this article in the hope  of contributing something useful to a dialogue that has finally been opened. My  views are based on my readings about  battering, about lesbian battering in particular (of which there is very little in  print), and on my own experience in an  abusive relationship.  Part of the reason that feminists find it  difficult to discuss lesbian abuse has to do  with our analysis of heterosexual abuse. As  long as we blamed wife battering on unequal  male-female power and on sex-role stereotyping, the fact of lesbian abuse could only  call into question our beliefs on the subject.  Examining lesbian abuse allows us to  broaden our understanding. We are forced  to see that there is something fundamentally wrong with all patriarchal relationships". Our expectations of love, of friendship, of partnerships, are based on models  and beliefs that are formed at an early age  and reinforced throughout our hves. Being  lesbian does not make us immune to this  socialization. I think lesbians must recognize the expectations we have of love, as  well as recognize the particular factors in  lesbian relationships that aggravate abusive  tendencies, so that we can work politically  and personally to neutralize them.  One of the differences between lesbian  and heterosexual abuse is that within lesbian relationships the incidence of battering  is quite low. The battered women's movement has concentrated its efforts on physical abuse, because this is more visible, and  because its life-threatening nature makes it  an immediate priority. Recently there has  been an attempt to address the problem of  psychological abuse, and this is important  for lesbians because it opens the door to the  services available for battered wives.  Psychological abuse is difficult to define  because its scars aren't visible. What is the  difference between an occasional fight or  bad relationship, and an abusive relationship? I think the difference lies in the duration and the effect. An abusive relationship is one in which the abuse is sustained  over a long period of time, and which results in real psychological damage—damage  that produces personality and behaviour  changes.  Abusive behaviour follows a pattern,  is repetitive, is focussed on a particular  woman, and is designed to create control  over that woman.  Getting Free: A Handbook for Women  in Abusive Relationships, by Ginny  NiCarthy, describes a number of factors  contributing to psychological abuse. I would  like to examine some of these as they apply  to lesbian relationships.  . Isolation  An abusive relationship cannot survive for  long except in isolation. Isolation of the victim from potential support is the most effective way of exerting control over her life. Isolation can be enforced in a number of ways:  criticism of friends, criticism of the woman's  activities outside of the relationship, embarrassing behaviour when friends are visiting;  all discourage the maintenance of relationships outside of the partnership.  In lesbian relationships, the question of  how out of the closet each partner is can  also become an effective isolator. Most lesbian relationships are already isolated because of the homophobic society in which  we live. Very few lesbians have the privilege  of spending their working and social lives  within a supportive lesbian community. An  abusive partner can easily guilt her victim  into sharing her closet by arguing that openness is a threat to her safety. The threat  posed by exposure may or may not be a real  one, but the result in any case is a spiralling  isolation for both women.  Degradation  Once isolated, the abused woman becomes  extremely vulnerable to the opinions of her  partner. None of us is so self-confident that  we don't need some validation from a significant other. Constant criticism in an atmosphere of isolation can gradually wear down  any woman's self-esteem.  Degradation can take many forms. Name-  calling, fault-finding, public and private humiliation or ridicule. The abuser's need is  to reinforce her own sense of power, but  she finds there is no real satisfaction in feeling superior to somebody who is so 'faulty',  and she must therefore escalate her abuse  to continue feeling powerful.  The abuser becomes very skilled at learning what her partner is most sensitive about  and uses this knowledge to further undermine her. Sexual ridicule or degradation is  particularly devastating for women since we  all carry so many insecurities about our sexuality, and have been so well trained to desire giving pleasure and feel guilty about  getting pleasure. Within an abusive relationship it is very easy for the abuser to use  insecurity to force on her partner her own  definitions of sexual gratification.  Monopolization of Perception  Once isolated and constantly humiliated, a  woman who is being abused focuses all her  attention on the abuser and lives in fear of  provoking her partner's anger. She feels she  is walking on eggshells, constantly second-  guessing her partner's needs. The abuser  needs this kind of attention as this is her  idea of a love relationship—one that is all-  consuming. This is, after all, what we've all  been promised.  The search for answers  LESBIAN AB  The abuser enforces this constant attention by making it difficult for her partner  to do anything without her—by insisting  they always go out together, by telephoning her constantly when they're apart, by  turning all conversations to discussions of  her own needs. The effect on the victim is  that she begins to carry her partner within  her head, even when they are apart. She  thinks, acts and talks in ways her abuser  expects her to until every action and word  becomes self-censored. Her own identity becomes submerged in the overpowering need  of the abuser.  Induced Debility  In time, the victim of an abusive relationship is worn down and this in turn makes  her more vulnerable to the other's manipulation. She is deprived of sleep by late-  night arguments or sexual demands, or by  her own anxiety-produced insomnia. Addictions or bad health habits become difficult  to break. The abuser often implicitly encourages them, while voicing criticism at  the same time. The constant fear and anxiety of being trapped in such a relationship  can induce various illnesses, and the victim's  physical weakness then compounds her inability to act on her own behalf.  Threats  It is the ability to threaten the other's well-  being that solidifies the power of the abuser.  It is not always necessary for a relationship to be physically abusive, although this  does happen. Women are trained to accede quickly to threats of physical violence.  Shouting, threatening gestures, violent language, breaking things, all require quick action on the part of the victim if she is  to defuse the situation. An abused woman  never feels safe in her own home, and being  female in the patriarchy means she never  feels safe outside her home either. This sense  of having no safe place to go is an overriding reality in the abused woman's life.  inists the situation is unfortunately not  much better. We have fought long and  hard for the right to our relationships with  women, and are afraid that exposing lesbian  abuse will have the effect of increasing the  general climate of homophobia. Coming out  as a 'victim' among feminists can be among  the biggest threats of all to an abused lesbian.  Occasional Indulgences  In most abusive relationships there is a definite cycle of abuse. Tensions build to a cer-  merely a prelude to further abuse, but she  still needs it as a chance to recuperate.  Often she has been thinking of leaving  before this period, but her partner's apparent caring and sincerity now make her  doubt her perceptions and lead her to try  again. Also the abuser, racked by remorse  and guilt, becomes pathetically helpless after her explosions. She may be suicidal. She  may show amazing insight into her own  problem. She is often herself a victim of patriarchal society—a survivor of abuse, in-  \hrough isolation, through degradation, through threats, induced  debility, and occasional indulgences, the victim's sense of self or sanity  is gradually eroded, and the power of the abuser is solidified .  This is why the creation of shelters has  been a priority for battered women's movement, and why it should be a priority for  battered lesbians. Until we are able to find  a space from which we can safely conduct  our lives, it is impossible to examine our options or make any meaningful changes.  Within a lesbian relationship there is the  further threat of exposure to employers or  family, to ex-husbands or social workers or  services concerned with children's welfare—  anyone who has the power to destroy our  lives because we are lesbian. Among fem-  tain point, leading to an explosion of violence or concentrated abuse, followed by a  'honeymoon' period when the abuser feels  remorse and becomes unusually loving. During this time the victim is given a breather  from the constant harassment. It may not  be a particularly marvelous time, but in  contrast to the rest of the relationship it  is heaven. Being denied affection and caring most of the time, the victim is hungry  for the small indulgences that come her way  during the honeymoon period. She may well  recognize that this time is temporary, and  cest, isolation. How can anyone abandon a  sister in such need? How can anyone risk another woman's life and sanity by withdrawing support at such a time?  Occasional indulgences are more than  just flowers or gifts that con the victim into  believing she is loved. They are part of a display of helplessness and vulnerability that is  designed to cement the victim to the abuser.  The victim's self-esteem and identity are  pitted against her sense of morality and ethical, caring behaviour. It is a dilemma that  can seem impossible to resolve.  Crazy-Making  Among lesbians, who haven't even the excuse of societal pressure to "make the marriage work", it seems difficult to understand  why anyone would remain in an abusive relationship. Friends and relatives may see the  relationship deteriorating and may judge  the victim harshly when she appears to be  doing nothing to get out of it. Eventually  they withdraw their support in disgust and  she becomes more isolated still.  Friends and family, however, see only the  surface of an abusive relationship. The day-  to-day reality is well hidden. They do not  see that the victim is in fact fighting all the  time to change her situation, nor do they see  the underlying insanity of such a relationship. Abused women are not foolish or weak,  but neither is an abused woman totally  sane. Her insanity is induced. It takes time  to make a person crazy, but consciously or  not this is exactly what an abuser does to  her partner(s).  Through isolation, through degradation,  through threats, induced debility, and occasional indulgences, the victim's sense of self  or sanity is gradually eroded, and the power  of the abuser is solidified. It is nevertheless a tenuous, unsatisfying power because it  does nothing to change the real source of the  abuser's powerlessness, which lies outside of  the relationship. And so she is forced to exercise her control over the other to its limits. Her demands become increasingly trivial and her methods of enforcing them become more and more insistent. Every detail  of the victim's life is open to criticism and  coercion. Every moment of her life becomes  monitored and trivialized.  Eventually, living twenty-four hours a  day in constant anxiety and in isolation, a  woman in an abusive relationship is driven  to a peculiar sort of insanity. She has no obvious outward signs of 'craziness', but she  is no longer her old self. Her outlook on  life becomes bleak and she becomes increasingly incapable of holding her own in relationships with others. She appears to be uncaring and closed to the world.  In fact she is psychologically cut off.  Nothing around her makes sense any more  and she has nowhere to validate her per  ceptions. She is trapped in an emotional  wasteland, incapable of building new relationships and merely going through the motions of living. Unfortunately she blends in  well in a patriarchal world.  What Can Be Done  If we as lesbians and feminists are going  to do anything to help women escape from  abusive relationships we must first learn to  be supportive to one another. We must recognize that a woman trapped in an abusive  relationship or a woman who is an abuser is  no different from ourselves except in circumstances. As much as some of us may doubt  it, any one of us could find ourselves in a  similar situation.  We must admit that abusive lesbian relationships exist, and that our responsibility is to both parties. It is very easy to turn  our anger on the abuser and use social pressure to isolate and blame her. This is no solution because she will merely turn to another woman and repeat her pattern.  Within the battered women's movement  there has only been minimal success in helping battering men deal with their anger. I  believe this is because men, in a patriarchal  world, have no incentive to overcome their  anger and misogyny. Another difference between abusive lesbian and abusive heterosexual relationships is that lesbians, being  women themselves, are in a better position  to overcome the socialization that makes it  okay to attack and belittle women.  Since it is very difficult for lesbians to  'come out' within the battered women's  movement—as workers or victims, the issue of whether we should use established  services for battered women is complex.  We need discussion on how or whether we  should integrate into the battered women's  movement or whether we want to set up parallel services for lesbians. In any case it's  time lesbians in abusive relationships are  given at least the same support options as  our heterosexual sisters.  hi summary, then, as lesbians we are in  the unique position of being able to contribute a number of things to our general  understanding of abuse:  First, that abusive relationships are not  the result of male/female role stereotyping  alone, but are much more intrinsically a result of patriarchal relationships in general.  Relationships between friends, lovers, parents and children; all are subject to a set of  expectations that can lead to abuse.  Second, that we can contribute a lot towards understanding the psychological nature of abusive relationships, because physical violence is less common among lesbians  and therefore we aren't always forced to address this problem first, and  Third, that we can contribute much to  the understanding of the mind and motivations of the abuser, and finding ways to help  the abuser cope with her own powerlessness  and anger, because there is less social pressure on women to dominate in relationship,  or to indulge our anger and violent feelings.  Jane Smith is a pseudonym  MM Law  Power of Attorney and Committee  by Gillian Andrew  Can you be sure that if you're unable  to look after your own affairs the person  of your choice will be the one with power  to take over for you? Typical situations in  which this question arises are after serious  accidents or the onset of mental disease or  senility.  There are ways to make sure that the person of your choice has power when needed  but they are not automatic. And ensuring  this means taking action before the accident or mental incapacity strikes. It's one  more case of: Be Prepared! This is particularly important if:  • you're living in a "common-law" relationship  • you're lesbian or homosexual  • you have a number of children and have a  strong preference as to which child makes  decisions for you  • you're estranged from some or all of your  close blood relatives  The reason it is important in these situations is that the law assumes you want  blood relatives making decisions for you if  you can't make them yourself. In the cases  mentioned above that's probably not true,  or true about only some of those relatives.  If you take no action in time, you could find  the person closest to you, who knows what  you want, being pushed aside either by family or officialdom.  In law there are two ways to empower another person with legal authority to handle  your affairs. The first way is by appointing  him or her your "attorney" by a document  called a "Power of Attorney". The second  way is for a "Committee" (stress is on the  first syllable) to be appointed for you after  you've become mentally incompetent.  Power of Attorney  A Power of Attorney can give as few or  as many of your legal powers to your Attorney as you like, and for as short or as long a  time as you like. For the purpose of making  arrangements for possible future mental incapacity, the Power of Attorney should be  very broad in the power it gives—you probably wish to choose someone (or more than  one person) not only to pay bills and look after your finances, but also to decide whether  you stay in your home or live in a care facility, and give or withhold consent to medical  treatment. This is called a General Power  of Attorney. Obviously when you're granting someone such wide-ranging powers (in  fact all your legal decision-making powers)  you have to be able to trust the person implicitly as to his/her ethics, willingness to  follow your life-style choices, and of course  financial acumen in handling your estate.  A Power of Attorney can be terminated  simply by destroying it if it has never been  used. If it has been used, you can revoke it  by sending a Revocation document to each  business and person who has been dealing  Obviously you have to  be able to trust the  person implicitly.  with your Attorney for you and the Land  Titles Office if you own real estate. But you  can revoke a Power of Attorney only as long  as you're of sound mind. So to protect you  from abuse of the power by your attorney,  the Power of Attorney ceases to be effective  as soon as you become mentally incompetent unless you've specified in the Power of  Attorney that you want it to endure after  mental incompetence. This kind of appointment is called an Enduring Power of Attorney. Without the enduring clause the Power  of Attorney will probably stop working just  when you want it to start!  A Power of Attorney must be in writing  and notarised. Lawyers and notaries charge  reasonable fees for preparing them, but if  you wish, you can buy a form from many  stationary stores; ask for a "General Power  of Attorney, Short Form". If your Attorney  is to deal with your banking you should also  ask your Bank for its Power of Attorney  ^Learn How To Facilitate  Assertiveness Groups ♦  ►Vancouver Status of Women is looking for women interested in  facilitating our Assertiveness Groups on a volunteer basis.  We are offering a Facilitator's Training Program involving two skills  workshops followed by a six-week practice group (one night per  week).  ► Workshops will be held: Thurs. April 23: 5:30pm-10pm  Sat. April 25: 10am-5pm  Practice Group to follow  There is no charge, and childcare is provided.  ► Please register by Tues. April 14th. Call Patty Moore: 873-1427*  form, since many banks won't honour your  General Power of Attorney form.  An Enduring Power of Attorney lasts indefinitely. It will end only when you die, or  revoke it, or go bankrupt.  Committeeship  If you haven't appointed an Attorney, and  sometimes even if you have, a Committee  may need to be appointed at some time after  you become mentally incompetent to look  after things for you. A Committee may look  after only your affairs, or only your person,  but if it's a friend or relative, he or she often  takes care of both your affairs and person.  The Committee is appointed by a British  Columbia Supreme Court Judge after two  doctors certify that you're unable to look  after your affairs and/or yourself.  The court will usually appoint a private citizen as your Committee only if either you've nominated that person, or all  your close blood relatives agree to the appointment. If you haven't nominated him  or her, your common law or lesbian spouse  or a friend will need consent from your  relatives—often impossible to get. Failing  such agreement either a relative or the Public Trustee will be appointed as Committee. The Public Trustee is a government office which looks after the affairs of children  and mentally incompetent people. When  the Public Trustee acts as your Committee  it is usually only in relation to your affairs—  your banking, entering contracts on your  behalf, selling property. Decisions relating  to care and treatment are usually left to relatives if there are any, or the hospital staff  if there are no relatives.  Nomination of Committee  So a Nomination of Committee is a very  useful document to prepare. You must prepare it before you become mentally incapacitated, although it won't take effect until after then. A Nomination of Committee is a  document signed in the presence of two witnesses. The Court will appoint your nominee despite objections by relatives unless  the nominee's mental health or honesty is  in question.  Your Committee is required to keep careful records of your financial affairs and report to the Public Trustee every two years.  This is intended to protect you against an  unscrupulous Committee. Your Committee  is entitled to claim fees from your estate for  his/her work in managing your affairs.  Differences Between Power of Attorney & Committeeship  • Power of Attorney is inexpensive, 25  cents to $50. Committeeship is expensive,  $500 to $650;  • Power of Attorney is quick (often one  day); Committeeship takes two months  more as a rule;  • Power of Attorney is a private matter  and avoids getting bureaucrats (the Public Trustee's office) involved in your affairs;  • Because your Attorney does not have to  report to anyone it is easier for him/her  to cheat you or lose your money through  poor investments than it is for a Committee, so good judgment is more essential in  choosing an Attorney than a Committee.  Sources of Assistance  Vancouver Community Legal Assistance Society, 257 East 11th Avenue, Vancouver,  B.C. V5T 2C4 tel: 872-0271  Legal Services Society, Offices in many  communities (check phone book)  Lawyer Referral Services, tel: 687-3221  Lawyers & Notaries Public, listed in yellow pages of telephone directory  Public Legal Education Society, 3466  West Broadway, Vancouver, B.C., V6R 2B3,  tel: 734-1126, produces a six page booklet  on Power of Attorney and Committeeship.  Price: $3, available inmost Public Libraries.  Dial-a-Law, tel: 687-4680, long distance  toll free: 112-800-972-0956, hours 8:3f  4:30, Monday to Friday.  Gillian Andrew is a lawyer who works  with the Vancouver Community Legal  Assistance Society.  Maureen McEvoy  is pleased to announce the opening  of her counselling practice.  Specializing in:  • adolescents and adults  who were sexually  abused as children, and  their families  • post-traumatic stress  disorder  • eating disorders  • sexuality  • relationships  • concerns of single women  732-3227  sliding scale available        2531 Cornwall St., Vancouver  Spartacus Books       politics • art  HISTCRY* PERIODICALS  FEMINISM ©THIRDWORLD  PEACE  Winnie Mandela: Mother of a Nation $6.50  Truth Tales: Stories by Indian Women $10.50  The Threshing Floor $9.40  Fireworks: The Best of Fireweed $9.95  1 West Hastings Street  Vancouver. B.C.  688-6138  NEED   INFORMATION?  WANT TO  TALK?  (604) 875-6963  Weds. & Sun. 7-10p.rr  400A West 5th Ave.  Vancouver, B.C. Canada V5Y 1J8  Lesbian (nformation Line  Support your local  IlllIIIIIIII!II«lllllli«i«Sllc  KINESIS SS//S/S//SSS/////S//S/////////////////S//S/S///////S////S//////////////////////////////////S/S/////A  ////////////////^^^^^^  ///////////////////^^^^^  LIFE STORIES  Boy and girl culture foments on schoolbus  by Nora Randall  There is a stool on my bus, a beige plastic, four-legged stool. I got it the same day  I got a new kid on my bus. He has muscular dystrophy and he needs the stool to get  from the street to the bus.  This is what happened with the stool  on the first day. I drove up to David's  stop, opened the bus door and said, "Hiya  David." David bent over, picked up the stool  and put it on the ground. Then he climbed  into the bus and sat down. I took off my seat  belt, got out of the bus, picked up the stool  and put it back. Then I got in, sat down,  put my seat belt back on, closed the door  and drove off.  After doing this for about a week, I began  thinking that it would be nice, if one of the  other kids picked up the stool after David  got on the bus—and faster. I didn't say anything right away. I wanted to think about it  a bit. I mean there were all kinds of ramifications, like—why should a kid have to do  part of my job when I'm getting paid to do  it? But on the other hand why shouldn't a  kid help out when I need a hand? After all,  kids need to perform useful work just like  the rest of us. And also it wouldn't hurt  them to get in the habit of noticing disabled  people and being useful when they could.  All this went through my mind before I  ever asked a kid to pick up the stool. You  may think I sound like some heavy-duty  philosopher, going through all this over a  lousy stool. The truth is that I was searching desperately for a reason why the kids  should pick up the stool because I figured  it was the first thing they were going to ask  me. Now when I think about it, probably all  major philosophical thought was produced  by people who were trying to figure our how  to get kids to do something they wanted  them to do.  Anyway, I went round and round like this  and nothing really occurred to me, but I got  really tired of getting out of my seat belt  and getting off the bus and picking up the  stool and putting it back, then getting back  on the bus, putting on my seat belt, closing  the door and driving into the sunrise, so one  day I just turned to the nearest kid and said,  "Would you please get the stool and put it  back on the bus." He was out of his seat in a  flash. Before I could close my mouth he had  put the stool away and was buckling up. I  closed my mouth, shut the door and drove  on. The next day I said, "Who wants to get  I, Rural, Feminist Newsjou  IMAGE!  Subscriptions $15.00 Institutions  $.L50 Individuals  $5.00   Outside Canada  lil to Image.. P.O. Boi  B.C.. Canada     V0G-4E0  the stool?" All the boys raised their hands  and shouted, "Me!" I picked the first one I  heard. I had started something.  So I had solved my stool problem. I didn't  understand it but who argues with success.  Now all I had to deal with was administrative detail.  Soon the boys stopped waiting until I  asked and somewhere in the middle of the  run before David's house one of them would  suddenly shout, "I get the stool." I figured  that was okay. All I had to do was remember who had said it first. Then they took  to saying it the moment I opened the door  to pick them up. I ruled that this was unfair. No one could shout, "I get the stool"  until all the kids before David's house were  on the bus. What happened with that was  the kids who got on the bus first waited like  coiled springs for the last kid to get on.  As he put his foot on the first step he  was blasted by a chorus of "I get the stool".  He would grit his jaw and push his way to  the back of the bus saying, "I don't care".  Clearly this system was not working. It was  time to take stock.  The only problem with taking stock is  that I had no idea what was going on. I  had started out wandering around in my  head trying to figure out how to get the  kids on my bus to perform a simple little chore which would make my life easier.  It had become a full scale competition between the boys that totally excluded the  girls. As a feminist^ I felt I had created a  monster. But why had the boys decided to  endow this poor little beige plastic, four-  legged stool with the same mystical powers  as an Olympic gold medal? Why didn't it  seem to them like the trash their mothers  were always trying to get them to take out?  And if it was going to be this coveted prize  how had the girls so silently evaporated? I  found myself trying to think of ways to include the girls.  I know the obvious solution is to take  turns but first I wanted to implement a little  affirmative action. So finally the day came  when the last boy put his foot on the step,  and was hit with a chorus of "I get the  stool". I turned to them and said, "Wait a  minute. This isn't working. I have a new system." (It's an amazing feeling of power to  be able to do that at will even if it is only  inside a metal 'great pumpkin' that travels  around in rush hour.)  When we got to David's house I asked,  "Is there anyone who has never done it  who would like to get the stool?" Bullseye.  Sharon, the first girl, pipes up and says, "I  would". "Go for it", I said. I don't understand why this is progress but I guess if the  boys hare off in any direction, in order to  keep up we have to go there too. Anyway,  Sharon does it perfectly and I drive on.  The next day I repeat the process. At this  point in my route there are only two girls  on, so there is really only one kid left who  has never picked up the stool. That is not  counting David, who if he could get off and  pick up the stool wouldn't need it in the first  place. The one kid left is Irene. All the kids  look at her expectantly and Irene says, "No  way". Which is the response I had imagined  from the very first moment I got the idea  to ask the kids to pick up the stool. Thank  you, Irene.  Not missing a beat, one of the boys asks  Sharon if she's going to do it. "No", says  Sharon. "I did it once yesterday, but it's cold  and icky outside." So I picked one of the  boys and I wrote his name down because tomorrow Til pick somebody else until everybody on the bus who wants to pick up the  stool has a turn and then PH start over. But  it looks like it's only going to be the boys.  UPQI&ING  BREADS  BAKERY  Vancouver's Best  Wholegrain Breads  Honey Sweetened  Whole Wheat  Hot Cross Buns  1697 VENABLES ST.  VANCOUVER, BC  V5L2H1 (604)254-5635  I really don't know what to think about  it. On the one hand, I'm kind of disappointed that the girls didn't leap in there  and compete for the prize. I wonder if  they're going to sit out all their lives. On  the other hand, I feel this admiration for  Irene because she noticed what was really going on and refused to get sucked in  by social pressure and competitive frenzy.  And Sharon wanted to try it but noticed it  wasn't all that thrilling. Or did she just notice that she was out of place?  It should have been a simple social task  which people were willing to share for the  smooth operation of the whole. I mean,  that's what I thought it was. It turned into  a catalyst for the separation and foment of  boy culture and girl culture. A beige plastic, four-legged stool.  BACK BY POPULAR DEMAND!  ii She gets the  laughs all right  ..in a performance  part vaudeville,  part stand-up  comic and part  Cheryl Cashman  MARCH 31  "APRIL 11  Turning, PUSHING  Thirty-* FflflTF  for-one Tuesdays! On sale at VANCOUVER TICKET  by PHONE call 280-4444. For RESERVATIONS call  254-9578. TURNING THIRTY r  ft    THE VANCOUVER EAST'  ll:l-L-t'M,ll,UJilI'JMMJ)  KINESIS      Apr,. '87 Arts  by Sharon Knapp  The camera pans over the black and  white image of two young women sitting on  a sofa. The younger one speaks first. "Why  did he do it? Why did he do that to me? I  was only nine years old. I didn't even have  any tits yet."  Sixteen year old Bobbi is confused and  angered by her father's betrayal. She is'  one of two hundred juvenile prostitutes who  work in Vancouver's West End. Most are  runaways, like Bobbi, who were sexually  abused at home. Group-homes like the one  portrayed in Street Kids provide the hope  for a transition into a safer life for a few.  Peg Campbell's latest film helps us to understand how hard it is to kick the street  habit by recreating several days and nights  in the lives of Bobbi and her friends.  "I wasn't a feminist when I first started  getting involved in these issues", says  Campbell, referring to the subject matter of  Street Kids and her earlier pieces on wife  abuse, A Rule of Thumb and A Common Assault. "But my feminism grew as  my awareness increased. Juvenile prostitution and wife abuse are both due to an imbalance of power. Feminism is now my chosen political belief because it has the analysis of that imbalance, and its effects on people, and also the most reasonable way of  combatting it."  While making her films on wife abuse  changed her way of thinking and made her  a feminist, nothing prepared her for the way  Street Kids would involve her emotions  and consume her life for five years. "Now  that I've finished it, there's a void," sh,e  says. "Nothing has the same kind of meait  ing for me. I haven't found anything to replace the obsession and the passion I had  for that film."  Street Kids began after Campbell worked for two years as a child care worker in  the Senator group home, which was located  in the heart of the West End. Sitting in her  apartment today, only a few blocks from  where she shot Street Kids, she recalls, "I  thought the best way to do it was to work  with the kids, rather than saying, 'I want to  do a film about you'. I wanted to be with  them any hour of the day or night and let  them get to know me."  Street Kids:  An authenticity that comes  from the heart  Working with the kids was often difficult  for Campbell. "When I began I was really  naive", she admits. "And I found it painful  just how hurting they were, and how few  options they had, and how little I had to  offer them. But I also learned to see their  strength. The ones who have managed to  stay alive are incredible human beings."  While she hopes her film will keep young  people from turning to the streets, she does  not make moral judgments on the street  kids' choices. She explains, "They feel the  streets are one step up from being sexually  assaulted by their uncle. They're in with  friends who are supportive of them in a way  their families were not."  "It's a small step up, but they're trying  to take control when there are so few options open to them. These kids are generally very unskilled and uneducated because  the abuse starts so young. When it happens,  they stop being able to concentrate on their  studies, they run away and quit school. In  fact, their development pretty well gets arrested at the point where the sexual abuse  begins."  The kids Campbell chose to act in the  film had taken an eight month life skills program which included a course in theatre,  as well as Campbell's course in video, so  they understood what it felt like to be on  both sides of the camera. She used a democratic process to create Street Kids. The  actors contributed material from the lives of  their friends which felt real to them. Everyone helped to create the characters and the  script evolved from their improvisational  sessions.  Campbell explains, "If you're going to be  dealing with a social issue, you have to involve the people who are the experts, and  that has to be at every step of the way. I  "There's an authenticity in the film that  comes out of experience. It didn't matter  that aspects of the story were changed by  me, it still felt real because it came from the  heart", she says.  There were times when she had to cut off  the shooting early when the scene grew too  painful. "I was part director and part child  care worker and the kids always came first,"  she says.  Campbell pioneered an unusual combination of still photography, animation and  voice-over to grab the attention of her audience. Beautifully textured black and white  photographs have been filmed onto 16mm  film stock and dubbed with a voice track.  "There have been so many films made  around juvenile prostitution. I didn't want  to repeat the same images of kids getting  into cars that would let the audience get off  the hook, and say, 'oh I've seen this image  before' and read it in the same old dismissive way. I thought if I changed the pace of  the way people saw these kids, a new level  of understanding would open up."  It works. As their portraits dissolve into  action sequences, and their voices form  commentary on their lives, the street kids'  There's an authenticity  in the film that comes out of  experience.  have my vision as the director, and I want  people to support it, but I want the ideas  to come from a lot of people." Even though  Campbell guided the direction of the plot,  she says it is closer to fact than fiction.  courage and their emotional honesty leads  us to acknowledge their integrity. Street  Kids is careful not to portray them as  saints or victims, nor does it present us with  miraculous transformations. Instead, it provides a tough view of street life. It points  out the difficulties of leaving, and that second chances are hard to come by. Where the  film falls short as a teaching aid is that no  one in it has any safer options for a teenager  who finds home life dangerous or impossible. The film will soon be accompanied by  a discussion package which Campbell hopes  will provide this information.  The actors in Street Kids are all now  off the streets. They are too old for a trade  that wants sixteen year olds who don't look  their age. Variously, the street kids have become a cook, a cleaner, a companion, and  a stripper. Campbell feels they are further  away from the street now than they would  have been without participating in the film.  Their acting achievements proved to them  that they could follow through on something, which was a big step in building their  self-esteem.  Peg Campbell's film stands as an affirmation of their accomplishments, and as a  call for more services for the hundreds more  Bobbis who have run away because they  have been sexually exploited at home.  Street Kids can be rented at no cost  from National Film Board in 16 mm or  video format. Contact NFB, 1161 West  Georgia, Vancouver, B.C. V6E 8G4.  Call 666-0716 for further information.  THEATRE .• •  For the best in Foreign Films  and Independent Quality Films  Non-Sexist, Coffee Bar, Crying Room for parents  with small children  16th and ARBUTUS STREET  Phone 738-6311  $2.50 on Tuesday, $4 students with  valid student cards.  r^S  jeyw  ^m  .-;  s  ^j^  "TpJ  margo dunn  " ariel boohs [or women  '        2766 west 4th ave.  feminist thee:  Vancouver, b.c.  somen's writing    ^8  Canada V6k in  ending abuse  (604)733-3511  [_/«£ C-ouiLzx  PIGEON  program v°ur  save a bundle-  683-1610  683-2696  s KINESIS Arts  ////////////////////^^  by Maura Volante  Christine Donald  Starting to  make sense  of fat issues  "I was astonishingly lucky," said Christine Donald, speaking of her experience  publishing The Fat Woman Measures  Up, her book of poetry from which she read  last month in Vancouver. "A friend of mine  showed the manuscript to the publisher at  Ragweed Press in Prince Edward Island,  and she made me an offer."  Donald, a Toronto resident but originally from Britain, said she initially "came  over very bashful and was not sure if she  wanted this highly personal collection of poems published. At the point at which the  book became a product that you could hold  in your hands, I got very enthusiastic about  it."  Donald is currently on a cross-country  reading tour, during which she has been  "very heartened by people's reactions."  There are fat women who come up and say,  I couldn't really use the word before. I've  been really uncomfortable with it, but now  that I hear it over and over it's starting to  make sense."  The dreaded word in question, fat, is repeated over and over, in the poems, as the  character is mostly referred to as "the fat  woman". I asked if this was intended as a reminder of the voice of fat women in a world  which tends to silence women and fat people.  Donald replied, "That is in effect what it  does. It's not necessarily what I set out to  do. Partly it's a distancing device, because  a lot of the material is painful enough that  it's hard for me to handle and hard-hitting  enough that it would be hard to read, too.  Part of it is that it's not all my individual  Donald recommends Shadow on a  Tightrope, a collection of essays, poems  and imaginative writing, as the best book  on the issue so far.  In speaking of her book she said, "One of  the things I was keen to do was not a sociological analysis of the process by which fat  women are discriminated against, but to say  that every time you do something like that  to a fat woman there is a woman in there  who feels it."  She spoke of anti-fat attitudes in the  women's community: "Women, however  feminist or however lesbian, are still on some  level uncomfortable with our own bodies  and even if we're not into making comments  like, 'you look gross because you're so fat',  you still hear women who are to my eyes  perfectly thin saying 'I'm so fat, I need to  lose five pounds.' That goes through me like  a knife."  With all the difficulties in relating to thin  feminists, Donald made a point of saying  that "there's more hope for feminists to deal  with the issue, because we have a groundwork and framework for building on."  Christine Donald, author of the Fat Woman Measures Up.  The Fat Woman: beginning  T •—  1 he dreaded word in  question, fat, is repeated  as the character is  referred to as  "the fat woman".  experience. And to some extent I was playing backward and forward between the notion of there being a character called 'the fat  woman' and there being no character called  'the fat women' but a number of fat women  who all respond to that label but speak with  their own voices."  It wasn't until about four years ago that  Donald began connecting with other fat  women's voices through fat liberation writings from the United States, but she had  worked through a lot of the material on her  own over the years. Tartly," she said, "it  was coming out as a lesbian. You have to  learn to like what your body likes. There  comes a point at which you're going to  stop trying to put yourself inside a different  mould."  When Fat is a Feminist Issue came  out, she found it exciting, but was disappointed with the ultimate message that  through self-acceptance would come weight  loss. T wasn't sure that I wanted to change,  because this is after all a substantial amount  of what I am. I've always been fat, and it's  a solid part of my identity."  by Deb Thomas  THE FAT WOMAN MEASURES UP  by CM. Donald  56 pages. Charlottetown: Ragweed Press,  1986.  $8.95  Christine (CM.) Donald introduces herself as "thirty-five years old, five foot ten  inches tall and weigh[ing] two hundred and  fifty pounds (again)". This slim volume, her  poetic treatise on being fat and, conversely,  on being thin, is full of wry humour and a  slicing-sharp perceptiveness, is tinted with  some vague emotion between defensiveness  and rationalization, and is sometimes more  than a little bitter.  Take "If You Could Manage to Keep Me",  for example. After listing the useful skills  she can contribute ("I'm a dab hand with  a hammer and nails") to a household, the  poet concludes by saying:  It is true that I take up a bit more  space than most,  but I'm dreadfully  tidy,  if you could just overlook the other,  you know,  I'd be terribly grateful.  Out of context, this mix of British politeness, puppyish eagerness, and feminine  indirectness could sound like a humble request. Surrounded by its sisters, however,  the poem's thinly-concealed edge is evident.  Donald explores again and again the reasons the edge is honed to sharpness: the attitudes of a thin-thinking world toward fat  women, the attitudes that fat women end  up developing toward themselves.  In "The Lovers of Fat People", one consequence is that:  The lovers know  they must like the fat  because the confident in body  lose weight better  Fat people know  they must hate the fat  enough to lose it  even if they need it  There are also poems of unfettered delight:  Suddenly falling, casual, delicate  litter—the first snow.  The fat woman laughs and runs  outside. "Snow"  and open anger:  To those women  Who find me cuddly,  Who like fat women  And want to hug them all:  I am not your mother,  Your baby or your shelter  And I am not your blasted teddy bear.  "To Those Women"  Throughout, Donald's persona is always  and solidly the "Fat Woman", an identity as  real and unapologetic as her feminism and  her lesbianism, and one which, for the purposes of this book consumes her more. She  has divided the world into two camps, leaving little room for any who may fluctuate  between the two or be, in shape and personality, a little fat and a little thin.  Occasionally, the fat woman steps over  the fence, with obvious discomfort:  The fat woman watched, powerless,  as the muscles  of her thighs first emerged and then  diminished.  "The Fat Woman Sees the Diet Out"  and in "My Dream":  / have unseamed me, so to speak,  and out I clamored.  I have danced among the stars,  waving my thin limbs.  Which concludes with:  And I'm climbing back in and I'm zipping myself up, that's what.  And the fat is settling me in.  This last poem is the closest Donald ever  comes to suggesting any enjoyment in being  thin.  The issue explored in these pages is a delicate one among feminists. The fat feminist  may feel inadequate, guilty and defensive.  The thin feminist may find herself torn between the ideal of accepting all of her sisters  for who they are, and the reality that she  probably doesn't like fat in herself, much  less in anyone else.  Donald has found the surest remedy to  this dilemma—open and uncompromising  expression of feelings. Apparently, perceptive fat women already know the uncomplimentary thoughts of thin women, and perceptive thin women may well have divined  some of the true thoughts of their fat sisters.  So why not talk about it to each other?  I recommend this book as a way to begin.  Deb Thomas lives in the Kootenays,  works in a film library, tutors English,  writes reviews, and still enjoys reading  poetry for the sheer pleasure of it.  Publishers: Send review copies to  Deb Thomas at R.R.#2, Sandy Creek,  Blewett Road, Nelson, B.C. VlL 5P5  KINESIS  April '87 Arts  A Little Night Reading: Fireworks  by Cy-Thea Sand  FIREWORKS  The Best of Fireweed  edited by Makeda Silvera  239 pages. Toronto: The Women's Press. 3  86. I  'ñ∫>  Makeda Silvera's intention in compiling  the best of Fireweed's eight years of publishing is to document the journal's history  a forum for women writers, visual artists  and photographers in Canada. Silvera accomplishes this task well, drawing together  the various threads of thought and creativity, controversy and debate which have concerned the feminist literary scene over the  past several years. Reading Fireworks is  like remembering all-night gab sessions with  friends over the years. For women new to  the arena of feminist writing in Canada,  Fireworks welcomes you with its range of  issues and concerns.  The representative fiction chosen is excellent, including Anne Cameron's "A Short  Story"; Himani Bannerji's "The Story of A  Birth,"; Claudia Lambert's "Lessons" and  Helen Weinzweig's "My Mother's Luck".  The poetry is good too. My favorites are  Edna H. King's "To My Nephew Wherever  You Are", about a native woman's painful  separation from her nephew, and Bronwen  Wallace's "Coming Through", also about  loss, which ends with the insight that:  some people are a country and their  deaths displace you. Everything you  shard with them reminds you of it: part  of you in exile for the rest of your life.  The essays are probing and demanding: Cecilia Green's "Marxist-Feminism and  Third World Liberation ", Robin Belitisky  Endres' " Why I Left the Left To Write ",  "Consuming Passion " by Janet Patterson  about why so many women read Harlequin  Romances, and "Grenada: A Woman's Revolution Deferred " are just a few of the prose  pieces which challenge the reader.  "How Far Have We Come?" by Makeda  Silvera and "Organizing Exclusion", dis-  les the systemic racism which the white  Canadian women's movement is just beginning to face up to. These two pieces, read  together with the Lesbians of Colour statement in the introduction to Women's Press  recently released Dykeversions, give the  reader a good overview of the anti-racism  work ahead for the Canadian women's  movement.  Lesbian literature is not neglected in  the anthology. "Lesbian Writing" my first  anthologized piece included in Fireworks,  accompanied by Susanna Berns' excellent notes on lesbian pulp, Sappho in  Soft Cover, and an excerpt from Mary  Schendlinger's lesbian radio soap opera, "  Flux".  Read this one to be informed and challenged Send it to the next person who mentions that the women's movement is a dying fad or a privileged circle for the few.  Fireworks editor Makeda Silvera reminds  us here that change enhances creativity and  the boundaries of what is possible.  Publishing News  The Threshing Floor, Short Stories by  Barbara Burford, a black British lesbian  poet, has been published by Firebrand  Books. I first heard of Burford in The  Women's Review of Books in an article  on feminist publishing by K. Kaufmann in  which she reports on the second Women's  International Book Fair held in June 1986  in Norway.  Kaufmann writes: "In the workshops on  'Feminist Publishing in the Third World'  and 'Black Women and Who They Write  For*, women were asking the kinds of questions that white Western feminists don't  raise often enough. They were criticizing  the 'star system' of mainstream publishing in the West and the commodification of  Makeda  Silvera,  editor of  Fireworks:  the best of  Fireweed  women's writing that results. Barbara Burford of Great Britain, a black lesbian writer  of poetry, plays and fiction, spoke of the  'ethno-cred-gloss' that publishers have built  around the writing of black women to stylize  and isolate it. Black women's books have,  she charged, become the coffee-table books  of the eighties for white, liberal readers."  Firebrand describes Burford as a major new voice who crafts powerful tales  about the lives of black women. Ask your  bookstore or library for this one or order  directly from Firebrand, 141 The Commons, Ithaca, New York 14850, $7.95 in U.S.  funds.  In The Turning: Summer Journal  of a Sojourner in the Women's Movement, has been self-published by Mary E.  Billy of Squamish, British Columbia. Mary  sent me an excerpt from the book to include  in the upcoming class issue of Fireweed.  In The Turning takes the exercise of journal writing seriously enough translate it into  the hard work of self-publishing. It includes  prose and poetry, dream excerpts and the  everyday nitty-gritty of survival. Mary E.  Billy is a middle- aged working class woman  who has a lot to say about the economic priorities of a women's movement which has  been much more responsive to the needs of  middle class women at the expense of less  privileged women.  In The Turning is available locally at  Octopus East, Ariel Books and The Vancouver Women's Bookstore or write directly  to Mary E. Billy at Box 2047, Squamish,  British Columbia VON 3GO.  Merlin's Daughters, Contemporary  Women Writers of Fantasy, by Charlotte  Spivack has just been published by Greenwood Press, 88 Post Road West, Box 5007,  Westport, CT, 06881. This critical study  includes a feminist perspective and analysis of leading women fantasists of the past  two decades, including Andre Norton, Susan Cooper, Ursula K. Le Guin, Katharine  Kurtz, Mary Stewart, Evangeline Walton,  Vera Chapman, Patricia McKillip and Marion Zimmer Bradley, as well as a bibliography of fantasy fiction by women writers.  Cy-Thea Sand is taking a break from  her review column to concentrate  her own writing and other projects  progress. A reminder to all readers that  Fireweed t's still accepting manuscripts  for it3 special class issue. Please send  work to Cy-Thea c/o 417-675 East  Fifth  Avenue,   Vancouver,   B.C.   V5T  4P1.  If anyone would like to pinch hit for  Cy-Thea for the next several months,  please contact Esther Shannon at Kine-  Maillet's "fantastic" novel  by Gillian Smith  THE DEVIL IS LOOSE!  by Antonine Maillet, translated by Philip  Stratford  Lester and Orpen Dennys Ltd., 1986.  In an essay published in last January's  edition of Saturday Night Magazine, Antonine Maillet reveals the roots of her writing style when she comments that she grew  up "at the flash point of oral and written  traditions" and learned the rich language of  Acadian French, full of "beautifully archaic  turns of phrase ... hyperbole, double meaning, insinuations." The Devil is Loose is  set in the early 1930's when prohibition had  ended in Canada but was still in effect in  the United States. It is told in the tradition  of an oral tale, framed by the commentary  of a narrator, and full of fantastic incidents.  Maillet's Crache a Pic (Spitfire) fulfills  my fantasies of a heroine who is witty, intelligent, fearless, lusty and physically strong.  Descended from a long line of giants, sorcerers and intrepid sailors, and armed with  the experience of sailing around the world  in a steamship, Crache a Pic refits an old  schooner, takes on an eccentric crew of  friends and relatives and sets herself up in  competition with the biggest bootlegger of  them all, Dieudonne, who has controlled  smuggling on the coast from Newfoundland  to Maine for the previous ten years.  Not only is the novel in the form of a  tall tale but the plot depends on the efforts  of several gossips, or storytellers, who keep  news and information on the move. By questioning and listening well, Crache a Pic can  learn the plans of her competitor, and by relaying misinformation to the right ears, she  and her supporters can distract Dieudonne  from her activities and send him off in the  wrong direction. Her opponent established  his wealth in real estate and lumber deals  which profited from the misfortunes of his  fellow villagers, so he attracts little sympathy while Crache a Pic outwits him at each  twist and turn of his complicated plots to  make money.  On her first trip, Crache a Pic snatches a  valuable cargo of brandy and wine, intended  for the United States president, from under  Dieudonne's nose, and then by a series of  misadventures the liquor is made available  to the entire village for a drunken party.  Each clever trick that Dieudonne uses to  hoodwink the law and sneak his contraband  through is discovered by Crache a Pic and  turned to her own advantages.  In one incident, Dieudonne loans his  cadillac to two local priests to go on a holiday to the United States, the border guards  are alerted and the priests are subjected to  a strip search. The Church is outraged by  this humiliation, and Crache a Pic and her  cousin, unbeknownst to Dieudonn/'e, slip  across the border easily the next day disguised as nuns.  Up to this point in the story, the smugglers had only to contend with a slow and  Maillet's Crache a Pic (Spitfire)  fulfills my fantasies of a  heroine who is  witty,  intelligent,  fearless,  lusty,  and physically  strong.  stupid officer of the law, but when he is replaced by a constable nicknamed "Quicksilver", Crache a Pic has met her match in  both her wits and her heart. How Crache  a Pic and Quicksilver become lovers, how  Dieudonne is eventually tried as a murderer,  and various other convolutions of plot would  take too long to describe here.  Crache a Pic and Quicksilver are larger-  than-life figures, and Maillet surrounds  them with a cast of secondary characters  that would do justice to a Dickens novel.  There is Crache a Pic's brother, Tobie,  sweet and simple-minded and epileptic who  tames a bear which lives under the apple tree in their backyard. Then there are  the interchangeable and inseparable twins,  Adelbert and Dagobert, who confuse even  themselves as to which is which, and the  three gossips, Zephirine, Marie-Pet and Old  Clovis.  The Devil is Loose is feminist only to  the extent that it features a strong, independent heroine. Otherwise, it's a good read for  a rainy winter's night. m^^Stk  KINESIS  April '87 by  Wendy   Frost  and   Michele  Vail- I viewer voiced cautious praise (Rich's prose  quette  The headline over a short review in a recent Saturday Sun caught our attention:  A Feminist View That's Far From Liberating. "What's this," we asked each other, "A  is "solid," "tough-minded," "powerful"; her  poetry "widely respected") but spent most  of the brief article calling into question  Rich's "one-sided" views. Why "one-sided"?  Because of her "loyalties to those she champions as outsiders—primarily lesbians and  /fe^^^&S&vn  treatise on re-education camps for men?"  But no, dear reader, the column that followed announced (denounced?) the publication of Adrienne Rich's new collection of essays: Blood, Bread and Poetry.  In these days of media silence on the  women's movement, feminist contributions  to culture are rarely noted by the dailies.  So, in that sense, the review was unusual.  Unfortunately, its content signaled no new  departure. The unnamed L.A.  Times re-  A AAKING IT CLEAR!  I\\ Jhat We ^t  aseline  k SET SUPER  ^TYPE  V£/ HELP  s      o      l      v    . E  /your communication  LI problems from concept  \nd DESIGN  Through Tayout —    ■" to  Final L froduct  women of colour." For the reviewer, this loyalty makes Rich's work "too limited to be  truly liberating."  One of the ways women have challenged  such dismissal of feminist poetic and feminist politics is by building an extensive network of periodicals which celebrate, analyze  and make available our creative writing.  The efforts of editorial collectives, who surmount considerable obstacles to keep these  periodicals alive, help the creative work of  second wave feminists to continue flourishing.  The journals we're featuring this month  demonstrate how. They include two longstanding Canadian cultural forums—Room  of One's Own and Fireweed—and a new  The issue has something to offer both  casual readers and literary researchers; it  would adapt particularly well to classroom  use. The photographs interspersed throughout, of Thomas at various stages in her life,  are a lovely addition.  For the Audrey Thomas issue of Room  of One's Own, write the Growing Room  Collective, P.O. Box 46160, Station G, Vancouver, B.C. V6R 4G5. Regular subscriptions, available from the same address, are  $10 per year inside Canada and $11 outside  the country.  Fireweed, Canada's other feminist literary and cultural journal, is celebrating  eight years of healthy existence. Issue 23  (Summer 1986), a special issue on Canadian  Women Poets, is a good illustration of the  reasons for their continued success.  Choosing from the poetry of women living in Canada and writing in English, guest  editors Dionne Brand and Pamela Godfree  had clear criteria for inclusion: "evidence  of excellence of craft, commitment to the  ... goal of freedom from oppression, and  issues of equal access and representation."  i They've succeeded admirably in meeting  ! these editorial goals. Especially important  I is the space given to women of colour (seven  ' out of the fifteen poets here) and to relatively unknown or unpublished poets.  Each poet's work is prefaced by a photograph of her and a short "thought piece"  answering the editors' question: why do you  as a woman write poetry? The responses are  as varied and interesting as the poetry they  introduce.  A FEMINIST QUARTERLY  FIREWEED  American journal—Sage—which explores  various aspects of black women's lives. All  three have recently published special issues  on writing women.  Since 1975, Room of One's Own, produced by the Vancouver based Growing  Room Collective, has been bringing feminist readers new poetry, prose and drama by  women, as well as feminist literary critiques  and reviews. This combination of creative  work and critical commentary works particularly well in the special Audrey Thomas  issue (Volume X, Numbers 3 and 4). The  volume contains four new prose pieces by  Thomas—all treats—short critical treatments and reviews of her work. Several of  the latter are written by friends of Thomas',  one of the factors which lends the volume  its particular warmth.  The volume is introduced by a lengthy  conversation between Audrey Thomas and  Eleanor Wachtel. The two women clearly  enjoy each other's company and the result is  a wide-ranging exploration of what it means  to be a writing woman: the artist as a girl  and young woman, creativity and motherhood, the impulse to write, marriage, humour, Harlequins.  The special issue concludes with the  genre close to our own hearts,—a bibliography by Robin Bellamy which provides direction both to Thomas' work and to articles  and essays about her work. These opening  and closing pieces alone would justify making a special effort to get a copy of Room  Volume X.  This handsomely laid out and attractive  volume gives us the work of fifteen poets in  115 pages—a sizeable enough chunk from  each so that the reader can really get a  taste of their work. In an overall excellent  collection, several pieces stand out: long sequences by two poets, Bronwen Wallace's  "Intervals" and Marlene Philip's "... And  Over Every Land and Sea" and "Cyclamen Girl", and Himani Bannerji's "Death  by Trivia."  The contributions vary tremendously  in style, theme, and content; these poems defy any easy generalizations about  women's writing. The poets write about the  easily identified women's issues—mothers  and daughters, love relationships, violence  against women—and they write about  Nicaragua, about apartheid, about experiencing racism in Canada, about pollution,  war, global violence. Again and again, they  make connections among all these issues,  showing us that "women's concerns" are the  whole world.  For more from Fireweed, see their anthology of pieces from the first eight years,  The Best of Fireweed just out from  the Women's Press and reviewed in this  month's A Little Night Reading page.  Sage: A Scholarly Journal on black  Women, is a relatively new journal, begun in 1984, devoted to feminist scholarship,  to providing "an interdisciplinary forum for  critical discussion of issues relating to black  women" and to "disseminating new knowledge about black women to a broad audience."  Their Spring 1985 issue (Vol. H, No. l),  "Women as Writers", is women's studies at  its best: analytical, exploratory, connected.  In their editorial, "A Tradition of Black  Women as Writers", Patricia Bell-Scott and  Beverly Guy-Sheftall state the purpose of  the issue as "to pay homage to a great literary tradition" and "to analyze the writings  and experiences of forgotten, well-known  and not so well-known women writers."  The Features section includes essays on  a broad range of women writers: contemporary novelists Alice Walker and Toni  Morrison, four early 20th century American playwrights, African writers Buchi  Emecheta and Bessie Head, black francophone writers from the Caribbean and  Africa, and three West Indian novelists.  The Close-Up Section includes several interviews, excerpts from black women's private diaries and journals, and an article by  Bell Hooks, "Black Women Writing: Creating More Space", on the conditions facing  black women who write.  These pieces, complemented by reviews,  and a Resource Round-up (a regular feature  of Sage) offering a resource guide to critical  work on African American women writers,  give the reader a multifaceted introduction  to black women's writing.  The photographic essay, giving pictures  and background information on writers in  the Afro-American tradition from Frances  E.W. Harper to Audre Lorde, rounds out  a splendid issue. Those who have come to  know and love black women's writing will  want this special issue, and so will those new  to the field who want to learn more. Sage is  available from: Sage Women's Educational  Press, P.O. Box 42741, Atlanta, GA 30311-  0741 for US$15 per year (two issues).  In keeping with our not-so-hidden agenda  of making sure Kinesis readers are completely up to date on feminist research  guides and indexes, we want to introduce the Canadian Women's Periodicals  Title-Word Index. The index has been  compiled quarterly since 1985 for CRIAW  (Canadian Research Institute for the Advancement of Women) by a production team  at the University of Alberta. It provides  clear, easy access to the contents of Canadian pages from selected feminist journals  and through a computerized listing of authors and titles of all items published in  feminist periodicals as well as some useful  pieces from other publications.  The index is intended "for researchers,  lecturers, students, women working with  women's groups and anyone else who may  be interested in women's studies." We would  add to this list, the range of feminist activists, who we're sure could all make use  of this "quickest possible reference to recent  Canadian publications."  We recommend the index highly. Every  public and university library should have it  on their shelves—if yours doesn't insist!  Subscriptions are available from CRIAW  Suite 408, 151 Slater Street, Ottawa, Ontario, KIP 5H3 at the cost of $20 (CRIAW  members) and $35 (non-members.)  VANCOUVER WOMEN'S   BOOKSTORE  Hours: Monday-Saturday   684-0523  11:00-5:30 pm  New Titles  Leave a light on forme. . .Jean Swallow.. .$12.55  Womanguides: Readings Towards a Feminist Theology. .. Rosemary  Radford Ruether. . .$16.50  315 Cambie Street    Vancouver, B.C. V6B 2N4  KINESIS     Apr.. '87 Commentary  What is South African women's future?  by Jenny Penberthy  I've lived in Canada for ten years.  I'm a white South African by birth and  I've just returned from a year's stay in  a South Africa much closer to liberation  then it was when I left it in 1975. Here  are some brief thoughts about the lives  and future of South Africa's women.  A resident of Guguletu (a black township  in Cape Town) wrote the following letter to  the Cape Times in August 1986. I quote  from memory:  It's embarrassing to hear women talk  about equal rights. We men pay a high  lobola (dowry payment) for our women.  I say that one buys a loaf of bread in  order to cut a slice when one chooses.  The letter is a reminder of the oppression suffered by black South African women,  sexual oppression in addition to racial oppression. But the critical spotlight is,  course, trained on apartheid. World condemnation hasn't extended to the lot  Africa's women. In fact, the oppression oi  black women seems to be regarded as an untouchable, immovable fact, a fact of tribalism and because of its roots in tribal practice we have no right to meddle with it. H  is a fact of nature.  We can be grateful that the revolutionary  leadership speaks otherwise and that sexual  equality would seem to be in the cards for a  a liberated South Africa. But the experience  of women in Zimbabwe makes one somewhat  wary of this revolutionary rhetoric. Zimbabwean women were promised freedoms that  have not yet materialized int he six years  since independence. Liberation was found to  bring more urgent priorities and women's  rights were, for the time, shelved. Now discussions favour the angle that sees tribal  practice as immutable and the reversal of  history and social custom as an impossibility. South Africa's women will do well to  learn from this a healthy cynicism and to  demand more than airy promises.  During my brief stay in Harare  (Zimbabwe)  I was struck by how  little male  The possibility of women  being shortchanged by  the revolution seems to  me to be great.  eye-contact I was able to make, and by  what came to seem more and more like my  invisibility. The daily newspaper reported  Sally Mugabe, (wife of Robert Mugabe,  Zimbabwe Prime Minister) urging women  school teachers not to indulge in childish displays of emotion. At Mrs. Mugabe's  birthday celebration it was her husband  who made the speech of thanks on her behalf. The familiar rites of sexism.  My observations were supplemented by  those of the Harare residents I met. They  all agreed that sexual harassment is pervasive among unmarried women. A woman's  request for any kind of service comes always  with a sexual price-tag.  My fear is that the same is true for South  Africa's black women but that the problem  has been eclipsed by apartheid. The possibility of South Africa's women being shortchanged by the revolution seems to me to  be great. Dr. Mamphela Ramphele of the  University of Cape Town (UCT) social anthropology department voiced these same  fears in her address to an assembly of the  university's Women's Centenary. Women,  she said, would have to begin making their  demands now in order to guarantee their  prominence in the post-revolutionary programme.  I heard Dr. Ramphele again after she had  been to Lusaka to speak to the African National Congress (ANC) as part of the UCT  delegation. She spoke of the ANC's awkwardness around the subject of women's  rights. It was the last item on their agenda  and it was almost unanimously regarded as  the joke item. She warned the almost entirely male executive of the ANC not to depend reflexively on docile, servile support  from South African  In Lusaka Dr. Ramphele heard reports  of widespread harassment of women in  the ANC-affiliated exile community. Even  amongst the revolutionary vanguard, marriage was the sole shelter from intolerable  sexual pestering.  Sexism is one of white South Africa's  points of compatibility with black South  Africa. It is also tribally entrenched. A  more male-adoring, women-despising society must be hard to find. The media is  saturated with stale examples of misogyny:  women drivers are the favorite butt of jokes  though we know from accident statistics  that it's men who contribute most to the  havoc of those treacherous roads; prospective employers advertise for 'girl fridays'; a  movie reviewer writes of an actress who is  so ugly that she could be used to rehabilitate sex criminals. And so it goes one, day  after day; women serve and decorate and,  on the whole, keep their mouths shut.  The society doesn't expect women to object or to have opinions; it rewards silence.  I learned that achievement is the province  of men when I approached an insurance  agency for a policy to cover the possible loss  of my word processor. The male agent asked  what I used the machine for and I told him  I was writing a book. This impressed and  baffled him so much that in his next sentence he addressed me as 'sir'.  It often seems to me miraculous that  so many of apartheid's most courageous  opponents have been and continue to be  women—Ruth First, Helen Joseph, Molly  Blackburn, Winnie Mandela, Albertina  Sisulu and many, many more. They speak  out against the great odds: against the double resistance of the state and of patriarchy.  Feminism has made little impact on South  Africa's thirty million people and for the  majority of outspoken women, feminism is  not an immediate priority. The overthrow  of the racist state is their primary concern.  But racial liberation will be a meager affair if patriarchy is allowed to maintain its  stranglehold. With sexism rampant, domestic fascism will maintain its grip on everyday life.  THE NATIONAL FILM BOARD  in association with WOMEN AND WORDS  presents the Vancouver premiere of  A film that captures the mystical  and revolutionary spirits of three  Quebec writers: Louky Bersianik,  Jovette Marchessault and  Nicole Brossard.  This premiere will be held as a benefit  for Women and Words. Director  Dorothy Todd Henaut will be present at  the screening.  Wednesday, April 22, 7:30 p.m.  Cinema, Robson Square Media Centre  800 Robson Street, Vancouver  Tickets can be reserved by calling Women  and Words, (872-8014) or purchased at the  door. Advance tickets will be available from  Ariel Books and the Vancouver Women's  Bookstore.  Admission: $5  $4-unwaged  National        Office  Film Board   national du film  of Canada     du Canada  2Q KINESIS ////////////////m^^  //////////////////////^^^^^  LETTERS  AIDS  response  Kinesis:  Congratulations on your article last  month on women and AIDS. Your writers  take care to point out the hysteria and false  ideas about the subject which have become  common in the popular media. As gay men,  however, we have some concerns about the  way some issues were presented in the article.  Most people with AIDS are gay, but it is  wrong to say that because a man has gay  sex, he presents a risk to women who have  sex with him and it is certainly an overstatement to say that you are at risk if you "have  had sexual contact with ... men who have  had gay sex since 1979."  The issue is not whether a sex partner is  gay, but whether she or he is carrying the  Human Immunodeficiency Viruses, known  as HD7. Unqualified statements like the ones  in the article contribute to the victimization  of gay men and Kinesis should take care to  avoid confusing the transmission of a virus  and gay sex. Only a few, very specific, forms  of gay sex are known to be routes for transmission of the virus, and although some are  commonly practiced by gay men it does not  follow that gay men are a risk factor for  women. Many gay men do not practice those  forms of sex, or do not practice the receptive form, or do so with protective barriers,  or do so with monogamous partners.  It may be technically accurate to say that  there may be a risk from people whose sexual histories you do not know, but it is certainly an overstatement to say that you are  at risk if you have had sexual contact with  "people whose sexual histories you don't  know"; have artificial insemination from  a donor "whose risk status is unknown";  or "have received blood or blood transfusion products between 1979 and November,  1985."  Statements like these reduce the idea of  "risk" to its mathematical definition, and  simply do not say anything very meaningful for your readers. I suspect virtually all  of your readers are "at risk" under these  generalized definitions, just as all of us who  venture into the streets are at risk from  drunken drivers—but it is not very useful  to tell your readers they are at risk under  such circumstances.  On HrV antibody testing, your writer  correctly points out that the test can  give both false positive and false negative  eadings—up to ninety percent false positives, according to Red Cross blood surveys.  Under these circumstances, your writer is  well informed to advise readers to "make  sure extensive counselling is available both  before and after your decision to test and after getting your results." Your writer does  not point out, however, that the only organization presently counselling people about  the test, AIDS Vancouver, has received  barely enough funding to continue operating and faces staff cuts when its funding  ends. The kind of counselling available from  public health institutions is cursory and inadequate.  While your writer appears to recognize  the difference between AIDS virus and the  antibody, she does make the mistaken statement that the test "shows whether someone has been infected with the AIDS virus."  It does not and that is precisely the problem with the test. It shows only that one  has been exposed to the virus, and has formed antibodies to it. It does not show the  presence of the virus, it says nothing reliable about the likelihood of developing the  disease itself, and it says even less about  the likelihood of transmitting the disease to  others. It is for this reason that many gay  organizations advise people not to take the  HIV antibody test. The test is not reliable,  and sexually active people should practise  safe sex assuming that both they and their  partners have been exposed to the virus, or  could be.  Finally, your writer's advice on safe sex  suffers from the same excess of caution  that many gay safe sex guides suffer from,  namely the assumption that any contact  with blood or blood products is dangerous.  In fact the statistical evidence is that gay  male oral sex is safe, and that the use of condoms during anal/oral and vaginal/penile  intercourse is highly effective in blocking  transmission of the virus. I am not aware of  any statistical evidence relating to women's  sexual practices, but because human skin is  effective in blocking transmission it is extremist to advise the use of latex between  the mouth or hand and genitals.  Gay men are just beginning to recover  from the anti-sex message that was spread  along with fear of the AIDS virus and  we have not yet recovered the liberation  that we fought for during the 1970's. The  women's community does not need to learn  the  irrational fears we  have  dealt with  around AIDS. It needs reliable accurate  information,  and it needs to learn that  women's liberation and gay liberation need  not be steered off track by exaggerated and  unfounded health fears.  Yours in solidarity,  Richard Banner  Front for Active Gay Socialism  Need refugee  overview  Kinesis:  The speeches at the IWD rally this year  got me thinking about the immigration laws  that Canada is tightening up in order to  keep people out. So after the rally I wrote  a letter to the newspaper and sent a copy  to the prime minister and to my member of parliament. When I started actively  thinking about the refugees, I remembered  something Rosa Luxemburg wrote in the  early 1900's. She said that in the future all  our wars, meaning wars by the first world,  would be fought in under-developed countries. I think that is happening now.  Refugees are pouring into Holland,  France, United States, Canada, etc., and the  governments pretend it has nothing to do  with them. Bus loads of men, women, and  children are being driven out of France and  Holland; Canada and the United States are  tightening up their immigration laws. People have no where to go. This issue is only  being addressed in a piecemeal way. There  is no overview of the situation being put forward. I don't have an overview of the problem. I don't like how it is being dealt with,  each country seeing it as their problem and  using the laws of the land to keep people  out. I think the refugee problem is an international problem.  I would like anybody out there who has  an overview of the refugee situation to  please write to Kinesis about it. I find it  very hard to write an effective protest letter when I don't understand the overall picture. I think that on the problem of refugees  a lack of knowledge hinders me, and I don't  know where to go to get information.  Yours sincerely,  Dorrie Brannock  IWD: pluses  and minuses  Kinesis:  I am writing this in order to put down  on paper my feelings and thoughts on this  year's International Women's Day parade  and rally. There were things that really  moved me about the event, and some things  that upset me.  I thought the IWD rallythis year was the  best ever in Vancouver. There was a consciousness of class, race, and homophobia.  The speakers represented a wide range of  the cultures that make up the population of  Vancouver. The message that unity is only a  concept, and an empty concept, if we are not  willing to be active in fighting prejudice in  all its forms, was well delivered. The speakers made it very clear that if we only fight  for justice when it affects us, then we walk  alone and there is no unity. I loved the way  a lot of the speeches blended one oppression  with another. I was glad that the immigration laws were given as one area that we as  women should deal with. After the rally I  wrote a letter to the newspaper and sent a  copy to the Prime Minister and my Member of Parliament.  I loved the singers and the music, I was  inspired by the speeches. In the IWD parade I liked the band, I loved the weather, I  also loved celebrating IWD with all the people who came.  I disliked that we only took up one lane  and that the marshalls enforced this. The  banners were not displayed well because of  this. I disliked the way some marshalls interpreted their role as marshalls, and I was  very disturbed that we paid $800 to cover  police costs.  The Toronto and Edmonton IWD marches were on TV. Both of them took up  more than one lane. We in the past took up  more space. Why are we getting less instead  of more?  The name 'marshalls' has always bothered me. It conveys the idea that the marshalls are there to marshall people. A mar-  shall is a person of authority. That is not  the role I want women to play at IWD. If  I am going to be marshalled, let it be by  my enemies. I would like to be informed,  'not marshalled. I believe the original idea  was to have women marshalls there in case  of trouble, in case children got lost, to give  information, and to run interference with  the police—ie. telling the police what the  marchers are going to do, not telling the  marchers what the police want them to do.  The organizers of Reclaim the Night in  Vancouver do not pay any money for police. They also don't have marshalls, they  have safety women. The job of the safety  women is to make the march safe. They deal  with the traffic, they run interference between the marchers and the world. In other  words they don't see their job as controlling  the marchers. They are there to make deci  sions on safety and they ask for and get cooperation from the women in the march.  We are intelligent, capable people; we are  not self-destructive. We don't need to be  marshalled. Nor do we need to pay the police $800.  For a women's organization whose aim is  to reclaim our power, it's ridiculous to pay  the government money in order to protest  the fact that we are discriminated against,  that we get raped, that we get paid fifty-  nine cents for every man's dollar. Governments are mostly white and male in this  country. This is discrimination. This is one  of the things we are fighting. Why, oh, why  are we giving them our money?  I phoned a friend and asked her what she  thought of this letter. She thought I was  sugar-coating and not making myself clear,  because of the way I started the letter. She  thought I should leave out the stuff about  the rally. I protested. She said that people  _ will think that I only wrote the letter to  criticize and that I was being nice about  the rally because that is what we're supposed to do in order to deliver a criticism.  Li case anyone is interpreting this letter in  that way, I want to make it clear that I  think the IWD committee did a terrific job  this year. Yes, I'm upset about the $800 and  the lane business. I am also delighted about  the quality of the rally, the number of people the committee reached, and the poster.  It's true that I believe the committee made  some bad decisions. I also believe they made  a lot of excellent ones and that the good decisions by far outweigh the bad ones.  Yours sincerely,  Dorrie Brannock  OPEN SEVEN DAYS A WEEK,  10am to 7:30pm  • KIDS play space  • FRESH produce—incl. organic  NEW convenient location  10% OFF for seniors, Wed. & Thurs.  1034 COMMERCIAL  254-5044  Invest in your  principle  At CCEC your money works for you,  your principles and your community.  Your investments will promote  community economic development in British  Columbia by financing community businesses,  cooperative and democratic organizations and  by assisting the traditionally disadvantaged.  We don't finance distant corporations,  land speculators or companies that profit from  apartheid, toxic waste or armaments.  A variety of terms are available to meet  your needs for growth and liquidity.  With Term Deposits, CCEC provides you  with a direct return and supports community  economic development.  Put your money to work.  CCEC Credit Union  33 East Broadway  Vancouver. B.C. V5T 1V4  876-2123  KINESIS      Aprl.87 Bulletin Board  UUrtWJM^M  CALGARY LESBIAN CONFERENCE  Just For Us, Calgary's third lesbian conference. Apr. 24. 8 pm Tracey Riley.  Noele Hall performing at Alberta Vocational Centre. 332-6 Ave. S.E. Workshops  Apr. 25 at A.V.C. begin 10 am. registration 9:30. Women's dance Apr. 28 8  pm Multicultural Centre. 712-5 St. S.E.  Costs $5 per workshop to $25 for entire  event. More info Kim or Marilyn. Status  of Women Action Committee office. 124-  320 5 Ave.S.E. Calgary (403) 262-1873.  WOMEN'S WRITING RETREAT  From Aug. 14-21, Canadian Women's  Writing Retreat. Far Hills Inn. Val-Morin.  Quebec. Intensive workshops for English  fiction, poetry, plays, non-fiction prose  writers and French to English translators. Workshops, discussions, readings,  recreation and relaxation. More info Debra Martens, c/o Centre for Continuing Education. Dawson College. Victoria  Campus. 485 McGill St. Montreal H2Y  2H4 (514) 931-8731, local 6102 or Greta  Hofmann- Nemiroff (514) 931-8731. local  6075.  NEW TECHNOLOGIES  Pacific Group sponsoring seminar: New  Technologies and the Changing Nature of  Work. Apr. 8 7:30 pm at B.C. Teachers  Federation. 2235 Burrard. $10 for non-  members. Members free. More info. 324-  6122.  THURSDAYS AT NOON  Victoria Status of Women Action Group,  213-620 View St. sponsor a series of informal lunch hour talks 12-1 pm. Apr. 2.  —Taking a Sexual Abuse Case to Court;  Apr. 9—Eric Martin Psychiatric Day  Programme: A Community Resource;  Apr. 16—Women in China: Apr. 23—  older Womenfc Depression: Apr. 30—  Women for Astrology. Bring your lunch.  Tea & coffee provided. All women welcome.  HEALTH COLLECTIVE  To coincide with D.E.S. Awareness  Week, Vancouver Women's Health Collective is holding public meeting and  screening the NFB film. D.E.S. An Uncertain Legacy Apr. 23 7:30 pm.. 888  Burrard. Free. More info. 682-1633.  OUR NUCLEAR BACKYARD  Our Nuclear Backyard: A Conference  About Hanford. Apr. 10- 12. Nelson.  Conference info: Kootenay Centre for a  Sustainable Future, c/o Box 727. Nelson.  B.C. V1L 5R4 or Sandra Harline (604)  352-9871.  ATI listings must be received no later  than the 18th of the month preceding publication. Listings are limited to  75 words and Should include a contact  name and telephone number for any clarification that may be required. Listings  should be typed, or neatly handwritten,  double-spaced on 8| by 11 paper. Listings will not be accepted over the telephone. Groups, organizations and individuals eligible for free space in the Bulletin Board must be. or have, non-profit  objectives. Other free notices will be  Items of general public interest and will  appear at the discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $4 for the first 75 words  or portion thereof. $1 for each additional  25 words or portion thereof. Deadline for  classifieds is the 18th of the month preceding publication. Kinesis will not accept classifieds over the telephone. AH  classifieds must be prepaid.  For Bulletin Board submissions send  copy to Kinesis Att'n Bulletin Board. 400  A West 5th, Vancouver, B.C.. V5Y 1J8.  For more information call 873-5925.  AT WOMEN IN FOCUS  Wanda Koop: Northern Suite. Powerful  and visionary, multi-panel, acrylic on plywood paintings. Guest curated by Grace  Eiko Thomson. To Apr. 25 at the floating curatorial gallery at Women in Focus,  204-456 W. Broadway. Wed-Sat 12-5 pm.  GIVE PEACE A DANCE  A 12 hour dance marathon May 30 to  raise funds for UNICEF, End the Arms  Race Coalition, Greater Van. Food Bank,  City of Vancouver Flame of Peace Monument, and Pacific Peace Umbrella Society. Dancers, bands, stage technicians,  publicists, D.J.s., organizers, individual  and group sponsors of dancers required.  More info Give Peace a Dance, c/o Pacific Umbrella Society, P.O. Box 67338.  Stn. O. Vancouver V5W 3T1 or 321-  6626.  RECITAL  Nadine Davenport Band. Apr. 16 4:30  pm. Rm. H-113. Commercial Music  Building, Capilano College. All welcome.  Wheelchair accessible.  LA DONNA DELINQUENTA  An interdisciplinary spectacle presented  under the artistic direction of Martha  Fleming and Lyne Lapointe by Les Pe-  tites Filles aux Allumettes, Inc. May 16-  June 7, Corona Theatre. 2490 Notre  Dame West in Montreal. Info (514) 937-  0924.  LEGAL ABORTION CLINICS  Concerned Citizens for Choice on Abortion (CCCA) sponsor Dr. Henry Morgentaler and Dr. Nikki Colodny speaking on the campaign for legal abortion  clinics. Apr. 4 8 pm (doors open 7:30)  John Oliver Secondary School. 41st and  Fraser. Tix $5 employed, $2 unemployed.  Available Ariel Books, Octopus East.  Women's Bookstore. Peregrine Books.  COLOURED WOMEN  Coloured Women's Celebration. Potluck,  Asian Women's Group Performance,  slides of China, art exhibition and poetry  reading. Apr. 11 234 E. 15th Ave. 7 pm.  All coloured women welcome.  VLC COFFEE HOUSE  Vancouver Lesbian Connection hosts coffee house every 1st and 3rd Friday of the  month. 876 Commercial Drive, 7:30-11  pm. Apr. 3. Carol Weaver, singer, songwriter, guitarist. Apr. 17, Susan Cogan.  singer, songwriter, and Annie Goodwyne,  songstress.  LESBIAN MOTHERS  Lesbian mother and child drop-in. Wed.  9-11 am. Vancouver Lesbian Connection.  876 Commercial Drive. Non- judgmental  environment, make new friends, have coffee, talk and share ideas on coping with  special anxieties that come with being a  lesbian mother.  GODDESS SLIDE SHOW  A Trek Through Europe in Search of the  Goddess. Slide presentation of a feminist's trip through Greece. Europe, British Isles. Goddess images and associated  prehistoric sites. Apr. 25 7:30 pm. Sitka  Co-op Common Room. 1550 Woodland  entrance. Women only. $3 or what you  can afford. More info. 685-2747.  RESOURCES  BOOKS BY MAIL  Feminist and lesbian books by mail  (in English and French). Free new  book  bulletin   published  3 times/year.  L'Androgyne Bookstore. 3636 St. Laurent. Montreal H2X 2V4.  WOMEN'S DIRECTORY  Canadian Women s Directory/L 'Annuaire  des Femmes du Canada is an index of  nearly 2000 women's groups. Lists over  170 B.C. groups and services. Organized  by subject with easy province and territory reference. Available through bookstores or from publisher. Les E/'ditions  Communique/Elles.. 3585 rue St. Ur-  bain. Montreal H2X 2N6. $7.95 plus  $1 postage and handling. Phone orders  (514) 844-1761.  THE BODY POLITIC  The last two in a series of productions by women about women taking  control over their physical and mental  health through individual and collective  action. Apr. 6 The Best Time of My  Life—Portraits of Women in Mid-life.  Apr. 13 The Impossible Takes a Little Longer. Five disabled women manage  to overcome formidable barriers. NFB—  Knowledge Network 9pm.  SUBMISSIONS  MISC.  LESBIAN FOOD BANK  Vancouver Lesbian Centre. 876 Commercial Drive, in conjunction with Gay and  Lesbian Food Bank has a depot for lesbians Tuesdays 1-3 pm.  SHORT STORIES  New Directions, a progressive bi-monthly  magazine, is looking for fiction, especially  short stories by women. Ideal length  2500-3000 words. Payment in subscriptions. Send material Box 34279. Stn. D.  Vancouver V6J 2P2. Manuscripts typed  or letter-quality, double-spaced.  OUR MENSTRUAL CYCLE  I am a woman who is concerned that  the idea of menstruation which is presented as common does not represent what women really experience. I  want to find out about women's views  of menstruation—of ourselves, for ourselves. If you would like to share your  thoughts and experiences of menstruation please call me. Barbara Luxton at  255-6475.  SUMMER WOMEN'S STUDIES  WS100-4:   Perspectives   on   Women—  Anita Clair Fellman.  WS201-3:   Women   in   Canada   1600-  1920—V. Strong-Boad  WS301-3: Women in Utopias—Margaret  Benston.  More   info   and   registration   Women's  Studies, Simon  Fraser University 291-  3593. Also at SFU Hist. 484-3: History  of Women in North America.  FILM/VIDEO  VIOLENCE AGAINST LESBIANS  Just Because of Who We Are is a  new video documentary about the violence that today still threatens lesbians,  women who love other women. Available  in Canada from V/Tape. 489 College St.  Toronto M6G 1A5 (416) 925-1961.  CANADIAN WOMEN'S FESTIVAL  This years festival is Aug. 21-23.  The Programming/Selection Committee  of CWF is looking for submissions from  Canadian women who are musical and  theatrical performers, artists, writers,  film and video makers, and craftswomen.  Send tapes, portfolios, cv's ... to festival office, 3-161 Stafford St., Winnipeg,  Man. R3M ZW9 (204) 477-5478.  '87 FRINGE FESTIVAL  Calls for submissions from individual  artists and companies for participation in  Vancouver's Third Annual Fringe Festival of alternate theatre and performance  art. scheduled Sept. 11-20. Submission  deadline Apr. 30. More info. TheatreS-  pace 2414 Main. Vancouver. V5T 3E3.  873-3646.  NATIVE WOMEN  Ts'eku Collective is seeking short stories, poetry and photographs from native  women for anthology being published in  1988. Anthology theme is Native Women:  A Celebration of Survival. Contemporary  fiction and traditional folklore. Submissions open to all Indian, Inuit and Metis  women. Deadline June 30. For guidelines  call or write: Ts'eku Collective, 603 Powell St.. Vancouver V6A 1H2 738-5738 or  254-5069.  WORKING CLASS WOMEN  Working class women of colour and white  working class women: last call for submissions to Fireweed's special class is-  22 KINESIS //////////////////^^^^^  /////////////////////^^^^^  bulletin Board  SUBMISSIONS  sue, hopefully printed by the mid-June  Canadian Feminist Periodicals Conference. Send stories, photographs, poems,  self-narratives to C.T. Sand, 417-675 E.  5th Ave., Vancouver. V5T 4P1. Editing, suggestions, more info Cy-Thea 875-  1543 days only.  GROUPS  SOUTH AFRICA  The Southern African Action Coalition  (SAAC) monthly meetings are designed  to encourage B.C. public involvement in  anti-apartheid campaign. Discussion, education, planning and current developments in South Africa. Apr. 29 7:30 pm.  SAAC office, 2524 Cypress. More info  734-1712.  CREATIVE WRITING  Ongoing group looking for women serious about creative writing. Meeting every  second Sunday evening. Christine 732-  0957 or Laura 738-6283.  ADDRESS CORRECTION  Please note that Battered Women Support Services and Women's Resource  Centre are at 1666 W. Broadway, Vancouver V6J 1X6 and not at street address  printed in Mar. Kinesis.  GAY LESBIAN YOUTH GROUP  Every 1st Sat. of the month Vancouver  Gay Lesbian Youth Group meeting addresses specific interests to women. April  is their 10th anniversary. Group discussion on sexism. Apr. 4, 7:30 pm. Vancouver Gay/Lesbian Community Centre  1170 Bute 684-6869. Newcomers welcome. Food and refreshments provided.  WEAVING WOMEN'S COLOURS  U.S. National Women's Studies Assoc,  celebrates its 10th anniversary with conference on the intersection of race and  gender. Weaving Women's Colours: A  Decade of Empowerment. June 24-28,  Spelman College, Atlanta. Georgia. 4 plenary sessions, over 200 workshops, films,  cultural events. Registration materials  available through NWSA'87, Emory University, P.O. Box 21223. Atlanta, GA  30322. (404) 727-7845.  VANCOUVER LESBIAN CENTRE  Open Mon. to Fri. 11 am-4pm. 876 Commercial Drive. Ongoing groups: coming  out. young lesbians, and violence in relationships. More info 254-8548.  WOMEN OF COLOUR GROUP  Women of colour support group meeting  Apr. 2 7-9 pm and Apr. 16 7-9 pm. Pot  luck on Apr. 30, 6 pm. More info 873-  6940.  VANCOUVER RAPE RELIEF  Come work with V.R.R. and Women's  Shelter against violence against women—  for yourself and other women. Ask about  Support,Education .Action Groups. Childcare provided. 872-8212.  ASSERTIVENESS TRAINING  Vancouver Status of Women is looking  for women interested in facilitating assertiveness groups on a volunteer basis.  Facilitators training workshop, Thurs.  eve. Apr. 23 and all day Sat. Apr. 25.  Call Patty Moore 873-1427 if interested.  Registration required by Apr. 14.  Two women from Greenham Common will speak on the initiative to support a nuclear free and independent pacific  LaQuena, 1111 Commercial Drive. April 29, 8pm and at the Unitarian Church, 949 W. 49 Avenue. April 30. 8pm.  WORKSHOPS1CLASSIFIEDICLASSIFIED  SINGING FOR OURSELVES  Singing for enjoyment, singing for meditation, singing for vocal development,  singing for ourselves. Weekly classes  beginning Tuesdays. 7:30 pm. Sliding  scale fee. More info. Maura Volante 872-  4251.  SEXUAL ABUSE  Sponsored by the Justice Institute of  B.C.: Adult Survivors and Their Partners:  Issues for Support and Recovery. Apr.  9 9-4:30 pm. Interviewing The Sexually  Abused Child Apr. 10 9-4:30 pm. The  Sexually Abused Pre-school Child: Diagnostic and Treatment Issues Apr. 27 9-  4:30 pm. Blake Hall. 4180 West 4 Ave.  Content info 228-9771. loc. 233. Registration 228-9771. loc. 224.  WOMEN'S HEALTH  Sponsored by Vancouver Women's Health  Collective. Menopause: symptom relief  Tues. Apr. 14, May 12, June 9 7:30 pm.  Birth Control: options, safety, effectiveness, marketing. Tues. Apr. 21, May 19,  June 16 7:30 pm. Pre-menstrual Syndrome (PMS): causes, self-treatment.  Tues. Apr. 28. May 26, June 23 7:30  pm. Workshops at Health Collective. 888  Burrard. Free. Above workshops can be  given upon request to groups and organizations. More info 682-1633.  BED & BREAKFAST FOR WOMEN  Quadra Island is a short ferry ride from  Campbell River, 5 hours from Vancouver.  The island provides great trails, fishing, skin diving, a native museum, etc.  We provide a large room with gorgeous  view of mountain^ and ocean plus private bath. $35 double, $28 single. 10%  discount on 3 or more nights. Call Susan  or Carolyn (604) 285-3632 or write Box  119. Quathiaski Cove, B.C. VOP 1NO.  PRESS GANG HIRING AGAIN!  Press Gang Printers new collective member will be a bookkeeper and bindery  worker. Job starts May 11 or earlier and  lasts until Aug. '88. Application deadline  Apr. 24. Bring resume to 603 Powell St  ... and fill in application.  PERSONAL CARE ATTENDANT  Wanted for 3 physically disabled adults in  False Creek area. Domestic chores. Self-  motivated. Drivers licence required. Ap-  prox $60 per day. More info 736-7107  days or 732-1694 evenings.  CALL FOR CRIGKET!  Housecleaning with a difference. We're  faster, more efficient, and we ask you  what you need and how you want it done.  Cricket Domestic Services. For consultation and an estimate call 734-7486.  TWO SPACES AVAILABLE SOON  Four bedroom shared house. Kits/Pt.  Grey, garden, fireplace. $250 mo. plus  util. Emphasis on creating home envi  ronment with compatible people. Share  meals, chores and Agora Food Co-op  membership. Common interests include  theatre, outdoors, vegetarian, food. cats,  beach walks. Russel or Valerie 732-8927.  SATURNA ISLAND RETREAT  Enjoy the unspoiled quiet of island life  in 12 room historic farmhouse nestled in  28 acres with private beach. Reasonable  rates. Groups, families and individuals.  Breezy Bay Bed and Breakfast. Saturna  Island. B.C. VON 2YO (604) 539-2937.  ROOM FOR RENT IN SHARED  HOUSE  One. or possibly two rooms for rent  in shared women's house at Clark and  13th. Non-smoking, have pets, baby expected this summer. Woman with child  welcome. Avail. May 1 $150 plus until.  872-4251.  IWMrtEWMfiH  1146 Commercial * 253-0913  rAirheart  Co-operative Travel Centre  Deborah Bradley  Travel Consultant  Ellen Frank CTC  Travel Consultant  2149 Commercial Drive  Vancouver, B.C. V5N 4B3  (604)251-2282  CompuServe 71470,3502  KINESIS     Apr.,   87 If there'd been K/M  in 1930, these won  would have subscribed.  LIBRARY PROCESSING CENTRE-SERIALS  2206 EAST MALL, U.B.C.  VANCOUVER, B.C.  V6T 1Z8        GR - 8804  Photo: Five Girls Running, New York, 1930. by Toni Friessell  Now there is KINESIS,  so why don't you?  I $&Mf  Published 10 times a year  by Vancouver Status of Women  400A West 5th Ave., Vancouver, BC V5Y 1J8  G VSW Membership-$25.50 (or what you can afford)..^^^ Kinesis subscripts  □ Kinesis subscription only - $17.50  □ Institutions - $45  □ Here's my cheque  D Bill me  □ Sustainers - $75  □ New  D Renewal  □ Gift subscription for a friend