 July f992 Coming OUT on our rights... page 9  $2.25 paper.   Call   us   a  255-5499.  Our next Writer'i  Meeting is  Aug. 4 for the Sc  pt. issue, at  7 pm at Kinesis  #301-1720  Grant St. All won  en welcome  even if you don't  mve expen-  PRODUCTION "T  HIS ISSUE:  Luce   Kannen,   J.  nette   Hell-  ninth,    Fatima    J  iffer,   Anne  Jew,   Diana   Bapt  ste,   Donna  McGee, Harriet F  incott, Mir-  iam Jurigova, Sig  ly Madden,  Manisha Singh, K  athy March,  Frances Suski, Eli  zabeth Ken-  dall, Shelley Hine,  Lissa Geller,  Jackie   Brown,   Je  nnifer   Rus-  sell,   Christine   Cc  sby,   Gladys  We, Kelly O'Brie  , Ria Bleu,  mer, Farhat Khan  FRONT   COVER  :   Photo   of  Leslie Kimori of R  eijingu Hor-  EDITORIAL  BOARD:  Huang,  Christine  Cosby,  dys We, Fatima Jaffer,  Anne  Jew, Kelly O'Briei  CIRCULATION AND DISTRIBUTION: Jennifer Johnstone,  Birgit Schinke, Tory Johnstone, Cat L'Hirondelle.  ADVERTISING:  Birgit Schinke  OFFICE: Jennifer Johnstone  Kinesis Is published 10 times  a year by the Vancouver Status of Women. Its objectives  are to be a non-sectarian feminist voice for women and  to work actively for  change, specifically  ting sexism, racism, horn  bia and imperialism.  Views expressed in  are those of the w  do not necessarily reflect V  policy. All unsigned material is  the responsibility of the Kinesis Editorial Boar  SUBSCRIPTIONS  IONS: V\  girls are welcome tc  missions. We reserve the right  to edit and submission does  not guarantee publication. If  possible, submissions should  be typed double spaced and  must be signed and include  an address and phone number.  Please note: Kinesis does not  accept poetry or fiction contributions. For material to be  returned, a SASE must be included. Editorial guidelines are  available on request.  ADVERTISING: For information about display advertising  rates, please contact Kinesis.  For information about classifieds, please see the classified  page in this issue.  DEADLINE: For features and  reviews: the 10th of the  month preceding publication.  News copy: 15th. Letters and  Bulletin Board listings: 18th.  Display advertising—camera  ready: 18th; design required:  16th.  MEANS MOVEMENT  Talking about what went on at NAC  14  The women who do science  INSIDE  ttf*  Norberg wins In sex-exploltatlon court case 3  by Agnes Huang  Proud and loud over the BC's Human Rights Act 3  by Heather Gray  Press Gang Printers struggles to survive 4  by Slgriy Madden  Band-aid project for single moms 4  by Lynn Wanyeki  A step backward for "No Means No" bill 5  by Lissa J. Geller  BC Legal Aid still under review 7  by Kelly O'Brien and Fatima Jaffer  Canadian Labour Congress takes stand on  violence .7  by Sue Vohanka  Cross-border loving 8  by Chris Morrlsey  Coming out on human rights » 9  by Ashley Reed and Maria N. Penn  Dykes play ball at the LIL Softball tournament:  Aphoto story ..10  by Fatima Jaffer and Raine McKay  Women size up the Earth Summit 11  by Margaret Gallagher and Maria N. Penn  Photos In memory of one helluva Kinesis  benefit 14  Talking about what went on at NAC 14  by Kate Elchhorn and Sunera Thobani  Panel discussion raises awareness on teen pregnancy 16  by Earendll McNay  New reproductive technologies that make babies  perfect.L. 17  by Harriet Fancott  A look at Revolutions and Revelations: Photos by Saralee  James 18  by Anita Bright  Lesbian films at Out on Screen In review 19  by Kathleen Oliver  Travelogues and guidebooks for  by'D'sa'Schmidt  An Interview with mystery writer Elisabeth  Bowers 21  as told to Shelly Hlne  Reviewing a polyphony of poetry 22  by Eunice Brooks  Women do science despite all  odds 23  by Janet Nlcol  Kinesis is indexed in the  Canadian Women's Periodicals Index, and the Alternative  Press Index.  Kinesis is produced on an  IBM PC using PC Tex and an  LC-800 laser printer. Camera  work by The Peak. Printing  by Web Press Graphics  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis,    Vancouver    Status  Women, 301-1720 Grant St  Vancouver BC V5L 2Y6  Paging Women..  by Gabrielle Cordelia  Letters   Bulletin Board...  compiled by Cathy <  ■Magna  Kinesis is a member of the  Canadian Magazine Publishers  Association. ISSN 0317-9095  Second class mail #6426   , I Movement Matters  vN\\\NN\NNN\NV^\N\\XXXX^\  Movement  Matters  listings information  Movement Matters, is designed to be  a network of news, updates and information of special interest to the  women's movement. Submissions to  Movement Matters should be no  more than 1>00 words, typed, double-  spaced on eight and a half by eleven  paper. Submissions may be edited for  length. Deadline is the 18th of the  month preceding publication.  Women's  Monument  Project  The Women's Monument Project is asking women students nation-wide to submit.  original, feminist designs for a permanent  memorial to the fourteen women students  murdered in a massacre at L'Ecole Polytechnique in Montreal in 1991, and to all  women victims of male violence.  The Project began in the spring of '91.  when women, who came together at Capilano College in Vancouver after the Montreal massacre, identified the need for a  monument as a way of raising public consciousness about violence against women.  The monument is also intended to serve as  a place of healing where women can gather,  grieve and renew their commitment to making it safer for all women to live lives free  from male violence.  The Project committee consists of a core  group of women from various backgrounds,  single mothers, video producers, artists, architects and instructors. The Project is  sponsored by and has been given a startup grant through the Capilano College  Women's Centre.  Designs for the monument will be reviewed by a jury of women and the chosen design will be built by an. all-woman  construction crew. The committee hopes  to incorporate a surface such as slate into  the design, in order to allow visitors to inscribe something of significance to them. In  this way, the monument intends to serve  both as a changing, living testimonial to  the truth of women's lives and a permanent  symbol that violence against women is unacceptable. Donors to the monument will  be acknowledged by having their names inscribed on the pathway to the monument.  At present, the proposed site for the monument is Vanier Park in Vancouver.  The Women's Monument has received  support from Battered Women's Support  Services, the NDP Women's Rights Committee, Audrey MacLaughlin, Margaret  Mitchell, Joy MacPhail, Darlene Marzari,  Rosemary Brown, Dawn Black, and Svend  Robinson. The committee is in the process  of approaching other community and political leaders for support. Anyone wishing further information or wanting to help can call  the Project Coordinator, Cate Jones at 245-  3831, or Kelly Phillips at 988-0Q25.  Don't  be shy  Women's  legal clinic  The Women's Legal Clinic offers free legal advice to women who cannot otherwise  afford a lawyer or legal services. Operating  out of Vancouver's Battered Women's Support Services and established by the University of British Columbia's Law Student's  Legal Advice Program, the clinic caters to  the unique needs of women, providing legal  information and assistance on a wide range  of matters.  Jennifer Jones of the Clinic says "students at the Women's Chnic recognize the  need for the legal system to be responsive  to and explained from a woman's perspective. We know the legal system can be inaccessible and intimidating for women whose  legal problems are very often coupled with  male violence. We also strive to be sensitive to how women may be further disadvantaged by other forms of discrimination  such as racism, poverty and homophobia."  Jones is concerned that women are not  yet using the clinic as much as she had anticipated. Colleen Smith, a summer worker  at the chnic, says that while "women are  in need of free legal information and assistance, ... to be more successful, the chnic  needs to both see itself and be seen, more  as a part of the community."  Smith cites her experience working at  Women Against Violence Against Women  as an example of how Uttle is known  about the chnic. "I was reluctant to refer  women to the clinic because I didn't have  a good sense of the women working there.  I was concerned about biases and that students would not understand the reality of  women's hves."  The chnic also considers advocacy work  to be an important role of the clinic, especially regarding legal issues and supporting women's groups in this area. In January, the chnic participated in an NDP lobbying meeting held by the Vancouver Status of Women, and is currently involved in  organizing a province-wide consultation of  women's groups regarding the reform of legal aid services in BC.  As part, of her work with the Law Student's Legal Advice Program, Smith works  at the Downtown Eastside Women's Centre  on Monday afternoons. Issues dealt with at  the two locations tend to be quite different. Says Smith, "Both chnics are very important and, depending on how the summer  goes, we'll be exploring the possibihty of op-  crating at both locations through the school  year."  At present, the chnic deals with issues  ranging from Ministry of Social Service.  UIC and Criminal Injury appeals and low-  cost divorce where issues of maintenance  and custody have been resolved, to small  claims matters and criminal charges where  legal aid has been refused.  Through the summer, the Chnic is held  on Wednesdays from 2-8 pm at Battered  Women's Support Services and on Mondays from 1-5 pm at the Downtown East-  side Women's Centre. For more information  call Law Students' Legal Advice Program  at 822-5791, or Battered Women's Support  Services at C87-18C8.  Correction  We messed up with attribution for the  centrespread graphic in the June issue of  Kinesis. While we correctly identified the  photographer of the original picture, we did  not know then that it had appeared in the  May? April issue of Spare Rib?, a UK-  based publication. Hence, the credit should  read: "graphic adapted from a photo by  Desmond Ip, reprinted without permission  from Spare. Rib.  Inside  Kinesis  If you were there, you'd know. If for  whatever reason you couldn't make it, you  • missed a helluva party t he Kinesis annual  raffle and benefit was a great success this  year and we raised over $900. It took many  hours of work to put together and we'd like  to thank everyone for their support. First, of  all, thanks to everyone who supported us by  buying raffle tickets or attending the event.  Many thanks to the performers: Mercedes Baines, Anne Jew, Penny Singh.  Vicki Oates, Sylvi, Random Act's (that's  Nora Randall and Jackie Crossland), Rei-  jingu Horumonzn, and surprise acts, Burcu  Ozdemir and Ming Dinh. Ed Board member  Agnes Huang hosted and Cat Renay performed sound miracles with the equipment.  [see page 13.]  Thanks also to the volunteers who  sold raffle tickets and worked during the  event: Christine Cosby, Fatima Jaffer, Faith  Jones. Camie Kim, Tory Johnstone, Jennifer Johnstone, Patricia Holton, Shelley  Hine, Ceciha Dioscon, Gabrielle Cordclla-  Chew, Shaiy Bartlett, Ria Bleumer, Sally  White, Vancouver Women's Health Collective, Lisa Smedoman, Nancy Pollak, Agnes  Huang, Robyn Hall, Brenda Wong, Charmaine Saulnier, Mercedes Baines, Susan  Brekelmans, Selina Velji, Mabe Elmore, Jo.  Frances Suski, Gladys We, Johanna Pilot.  Miche Hill, Cat L'Hirondelle, Shamsah Mo-  hamed, Joan Miller, Janet Lucas, Birgit  Schinke, Jennifer Russell, Farhat Khan, Colette Hogue, Chris Rahim, Anne Jew, and  Kelly O'Brien. Hopefully we haven't left  anyone out.  Congratulations to raffle prize winners:  Miche Hill, Nancy Pollak, Philippa Bull,  A. Russel Earnshaw, and Fraser Easton. Thanks to the raffle and door prize  donors: Opus Framing, Cynthia Low, Pa  per Ya, Pulp Press, Ridge Theatre, Van  couver Folk Music Festival, Vancouver Jazz  Festival, Vancouver Women's Bookstore.  Rasta Wares, Mecca Clothing. Cabbages  k Kinx. Isadora's Restaurant. SFU Writing and Publishing Program. Ckoi> Stix  Noodles, and Bubble Gum Clothing. Also  thanks to La Quena Coffee House and CRS  Distributors for their help.  It was fun. Sigh.  Ria Bleumer needs no introduction to  Inside Kinesis readers—she's been with us  as the coordinator of Kinesis' upcoming  Writers' School and has transcribed tapes  galore for many issues now. However, we  would like to properly introduce her as the  latest and bestest (well, we all are, really)  editorial board member to sign up. Welcome, Ria, and face it, this is probably the  best tiling you've ever done with your every  spare minute! We're happy to have you on  (the) board!  Hello also to first-timers at the paper. Wielding proofers' pencils and x-acto  knives were Elizabeth Kendall, Miriam Jurigova and Farhat Khan. Scrunched up  at the computer with furrowed brow and  reams of notes were Maria N. Penn, Shelley Hine, Earendil McNay, Chris Morrissey,  Kate Eichhorn, Ashley Reed, Margaret Gallagher, Anita Bright and Heather Gray.  Kinesis is working on changing its look  over the summer. We've formed a redesign  committee to take on the huge job, but we  still want your input. Write down any suggestions for remodelling— tell us what you  hate or hke—and mail it in. We don't want  you to not recognize us when the next issue hits your doorstep come September, so  we won't go nuts. But we're hoping most of  you will agree it's time for a new and improved Kinesis.  juld hke to take this opportunity to express a huge THANK YOU to all the volunteers who have been answering the phones at VSW for the past few months:  Karen Ainlin • Bonnie Barklcy • Carol Bast • Catherine Burke • Anne Dagg ♦ Anna  Dwyer • Anne Filipowski • Theresa Healy • Miriam Jurigova • Elizabeth Kendall ♦ Marg  Kocuiba • Eileen Louie • Janet Lucas • Mabe and Jo • Julie MacDonnell • Joan Miller ♦  Shamsah Mohamed ♦ Jennifer Russell • Sally White • Brenda Wong  If you would hke to 'put a face to a name' of VSW volunteers, please join us at our first  annual "Pat-on-the-Back Picnic" for all VSW and Kinesis volunteers on July 23rd (see the  ad page, 24).  Our thanks also to Vancouver Status of Women members who support us year 'round  with memberships and donations. Our appreciation to the following supporters who became members, renewed their memberships or donated to VSW in June:  T. Anderson •Nancy Beal • Annabelle Cameron • Rita Chudnovsky ♦ Jo Dunaway •  Canadian Women's Foundation • Caper-A-Glen • Catharine Esson • Lin Hay-Roe • Valerie Kcini • Inger Kronseth • Bev Loset • Judith Lynne • Leanne Macdonnell • Catherine Malone ♦ Maureen McEvoy • Patty Moore • Denise Nadeau • Janet Patterson • Sue  Penfold • Neil Power • Constance Reynolds ♦ Tandi Stone • Joanne Taylor • Sheilah  Thompson • Christine Waymark • Jane Wolverton  Finally, we would like to express our gratitude to those who have responded so generously to our fundraising appeal this month. Your donations really do make a difference!  Vicki Allen • Laureen Anderson • Sam Archer • Cynthia Baxter • Joan Bird • Ruth Bullock • Janet Calder • Margaret Coates • Holly Cole • Barbara Curran • Jill Davidson  • Judith Doll • Glenn Drover • Marlene Duerksen • Deborrah Dunne ♦ Lois Ethering-  ton • Carol Fairbank • Carole Gcrson • Chris Groeneboer • Jam Ismail ♦ Lorraine Johnston « Nola Johnston ♦ Linda Keller • Janet Kellough-Pollock • D. Kennerley • Barbara  Kuhne • Marlene Legates • Abby Lippman • Andrea Little • Louise Long • S.J. Math-  eson • Deborah McDougall • Monica McGovem • Sharon Mien • Christine Morrissey ♦  Myrtle Mowatt ♦ Leslie Muir ♦ Andrea Newcombc • Karen Nordlinger • Joan Parkinson  • Kate Pelletier « Claire Perry • Renee Peterson ♦ Helen Purkis ♦ Joanne Quirk • Nora  Randall ♦ Margaret Rankin • Elinor Ratclifie • Mollic Rawling • M.A. Read ♦ Sharie Re-  ithaug • Carol Rhead • Hulda Roddan • Edna Rolston • Jane Rule ♦ Maya Russell •  Mary Schendlinger « Patricia Schwartz • Sarah Shamai • Eva Sharell ♦ Helen Shore •  Stephanie Smart • Pam Terry • Penny Thompson • Patricia. Tracy * Pamela Walker •  Joanne Walton • Susan Wendell • Barbara Wild • Phyllis Wilson • Working Design  KINESIS ///////////////////^^^^^  ////////////////////////////////^^^^^  NEWS  Supreme Court Ruling on sex-exploitation by doctor:  Norberg vindicated  by Agnes Huang  Seven years of fighting with the justice  system has now come to a fruitful end for  Laura Norberg. On June 18, the Supreme  Court of Canada (SCC) ruled she had been  sexually exploited by her doctor. The six  justices unanimously overturned an earlier  BC Court of Appeal (BCCA) decision that  she had voluntarily consented to the sexual  encounters.  After the ruhng, Norberg told the media  she is "very happy and fully satisfied" with  the decision.  The case is important in ensuring that  women have safe access to medical treatment. "Is universal health care universal if  women have to pay a sexual user fee?" retorts Christine Boyle, a law professor at  UBC.  "Just as women should be safe from sexual assault on the streets, in the workplace  and home, women should be safe from sexual assault in doctors' offices," says Boyle.  Boyle was a co- author of the intervener's  factum of the Women's Legal Education  and Action Fund (LEAF). LEAF intervened  at the Supreme Court to raise constitutional  sex equality arguments regarding the concept of consent to sexual contact.  It's been a long battle for the woman  from Williams Lake. In 1982, Norberg, who  was addicted to the prescription drug, Fior-  inol, went to see Dr. Morris Wynrib to obtain more prescriptions.  When Wynrib, a physician in his seventies, became aware of her addiction to the  pain killer, he told Norberg 'he would be  good to her if she was good to him.' and mo-  BC Human Rights Act  tioned to the back stairwell leading to his  apartment upstairs. She turned him down  and left.  About a year later, desperate because her  other sources of supply for Fiorinol were  cut off, Norberg went back to Wynrib and  agreed to his terms. After about a dozen  sexual encounters, during which Wynrib  put the drugs on a bedside table, Norberg  told Wynrib she needed help with her addiction. Wynrib advised her to 'just quit'.  In 1985, after being given a conditional  discharge in a provincial court for double-  doctoring—getting prescriptions from more  than one doctor without informing them she  was doing so—Norberg sought treatment  for her drug dependency on her own. After  overcoming her dependency, Norberg filed a  civil suit against Wynrib for sexual assault,  breach of professional duty and negligence.  Both a trial court and the BCCA dismissed her claim of assault, holding that  Norberg had implicitly and voluntarily consented to the sexual activities. Norberg continued her fight, taking her appeal to the  Supreme Court.  In allowing her appeal for civil redress, the SCC awarded Norberg $30,000—  $20,000 in aggravated damages and $10,000  in punitive damages. Punitive damages are  awarded to punish the defendant and make  an example of him or her to deter others  from committing the same offence.  Boyle says the Court not only stressed  the necessity to deter sexual exploitation  in awarding punitive damages, but also acknowledged the harm done to Laura Norberg as a result of the sexual assaults. "In  awarding aggravated damages, the Court  recognized the indignity and humiliation  of the experience that Laura had been  through."  ..women should be safe  from sexual assault  in doctors' offices."  -Christine Boyle  In their decision involving three separate judgments, five of the six justices accepted that consent to sexual contact must  be looked at in the context of power. In  his reasons for judgement, Justice Sopinka  wrote that the sexual contact had not been  without Norberg's consent, and accepted  her appeal instead on the basis of the breach  of trust of the doctor-patient relationship by  Wynrib.  Justice La Forest, in writing for the majority, clearly places the onus on the person in a position of power not to abuse  that power for sexual purposes. "The unequal power between the parties and the  exploitative nature of the relationship re  moved the possibility of the appellant's providing meaningful consent to sexual con  tact."  La Forest adds that consent will be con  sidered legally ineffective if it can be shown  that the weaker party was not in a position i  to choose freely, not only in doctor-patient  relationships but in other 'power depen  dency' relationships. These include parent  child, psychotherapist-patient, physician  patient, clergy-penitent, professor-student  attorney-client and employer-employee.  "The Court has recognized that in an  alyzing claims of sexual assault, you must  appreciate any power relationships between  the parties and this is critical in distinguishing between voluntary consent and forced  submission to sexual activity," says Helena  Orton, director of htigation for LEAF.  Justices McLachlin and L'Heureux-Dube-|  the only two women Supreme Court  judges—went even further by pointing out  that women are particularly vulnerable to  exploitation by doctors and that the "gen  der dynamic cannot be ignored" by the  courts. In her reasons for judgment, Jus  tice McLachlin wrote that there was a serious breach of fiduciary (trust) responsibility by Wynrib, and that Norberg ha<  done nothing wrong. The two justices would  have awarded Norberg $70,000, including  $25,000 for sexual exploitation.  The SCC ruling is important not only  for women, but also for other groups, such  as children and people with disabihties, be  cause of the recognition of the inherent  power imbalance in certain special relation  ships.  See NORBERG page 4  A right to be proud and loud?  by Heather Gray  June 9th was a great day for lesbians  and single mothers in British Columbia.  The day the NDP government introduced  long-awaited amendments to BC's Human  Rights Act marked the first step in this  province towards protection for lesbians and  single moms from discrimination in the areas of, among others, tenancy, employment,  membership in trade unions, wages, purchase of property, public facUities and housing.  The amendments, which were promised  in the last provincial election campaign and  announced by education and human rights  minister Anita Hagen, seem to reflect the  NDP government's good faith in recognition  of society's changing attitudes.  Discrimination on the basis of race,  colour, ancestry, place of origin, pohtical  behef, rehgion, marital status, physical or  mental abihty, sex, age and criminal conviction are presently protected areas under the  law. The amendments add family status and  sexual orientation to prohibited grounds.  According to Hagen, "for too long,  British Columbians have been discriminated against because of their family situation or sexual orientation." And women's  equahty minister Penny Priddy says "it's  time women were ensured equal and fair access to job and housing opportunities without fear of being discriminated against because they're single parents."  Another amendment to the Human  Rights Act aims at making it easier for  employers to implement employment equity  programs. Employers currently must have  pre-approval of the Human Rights Council before implementing employment equity programs. The amendments remove the  need for pre-approval requirements.  Yet another change will expand the definition of age. The age under protection-  is currently 45 to 65 years old. Once the  amendments become law, this will be broadened to include those between 19 and 65  years. The amendments also remove the  maximum limit for damages—previously  $2,000—and allow for class actions and  remedies.  Yet, the question remains as to just how  these amendments will work towards recognizing the rights of lesbians and single  mothers to protection from discrimination.  According to the Act, women who feel  they have been discriminated against may  file complaints with the Human Rights  Council, which has the authority to investigate complaints and order remedies. But legal actions can be expensive, time consuming, and emotionally exhausting and, while  legal aid is available for those wishing to file  a complaint under the Act, cases can take  up to 36 months to be resolved. In most  cases, the complainant usually wins.  David Mossop, of the Community Legal  Assistance Society, welcomes the amend  ments but beheves that there is too long a  delay in resolving disputes. It is a concern  echoed by Pam Fleming, of the advocacy  group, End Legislated Poverty, who says she  beheves a change in the structure of human  rights action is necessary to make the process more ;  Fleming suggests a tribunal format could  accomplish this by making the process  a quicker and less bureaucratic one. She  also says the presence of an Ombudsper-  son could provide the Human Rights Council with more power to take pohtical action. However, Fleming beheves the class  action clause is a step in the right direction towards ending systemic discrimination  if it encourages groups united by a common  complaint to come forward to seek justice.  Because the amendments are not all-  inclusive, they may sometimes fail to provide protection to the very groups they  are designed to help. For example, nothing  in the amendments prevents discrimination  based on income. Many single parents and  their children hve below the poverty hne.  Income from one full-time job often is not  enough to meet the financial needs of an entire family.  Affordable housing is a necessity for  most single parents. Discrimination by landlords against people on social assistance  is widespread and, even if the government  were to add income to the hst of prohibited  discriminations, many single parents would  not be able to afford adequate housing.  Says Fleming, what good does a 3-year  legal battle do for, say, a recently divorcee,  woman with children to support, inadequate  income, and nowhere to hve?  Positive change may be affected in the  long run—removal of the $2,000 ceiling on  damage awards may act as both an incentive  for complainants and deterrent for landlords  who discriminate, for example, or employ  ers. However, in the short run, simultaneous action to ensure rent controls, more cooperative housing, and lower interest mort  gages could be more effective.  The amendments are of httle use to se  nior citizens as they apply only to people  who are 19 to 65 years of age. Persons sixty-  six years or older can be excluded from con  dominiums by strata councils who decide  whether the elderly are welcome at a com  plex. Some landlords currently bar families  from renting because their children are un  der 19. Children under 19 are not protectee  under the Act.  However, most women's groups are hoping that the NDP government's legislation  "is only the beginning and that there is sti].  a long way to go," as barbara findlay, of the  group Working With Lesbians puts it.  As the BC Human Rights Act apphes  only to matters within provincial jurisdic  tion and federal matters, dealt with under  the Canadian Human Rights Act, are cur  rently under review, more good news couh  be on the way.  Heather Gray is a first time  Writer,  for Kinesis who just moved to Vane  ver from Victoria.  KINESIS Press Gang Printers:  Don't... stop the presses!  by Signy Maden  There's nothing unusual about hearing  that, yet another company is struggling to  remain solvent. Casualties of the recession  and Free Trade are hsted in the mainstream papers almost daily. But when the  company in trouble is the last remaining  women's print, shop in North America, the  news touches more than a few workers and  their friends.  Vancouver's only femimst print shop collective Press Gang Printers, is in crisis.  Sheila Gilhooly, a collective member, describes the current situation at Press Gang.  which has been hit hard by the recession.  "We arc not. crying wolf here. If things don't  change, wo won't be here next year. Our  doors won't close tomorrow but Press Gang  must generate $30,000 worth of sales over  the next few months or close its doors. The  staff didn't take salaries last month—that's  how bad it is."  For the last 20 years, Press Gang Printers has earned the respect of the Vancouver, and indeed international, community  for its commitment to dehvery of "a consistently pro-woman message on every feminist issue from abortion to lesbian rights to  anti-racism to trade unionism," as one history of the print shop put it.  "We are not crying wolf here.  If things don't change we won't  be here next year."  -Sheila Gilhooly  But. while  Pubhshers, i  books as a se  financial sha  Gang Printe.  Collective  print shop h  i sister collective, Press Gang  ntinnes to produce feminist  irate business and is in sound  •. the story differs for Press  lember Mary Watt says the  been doubly hit by the re-  "The labour,  women's and environmental organizations who are our cus-  Women on welfare  Band-aid for  single moms  by Lynne Wanyeki  Women's groups and anti-poverty organizations ahkc are expressing skepticism  about a recently announced federal initiative to help single parents, who are mostly  women, get off social assistance. The Self-  Sufficiency Project will cost the government  $50 miUion over five years and will be tested  in the provinces of British Columbia and  New Brunswick.  The project is intended to work as a  wage supplement plan, by covering 50 percent of the gap between wages received for  entry-level jobs ... This translates to additional federal funding of $35,000 in British  Columbia and $25,000 in New Brunswick  annually.  However, Jean Swanson of the anti-  poverty organization End Legislated Poverty (ELP) says that the project does not address the real causes of women's poverty.  •'I tlunk this is a good example of a plan  that, on one level, seems to benefit low-  income people, but on another level undercuts our work to reduce and end poverty by  tackling the structures that cause it.  Each of the anticipated 5,000 participants  in the project will receive the wage supplement for three years. At the end of this time.  they are expected to have acquired the skills  necessary to close the wage gap themselves.  Swanson explains that this "does absolutely nothing to address the problems causing poverty such as low wages, lack of decent jobs and lack of childcare. and as such.  is utterly inadequate."  She says the details of the project are  problematic and that expectations for the  participants are unrealistic. "With only $50  million available for 5 years, that's $10 million a year. With 5,000 people participating,  that's oidy $2,000 a year per participant,  nothing close to what would be required,"  says Swanson.  "While no woman should be faulted for  going onto the project, it is absurd to expect that, within three years, she will have  received the skills necessary to go off the  program especially when Statistics Canada  shows that the average family income is actually going down."  Swanson adds she is concerned that the  project will be seen as a subsidy program by  employers, thus encouraging them to maintain low wages.  "This project came about because of the  pohtical pressure on the government to appear to be doing something about poverty,"  she said, and "this happened to fit nicely  into its corporate agenda,"  The Self-Sufficiency Project was put together by a US company, Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation (MD-  RC), at the request of Employment and Immigration Canada. Apparently MDRC was  approached as it has experience in both implementing and doing follow-up research on  large-scale projects.  Swanson points out that the choice of a  US company meant that no Canadian anti-  poverty organizations were approached for  consultations during the drawing up of the  project. She was VP of the National Anti-  Poverty Organization at the time.  After the project had been put together,  ELP was approached for comment. The  MDRC remained unconcerned at the problems pointed out by Swanson, stating that,  if the project was a farce, follow-up research  would prove it to be so.  Lynne  Kinesis.  Wanyeki  rriter for  tomers are also struggling to survive. When  it comes down to the crunch, some of them  are deciding to get their printing done elsewhere to save a few dollars.  recognize that all the  s directly back into the  use local suppliers and  ve higher safety stan-  printing company and  tly  "We would like t  money spent here go  community, that we  union labour. We h  dards that any othc  have made great efforts t  friendly," says Watt.  Businesses, hke Press Gang, which are  run by women or are operated on a collective or co-operative basis, have always had  a tough time surviving, says one long-time  femimst activist in Vancouver's women's  movement. Frances Wasserlein points out  that "these organizations can't get access  to capital so they have trouble updating  their equipment. Because their equipment  is older, their turn-around time is longer so  they can't accept certain jobs. This makes  it. harder for them to compete."  Wasserlein says she beheves Press Gang's  survival requires more than continued support from existing customers. "The major  labour groups have a responsibihty to support the women's movement by using Press  Gang. The trade unions could easily send  some of their smaller jobs to them. It is the  responsibihty of working people to stand up  in their unions and say that Press Gang  should not die."  In 1989, in an effort to remain competitive and to better serve the employees, Press  Gang strengthened their ties to the labour  movement by joining a union. In November  last year, Press Gang updated its equipment  and purchased a new printing press with the  help of a $5,000 loan guarantee from WomenFutures Community Economical Development Society in Vancouver. This was the  first loan guarantee granted by WomenFutures.  Press Gang is not the oidy print shop  threatened by the recession. Many companies are sending their print jobs to eastern  Canada, overseas or south of the border to  the United States to save money. The print  industry as a whole is suffering and smaller  shops are being bought out or closing.  Response to Press Gang's possible demise  has been strongly supportive. One customer, Catherine Ludgate, of the Westcoast  Environmental Law Association, says that  "all organizations wanting social change and  concerned about community economic development should print at Press Gang. They  give so much to the community in terms of  teaching paste-up and layout skills, training  women in non-traditional jobs, and donating printing services to help other organizations. They are committed to empowering  both groups and individual women."  "Their work is excellent.'- agrees Nora  Randall, co-partner in Random Acts Theatre Company. "They bend over backwards  for their customers. I will be exceedingly upset if Press Gang goes down."  The Press Gang collective is hoping others feel the same way. They sent a letter in  early June to all their friends and customers  asking people to notify them of up-coming  print, jobs. As Mary Watt says, "$30,000 is  not an impossible amount of sales to generate, but Press Gang needs to know if the  work is out there."  Watt also reports that the collective's  members are investigating the idea of selling  shares to members of the community. Meanwhile, friends of Press Gang are planmng an  auction and other fundraising events to try  to generate enough cash to keep the collective alive [see ad this issue].  Signy Made.)  to Kinesis.  regular eontributo  NORBERG from page 3  "For women with disabihties, the power  imbalance with medical professionals is  heightened because the doctor-patient relationship is often a long-standing one,"  says Joan Meister of the DisAbled Women's  Network Canada. "Women with disabilities have often been abused sexually,  chemically—over medication— and through  neglect."  The SCC ruling may make it easier for  women seekirig^civil redress against doctors  and other professionals who sexually exploit  them. Most of the justices rejected many  of the legal mechanisms used for excusing  sexual assault which have involved 'blaming  the victim'.  Victoria Gray, partner with Bull Housser  Tupper and counsel for LEAF in the Norberg intervention, agrees that the SCC decision will hkely pave the way for a lot of  civil cases.  The reasons for judgment by the SCC  in this case may also serve as precedent in  criminal cases using the recently passed Bill  C-49, the Sexual Assault Bill [see this issue, p.5].  "The doctrine of consent has been significantly developed to respond to the needs  of people who are vulnerable to sexual assault," says Boyle. "The SCC did not come  out in support of zero tolerance in power dependency relationships, but they came close  to doing so."  Gray, who was also counsel for LEAF in  Norberg's appeal, says that while criminal  law and civil law are not the same, the definition of consent in this decision could still  be used in rulings under the new sexual assault legislation. "The SCC decision gives  some indication where the courts are going  regarding consent to sexual contact," she  said.  Linda Schulz of WAVAW rape crisis centre agrees that the decision has positive  implications for women seeking justice under the new sexual assault legislation. "This  case should add weight to Bill C-49."  Orton says, 'This is an extremely important decision in making the legal system  more responsive to claims of sexual assault,  and specifically ensuring that harms women  experience are recognized in civil law.  Agnes Huang  to Kinesis.  j a regular contributor  KINESIS" ^'y/Aug. NEWS  /////////////7///////////^^^^  Sexual assault bill:  Just what does 'no means no' mean?  by Lissa J. Geller  After developing what women are calling  one of the most progressive and encompassing bills to date on sexual assault, Justice  Minister Kim Campbell has caved in to the  pressure of anti-woman criticism and softened much of it.  Bill C-49 was first introduced after a decision by the Supreme Court to strike down  the old Rape Shield provision in the Criminal Code last August. The old law prohil>  ited cross-examination on a woman's past  sexual history [see Kinesis, Feb. 1992].  The new bill is the first in Canadian history to include a preamble which made explicit that "...the complainant's sexual history is rarely relevant and that its admission  should be subject to particular scrutiny."  Further, before amendments, it defined consent, called for the man to take all reasonable steps to ensure a woman's consent, and '  noted that consent could not be assumed if  a woman was drunk or incapacitated in any  other way, or if the man was in a position  of authority or trust—for example a doctor  or therapist.  The softening of the bill came after substantial opposition and controversy during  its second reading in the House of Commons in May. At issue was apparent confusion over the meaning of consent—surely  'no' is just something a woman usually saj>  before she says 'yes?' Aren't we tampering with social behaviour by asking men to  make sure they aren't raping a woman?—by  members of male-dominated groups such as  the Ontario Criminal Lawyers Association  and the Canadian Bar Association [see Kinesis, June 1992].  While attention in the House of Commons and mainstream media focused on  these objections, the legitimate concerns of  some women's groups were being ignored.  While women have been largely supportive of Bill C-49, the fact that the language  of the bill is gender-neutral shows a refusal  on the part of government to acknowledge  that history and statistics demonstrate that  sexual assault is gender specific- men rape  Further, the bill, in its preamble, does not  recognise that certain groups of women are  at greater risk for sexual assault than others. Women of colour, lesbians, women with  disabihties, First Nations women, children  and prostitutes do not have easy or protected access to the legal system and so do  not report violence against them as often as  it occurs.  Just before announcing her decision  on the amendments, Campbell met with  groups of women from across the country. The Vancouver-based group POWER  (Prostitutes and Other Women for Equal  Rights) testified that each of its 400 members is raped on average ten times a year.  They requested a special provision in the  bill acknowledging that sex trade workers (including prostitutes and strip club  dancers) can be victims of rape and deserve  accused must take "all reasonable steps to  ascertain whether the complainant was consenting" before pursuing sexual activity, has  been amended by removing the word "all."  Feminist writer and broadcaster Marian  Botsford Fraser points out in a recent opinion in The Globe and Mail that "to alter  tins wording is to send an ambivalent message to the courts, to complainants and to  those accused." Botsford Fraser concludes  parliament is obliged to endorse the idea  that, without uncompromised consent, sexual activity is illegal.  In a written opinion to The Globe and  Mail, Kim Campbell defended the provision in the law that said a woman was incapable of consenting if she was incapacitated for, among others, reasons of "intoxication" on the basis that the intention  was to provide "badly needed emphasis... on  protection of the rape laws.  CampbeU and the Justice Ministry chose  to dismiss the concerns of Canadian women  and refused to amend the preamble to protect these specific groups of women. The  amendments to the bill, instead, alter several sections considered controversial by  the male-dominated legal and professional  groups.  On the amendments  The provision defining consent, where the  the obvious." In the amendments, however,  Campbell removed the reference specifying  "intoxication" from the provision less than  one week later. Saying the courts were already famihar with the term "incapacity,"  the Justice Minister bowed to pressure from  the provision's chief critic, the Canadian  Bar Association.  One amendment has yet to be fully articulated. It involves the provision that a  woman cannot be deemed to have consented  if the accused is in a position of trust or au  thority over her. LEAF has requested that  this provision be expanded to include a person in "a position of power." For example,  an off-duty pohce officer is not in a position  of authority when assaulting a prostitute  but is in a position of power to coerce submission. By way of other examples, LEAF  points to a spouse who sponsors the immigration of a family member, a social worker  with power to recommend a chent for subsidized benefits, or a spouse who threatens to  contest custody. At the bill's second reading, the Canadian Bar Association was especially critical of this provision, claiming it  made a mockery of the principle of innocent  until proven guilty.  But Roz Currie of the National Association of Women and the Law (NAWL) say:5  the provision serves only to emphasize the  "power difference between a woman and her  assailant in certain situations." And even  Campbell initially dismissed the concerns o:  the Bar Association, noting- that "the burden of proof beyond a reasonable doubt remains on the Crown on every single issue,  including consent."  Nonetheless, as the Bar Association  "strongly endorses" the bill as a result o:  the amendments, it stands to reason that  amendments to this section will water down  this provision as well. LEAF's Helena Or-  ton says LEAF has yet to discover the exact nature of the amendments but that this  "is a critical clause of the Bill, recognizing  the power dynamic and being capable of an-  . alyzing consent in this context."  She said that watering down the amendment will be disastrous for women whose  consent has been coerced due to an abuse of |  trust, power or authority, [see this issue  page 3.]  Women's groups across Canada are  mounting a campaign to protest the amended bill but it seems unlikely Campbell is  hstening. Heading into an election year, it  seems far more hkely that she'll sell out the  women of Canada to buy her own seat in  the Tory cabinet and caucus.  Lissa  Geller is a regular volunteer]  writer for Kinesis.  CANADIAN  MAGAZINES  Now, 245 publications to choose from!  UNIONS • PEOPLE • IDEAS • ACTION  The new 1992 Canadian  Magazine Publishers Association  catalogue is the best and only  source for individual descriptions  of Canada's magazines. An  incredibly wide variety of special  interest topics and points of view  are represented by 245 magazines,  covering every interest and taste.  Fill in the attached coupon today  and for just $5 (includes GST,  postage and handling) we'll send  you our new catalogue.  Subscribe now to your favourite  magazines with our easy-to-use  detachable order form.  Send me the new 1992 CMPA  catalogue. I enclose my cheque fo  $5 [GST, postage and handling are  covered in this amount].  2 Stewart Street  Toronto, Canada  M5V1H6 Mag^-e-  OUR TIMES  INDEPENDENT CANADIAN LABOUR MAGAZINE  is a monthly magazine  where working people come together  to share victories, exchange new knowledge,  and compare fears and insights.  We celebrate the vitality and strength  of the union movement in Canada  today, and believe our future potential  is measured now in our diversity  and solidarity.  PROGRESSIVE JOURNALISM  MEANS GIVING PEOPLE A CHANCE TO  SPEAK FOR THEMSELVES.  $18 for one year ($30 institutions).  Send to:     Our Times    390 DufTerin St.     Toronto, Ont.     M6K 2A3  KINESIS Ju,y/A^ ssssss*s*ss^  WHAT'S   NEWS?  by Robyn Hall  Chalk one up  for women  Women in BC will be pleased to hear that  sexist words such as alderman and freeman  are being scrapped under amendments to  the Municipal Act.  In an effort to remove words long identified as sexist by women from provincial legislation, the NDP introduced amendments  that will replace the term 'alderman' with  'councillor to describe a municipal council  member.  Further, the term 'freeman,' used to refer  to a distinguished person by a municipality,  has been done away with altogether.  As Vancouver city councillor Libby  Davies put it, "It's about bloody time!"'  Update on polygamy  in Creston  A polygamist group in Creston, BC will  continue to exist outside of the law without  fear of prosecution, BC's attorney-general's  ministry announced in June.  In spite of the testimony of women who  are breaking the silence on the emotional,  physical and sexual abuse taking place  within the group [See Kinesis June 1992].  the Attorney General backed off from taking action against members of The Bountiful Polygamists, a Mormon sect practicing  polygamy in the Southern Interior of British  Columbia.  The decision not to prosecute came on  the advice of some constitutional lawyers  who say that, while polygamy is against the  law. freedom of religion is guaranteed under  the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  A written opinion by a retired BC Appeals Court Justice recommends the federal government replace old polygamy legislation with new laws to "enhance desirable  social objectives" that do not violate Char-  However, at present, nothing is being  done for the women and children still living  in the Lister commune near Creston nor for  those who have left the sect and are seeking  The onus is still on individual women to  come forward with civil law suits in court  against individual members in the sect who  have abused them.  Anti-pimp  law makes  love illegal  A federal law that makes it a crime for  partners, friends, families or anyone else  to associate with prostitutes was upheld  in a recent Supreme Court decision, even  though the law clearly violates the Charter  of Rights and Freedoms.  The anti-pimp law in the Criminal Code  basically says that a person who hves with  or is "habitually in the company of" a prostitute can be presumed to be a pimp and the  person must provide evidence to the contrary to prove his or her innocence. In the  case Regina vs Downey, the law was challenged because it is obviously in direct vi-  UPRISING BREADS  BAKERY  Makcre of Vancouvcrs Finest Wholegrain Breads.  Lunch at Uprising  Sandwiches on Uprising Bread  Vegetarian and meat available daily  Soups/salads - all vegetarian  Monday - Friday  Hot Lunch includes:  Empanadas, somosas, burritos, quiche, Jamaican  patties, sausage rolls, vegetarian rolls, spanokopita  Mon.-Fri. 8:30 am - 5:40 pm • Sat. 9:00 am - 5:30 pm  1697 Venables Street Vancouver 254-5635  A part of CRS Workers" Co-op  Eastside DataGraphics  1460 Commercial Drive  tel: 255-9559 fax: 253-3073  Computer Training  • Introduction to MS-DOS  • WordPerfect 5.1  • Desktop Publishing  • Lotus 1-2-3  • dBase  Specializing in on-site training for small groups and customized  training schedules. Beginner and intermediate instruction available.  Please call for rates.  j*-Union Shop  mmm^MWsMMmmMiit  olation of the section of the Charter that  guarantees a person be presumed innocent  until proven guilty.  While the Court agreed, it upheld the  law arguing it is "demonstrably justified in  a free and democratic society,"and by citing the gravity of the 'prostitution problem'  and the need to protect prostitutes—'a vulnerable group'—from exploitation.  In reality, the law does nothing of  the sort, writes Alexandra Highcrest, a  spokeswoman for the Canadian Organization lor the Rights of Prostitutes in a recent opinion piece to the Globe and Mail.  Highcrest points out that, while it is necessary to protect prostitutes from exploitative  men. "prostitutes are not the only women  subject to exploitation.  "If a man beats his wife, the man is not  charged with being the woman's husband—  he is charged with assault." Similarly, an  employer exploiting a waitress is charged  with extortion, not with "living on the avails  of waitressing." Highcrest adds, that, as a  prostitute, " I can Uve on the avails of [my  lover's] work but she can't live on the avails  of mine."  Prostitution is not a crime in Canada  but, by upholding this law, "the Supreme  Court has clearly stated that my partner is  a criminal 2-1 hours a day."  Justice Beverley McLachlin notes in her  dissent that the law may prevent women  from entering into relationships that will  protect them from some of the dangerous  aspects of their work because it is illegal for  prostitutes to associate with their friends  and families.  Critics of the law also say the kind of  pick-and-choose judicial activism by the  Supreme Court, that let this unconstitutional piece of legislation stand cannot make  u hopeful that our rights will be pro-  by the courts in the future. In tins  women are being isolated and made  vulnerable to abuse, rather than less.  Robyn Hall i  :inesis. living u  a voluntet  Vancouver  miter for  New Limitations  Amendment bill  by Harriet Fancott  A new act in BC removes the time limits  on suits by survivors of sexual abuse against  their abusers. The new law, the Limitations Amendment Act, introduced into BC's  legislature and the only one of its kind  in Canada, permits victims of child sexual  abuse to sue the offender for damages at any  time.  The current statute of limitations for civil  suits is two years from the age of majority, which means a BC person must file by  21 years of age. Most victims of child sexual abuse don't know the extent of their injuries for many years after the abuse. There  is no time limit on laying criminal charges.  The announcement follows a court decision in February that awarded Kathy Gray  $85,000 in damages for eight years of abuse  by her uncle more than 20 years before.  In the decision, a BC Supreme Court Justice wrote that the current laws "were not  drawn with the cluld sexual assault victim  in mind."  It is hoped the new law may begin to  recognize the long-term suffering of sexual  abuse survivors and allow for therapy to occur through compensation gained by legal  action.  Circling D»«J! Orsurfc food  Collective  Organic B.C. Fruit Specials on now!\  Best Organic Produce selection in Vancouver !  Organic Bulk Foods, Herbs & Soaps !  Organic Juice & Coffee bar.  Live Music Monday & Friday nights.  Open-pollinated seeds still available.  Kids' Play Area"  VVI;////  We work with  consensus.  1045 Commercial Dr,  Supporting  i   * Uou don't have to finance  ^ what you don't support  n. ^  * Lower interest rates on loans  to co-ops and societies  » Term deposits     • RRSPs  » Chequing accounts and  other banking services  y^flWRT"   A full-service credit union dedicated  cgs  ~j£EK^k+. to community economic development/^^r§K  CCEC Credit Union  tercial Drive, Vancouver, B.C., V5N 5P9  Telephone  254-4100  KINESIS NEWS  /^*m**m^m^^^   ,,".-  BC Legal Aid under review:  A foot in the door  by Kelly O'Brien and Fatima Jaffer  A reform of legal aid in BC is getting  more input than the BC government bargained for. Women's groups and front-line  legal advocacy organizations are changing  the consultation process by demanding their  say.  And the legal consultant hired by the  government last February to meet with  community groups has had to rethink his  initial plans to have consultations wrapped  up in three months. [See Kinesis, April,  1992.] Tim Agg says the message he received from women's groups was that they  wanted their own process, time to think .  through the issues and to formulate their  own views in a provincial context.  According to Johannah Pilot of the Vancouver Status of Women (VSW), the shortness of the review's consultation process-  six months—coupled with lack of resources  to legal information and funding, disadvantaged women's groups from the outset. In  an interview with Kinesis in March, Agg  said he intended to give his first internal report on the consultation process to the Attorney General in May, three months earlier  than it was due.  Pilot says "we were concerned women's  groups wouldn't be able to discuss the issues if the time frame wasn't extended and  that, without access to resources, women  wouldn't be guaranteed full participation in  the consultation process."  In response, women's organizations in  the Lower Mainland formed the Legal Aid  Ad Hoc Coalition to address the need for  a province-wide consultation representative  of all concerned groups. The Coalition approached Agg in April to outline terms of a  consultation process that would allow them  to participate.  Canadian labour Congress:  "Tim Agg's mandate wasn't satisfactory," says Pilot. "We need to be given the  same opportunities as the legal professionals who were being consulted."  Following the first ad hoc coahtion meeting, VSW submitted a funding proposal to  the Ministry of the Attorney General, the  Ministry of Women's Equality, and Legal  Services Society (LSS). Pilot says she was  pleasantly surprised when VSW received  a total of $14,500 from all three government bodies. The funds enabled VSW to  hire an organizer on a ten-week contract to  facilitate a three-phase process to explore  women's perspectives on legal aid service  dehvery in BC.  The first phase, which took place in Vancouver in June, gave representatives from  women's organizations across BC the opportunity to come together to define the important issues for legal aid chents, who are  mainly women and poor. Conference participants also made recommendations on how  legal services could be restructured to better represent chent interests.  As Kinesis goes to press, women's  groups are tabulating these recommendations for phase two, a meeting between  representatives of women's groups and legal professionals. Phase three is a meeting being planned for the last week in July  which will bring together representatives of  women's groups, government, the women's  equahty ministry and LSS.  Consultation organizer Miche Hi" beheves "the process women throughout the  province have initiated is unprecedented  and very significant." Agg agrees and says  he is "encouraged by their [the Coalition's]  process ... hopefully at the end we will be  hearing some very useful perspectives.  "I think there is a growing recognition  around legal aid issues that, in order for the  best type of service to be developed, there  needs to be a better pooling of knowledge  between people in the community and professionals," says Agg.  Pam Fleming of End Legislated Poverty  (ELP) also sees the consultation process as  a real victory and a blueprint for future consultation with government. ELP and other  front-line advocacy workers (FLAW) had  their own meeting with Tim Agg before  the conference and recommended the LSS  board include non-lawyer community and  regional representation to reflect the demographics of BC.  Other suggestions for reform included increased public education on poverty law issues, implementation of a clinic/community  services model that would include a range of  legal services under one roof, legal information counselling by lay advocates and more  accountability to low-income people.  There have been some signs of change already. As a result of pressure from frontline advocacy groups and the support of  Agg, four community-based people were appointed to the LSS board in June. Three  are women: Sue Egers of the Port Alberni Women's Centre, Margaret Cissell of  Elizabeth Fry Society in Kamloops, Patsy  George from the Community Review Panel  on Child Welfare.  The board is no longer "lawyer-heavy,'  says Fleming. "Before these appointments  the LSS board was entirely inaccessible."  Hopefully these new appointments to the  LSS board reflect a commitment on the  part of government continue a dialogue with  women's groups and front hne advocacy  groups before reforming pohcy.  Kelly O 'Brien and Fatima Jaffer o  regular contributors to Kinesis.  Zero-tolerance for violence  by Sue Vohanka  The recent Canadian Labour Congress  (CLC) convention had its moving moments.  and some of them came as delegates recognized oppression and voted to take affirmative action.  Nearly 3,000 delegates adopted a wide  range of pohcy resolutions during the week-  long convention in Vancouver in early June,"  and a handful of the decisions stole most  mainstream media headlines.  But the debates signalling real change in  the CLC happened while delegates talked  about ending violence against women, taking affirmative action to recognize visible  minorities, and protecting lesbian and gav  rights.  They weren't really debates, either. Del-  gates spoke with obvious feehng, and the  testimonies they gave about the need for  .-hange drew a depth of support that seemed  to be lacking in the past. The honesty wa>  apparent this time, and it was convincing.  "Getting rid of sexist pinups is a union  issue. Challenging racial slurs is a union  issue. Stopping discrimination based on  sexual orientation is a union issue," said  Peggy Nash of the Canadian Auto Workers (CAW), urging delegates to make human rights a priority.  '"Our job is to express true solidarity by  insisting on respect for the rights of all  workers," she said.  A day earlier, delegates made history by  changing the CLC constitution to provide  for two vice-presidents to be elected, Lynn  Jones (Pubhc Service Alliance of Canada)  and Hassan Yussulf (Canadian Auto Workers) as CLC vice-presidents representing  visible minorities.  "We have really moved," said outgoing  CLC president Shirley Carr, when those  election results were announced. "It took a  little time," she added.  The convention also endorsed a comprehensive resolution about fighting discrimination based on sexual orientation. The  CI.C delegates resolved to:  > lobby for legislative changes and administrative practices that would prohibit such  discrimination;  > actively encourage its affiliated unions  to negotiate no-discrimination clauses including sexual orientation; and  > encourage its unions to negotiate contracts expanding the definition of spouse  to include lesbian and gay relationships.  Delegates at the CLC convention in Vancouver strongly condemned the recent bombing  of the Morgentaler abortion clinic in Toronto.  The emergency resolution adopted June 10 also called on federal and provincial governments to provide full funding and round-the-clock security for abortion clinics.  The resolution, introduced by the CLC executive council, described the bombing as "a  shocking assault, by anti-choice forces against women's rights" and'"another form of violence against women by an increasingly intolerant society."  Jan O'Brien, a Vancouver delegate for the Newspaper Guild, said the abortion chnic  bombing seems to be a tactic imported from the US. "Some of our opponents are not prepared to use democratic means to dissent," she said.  A majority of Canadians support women's right to choose, O'Brien added. We need to  stand up for these rights," she said, and we're fortunate that one of the first acts of BC's  NDP government was to fully fund abortion chnics.  "Women must have the right to choose," said Barb Byers, president of the Saskatchewan  Federation of Labour. "And I want to tell you we will have the right to choose."  "They're important issues of equahty  and solidarity," said Deborah Bourque, of  the Canadian Union of Postal Workers  (CUPW). She said gome benefits in her  union contract, hke basic medical coverage  and extended health benefits, would be pro-.  vided if her partner was male, but not if her  partner was female.  "Workers arc economically penalized on  the basis of their sexual orientation," she  add txi.  One of the most powerful debates at  the convention took place as delegates discussed a pohcy paper on ending the violence  "Pohcies aren't good enough. We want  the union movement and we want Canada  to be a violence-free zone," said CUPW delegate Marion Pollack, calling for "zero tolerance for violence."  Women experience indignities every day,  at the workplace, or while walking home at  night, or standing at a bus stop. "These  tilings happen to women and happen on a  daily basis," Pollack said. "Wein the trade  union movement have to acknowledge that.  Every day our sisters come to work with  bruises of their face," she added.  Sue  Vohanka   is  i Vancouver.  freelam  writer,  KINESIS FEATURE  ^XX^XX^XX^X^XX^XX^XX^XX^^^  Cross-border loving  by Chris Morrissey  On June 10, 1992, the Lesbian and Gay  Immigration Task-force (LfeGIT) presented  to Bernard Valcourt, Canada's Minister of  Employment and Immigration, a brief entitled "Growing Old Together." The brief describes the impact of present immigration  pohcies on the hves and relationships of individual Canadians and offers a proposal for  change.  The recommendation is that a new category, similar to Australia's "mutual interde-  pendency" category be added to immigration law. Such an addition would, at least,  provide access to immigration for same-sex  partners of Canadians who otherwise have  no access. Conceivably, it would not be exclusive to lesbians and gays but, for example, could extend to heterosexual common-  law partnerships. This would grant status to  women who are not able to or who choose  not to enter into a formal marriage, and who  are in a relationship with a man or woman  of citizenship different to her own.  For many years, women hke me have felt  isolated, overwhelmed and powerless. It has  been very easy for us to remain invisible.  There are so many reasons for staying hidden, but we pay a price for doing so. We are  all in relationships with women whose citizenship is different from our own.  The abihty to continue our relationships  depends on our being successful with Immigration Canada, the Department that holds  the power to separate us from each other.  The fear of losing jobs, friends and family  support is what has kep*t us silent and isolated from each other.  We have found that we have no access to  immigration because we do not have enough  money, or the 'right' education, or are too  old or do not have husbands. The hst goes  on to include race, abihties, and so on. Sexism also plays a role in the above.  Immigration Canada and its pohcies are  in the hands of the patriarchy. All of its  values and prejudices are embodied in the  Immigration Act and perpetuated through  its practices. Like so many others, we are  .ictims of institutionalized violence. Like  so many other marginalized and oppressed  people we have said, 'Enough!' We have finally broken the silence and have started to  find each other. We have begun to organize  and to fight back.  Recently, proposed changes in provincial, federal and international laws regarding sexual orientation make us feel a httle  safer. It's a step, but we still hve in a hetero-  sexist world. None of the proposed changes  acknowledge or extend to our relationships.  It is okay to 'be' lesbian, for example, just  not to 'do' lesbian or, if we 'do' it, not to  flaunt it or break the patriarchy's rules, such  as ignoring international borders.  Anyone who wishes further information  or who wishes to participate in the Task-  force may write to: L&GIT, P.O. Box00384,  Station A, 757 W. Hastings St., Vancouver,  BC, V6C 2N2 or phone Chris Morrissey at  321-3647.  (L-R)Kathryn Hansen, Carla Petievich, Chris Morrissey and Bridget Coll  "IWsMag^zine  "Some of the most  energetic political  commentary in the  country."  - Richard Gwyn,  syndicated national  newspaper columnist  I For just $2.50 you can sample This Magazine, Canada's fiercely  I independent journal of politics, society and culture. Our articles are  1 written with wit and insight we're winning awards for. Send your  I cheque or money order payable to: Chaos Consulting, 4-1825 Nelson  I Street, Vancouver, BC V6G 1M9.  Don't forget your address!  Nl is the one  journal anyone  concerned about  international  development must  read."  - Frances Lappe,  author of Diet for a  Small Planet  For just $2.50 you can sample Nl. the world's largest-selling  I monthly magazine on international developmental issues.  j Sena your cheaue or money order payaPle to: Chaos  j Consulting, 4-1825 Nelson Street, Vancouver, BC V6G 1M9.  Don 7 forget your address!  Labour/Le Travail  Journal of Canadian Labour Studies  Labour/Le Travail is the official publication of the Canadian Com  Labour History. Since it began publishing in 1976, it has carried many  important articles in the field of working-class history, industrial sociology,  labour economics, and labour relations. While the supply lasts, new subscribers may purchase sets of the journal at a special bargain rate of $250.00  (28 issues, 9082, reg. $338).  Subscription rates (outside Canada): Individual $20.00 ($25.00 US); Institutional $25.00 ($30.00 US); Student/Retired/Unemployed $15.00 ($20.00 US).  MasterCard accepted or make cheque payable to: Canadian Committee on Labour History,  History Department, Memorial University, St. John's, Newfoundland, Canada, A1C 5S7  Articles are abstracted and indexed: America: History and Life; Alternative Press Index; Arts and Humanities Citation IndexTM; Canadian Magazine  Index; Canadian Periodical Index; Current Contents/Arts and Humanities;  Historical Abstracts; Human Resource Abstracts; PAIS Bulletin; PAIS  Foreign Language Index; Sage Public Administration Abstracts.  #$&•**  \0*  5766 Fraser    Street  Vancouver, B.C.  U5W 2Z5  Sarah-Jane  C604J  322-0107  KINESIS FEATURE  ^^^^^0^^^^^^^^^  OutRights/Les Droits Visible:  Coming Out on human rights  by Ashley Reed and Maria IM. Penn  In a precedent-set ting case before the  courts in BC, Carol Nielsen is fighting for  Iter right to equal recognition of her lesbian  family. ''Lesbian.-- and gays have every right  to expect equality."' says Nielsen. "Because  of internalized homophobia, we are one of  the last groups of Canadians to insist that  we be treated with dignity. I think the 90s  will be remembered as a decade when we finally united for our rights.  Nielsen, an East Vancouver resident,  lodged a complaint with BC's Human  Rights Commission in 1989 when her employer refused to allow dental insurance coverage for her female partner and her partner's children. Nielsen's case is being sponsored by the Women's Legal Education and  Action Fund (LEAF) who have supported  more than 100 sex equality cases in the past.  In Nielsen's case, LEAF is arguing discrimination on the basis of marital status, family  status, sex and sexual orientation. LEAF's  Carol Allen, who ha.  been coordinating i  sues around Nielsen  s case, says the ca  raises the issue of ho  v to litigate the mult  pie discrimination fa  •ed by lesbians.  "Lesbians are woi  uen—there is a cros  over with respect tot  ■^sttes for women," sa  Allen. LEAF's concern is how best to litigate for lesbian equality and that may be  closely tied with "issues [of equality] for all  women." she says.  Says Nielsen."We are slowly learning how  to react against discrimination. If we don't  experience equality.' we can do something  about it."  Being clear about one's legal rights pays  off even in mundane situations. One Vancouver lesbian who requested anonymity  said she had asked her local insurance company for a tenancy policy for herself and  her partner. ''I wanted us classed as spouses  so we'd get a break on the insurance premium."  When the insurance agent, refused, saying insurance companies "did not write that  kind of insurance." the woman told him it  was "illegal in BC for insurance companies  to treat lesbian partners differently than  heterosexual partners. At that point, the  agent suddenly remembered the name of a  company that sold those kind of policies.  Because I know my rights, I got the insurance."  Earlier in June, the BC Government announced formal protection for lesbians and  gays from discrimination under the BC Human Rights Act [See this issue, page 3].  Ontario, Manitoba, New Brunswick and the  Yukon have also recently introduced protection from discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation in human rights legislation.  Federally, the Conservative government has  put off until the fall long-overdue changes  that will look at protection from discrimination against lesbians and gays in the federal Human Rights Act-  Last year, Amnesty International, the  international human rights body, included  persecution for sexual orientation under  crimes committed by governments and  vowed to fight such persecution. Internationally and in Canada, this commitment  may have far-reaching implications.  Many unions are beginning to routinely  include protection from discrimination on  the basis of sexual orientation in their  collective agreements. Unions and employers disrespectful of human rights are sued.  Union members are beginning to insist on  union-sponsored seminars on ending homo  phobia in the workplace, as was seen at the  recent Canadian Labour Congress convention held in Vancouver in June [See this issue, page 7.]  On the other hand, a reactionary caucus of Tory backbenchers in the federal parUament are openly vowing to limit protection from discrimination on the basis of  sexual orientation. The caucus on family  issues, which includes many conservative  backbenchers and has the support of most  cabinet members, has been remarkably effective in promoting its ideology of traditional family values.  Meanwhile, lesbians are left to fight with  their sick partner's parents on who makes  decisions regarding medical care. Lesbian  mothers have a traumatic time battling for  custody of their children with their ex-  husbands and the courts continue to deny  legal recogiution of lesbian partnerships in  the area of old age pension benefits.  There has never been a more critical  time for feminist and lesbian activisties to  develop a focused approach to demanding  their basic human rights. One opportunity  to develop a national perspective on these  issues may be at OutRights/Les Droits Visibles.  The second pan-Canadian conference on  lesbian and gay rights, is expected to draw  more than 250 people from across the country to Vancouver in the fall. OutRights/Les  Droits Visibles will be looking at issues of  custody, immigration, spousal benefits, lesbians and gays in the legal system, the  Charter of Rights ami Freedoms, harassment in the workplace, anti-racist work and  education.  In recent months, the family caucus has  eliminated tax breaks for common-law couples, killed a national daycare program and  is currently trying to amend federal laws  to include an official definition of the family in the preamble to the Canadian Human  Rights Act, specifying that the couple must  be husband and wife, specifying this means  male ami female.  Developing a national perspective is important because, if the Supreme Court of Canada  decides that Charter equality guarantees protect lesbians, all areas of the law will be open  for re-examination. Issues covered in various 'discussion streams' at the OutRights conference will include:  • AIDS/HIV And the Law: A look at legal issues such as those resulting from illness for  people with AIDS/HIV; wills and estates, insurance and living wills. There will also be  a discussion about what companies can do to employees on the job once they find out  they are sick.  • Are We Family?: Lesbians and gays are both winning and losing rights as partners. This  discussion stream will look at current partnership issues and family law, and examine  the legal implications of calling ourselves spouses or family.  • Rights and Wrongs: Looking at the history of our struggle for lesbian and gay rights and  a review of past achievements, as well what remains to be done.  • Working in Law: A discussion by gay lawyers working in a homophobic legal system.  • Straight Up: A focus on organizing strategies in straight institutions such as unions, media, churches and the pohtical and education systems. How are lesbians and gays seen by  the public, how do we represent ourselves, who decides and what are we doing about it?  • Mobilizing for Change: How do we organize around issues such as racism, sexism, ableism  or classism? What creative strategies can we develop to work with our differences?  • Networking Caucus: Participants from the gay and lesbian community across Canada  can compare experiences and strategies, as well as develop an agenda for the future.  The conference runs from Friday,- Oct. 9 to Sunday, October 11. Conference  fees are $25 to $250, on a sliding scale. Credit hours will also be given for volunteer work. Upon registration, participants will be given a Lay Person's Guide to  Lesbian & Gay Rights in Canada, an information package about issues being addressed and an assessment of where vie currently stand in the law. To receive a  registration package, call 251-4356 in Vancouver.  Coming Out For Our Rights  Perhaps the single most important event for  any lesbian is that of coming out. Visibility  as a lesbian, or whether or not one is 'out,'  tends to have a lot to do with the range of  choices one has in life. OutRights/Les Droit  Visibles aims to take a step towards resolving these issues.  Over the past two months, leading up  to OutRights, LEAF sponsored consultations with lesbians in Hahfax, Toronto  and Vancouver. Participants explored issues such as lesbians' entitlement to family benefits, family status, spousal benefits,  and whether using a gender-specific term  "We are learning  how to react  against  discrimination. If we  don't experience  equality, we can do  something about  it."  -Carol Nielsen  like wscx-discrimination' is better than tin  gender neutral term, "sexual orientation,'  when fighting for equahty rights for les  bians. These are some of the more complicated issues that arise when talking about  lesbian rights, says Allen.  At a recent Vancouver event, Taking The  Law Into Our Own Hands, lesbians who  came together to talk about similar issues, tended towards use of the less gender-  specific term, "sexual orientation" over "sex  discrimination" because it recognized their  lesbiaidsm more specifically and was therefore more "out."  "We are always filling out forms. Every  time I get asked my marital status, there  is no space to claim my relationship. Homophobia works to keep us invisible," says  white lawyer and lesbian activist barbara  findlay, one of the four co-chairs of the conference.  Lesbians encounter homophobia and are  all discriminated against in the law. The  OutRights conference will look at what  strategies have worked in various parts of  Canada to confront homophobia.  "Homophobia has different effects on different people. Among ourselves, we need to  understand the diversity of experiences of  lesbians and gay men of colour, low income  lesbians, lesbians with disabilities and the  needs of lesbian parents, young people and  our elders," says findlay.  She concludes by inviting the entire lesbian community to the OutRights conference "to find out about the gains we've already made and how to win on every front.  We can learn things of immediate use in our  own hves."  Ashley Reed is one of many "invisible'' lesbians working in a mainstream  world, who believes it's critical we all  attend the OutRights conference. Maria  N. Penn is a new volunteer writer for  Kinesis.  KINESIS  July/Aug. 92 Sports  VLC hits a homer!  by Fatima Jaffer and Raine McKay  It was a different culture. A place where  women just ... you know, had a lot of fun.  They weren't worrying about being Out—  they were celebrating it in an arena where  being a dyke in sports is usually oppressive.  It was the 7th annual LIL softbaU challenge tournament, and it took place in Vancouver over the weekend of June 7th. The  tournament is a legacy of the Lesbian Information Line, which closed its doors in . A  record number of teams—eighteen, including for the first time two from Victoria-  participated, in two divisions. Division A  teams compete in leagues through the year,  while B Division teams are less competitive  and more recreational.  The Vancouver Lesbian Connection (VL-  C) and the Moovers played in the finals for  the Recreational Division, with VLC taking the trophy home. In the A Division, the  rookie team Denman Drivers stole the game  from two-time champions the Raiders, by  one point.  Said organizer, Kate Stewart, "This is  the biggest tournament of them all. Cash-  wise, we broke even and the only headache  this year was... we didn't have enough umpires."  But it was fun or, as a player from the  Bratz put it, "We keep losing and we keep  playing. I don't understand it." No-one remembers exactly who said it but it became  "best quote of the tournament [because] it  sums up the spirit of the games." said Stewart.  Among awards handed out: Vicious Rumours from Victoria were Most Sportswoman Team (the most fun team on the diamond); Women Warriors got the Rec. Division Consolation award; the Bratz got the  Comp. Division Consolation award;  In all, there was a lot of laughter, a lot  of girl watching, a lot of hollering ... As an  audience member put it, "some watch, some  soak in the sun, most sweat ...  Denman Drivers cheer on their team  and some just play ball!  Denman Drivers go to bat  Denman Drivers celebrate  their win  KINESIS FEATURE  x2*#*^%?m?^?^%?;2  Women & the environment:  Sizing up the Earth Summit  by Margaret Gallagher  & Maria IM. Penn  The globe is warming, forests are dying,  people are starving and the air is being poisoned. Every day, we are confronted with  evidence just by walking down the street,  and breathing in toxic air that our environment is in crisis. Yet. when talk of action  on addressing these issues comes up, women  are being shut out of the decision-making  processes. Currently, they hold less than  four percent of policy-making positions at  the United Nations. Yet, women make up  about 70 percent of those involved in environmental issues at. the grassroots level and  stand to lose the most.  Between June 3-14. over 18,000 people  travelled to Rio de Janeiro in Brazil with  a mandate to discuss solutions to environment and development-related problems for  what some called "our last chance to save  the planet."  The United Nations Conference on Environment, and Development (UNCED),  otherwise known as The Earth Summit,  brought together 175 world leaders, representatives from non-governmental organizations (NGOs). representatives from  women's groups around the world calling  themselves The Female Planet, members  of grassroots environmental organizations,  and over 7.000 journalists.  Ann Danayia Usher, an environmental journalist from Bangkok, Thailand, attended UNCED and noted that "most of the  environmental reporters are women, maybe  because it's seen as a soft issue." However,  says Usher, "as the issues have become more  politicized, it's seen as more and more legitimate. There are still the old boys, who  see it as a hght issue because you're dealing with people who have no power. And  the newspapers concentrate on people who  have power."  The summit certainly seemed to present  the best, chance of putting the world on a  path to sustainable development, according  to Scverin Suzuki, who at 12 years old was  one of the youngest people to address the  Earth Summit. "Really, we have nothing to  lose, other than a clean future." said Suzuki,  who spoke as a member of the Environment  Children's Organization and one of a BC  delegation of seventh graders.  And so it began. On the first day, women  from The Female Planet welcomed each  other to Rio at a beachfront neighbourhood  with an all-night vigil to protest environmental devastation. "A grain of sand is invisible in a beach hke Copacabana," said  Sharon Capeling Alakija, the Canadian director for the UN Development Fund for  Women. "But it is sufficient to irritate an  oyster. We women are that grain of sand  and the oyster is the UN."  As the conference got under way, the  oyster—official delegates and politicians—  wrangled over an environmental charter,  The Rio Declaration, and a non-binding  plan of action for sustainable development,  UNCED's Agenda '21. And, on the other  side of the crowded city, further congested  by a transit strike, thousands of NGOs met  at UNCED's alternative conference, The  Global Forum.  Richer western countries (the 'North')  and poorer countries (the 'South') clashed  on issues of responsibility: the North pushed  their agenda—they wanted to talk about  the environment—the South was more concerned about sustaining development. The  United States, typically, became a world  leader in apathy and self-interest, especially  by refusing to sign a biodiversity treaty and  watering down the climate change convention. For many, the conference was merely a  thinly disguised photo opportunity for the  rich, famous, and powerful. Fiasco or fresh  start, UNCED was the largest international  conference in history.  So where were the women? Of 175 heads  of state, three were women. Canada's official delegation to Rio was less than 20 percent women, despite endorsement of a policy to have equal gender representation at  the Earth Summit. At the more grassroots  Global Forum, the count was not much better. And about 120 women were at a grassroots summit in Ottawa, held by the group  Women for a Healthy Planet. For them,  what was happening in Rio was incidental—  UNCED was just that big "UN thing."  The 'UN tiling' had been almost two  years in the making. In late 1989, the United  Nations called for a global conference on the  environment and development. In preparation, four meetings (PrepComs) were held,  involving approximately 175 national delegations. It wasn't until the third one that,  women got put on the agenda—as a minority issue. By the time the Rio Declaration  was drawn up, women were on the agenda in  Principle 20. It read: "Women have a vital  role in environmental management and development. Their full participation is therefore essential to sustainable development."  "If world leaders  think they can make  a change in Rio...  they're dreaming in  technicolour."  -Sharon Venne  Women's Action Agenda '21  Besides participating in the PrepComs, delegates from all over the globe met at two  major conferences to discuss the role of  women in resolving environmental and developmental issues. The Global Assembly  of Women and the Environment and the  World Women's Congress for a Healthy  Planet took place consecutively in November last, year in Miami, Florida. The latter  brought, together about 1.500 women from  82 countries.  Out. of these gatherings came the Women's Action Agenda '21, a hst of recommendations calling for radical changes to  the present system of foreign aid and development, "from now and into the 21st Century." The document notes that "women are  a. powerful force for change ... everywhere  [and] catalysts and initiators of environmental activism. Yet policy-makers continue to  ignore the centrality of women's roles and  needs as they make 'fate of the Earth' decisions."  Delegates made recommendations on  how UNCED accountability to women participants could be facilitated. They supported a more interactive process, a broader  agenda with more depth and substance, special opportunities for women to meet each  other and network, attention to use of language, and greater accessibihty for women  of the South and indigenous women.  Proactively, the Women's Action Agenda  '21 stressed the need for UNCED to look  at poverty, militarism, racism and disrespect of diversity as integral causes of global  degradation.  The document begins by stating participants "are deeply troubled by the increasing  •quahty of life' disparities between inhabitants of the industrialized world and those  in the so-called 'developing' nations and by  the growing numbers of poor within the rich  countries. In all instances, women, children,  minorities, and indigenous people are the  chief victims." These include profound inequities in food, shelter, health care, education and opportunities, which limit and degrade the lives of women around the world.  The Action Agenda lays blame for these  inequities on the lack of pohtical will of  world leaders, reflecting "... a lack of basic morality and spiritual values and an absence of responsibihty towards future generations."  Further, conference participants concluded that "...a healthy and sustainable environment is contingent upon world peace,  respect for human rights, participatory  democracy, the self-determination of peoples, respect for indigenous peoples and  their lands, cultures, and traditions, and the  protection of all species."  Some of the other recommendations:  • that the International Monetary Fund  (IMF) and the World Bank establish environmental audits to which proposals  must comply before they receive funding;  • an immediate 50 percent reduction in  military spending;  • official debt cancellation by the IMF and  World Bank;  • woman-centred and woman-managed reproductive health care and family planning, prenatal care, voluntary contraception and abortion, and sex education;  • direct regulation of biotechnology and its  development; an end to the environmental racism that places hazardous facilities in communities of colour around the  world; and  • many other recommendations placing  women and their communities ahead of  multi-national corporations and dollars.  "Because you're a woman"  If the doors to government boardrooms at  the Earth Summit were closed to women,  they were more easily opened at the  more grassroots NGO level, says Ramona  Tibando, chair of the environment commit  tee of the United Nations Association.  "Women outnumber the men around  here two to one. At. the grassroots level,  there is an enormous amount of equality and  respect towards women. But, as we move  a couple steps up the bureaucratic level,  you're going to find more and more men  than you will women at conferences and  meetings," says Tibanda.  So while women actively lobby as part  of NGOs. it does not always translate into  power when dealing with decision makers,  she says. Commenting on her negotiations  with governments as an environmentalist.,  she explains, "you'll be talking to them, and  you'll look them straight in the eye and realize they've switched off. Whether that's  because they don't want to hsten to you  because you're from an NGO, or because  you are a woman, I haven't yet analyzed it.  But I do know in talking with some international delegations, it's happened because  I'm a woman."  The UNCED  process has led to  a strengthening of  ties, a sharing of  vision.  When all's said and done ...  No miracles came out of UNCED, but many  women were not expecting any. "If world  leaders think they can make a change in Rio   they're dreaming in technicolor," said  Sharon Venne, a lawyer from Saskatchewan  and one of the 400 Native representatives  who attended the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples. The conference took place  shortly before the Earth Summit.  However, for others, the process was  an important first step. Documents were  signed, speeches made and photos taken, but most importantly, contacts were  made—and not just at Rio itself.  For the UNA's Ramona Tibando, "the  greatest advantage of attending an international conference such as tins is to have that  face to face contact with the people to get  an understanding of their goals."  Adrian Carr agrees, adding she beheves  "the UNCED process has led to a strengthening of ties, a. shaping and sharing of vision." The executive director of the West-  em Canada Wilderness Comimttee's WILD  campaign added, "the people's movement is  the key to change ... We are growing a. set  of skills needed to shape an alternative. I  sec the era of ethnoceiitrism and multinational greed collapsing and the people involved with the environmental movement  and indigenous people taking over."  Margaret Gallagher is a first-time Kinesis volunteer writer, who works for the  United Nations Association, and is concerned about issues of the environment  and developments. Maria N. Perm is a  ■new volunteer writer at Kinesis.  KINESIS OPENING   CEREMONIES  &  SHOW  CELEBRITIES  1022 DAVIE  Doors: 8:00pm Show: 9:00pm  $3.00 at the door  MONDAY  JULY 27th  "Twice Over"  (includes closing night party)  The Firehall Theatre, 280 E. Cordova  8:00pm  WEDNESDAY  JULY 29th  FILMS  "Tongues Untied"  ■ an unprecedented exploration of Black Gay Life  "Billy Turner's Secret"  ■ a hip black comedy about street attitudes  Starlight Cinema, 935 Denman  9:30pm  FRIDAY  JULY 31st  From  London,  British Slnger/Songwrlter  Tom Robinson  in a special Pride Festival appearance  with special guest Babe  Gurr  The Commodore, 870 Granville  Doors: 8:00pm Show: 9:30pm  Tix:  Ticketmaster,   Little  Sister's  Squares Across The Border  Western Dance  Line Dancing Two Stepping  West End Community Centre  8:00pm  SATURDAY  JULY 25th  Pride Run  Ceperley Picnic Area, Stanley Park  9:00am  4th Annual Teddy Bears' Picnic  New Brighton Park  (North of PNE Grounds, off McGill)  Noon - ?  THE 15th ANNUAL  GAY/LESBIAN  PRIDE   FESTIVAL  July 24th - August 3rd  1992  VANCOUVER  CANADA  SUNDAY  JULY 26th  "Twice Over"  the original hit from the Fringe festival  The Firehall Theatre, 280 E. Cordova  8:00pm  Variety Show  Denman Station, 860 Denman  9:00pm  "Voices"  The Vancouver  Men's Chorus  &  The Lesbian & Gay Choir  TUESDAY  JULY 28th  "MEAT MY BEAT'  Latino Humourist/Performance Artist  ALBERTO ARAIZA  Tom  Lee Recital Hall/Sound Spectrum  929  Granville  8:00pm  Tix:  Little Sister's, The  Royal  THURSDAY  JULY 30th  FILMS  "International Sweethearts of Rhythm"  "Tiny & Ruby: Hell Divin' Women"  "Comedy In Six Unnatural Acts"  Starlight Cinema, 935 Denman  9:30pm  Alberto Araiza  Tom  Lee Recital Hall/Sound Spectrum  929  Granville  SATURDAY  AUGUST 1st  The Vancouver Gay Volleyball Association  hosts  The Queen Vicki Volleyball Tourney  all day  Vancouver's Rainbow Band  IN   CONCERT  Great Hall of the Law Courts  Hornby at Nelson  8:00pm  Tix:  Ticketmaster,   Little  Sister's  SUNDAY  AUGUST 2nd  The Vancouver  Men's Chorus  "Schmooze Cruise"  M.V. Brittania North foot of Denman  6:30pm  REGRESSIVE    COUNTRY  Ranch Romance  Country Like Country's Meant To Be  special guest Beverley  Elliott  The Commodore 870 Granville  Doors: 8:00pm Show: 9:30pm  Tix:   Ticketmaster,   Little  Sister's  M£>NDAY, AUGUST 3rd  GAY/LESBIAN FREEDOM DAY .n B.C.  THE PARADE  From Stanley Park  To Sunset Beach  via Beach Avenue  NQON  THE CONCERT  AT SUNSET BEACH  AFTER THE PARADE  The  Pride  Community  Foundation,  832-810  W.   Broadway,  Vancouver,   Canada  V5Z  4C9  tel:(604)682-2115  fax:(604)685-5351  I^INESIS .   July/Aug. 92 Kinesis  throws a helluva party!  ^  The Annual Kinesis Raffle and Benefit at La Quena  Coffeehouse on Commercial Drive in Vancouver  brought together over a hundred Kinesis volunteers,  subscribers and fun gals. We'd like to share some  photo memories of who was there and what went on  for those of you who couldn't make it.  Penny Singh enthralled with a mix of  gospel and soul  Pensive or puzzled?  Audience member Cynthia Low  11.  Ed board member Fatima Jaffer caught nodding off  while Shelley Hine watches with intense concentration  Jackie Crossland of Random Acts kept  the audience spellbound with her tale  of disenfranchised labour  KINESIS   July/Aog.-92- What went on at NAC Let's talk!  by Kate Eichhorn  The Canadian panel on violence against  women, the proposed rape shield law, the  constitutional talks, and the structure of  the National Action Committee (NAC) itself dominated discussion among more than  400 delegates from women's groups nationwide in Ottawa in June.  The setting was NAC's annual general  meeting which was attended by representatives from many of its 550-pi us member  groups.  By far, the most significant move NAC  delegates made during the three-day meeting was public denouncement of the Canadian Panel on Violence Against Women for  failing to address the concerns of women of'  colour. An emergency resolution states that  NAC will withdraw its support for the panel  (effective July 31) unless it meets a set of demands that include the immediate appointment of three women from "visible minority'" groups to the panel. [See article on  page 9].  Another emergency resolution at NAC,  put forth by the Legal Education and Action Fund (LEAF), called on Parliament  to make a series of amendments to Bill  C-49, the proposed new rape shield law,  that, would effectively reinstate parts of the  previous Rape Shield Law that protected  a. woman's right to privacy during a sexual assault trial. NAC's proposed amendments include a preamble in which the federal government, courts and society recognize that "...vulnerability to sexual assault and diminished access to justice are  directly related to social inequalities such  as those experienced by aboriginal women,  lesbians, poor women, refugee women, sex  trade workers, women without full citizenship, women with disabilities and children."  "These amendments to Bill C-49 draw  attention to the fact that women are still  operating under the sexist myths of the  court system," said delegate Zara Suleman  of Vancouver's Women Against Violence  Against Women (WAVAW) rape crisis centre. "The inherent nature of law is classist, racist, sexist and ablest. Our amendments recognize that women from certain  groups are more often the targets of sexual  assault."  A related resolution called for the immediate reinstatement of the court challenges program, which provides funds for  women's organizations to act as 'interveners' in terms of rape, pornography, hate  propaganda, pregnancy, sexual harassment,  lesbian rights and other issues before the  courts. (Under the court challenges program, groups granted intervenor status by  the courts argue for or against a ruling that  has gone to appeal.)  The NAC resolution also calls for the expansion of the court challenges program to  include both provincial and territorial appeals. Previously, the program only allowed  challenges to federal rulings.  NAC resolution:  . condemns the lack  of women in  constitutional  negotiations..."  Two more emergency resolutions dealt  with ongoing constitutional talks. The first,  put forward by the Committee in Support of  Aboriginal Women and the Quebec Native  Women's Association, passed unanimously.  It stated that: "Notwithstanding another  provision of this [Constitution?] Act, the  rights referred to in this Act are guaranteed  equally to female and male persons."  The second resolution "condemns the  lack of representation of women in the constitutional negotiations and the exclusion of  issues of concern to women from the constitutional agenda,"  It goes on to demand that NAC be given  a full place at the constitutional table immediately; that NAC, the National Orga  nization of Immigrant and Visible Minority  (NOIVMW), the Congress of Black Women,  the Disabled Women's Network (DAWN)  and francophone women be given an opportunity to make public presentations at the  next meeting of Ministers Responsible for  the Constitution; and that NAC, the Native  Women's Association of Canada (NWAC)  and NOIVMW be given seats at any First  Ministers Conferences.  Finally, the resolution calls for a constitutional conference to be held outside of  Quebec where issues, such as the division  of powers and representation on the Senate.  ran be democratically decided.  While much of the debate at the conference criticized the federal government in a  variety of areas, delegates also turned their  attention to NAC itself, which has undergone much criticism of late for having too  much of a white middle class agenda. While  some feel NAC is attempting to change its  structure and focus in order to become more  representative of women's diversity—"NAC  is ... no longer just a white, able-bodied organization," says NAC vice-president Shelagh Day others, like Cecilia Dioscon of  the Vancouver Status of Women, aren't so  sure.  "In terms of translating words into action, that still has to be proven to me. In  general, NAC's agenda is still being set by  white, middle class women," said Dioscon.  She noted that, for example, domestic workers were the last group of women to speak  at NAC's animal lobby with federal government MPs. which for the first, time in four  years was attended by Conservative MPs,  including Junior Defense Minister Mary  Collins and Constitutional Affairs Minister  Joe Clark.  However, Clark was said to have agreed  to attend oidy after NAC president Judy  Rebick agreed to ask the women speaking  at the lobby to refrain from "exaggerating  differences," a statement that later brought  criticism from Dioscon. "If I go to a lobby  and can't say what I want to say. then it  isn't me talking up there. "  'We don't all experience the same oppression and it is about time the leadership  ol' XAC knows that." said Dioscon. "I don't  tlunk that grassroots and other women who  are quite militant were happy with the way  the lobby went."  Commenting on the current round of constitutional talks, NAC VP Shelagh Day criticized the government's approach. "They've  gone back to the Meech Lake formula where  talks happen behind closed doors," say.-  Day. "It's extremely important that we  keep on pushing for women's participation.  There was overwhelming support on this issue at the NAC AGM."  Accordingly, one of three NAC campaigns for the coming year is the Women'.-  Agenda Campaign, that will continue to  organize around Constitutional issues. The  purpose of the Campaign, laid out in the  NAC AGM report, is "to ensure that  women's issues are strongly raised in up  coming constitutional discussions or in a referendum" and "to ensure that NAC is prepared for the next federal election, to publicize the positions of the various political  parties on women's concerns, and to oppose  those parties and candidates that promote  a neo-Conservative agenda,"  The Women's Agenda Campaign will replace last year's 52 Percent Solution Campaign which was designed "to mobilize the  women's movement in the development of a  caring alternative to the Tory agenda,"  However, some NAC members oppose  both of these campaigns on the basis that  there is still much to be done at the grassroots level.  In addition to the Women's Agenda Campaign, NAC will continue its United Against  Male Violence and the Future of Women's  Work Campaigns, both of which are being  further developed by regional committees  across the country.  In other AGM news, a series of resolutions were put forth concerning employment  and job training programs. The resolutions  demand:  • the immediate reinsta temen t of job training programs for women  ♦ full funding for holistic language training  programs for immigrant women  ♦ full funding for a plurality of training  models to accommodate different learning styles (for example, training programs which include work placements)  • the recognition of training as a basic right  for all individuals and the expansion of  community based training programs for  women  Delegates also passed a resolution calling for the end of the Canada/US free trade  agreement and stating NAC's opposition to  the proposed North American free trade  agreement. The Future of Women's Work  Campaign was given amandate to further  examine how these agreements effect women  in Canada and abroad.  The Ontario Coalition for Better Child  Care put forward a resolution recommending that immediate steps be taken to institute a National Child Care Program. NAC  members also agreed to campaign for support, of this program during the next federal  election.  Due to time restraints, several resolutions  were not dealt with, including a demand  that the federal government reinstate the  Cooperative Housing Program, and resolutions concerning women's health and AIDS.  Neither did the delegates have an opportunity to discuss a resolution calling on the  organization to pressure the SaskatcheAvan  and other provincial governments to commit to ensuring free and equitable access  to abortion services. The resolution also  opposed any government policy or medical practice resulting in the forced sterilization or coerced sterilization. However, an  emergency resolution was passed condemning the recent bombing of the Morgentaler  Clime in Toronto.  NAC resolution:  '...that immediate steps  be taken to institute a  national Child  Care program."  A resolution put forth by the Lesbian  Issues Committee of NAC demanded that  the federal government provide full human  rights protection in the Canadian Human  Rights Act for lesbians, including redefining the Act's narrow definition of family.  All hough the resolution was passed, .a related resolution regarding the way in which  obscenity laws are used to suppress lesbian  expressions of sexuality, was referred back  to NAC's Lesbian Issues Comnrittee. It was  proposed in response to recent charges laid  against Glad Day Books in Toronto after  police seized several copies of a lesbian magazine they considered 'obscene.'  One issue that received virtually no discussion was the men's movement and the  way in which efforts of so-called 'pro-  feminist' men's groups have and will continue to effect funding for and exposure  of women's organizations. Despite apparent disapproval among the delegates, a resolution stating that "NAC recognizes the  efforts of pro-fenunist men's groups" was  pushed through. The resolution went on  to state that while NAC recognizes the efforts of pro-feminist men's groups, NAC will  continue to focus energy and resources on  women's organizations. The resolution also  suggested that men's groups can support  feminism by "dealing with" right-wing and  anti-feminist organizations and individuals.  "It was a very vague resolution," said  WAVAW's Zara Suleman, noting that there  was little discussion clarifying exactly what  was implied by the word "recognizes" or  the use of the term "pro-feminist ." Accordingly, WAVAW and several other organizations abstained from voting on the resolution.  "Women's organizations are too overworked and underpaid to deal with that  right now," said Suleman. "I feel it's important to focus on the work in the feminist movement. There is too much co-option  and backlash to start supporting the men's  movement at this time."  In contrast to previous NAC meetings,  tins year half of the delegates were attending a meeting for the first time. There  were also at least 12 international delegates,  mostly from the U S and Latin America.  Delegates from BC included representatives  from VSW, WAVAW, Vancouver Rape Relief, the Downtown Eastside Women's Centre and the B.C. Coalition for Abortion  Clinics (BCCAC).  Next year, the NAC AGM will be held  in Winnipeg, marking the first time a NAC  AGM will be held outside of Ottawa. Organizers hope that alternating locations between Ottawa and other Canadian cities will  enable women now unable to afford the cost  of a cross country trip, to attend a NAC  AGM in their own region.  I{ate Eichhorn is a white, middle  class, able bodied, lesbian feminist and  a first-time writer for Kinesis presently  living in Vancouver.  NAC slams $10 million panel on male violence  by Sunera Thobani  A resolution on the Canadian Panel on Violence, passed at NAC's annual general meeting in Ottawa in June [see story, page 9] states NAC's unequivocal support for the Aboriginal Women's Circle and the accountability of the panel on violence to the national organizations of aboriginal women.  The resolution went on to demand:  « the appointments of three racial minority women to serve as full members of the panel.  These women are to be named by the National Organization of Immigrant and Visible  Minority Women (NOIVM) and The Congress of Black Women  • a series of consultations with national women's groups as well as the creation of a committee of at least 13 delegates from women's groups with whom the panel would work  closely  • the support of the panel for recommendations made by a coalition of national women's  groups who have consulted with Justice Minister, Kim Campbell on Bill C-49, the government's new legislation on sexual assault  With the passing of this resolution, the response of the women's movement to the government's agenda of isolating and marginalizing groups within the femimst movement was  made public. NAC president Judy Rebick was quoted in the media as saying NAC would  withdraw its support from the panel unless its demands for more racial minority representation on the panel are accepted.  The resolution was brought to the NAC AGM by the NAC Campaign on Male Violence  following a roundtable on male violence in April. The roundtable was held in Barrie, On  tario, and attended by about GO women from NAC-ineniber and non-member groups. The  racial minority women's caucus strongly outlined their opposition to the panel and, with  the support of a large number of national women's organizations, decided to bring the resolution to the NAC AGM.  In order to understand the concerns behind tins controversial resolution, it is necessary  to look at some of the events leading to the creation of the panel.  The women's movement presented an analysis and strong recommendations for necessary reform en male violence at hearings of a parliamentary sub-committee on violence  against women. Recommendations in the subsequent report, War on Women, provided  important, guidelines for immediate government action. In response to the report, however,  the federal government appointed the Blue Ribbon Panel on Violence in August, 1991—.  which was later to be renamed the Canadian Panel on Violence.  Given that the government had not accepted recommendations for direct action in War  on Women, and that the panel was given a $10 million budget to study anew the issue of  male violence at a time when federal funding was being cut for women's programs, shelters  and rape crisis centers, the appointment of the panel was questionable at best.  As the panel went from province to province over the year, it met with mixed reactions.  On the one hand, women who "suffer the violence endemic in Canadian society were relieved to have this show of the government's commitment to ending male violence. Study  after study and story after story attested to the horrific rise in violence against women in  all sectors of our society. For them, the appointment of the panel appeared to signal a step  forward by a conservative government otherwise known for policies that have led to the  deterioration of the quality of life for women in this country.  It was with hope and many expectations that women participated in the hearings conducted by the panel, believing that by telhng their stories, they could,.at last, bring about  change for all Canadian women. However, this was not to be. The contempt with which  the panel, notwithstanding its rhetoric, viewed these women became obvious as it moved  from community to c  Hearings were conducted in buildings inaccessible to women with disabilities. The time  allocated to women invited to the hearings was five minutes each. No childcare was provided by the panel, with its $10 million budget, to facilitate the participation of women  with children. Translation services were not available for racial minority women who wished  to speak. And most interesting of all. often, organizations did not know the panel was in  town until after it had left—of those who had been informed, most were given such short  notice that the possibility of meaningful consultation was ruled out.  By April, at that roundtable in Barrie, it had become obvious that the most serious  concerns raised by women nationwide centered on exclusion of the voices of racial minority women, women with disabilities, lesbians and sex trade workers and of the panel's lack  of accountability to the women's movement.  While the panel talked about building a •partnership' with the women's movement, it  would have served panel members well to remember that it is at the grassroots level of the  women's movement that front line work on the issue of violence against women is being  done. Panel members chose to ignore the wisdom and knowledge women's organizations  have to share, rather than including and holding meaningful consultations with women's  groups in the planning stages of its work.  It comes as no surprise then, that the panel's work does not reflect proper understanding of the problems of patriarchal violence nor the fact that women are paying for an inability to stop male violence with their lives. A panel on such violence which operates on  the assumption that its members have nothing to learn from those who have worked hardest and longest to end this violence—women in women's groups and on the streets, who  face male violence, and the backlash of anti-feminists in society on a day-to-day basis—is  hardly an endorsement of tins government's commitment to Canadian women.  Participants at the NAC roundtable in April passed a resolution charging NAC and  NOIVM to lead the women's movement's opposition to co-option of the issue of violence  against women by government-appointed bodies and marginalization of the work undertaken by the women's movement to end male violence. The only way to ensure the panel's  work will truly address the safety of women in Canada is by demanding that the Canadian Panel on Violence become fully accountable to the women's movement, as the NAC  resolution demands.  However, the sensibilities of government officials have been offended by the women they  claim to be concerned about. NAC's solution is an "ultimatum", according to the panel  which is considered "unacceptable." If NAC, and indeed, the women in this country, do  not shy away from upsetting liberal sensibilities by issuing 'ultimatums', it is because they  are fighting for the lives of Canadian women.  For panel members not to recognize this speaks to their inability to even begin to understand the horror that violence against women is. Ten miUion dollars notwithstanding.  Sunera Thoba:  Status of Wome\  a a member-at-large of the National Action Committee on the  ud of NAC's Comv.ittee on Male Violence.  14   KJNESIS  July/Aug. 92  KINESIS Teen pregnancy:  FEATURE  A question of what you know  by Earendil McNay  Five years ago, May 28 was declared the  International Day of Action for Women's  Health at an international conference on  women and health in Costa Rica at the insistence of the Amsterdam-based Women's  Global Network for Reproductive Rights.  This year, when the call went out internationally for action on teenage pregnancy,  the Vancouver Women's Health Collective  and the BC Coalition of Abortion Clinics (BCCAC) responded by co-sponsoring  a panel discussion in Vancouver on May  28. The panel, "Teenage Pregnancy: Community and Government Action—Is There  Any?" was aimed at raising awareness of issues around teenage pregnancy in BC. Of  five panelists invited to participate, only  one—a representative from BC's Ministry  of Health—declined the invitation.  Raine Mckay from the Vancouver Women's Health Collective welcomed women  and panelists who attended the event. Her  co-worker, Alexa Berton, of the Vancouver  Women's Health Collective in her introduction to the panel spoke about the need to  take a holistic view of health, one that involves lifestyle, background and cultural differences.  Berton stressed the importance of emotional and spiritual factors on a woman's  well-being, factors usually ignored by conventional western medicine, and the need to  acknowledge alternative modes of healing,  the sharing of information and the expression of pain.  She was followed by Vancouver writer  and founder of BC's Safe Teen Program,  Anita Roberts, who read a short story about  her own experiences as a pregnant teenager.  The first panelist, Muriel Kerr, pointed  out that "... while [teen] pregnancies have  gone down since the mid 70s, the number  of young people parenting has risen significantly from about 30 percent in the 70s to '  around 95 percent presently. That is why,  particularly in this province, the issue of  teenage pregnancy comes to the fore."  Kerr represents BC Alliance Concerned  with Early Pregnancy and Parenthood, an  organization primarily involved with networking, support and providing information  for the practitioners who work with young  people.  Responding to a question on what she  saw as the most important action that could  be taken, Kerr said she is concerned about  the high correlation between early negative sexual experiences or sexual abuse and  teenage pregnancy, and believes that the  community needs to talk about preventative services including working with really  young children.  Society's denial of teen parents and confusion around whether they are children or  adults is one of panelist Cathy Johnson's  greatest concerns. Johnson spoke on behalf  of Tupper Mini School, where onsite daycare and educational programs for teenage  mothers arc combined with health and parenting education.  "Housing, poverty, living on social assistance and trying to go to school while raising a child along with personal problems  that arise arc major issues," said Johnson.  "Providing support in a non-judgmental  way is crucial. Our society generally does  not want to believe that teenagers are sexual beings. We tend to close our eyes to the  reality of teenage pregnancy or teenage sexuality. We need to continually raise awareness of teen parents in the community and  support them in the choices they make to  continue the pregnancy and parent."  Women who attended the Health Collective and BCCAC's panel on teenage pregnancy were given a fact sheet published by the Women's Global Network for Reproductive Rights for their "Campaign for the Prevention of Maternal Mortality and  Morbidity—Fifth Call for Action 1992." Below are excerpts from that pamphlet.  « Approximately 15 million women between the ages of 15 and 19 give birth every year.  Eighty percent of these births arc in Latin American, Caribbean, African, Asian and  Pacific (LACAAP) countries.  • The United States has a higher teenage pregnancy rate than most other countries in the  world. It is also the oidy country outside the LACAAP where teenage pregnancies have  been increasing in recent years.  •> The problem of teenage pregnancy is mostly rooted in the low economic status of women,  which is generally aggravated by early pregnancy. Unmarried teenagers with a child face  poverty and find it difficult to cope. Pregnant teenagers very often drop out of school,  either because- that is standard policy in some countries or because they arc pressured  to leave. Pregnant teenagers and teenage mothers arc Ukely to suffer from psychological  « Pregnancy poses special health risks for teenage women, especially those under 15. The  younger women are. the higher the risk of death or severe physical damage clue to pregnancy, childbirth or clandestine abortion.  • A survey carried out in Bangladesh showed that pregnant girls aged 10-14 had a maternal mortality rate five times higher than women aged 20-24. In Nigeria., the rate for  pregnant women under 15 was seven times higher than for women 20-24.  The Women's Global Network for Reproductive Rights would like women's  groups and regional and national women's health networks to let them know about  activities taken, on International Day of Action for Women's Health in order for  them to 'publish a report giving an overview of these worldwide activities.  Joy Thompson, the panelist representing BCCAC, said that "teenagers, have a  higher rate of abortion proportionately to  older women ... [and] face a dispropor-  tional number of late abortions."  Thompson spoke the longest on a variety of issues around teen pregnancy. She  pointed out that "the unpredictability of  menstruation at the age of 13 and 14 means  that a pregnancy can go undetected for  some time. Young teenage women do not al  to be based on accurate information,'' she  said.  Thompson said she beheves reproductive  health services in supportive environments  have to be provided so that women of all  ages are informed about the reproductive  health choices available to them.  Thompson attributed the rapidly falling  teenage pregnancy rate in Canada almost  entirely to better access to birth control  "Our society generally does not want  to believe that teenagers are sexual beings.'  -Cathy Johnson  ways know how to detect pregnancy. Also, a  lack of resources and not knowing the legal  status of abortion makes things quite different for teenagers. ... A lot of teenagers  have really erroneous and anecdotal notions  of what an abortion is, how it is performed,  who performs it, how safe it is and what el-  fect it will have on their future fertility."  Thompson talked about the minority  anti-choice movement's targeting of teenage  women through crisis pregnancy lines and  birth rights information hnes advertized on  public transit. She noted that when talking  to teenagers about abortion, "the language  they use is that of the anti-choice minority,  not the language of the pro-choice majority."  "Teenagers have been manipulated and  lied to about abortion. It is important that  we assist young women in the process of  decision-making, if we are to really give  them choices about maintaining a pregnancy to term, becoming mothers or terminating a pregnancy. Ail informed choice has  information. "Changing attitudes of young  women towards their own bodies and sexuality, feelings of comfort and right to be sexual, getting information about how to protect their bodies in ways that will facilitate  more choices for them also contributed to  the decline," she told the audience.  Illustrating the importance of providing  information to teenagers to enable them to  choose more responsibly, Thompson noted  that the "young women who choose abortion and are supported well come out feeling strong and positive and have a great.  sense of relief. [Rather than] feel wounded  by their experience, they are .stronger, mote  self-assertive and have better coping abilities than they did before."  The need for education about reproductive health choices is also a priority for  Margaret George of the Vancouver Native  Health Society. George told the panel and  audience that "the Native community needs  more services in the downtown area [of Vancouver]. We need more understanding of  where the young girls come from. We are  looking at what the girls want themselves. If  they want an abortion that is their choice."  Saying that "things are changing in the  native community," George pointed out  that very few young Native women have had  abortions. "We work with Native mothers,  some who run away from the reserve, rather  than tell their parents they got. pregnant.  "We have young mothers who bring their  babies into the clinic. They just want nurses  and do not have medical cards. Most of  them live with either a relative or a parent.  They do not have financial support, they do  not have houses and a lot of them do not  have the education or the opportunity to go  any further once they have a child.  "In the 50s, there were a number of [Native] children put up for adoption. These  were the children from teen moms. Often, the mothers were raped," said George.  adding that the Department of Indian Affairs did not consider teens to be adults until the age of 21, and would usually apprehend the children of teenage mothers. It is  only recently that Indian Affairs has lowered the age of responsibility to 19.  "As Department of Indian Affairs wards  once a young women has a child, she is regarded as an adult, but not in the sense that  she gets finances or housing. She is caught  in between," said George.  In the end, the consensus among panelists seemed to be that teenage pregnancy  isn't an issue to be considered in isolation  but instead requires careful action, not just  on the part of women's health organizations  but by government and the community at  large. Teenage pregnancy must be considered in conjunction with issues such as the  acknowledgment of teenage sexuality, accessibility of reproductive health information  and availability of housing and other support services to teenagers.  Earendil McNay is a Vancouver  based, first time Kinesis writer, who is  interested in medical anthropology.  "KINESIS  July/Au<},-92- ---" FEATURE  ///////////////////////^^^^^  New reproductive technologies:  On making babies perfect  MAKING BABIES AND MAKING  PERFECT BABIES  directed by Gwynne Basen  NFB  by Harriet Fancott  Documentaries on the controversial subject of new reproductive technologies (NRTs) will be aired this fall on CBC TV as  part of The Eighth Day: Perfecting Mother  Nature, a National Film Board series. Directed by Gwynne Basen, Making Babies  takes critical looks at in vitro fertilization  (IVF), while Basen's Making Perfect Babies explores the issues around genetic engineering and its impact on women and society.  These two fascinating documentaries engage viewers for almost two hours in discussion of incredibly complex and contentious  topics—both advocates and opponents of  these technologies have been consulted and  interviewed for opinions. Doctors, surrogates, surrogacy brokers, salesmen, social  activists, differently abled people, infertile  women, and feminists are all given a voice.  Together, the videos carry a disturbing message forth to the viewer.  So, what happens when the act of having babies becomes a laboratory procedure?  Firstly, as the narrator in Making Babies  puts it, "women have been making babies  since the beginning of time. When doctors  do it in a lab, it is front page news."  IVF, where the egg is fertilized in a petri  dish with a partner's or donor's sperm, has  been hailed by the medical establishment-  and parotted by the mainstream media-  as a wondercure for infertility. We are in  an era where science and industry are new  partners in the production of life. Basen's  videos take us to a sales conference in Paris,  where salesmen pitch the latest in reproductive technology and discuss the most  recent innovations in embryo-freezing machines. This is an arena where men discuss  female reproductive organs as if they were  commodities like pork bellies or Toyotas.  The manufacturing of life, we are told,  has entered the marketplace, a place where  risk is just another part of business deals  and experimentation marks the first stage  in technological development. We see how  this commercialization of reproduction benefits doctors, lawyers, medical researchers  and large corporations to the detriment of  women.  Activists interviewed in the documentaries question money spent on NRTs that  would be better spent on improving social  and economic conditions. Gena Corea, a  femimst activist who appears in the videos,  condemns the "reckless" experimentation  conducted on women under the guise of  helping infertile women. Why aren't the  root causes of infertility being examined,  she asks.  Women who became infertile as a result  of the first round of experimentation with  the Dalkon Shield or DES (diethylstilbe-  strol) have become guinea pigs again for the  second round of experimentation using IVF,  says Corea.  Once again, we are not being fully informed of the inherent risks involved. The  failure rate for IVF treatments is almost 90  percent. A woman must ingest high doses  of powerful hormone-regulating drugs which  fragment the birthing process by effectively  cutting the head off from the womb through  what Corea terms, "chemical castration".  The uterus becomes experimental ground  for the doctor where, what was once a part  of our bodies is now completely under the  control of 'experts' who only understand the  medical and legal complexities.  The film examines how experiments with  NRTs began on the farm. Pre-implantation  practices in livestock—where eggs are  harvested, fertilized, frozen and shipped  around the world to be implanted in 'low-  grade' cows, who then produce calves worth  top dollar on the marketplace—have filtered  into the human realm. It is now possible  to clone identical animals from a single embryo.  The commercialization of baby production is further examined and we learn that  the multi-national pharmaceutical company  Serono, funds the two largest IVF clinics in  the world and offers credit courses to medical students in Reproductive Technology.  This is an arena  where men discuss  female reproductive  organs as if they  were commodities  like pork bellies or  Toyotas.  I found one of the most distressing parts  of the film to be the look at a surrogacy  clinic in Cahfornia. The high cost of hiring a  surrogate to cairy a child makes it an elitist  option available oidy to white middle-upper  class women. Couples pay up to $45,000 for  IVF treatment using a surrogate. The clinic  employees assure us that the surrogates are  screened before being chosen—we are told  by one of them that they have no "social  diseases." But, as one employee of the clinic-  asks another, "after how many parking tickets do we drop the surrogate?"  At, tins clinic, we learn that surrogates  have no legal rights to the child they  are carrying in their uteri. They are, in  fact, treated as no more than baby sitters  who must reUnquish the child forever for  $10,000. One surrogate mother interviewed  said she would want at least $50,000 to go  through it again. It is dear that the surrogates are women who need money—and  equally obvious that, once again, women's  work comes cheap.  The emotional cost of surrogacy cannot  be quantified. Also, both the women carrying babies were white, suggesting racism at  play in surrogacy. However the film does not  get into the issue of racism and we are left  to draw our own conclusions.  In Making Perfect Babies, we see how  complex and far-reaching the practice of genetic manipulation can be. The human embryo becomes a  test site for genetic ab  normalities. The film raises the question:  What are abnormalities and who is to  judge what is ■normal' or desirable and  what not? The practice of pre-implantation  diagnosis—genetic diagnosis of a human  embryo before pregnancy opens up a. host  of social and moral issues.  Flashbacks to Nazi Germany's holocaust  or 'racial hygiene' program and Canada's  sterilization laws, where institutionalized  patients were forcibly sterilized, serve as  reminders of the consequences of genetic  'quality control'.  A big part of this film is based on interviews with differently abled people on how  they see new genetic technology affecting  their lives. We hear how especially disturbing this false promise of "perfect" babies  is for them. In an increasingly intolerant  world, we may learn to call the prevention  of births of fetuses with genetic anomalies  an 'act of kindness'. Proponents of new reproductive technologies don't seem to have  triggered on to the fact that the leading  cause of infant disability is poverty and that  genetic intervention cannot solve this problem.  The video examines the disability rights  movement's attempts to counter the myth  that differently abled people are incapable  of leading full and productive lives. By genetically selecting who does or doesn't have  a right to life through increasingly stringent  methods of 'quahty' control, society is, in effect, allowing big business to shape and control human evolution. The glimpses in the  film of the magnitude of the power of science  and industry made me realise how awesome  and chilling it is.  Perhaps the most disappointing thing  about these videos is that little mention is  made of the effects of NRTs on women of  colour or lesbians. No mention was made of  the recent Royal Commission scandal [see  box] but it is clear that the films reflect  concerns that women have with these technologies and the films are successful in exposing the reproduction technology industry for what it is at present—a powerful  industry based on commercial values over  which women have little control and threatens the whole fabric of human evolution.  Harriet Fancott ?  volunteer writer.  \ regular Kinesis  Whatever side you're on, the topic of new reproductive technologies (NRTs) is a contentious one. And confusing. Typically, most of the proponents of and scientists working  on NRTs are men, while most of the people directly affected by and really upset about  these technologies are women.  Most recently, NRTs reached the media's attention when the National Action Committee on the Status of Women (NAC) called for an inquiry into the Royal Commission  on New Reproductive Technologies and demanded a moratorium on all new reproductive  and genetic technologies until a public discussion of the physical and social implications is  democratically conducted.  Earlier this year, the federal government fired four members of the commission who questioned commission chair, Dr. Patricia Baird's control of information, hiring of researchers  and undemocratic handling of the commission. [See Kinesis, Feb 1992). Reports released  under the Access to Information Act revealed the Commission's research plan expressed  the professional and commercial interests of a small number of scientists, doctors and medical administrators linked hand in glove to the massive pharmaceutical sector.  Further, the concerns of women of colour, disadvantaged women, Native women, third  world women, women in the work place and disabled women were excluded from the commission's early reports. These are the women who stand to lose the most from the expansion of these technologies.  Some of the deeper issues that remain to be addressed arc:  • Loss of control: there is a potential threat of women's loss of control over their reproductive functions.  <t Informed Choice: women in IVF treatments are often unaware it is a risky, complex and  experimental procedure.  • Access and class: IVF treatments are available to a select few—'stable,' heterosexual  women under the age of 40. IVF treatments cost $4,500 to $5,000 per cycle in Canada  thereby excluding poor women, lesbians and single women.  o Infertility: research into other causes of infertility, such as sexually transmitted diseases,  workplace hazards, contraceptives, industrial and agricultural chemicals, and consumer  products have been ignored in favour of high-tech solutions.  » Surrogacy: in surrogacy, women have no legal rights over the child they are carrying.  There is great potential for the exploitation of women in poorer countries who might be  tempted by a fraction of the standard $10,000 fee for surrogacy.  o Big business: the role of pharmaceutical industries and their political clout should be  carefully considered.  » Ethics: there are many questions that need to be discussed regarding the manipulation,  freezing and donation of embryos and their use in research.  ■> Sex selection: the practice of identifying the sex of a fetus in a world where male children are preferred 95 percent of the time. Most recently, in Canada, and elsewhere, the  South Asian community has been targeted for this procedure.  >> Transgenerational consequences: the long-term consequences of hormonal regulating  drugs like Perganal need to be researched, as do the consequences of genetic manipulation on future generations.  • Funding: money spent, on NRTs could be redirect'  economic conditions.  ■ Eugenics: poor women, women of colour, and the diil'ci  sterilization or gene manipulation.  ■ Family relationships: the question of redefining mot  "■mothers" involved in the birth of the child.  ■ -The Future: a place where babies can be produced wit  ■ improvement of social and  abled could be targeted for  > include the various  t wombs or women?  KINESIS  July/Aug. 92 Arts
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX^
Saralee James:
Second-hand stories of suffering
REVOLUTIONS AND REVELATIONS:
A Survey Exhibition of the Work of
Saralee James
Presentation House Gallery, North Vancouver
June 12-July 19 1992
by Anita Bright
I had no idea what to expect when I
went to see Revolutions and Revelations,
a survey exhibition of photography by Saralee James. The advertising blurb billed her
as having an "adventurous spirit [that] led
her not only to dangerous and far away
places, but also to that most difficult of
journeys, the exploration of the limits and
possibilities of the inner self." I wondered
how this spirit would come out in her photographs, but more than that I wondered
about the woman herself.
As often happens with artists, especially
women artists, it, is oidy after their death
that they gain exposure. Saralee James died
suddenly in a car crash last summer. A
group of her friends and colleagues from the
video, film, photography and writing communities created the Saralee James Project
Committee and began the task of organizing
an exhibition. With the help of Presentation House Gallery, they put together Revolutions and Revelations.
The ppening night on June 11 was
hot. The gallery was crowded. Well-dressed
women and men drank wine and mingled.
The noise and sweltering heat did not add
to my enjoyment of the evening, but I was
determined to find out about the woman
whose memory this exhibition intended to
honour.
There was a photograph of James surrounded by children on one wall. The note
beside the photograph offered a sketch of
the artist's Ufe. Saralee James was born
in Calgary in 1932. In the 40s, she moved
with her family to Vancouver, where they
became involved with the Pretez school, a
progressive Jewish education centre. In the
early 50s she married, and had four children
by 'C4. Together with some of her friends,
Saralee worked to set up a school that would
provide a progressive education for her children. The New School was born.
In '73, she travelled to Mexico with a
friend and three of her children in a Volvo
station wagon. Also in the early 70s, James
divorced her husband, lost her middle class
status, discovered Gestalt, feminism and the
'human potential movement.' She was a
founding member of Reel Feelings, a feminist media collective active in the 1970's.
By '80, Saralee was a photography student at Emily Carr College of Art and Design, and had a paying job photographing
performers for BJ's, a Vancouver drag club.
Later in the 80s, James moved to New York
where her son was studying dance. She became concerned with the state of the homeless and was awarded a Canada Council
Grant "to film and record sound for images
of homelessness in New York."
What I had, then, was a brief sketch of a
woman whose concern with pressing social
issues such as the environment, child care
and homelessness seemed quite clear. However, as she had travelled quite a bit, I began to wonder how she had balanced her
concern for social issues with respect for cultures other than her own.
The first set of photographs I saw were
seven silverprints (black k white photos) titled "Cuba: Cockfight" taken in 1980. The
prints featured Cuban men, cocks, and the
cocks fighting. I didn't know what to make
of them—I wondered whether they fit in
as "revolution" or "revelation." The text
beside the pictures state oidy that James
befriended Margaret Randall on her trek
through Mexico, Cuba and Nicaragua. Randall has written extensively on the revolutionary struggles in South America. The
text did not. help me understand the photographs.
Across the room were 23 silverprints
taken between '81 and '83 entitled "BJ's."
They featured female impersonators and
drag queens getting ready to perform at the
club in Vancouver. Again, I wondered where
they fit in—revolution or revelation? So far,
both of the series dealt with male cultures
and rituals. While interesting and visually
evocative, I wasn't certain how they related
to the photographer herself.
In another room, 11 silverprints covered two walls. The series, "Guatamalan
Refugees," featured shots of Guatamalan
women and children Uving in poverty in
Mexico. I found this series difficult to take.
In writing about taking these shots, James
acknowledges that "it's hard to know how to
photograph when I find myself dropped in
to a refugee camp of Guatamalans in [Chiapas] Mexico." She then goes on to tell us
how "many thousands of rural Indian peasants were massacred by the Guatamalan
The cliche goes: A picture speaks
a thousand words. I would add: what words
do they speak and who do those words
belong to?
From Guatemalan Refugees 1985
army in its drive to crush growing opposition from the gueriUa forces" and how many
of them then fled to Mexico.
What concerns me were the actual photographs and the manner in which they
were displayed. There were five portraits of
women and their chUdren posing against a
wooden waU. All of them are smUing for the
camera. Some hold their chUdren up for the
camera. None of the chUdren are smUing.
None of the women are named and none
of their stories are told. They have become
simply objects to be stared at.
I stood in that hot room amid the mostly
white, apparently mostly middle class 'audience,' dissecting these women captured
in the moment. Perhaps I'm tired of these
images—I've seen them on TV, in magazines. I've heard second-hand stories of
other people's suffering to the point where
they have become plastic, nameless 'images.' James wrote about, not knowing
how to photograph these women. I wonder whether she should have photographed
t'hem at all. I wonder if she ever asked herself that.
Directly across from these pictures were
15 colour photos of wedding parties in
Queen Elizabeth Park in Vancouver. The
contrast between the refugees and the wedding shots was startling. It seemed to me
to highlight the excesses of some cultures
at the expense of others. In the wedding
photographs, Saralee James was at her
strongest. Here, she was dealing with "rituals of marriage and the subtle mechanism
by which the myth is perpetuated," and
demonstrating a keen eye for detail.
In one shot, a blonde bridesmaid in a
purple gown is caught looking pissed off inside a fancy car. Impeccably dressed chUdren sit Uke little adults in one shot. In another, they run through the grass in suits
and dresses. In a third, a Uttle girl dressed
in a floor length evening dress is seen puUing
away from her guardian's vise grip. She
seems unable to play out her role with the
elegance expected of her.
In contrast with the previous photo series, the composition of the wedding series is
mostly uuposed—or at least as unposed as
wedding pictures can be. The chUdren's energy that emerges in these snapshots stand
out against the attempts at serenity of the
adults. James should have stuck to photographs of a culture she understands and
is part of.
In two other series of photographs titled "Japan" and "The North\" portraits of
two elderly women struck me. In one, the
woman is Japanese; in the other, a Native
woman from PeUe Bay. Both sit with their
hands in front of them as they look matter-
of-factly at the camera. They are quite different, yet have remarkably similar expressions. Yet, again there are no names or personal stories attached. The women remain
anonymous and sUent.
Perhaps the very nature of photography,
of taking someone's picture, is an act of silencing. Perhaps it is the way a photograph
is taken. The cliche goes: a picture speaks a
thousand words. I would add: what words
do they speak and who do those words belong to?
After Revolutions and Revelations, it
is clear to me that, even with a picture, you
cannot tell someone else's story. In the end,
I didn't really get to know any more about
Saralee James, the woman, anyway—except
for a gUmpse through photographs of the
weddings. But by then, I didn't reaUy care
to.
Anita Bright is an SFU Student majoring in Women's Studies and English.
3 KINESIS   July/Aug.92 Arts  /^^^^^^%%^%^  Out on Screen:  A bigger piece of the pie  PORTRAIT OF A MARRIAGE  directed by Stephen Whittaker  19S9/90, 220 minutes  ORANGES   ARE   NOT  TH.E ONLY §  FRUIT £  directed by Beeban Kidron 5  1989.' 180 minutes §,  z  TOO HOT TO HANDLE f  Program of Shorts, Out on Screen if  Saturday, May 23, 1992 |  LOOKING AT LESBIANS I  Program of Shorts, Out on Screen g  Monday, May 25, 1992 <£  by Kathleen Oliver  At events billed as 'gay and lesbian.'  there's always a danger the lesbian commu-  •  nity will be underrepresented—just as men   .  tend to get a bigger piece of the pie than •  women in all things, generaUy. This was  happily not the case at Out on Screen, the  fourth annual lesbian and gay film festival  held in Vancouver in late May. In addition  to a. range of programming aimed specifically at lesbians, there were a number of  films and videos that were of equal interest  to both men and women.  Standing out in the latter category were  two superb BBC-TV serial adaptations of'  books: Portrait of a- Marriage, which  opened the festival, and Oranges Are Not  the Only Fruit. As a whole, the festival held many delights for anglophUes—as  well as these two features, there were several British documentaries, including two  about older lesbians, Women Like Us and  its sequel, Women Like That, and one  about lesbian country music fans in London,  Stand on Your Mau.  Vita Sackville-West (L) and Violet Trefusis (R)  Still from We're Talking Vulva  A sort of queer counterpart, to the lush  Edwardian landscapes of recent Merchant-  Ivory films Uke Howard's End, Portrait  of'a Marriage is a four-part serial adapted  for British television from Nigel Nicolson's  1973 memoir of his parents, Harold Nicolson and Vita Sackville-West. Despite its title, the film spends less time portraying the  marriage than it does tracing Vita's passionate, tempestuous affair with Violet Trefusis.  Vita and Violet have been friends since  chUdhood, but their love affair doesn't begin untU after Harold confesses to Vita she  is the oidy woman in his Ufe, but that there  are other men—a confession necessitated by  a venereal infection he contracts.  The relationship between Vita and Violet  is displayed in a manner surprisingly steamy  for television. But the problem is that it is  essentiaUy just 'display.' We see the women  travelling off on adventures together—Vita  abandoning her chUdren and dressing up as  a soldier so she and Violet can rent hotel  rooms as 'man and wife'—and lots of passion, but we are never given more than a  gUrapse of what forms the basis of their love.  Instead, the film focuses on the devastation  the affair wreaks on the Uves of the women's  husbands, who ultimately intervene to split  the women up.  P»Hrtii »«iMi) jniitti  her classmates by telling them about heU  and damnation), and Melanie, a fish-staU  worker Jess meets and faUs in love with.  Jess' natural inclination is to bring  Melanie into her world, so Melanie becomes  a good churchgoer as weU. She also becomes  Jess' lover. Mother eventuaUy finds out, and  whUe Melanie recants, Jess is left to face the  wrath of the church—she is brutaUy beaten  and tortured by people she has grown up  trusting.  She eventuaUy breaks away from her  mother's iron control and finds her own way  m*mm  Amid the endless shots of waves crashing  against rocks were extraordinary wooden  actors earnestly delivering lines like,  "Well, lesbians fuck too, don't they?"  Far from being a celebration of lesbian  love, Portrait remains a male vision, which  is not surprising, given the social climate of  upper class Britain in 1920. It is, nevertheless a thoroughly riveting look into the Uves  of fascinating people who knew they were  fascinating and behaved accordingly.  The other British feature, Oranges Are  Not the Only Fruit, explores Ufe at the  other end of the social scale in Britain.  Adapted for television by Jeanette Winter-  son from her 1985 novel, Oranges depicts  a fervently religious segment of a working  class community in the '60s and '70s.  Mother is a fundamentalist zealot, who  exerts extraordinary control over the Ufe  of her adopted daughter, Jess. Jess knows  that her destiny is to be a missionary,  but Mother is unable to protect her entirely from the intrusions of the outside  world—like school (where Jess terrifies aU  in the world, but not before another uncomfortable clash with the church. (Incidentally, accompanying tins feature was Christine Taylor's short film, The Last Supper.  Images of a topless Last Supper and crucifixion over a pyre of burning pornography  gave yet another twist on Christianity.)  Oranges, the book, contains a wealth  of material that is impossible to translate  to screen, but Kidron remains remarkably  faithful to Winterson's novel. The film is  a richly textured and extremely funny account of growing up queer in even queerer  circumstances.  Interestingly, the L-word isn't mentioned  once in either of the feature films, though it  is clear they depict lesbian love. However,  the programs of short, films, particularly  one collection of films entitled Too Hoi  to Handle, provided the requisite complement of explicitly lesbian- -and sexually  explicit—material.  Two videos by the Vancouver-based Kiss  and TeU CoUective, True Inversions and  Drawing the Line, artfully explore issues  of expression and censorship, and whether  real lovers look 'more real' than actors making love on camera, among Other issues  of representation and authenticity. How.  to Have a Sex Party provides step-by-  step instructions and explicit demonstrations that go on so long as to become tedious, especially as the partygoers represent  a false uniformity of size (thin) and colour  (white).  More interesting was Nice Girls Don't  Do It, a black-and-white documentary  about female ejaculation, in which we are  provided with repeated demonstrations (including instructions) accompanied by a  voice-montage soundtrack exploring a number of issues around tins taboo topic. Another icon-smasher was We 're Talking  Vulva, Shawna Dempsey's hUarious rap-  song cum anatomy-lesson. Wohosheni, by  local director Susan Harman, also breaks  boundaries, using gorgeous sepia-toned photography that engages the viewer sUently in  the act. of watching two women make love.  Another program, Looking at Lesbians,  provided less sexuaUy explicit explorations  of lesbian identity. The Changer: A  Record of the Times tells the story of  the beginnings of women's music record '  bel, Olivia Records. This film is deUghtful  for the unselfconscious passion its subjects  bring to their work—as weU as their charmingly dated hairdos and fashions. Though a  tad over-long in its exposition, the film is  an important document of the singing side  of the femimst 'revolution' of the '70s.  Jean Carlomusto's L is for the Way  You Look breezUy explores different facets  of activism, from marching to movie-making  to foUowing celebrities down the street.  (The word is out on Dolly Parton!) In this  video, as in many of the others, the central  theme is lesbian visibUity.  But visibUity can have its drawbacks.  The Too Hot to Handle program was preceded by a trailer for Claire of the Moon,  touted in the festival guide as "the only  35mm lesbian feature film slated for release in 1992." Let's hope this is true.  This sneak preview provoked a more vocal response—long, loud guffaws—than just  about anything else shown at the festival. Amid endless shots of waves crashing  against rocks were extraordinarily wooden  actors earnestly deUvering trite Unes Uke,  "WeU, lesbians fuck too, don't they?" The  main lesbian character bears a curious resemblance to a younger Carol Burnett and  seems to specialize in significant pauses. If  this is what HoUywood can come up with for  lesbian visibUity, I'd rather remain invisible.  Or, at least retain visibUity in Umited circles with certain aesthetic standards. The  abundance of high-quality work shown at  Out. on Screen is evidence that lesbians  don't need to—and shouldn't—dUute their  visions into marketable, HoUywood formulas. What's important—and what festivals  like Out on Screen make possible—is that  we see ourselves.  Kathleen Oliver is a regular Kinesis  writer who loves covering the dyke culture beat.  KINESIS $Sxxx***SS^****^*^^  Arts  Travel Guides for gals: in review  Have money? Will travel  by Lisa Schmidt  Most travel guidebooks claim to be written for a wide audience. Frequently, the  oidy indication that women might be included in tins audience is a paragraph or  two, almost a disclaimer, advising women to  stuff some tampons and contraceptive devices into their backpacks before traipsing  the globe.  Exceptions to this aU-too-famiUar tendency can be found in the Let's Go and  Real Guide collections, both written for  younger travellers and both covering the  how-to's of visiting specific destinations.  These books include the phone numbers for  gay and lesbian hot Unes, rape crisis centres  and women's bookshops as weU as Usts on  where to stay, what to eat and, in the case of  non-EngUsh speaking countries, what words  like 'bcisbol' or 'Unterwasche' might mean.  Happily, in the past five years a number  of guides for gals have appeared, satisfying  a growing need for concrete information on  finding local feminists, avoiding harassment  and staying healthy whUe on the move.  The foUowing are a sampling of travelogues recently published specificaUy for  women. Readers should be aware, however,  that, the information they contain is largely  limited to a white, nuddle-class audience. In  fact, most of the guides do not seem to have  been written with women of colour in mind  at all, limiting otherwise interesting travelogues.  HANDBOOK FOR WOMEN TRAVELLERS  by Maggie and Gemma Moss  UK: Piatkus, 1987  Handbook is perhaps the most useful of  these. Between the two of them, the Moss  sisters have been virtuaUy everywhere.  Twelve insightful chapters explore topics  that range from what to bring along, the  pros and cons of going alone and which  countries are the easiest for first, time solo  travel. (They recommended Japan, Malawi  and Nepal). As far as I know, the final chapter on coming home is the oidy mention of  the difficulty of returning from a trip ever  published in a travel guide. Here, the authors recount the increasing poUticization  of women traveUers and their new found  abiUty to better, sort through more bewU-  dering aspects of global travel and grasping  connections between first world poUtics and  third world realities.  WOMEN TRAVEL  edited by Miranda Davies and Natania  Jansz  USA: Prentice HaU, 1990  Compiled alphabeticaUy by country, Women Travel is aii anthology in which  dozens of personal accounts express how  individual countries are seen through the  eyes of women. Included in this book are  tales of cUmbing the Himalayas, motorcy-  cUng through Ghana and squatting a river  barge iii Paris. For each country, a short  note on language and special problems that  may arise supplement the text. If you want  to travel but are not sure where to go, this  book wUl give you plenty of ideas. Editors  Davies and Jansz selected articles based on  two criteria: that women be traveUing alone,  with other women, or with chUdren, and  thai traveUing be done outside the structures of organized tourism. Frankly, it's a  great read and has the potential to infect  any woman with an acute strain of travel  bug.  WAYWARD WOMEN  by Jane Robinson  UK: Oxford University Press, 1990  Where Women Travel brings together  contemporary travel writing, Jane Robinson's Wayward Women is a 344-page annotated bibUography of over 400 women  traveUers who wrote first-hand accounts  of their journeys. The Uves and works of  women chronicled between the covers of this  book are remarkable. Intriguing titles such  as Anne Boyle Hore's "To Lake Tanganyika  in a Bath Chair" and "Unprotected Females  in Norway: Or, The Pleasant Way of TraveUing There" by EmUy Lowe wUl likely grab  the interest of many travel Uterature readers.  THE BLESSINGS OF A  GOOD THICK SKIRT  by Mary RusseU  UK: Collins. 1988  A GIRDLE AROUND THE EARTH  by Maria Aitken  Constable: 1987  Relating the day to day Uves of women  wdio chose to see the world rather than crochet, by the fireplace, The Blessings of a  Good Thick Skirt introduces many of the  women listed in Wayward Women as weU  as many others Uke Anne Bonny and Mary  Read, Irish seafarers of the 18th century  who wore trousers and carried axes and pistols. Together, the two ran off to pirate the  seas of the Caribbean.  .f   i   r"»u  >      -  Similarly, A Girdle Around the Earth  describes the adventures of women who  climbed mountains, sailed the Atlantic and  made Christmas pudding on a Tibetan  mountainside. While both these books detail the Uves of interesting and unconventional women, they also focus narrowly on  the experiences of British women, reflecting  the fact that the history of women's wanderlust is often a history of colonialism.  ARE YOU TWO ... TOGETHER?  by Lindsy Gelder and Pamela Robin Bradt  USA: Random House, 1991  In addition, more and more guides catering  to travellers visiting specific comers of the  world are being published.  In Are You Two ... Together?, the  grand tour of Europe is seen anew from a  lesbian point of view. Part travelog, part  guide and very fun to read, this book could  also be described as a social commentary  on European attitudes towards lesbians and  gays. For instance, in the chapter on Copenhagen, the authors tell of approaching a  tourist, information kiosk-to ask if, as lesbians, they should anticipate any problems.  "This is Denmark," replies the woman behind the counter, barely containing her  mirth. The implication is that Copenhagen  may just weU be the most Uberal city in the  world regarding gays and lesbians.  OUR SISTER'S LONDON  by Katherine Sturtevant  USA: Chicago Review Press, 1990  On another track, Our Sister's London  a lively and thoroughly researched guidebook to walking tours in the EngUsh capital  designed from a feminist standpoint. Last  year. I had the opportunity to explore London's East. End using this book and doing  so made my stay quite memorable. Standing on the comer of Brushfield and Commercial Streets near Liverpool Street Station, I turned to the page describing the  aiea and was somewhat taken aback to discover that I was on the sight where Mary  KeUy, final victim of Jack the Ripper, was  last seen aUve. Needless to say, I quickly retraced my steps to a busier street.  WANDERING WOMEN'S PHRASE-  BOOK  by Alison O wings  USA: Shameless Hussy Press, 1987  Finally, if you get your hands on a copy  of Owings' Wandering Women's Phrase-  book, you'U be well equipped to dish out  verbal retorts in a variety of languages in  circumstances where you wish to make your  feehngs very, very clear.  Lisa Schmidt, once an exacto-knife  toting Kinesis volunteer, now lives the  comedies and tragedies of full-time  ■writing, mostly as book reviewer, in  Toronto.   PAqiiNq Women!  by Gabrielle Cordelia-Chew  Looking for a new read? Our review books for July include a range of theory, reference,  and fiction. In case we haven't already mentioned this, anyone who reviews a piece of fiction or poetry from Paging Women may keep the book. We hang on to non-fiction pubUcations for our reference Ubrary that is available to the public. For those struck by the  urge to review a title from a previous Paging Women, terrific! We encourage both budding and established feminist book reviewers to contact us. The foUowing books merit further attention, so call 255-5499 if you want to review one.  Cinderella On The Ball: Fairytales For Feminists by various writers. A collection of  stories with titles such as The Ugly Sisters Strike Back and After Reading the Swan  Prince which gives an idea of the kind of humour and irreverence you can expect  from these tales. For feminists of all ages. (Attic Press, DubUn 1991)  The Missing Sex: Putting Women Into Irish History by Margaret, Ward. This is one  of a series of pamphlets by Irish women thinkers, writers and activists called LIP.  Ward is a noted feminist historian who has argued here that the 'collective amnesia ' of Irish male historians must be exposed in order to enable us to appreciate  the vibrant and complex history of Irish women. (Attic Press, DubUn 1991)  Sex Exposed: SexuaUty and the Pornography Debate Edited by Lynne Segal and  Mary Mcintosh. In the past twenty years the debates surrounding pornography  and sexuality have become more complex and convoluted. British, Australian and  American writers address various dilemmas in this collection of essays.  Topics  tackled include censorship in relation to AIDS work, the 'alliance' between the  right and pro-censorship feminists, and a reconsideration of racism and pornography in Robert Mapplethorpe's photography. (Virago Press, London 1992)  The Colour of Love: Mixed Race Relationships compiled by Yasmin Aiibhai-Brown  and Anne Montague. Through numerous interviews, individuals, couples, and children of mixed heritage express their views and share some of their experiences.  Some say coming to terms with their mixed heritage has been empowering, while  others find pressures applied by a racist society riddled with fear and contempt extremely harsh, and are daily reminded of having 'crossed the line'". (Virago Books,  London 1992)  July Nights and Other Stories by J.A. HamUton. In this first collection of stories,  Hamilton writes about family—the institution of 'family'—and uses a variety of  voices to confront pain and abuse, violence and betrayal, as well as to articulate  the incredible bonds between people and the resilience of love. (Douglas fc Mclntyre,  Vancouver 1992)  The Promise of Paradise: A Woman's Intimate Story of the Perils of Life with Ra-  jneesh by Satya Bharti Franklin. In this account, the author traces her experiences  as a disciple of the Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh in India and the United States and  describes the development and eventual collapse of this spiritual movement from  the 60s to the 80s. (Station HiU Press, New York 1992)  Canada and Free Trade with Mexico: Crossing the Line Edited by Jim Sinclair with  an introduction by Judy Darcy. This is a timely, hard-hitting and accessible book  written by Canadians, Mexicans and Americans who arc deeply concerned with  the push for a new 'free trade deal'. If you feel confused or uninformed about how  the original agreement has changed our lives, exactly what a new deal will mean  for people throughout the continent and whether we can stop it, this book may answer some of your concerns. (New Star Books, Vancouver 1992)  > KINESIS Ju'y/Aug- « Arts  ,#m*m*%^m2^m^  Wo Forwarding Address  Demystifying the writer  NO FORWARDING ADDRESS  by Elisabeth Bowers  Douglas and Mclntyre, Vancouver, 1991  by Shelley Hine  It was with anticipation that I began to  read Vancouverite Elisabeth Bowers' second  novel No Forwarding Address. I'd read  her first book, Ladies Night five years ago  and remembered being impressed enough  with the quality of the story to wonder from  time to time when she would write another.  Bowers is a mystery writer with the same  kind of pacing and depth to her stories and  characters as women mystery writers who  have been around a lot longer, Uke Sue  Grafton or Sara Paretsky. Her sleuth, Meg  Lacey, is refreshingly femimst. She's a single mother with two teenagers, has a longtime lover she chooses not to Uve with because of incompatible styles, and "for the  last ten years, has been scrounging a Uving  as a private investigator."  The plot is simple and familiar, yet Bow-   ',  ers' compelling style of writing and sociological analysis give it enough intricacy to  make No Forwarding Address a real page-  turner. That the story is set. in Vancouver  '  is an added bonus. I find it almost thriUing   :  to read a weU-written book and be able to  identify with the setting.  In short, Sherry, Hovey has left her hus- ■  band and now she and her young son Mark  are missing. Her sister hires Meg Lacey to  find her, worried that Sherry's precarious  mental state might cause inadvertent harm  to either herself or her son. As the story unfolds, a cast of characters emerges, diverse  in both race and class, through which we  find that Sherry's disappearance has much  more behind it than simple whim.  Writer Elisabeth Bowers was recently in  Vancouver from her home on GaUano Island  doing promotion for No Forwarding Address, and I got a chance to talk with her.  I've often thought, that writing a mystery  novel would be a tremendous undertaking  and saw tins as a rare opportunity to ask  some of the questions I've always wanted to  ask about what it. takes to put one together.  Shelley Hine: It's rare to emerge onto  the scene with a book as good as your first  mystery novel, Ladies Night. Is this the  first thing you'd written?  Elisabeth Bowers: No, I'd been writing  for a long time, and in fact, was writing  mainstream fiction. I finished a novel, sent  it out, got back critiques, and became totally discouraged and traumatized by that  whole process. So I decided to write a mystery novel because I thought it would be less  traumatic for me. I wouldn't worry about  producing great Uterature or great art—It  would be 'just a mystery novel'. I thought  that would be easier, and indeed it was.  Shelley: Are you a mystery fan?  Elisabeth: Yes, to a certain extent but  not a complete addict.  Shelley: What writer influenced you  most?  Elisabeth: Well, I grew up on the British  mystery writers, like Dorothy Sayers and  Margery AlUngham, and those 30s writers  were actually my favorites. I hadn't read the  American feminist mystery writers when I  started, and now, of course, read them.  Shelley: Out. of those, would you say you  have a favorite?  Elisabeth: I think my favourites are stiU  the British ones, PD James, Liza Cody ...  Shelley: When did you think, or begin  to tlunk that you could write a book?  Elisabeth: WeU, when I was about 27, I  was doing my 900th boring job and thinking, I don't, know, could I just come up with  .some other way to make a Uving? I knew  at the time writing was not a way to make  a living, but decided I would try writing fiction. I started with a short story because  it seemed inconceivable to write a novel. I  couldn't imagine how people wrote novels.  But actually, you just start.  Shelley: And it takes its own momentum?  Elisabeth: Yeah. You figure it out as you  go. It's not as hard as it seems somehow. Although, it is big and does take a long time.  Elisabeth: WeU, first, I just wanted to be  published, but I'm certainly glad that I'm  being published in Canada. The American  market, of course, is a huge market, so one  can't regret getting published in the United  States, but I am really glad to be published  here too.  Shelley: It's also good to educate people  in the United States about Canada.  Elisabeth: Oh always, because Seal is  putting out this international crime series, right, but I have to change aU my  speUings from Canadian speUings to American speUings, and it's interesting the Uttle frictions that go on. They edited Ladies  Night very heavUy. They wanted a more  fast-pacedyiction-based novel and, that be- •  be sort, of Uke Meg Lacey, and have two  teenage kids. Now I guess I see that I come  off as more heavy-hitting feminist than I  was aware of.  Shelley: It's unusual to find character^  as culturaUy diverse as yours are in mystery novels by white authors. I'm assuming  that you have done some unlearning ra<'  work?  Elisabeth: Yes. It's very important to  me to portray the multicultural character  of Canadian cities. I would Uke people to  see the Canadian cities as being Uke that,  and being interesting because they are Uke  that. So, I'm trying consciously to include  as many different characters as I can. And  it is difficult because I'm not writing about  "I especially enjoy dispensing with the sort of  know-it-all bullshit that male detective types  get into..."  -Sheila Bowers  Shelley: How do you write? Do you out-  Une a plot and characters beforehand?  Elisabeth: For mystery novels, I definitely do. I think, with a mystery novel, you  have to know exactly where you're going  and who's committed the crime. You spend  endless time working out the plot and I find  plots very difficult.  Shelley: Do you make up much of it as  you go along?  Elisabeth: Yes, you get better ideas and  you change from them, or mostly you find  holes. As you go along, you suddenly tlunk,  "Oh no, that person couldn't possibly have  been there," so you have to rewrite tins and  rewrite that, and that goes on right to the  end.  Shelley: Do you consciously stay away  from focusing your characters on someone  who might recognize themselves?  Elisabeth: Oh, for sure. Or you'll just  take a piece of them. You'U tlunk, weU I  want someone who looks sort of Uke so and  so, has that kind of presence, but isn't in  any other way Uke them. At least, this is how  it happens in my own writing. But sometimes I look at. a character Uke Ed Jeffries in  No Forwarding Address, and tlunk, weU, I  don't know anybody like that. I don't, know  where he came from.  Shelley: There is almost a glut of them  from the United States now, but the fictional Canadian female detective is a rarity. How did Meg Lacey happen to break  through?  Elisabeth: Well, when I first wrote  Ladies Night in 1984, I hadn't read any of  the other professional female PI stories. But  it is difficult to get published no matter how  good [a book] is. I was actually helped by  people ... in fact Talon Books was the one  who referred me, saying we're not publishing tins kind of book, but why don't you try  Seal Press in Seattle.  Shelley: Did you want to be published in  Canada specifically, or did you just want to  be published?  ing my first novel, I basicaUy went along  with everything. But in retrospect, when I  read British mysteries, which are incredibly  successful also, they're not Uke that at aU.  They're not aU tins fast-paced, dramatic action.  Shelley: Yeah, that's very American.  Elisabeth: It is very American, and to a  certain extent I feel a Uttle bugged that I've  been pushed in that direction, which wasn't  my original method of writing. It's interesting how you get a Uttle 'Americanized' if  you go with an American publisher.  Shelley: Your writing is quite pohticaUy  influenced. Where did this come from? Have  you been active in the women's movement  or in other movements?  Elisabeth: WeU, I've been a feminist for  a long time. I'm not aU that active but it  seemed obvious to me that one would go  with a woman PI when you consider how  many women read mystery novels. And  also, I wanted to present the world from a  woman's point of view and to explore the  differences between how a woman wUl behave in those kinds of situations and with  certain kinds of people as opposed to how a  man will behave. Because it is quite differ-  I especially.enjoy dispensing with the sort  of knqw-it-all buUshit that male detective  types get into, where you have to know everything, you're always smarter than whoever you're talking to, you're always more  savvy and more cool.  Shelley: So you're trying basicaUy to  ground yourself in reality and make your  character somebody women can relate to?  Elisabeth: Yes, in fact, when I started  writing, I was definitely thinking of a much  more Uberal mainstream audience. I was actually quite surprised that I ended up getting published by a femimst publisher because I didn't really tlunk of my book as  being that 'feminist'. I was really trying to  get. the Chatelaine readers, whom I thought  of as reading mysteries, people who would  people that I know as well as I know people from my own cidture, and so I'm trying very consciously not to be writing from  their point of view because I know nothing  about their point of view.  Shelley: Sara Paretsky endorses Ladies  Night, which is a pretty big deal for a first  novel. Was it a surprise to be accepted into  the 'big leagues' so quickly?  Elisabeth: Yes, although at the time I  didn't even know who Sara Paretsky was.  My publisher said "oh, we got Sara Paretsky", and I went, "who's Sara Paretsky?"  Now, of course, I do know.  Shelley: Are you able to support yourself with your writing?  Elisabeth: No, I work part-time in a post  office two days a week. But I don't mind  working part-time, because writing is a very  solitary thing, it's sort of Uke I'd never meet  anybody.  Shelley: Do you intend to continue writing mystery books?  Elisabeth: WeU, I probably wUl. There'  a tremendous financial incentive to keep  writing mystery novels and I do have some  ideas in the back of my mind that I would  like to explore.  Shelley: Do you have any words of advice for aspiring women mystery writers out  there'?  Elisabeth: You have to be very persistent and stubborn. You have to keep sending [your manuscript] out, and keep sending  it again and again and again. I suspect there  are more good writers that are not pub-  Ushed than are published because I think  it's rare to be able to accept the criticism  and keep on going. It's very hard to get pub-  Ushed and I don't tlunk it has a heU of a lot  to do with whether you're any good [but]  with whether or not they can seU you—I'm  quite cynical about it, reaUy. So, the main  thing is to keep trying and not give up.  Shelley Hine is a first-time Kinesis  writer, living in Vancouver, who thinks  mystery writing is its own form of art.  KINESIS -WAug.92 .xx^nS^S^^xxxx^xxxx^  Arts  Reviews:  A polyphony of poetry  JUSTICE  by Beverley Daurio  Goderich, Out: Moonstone Press, 19S8  BRIDGING THE GAP  by Margaret Saunders  Moonstone Press, 1990  ABSORBING THE DARK  by Beryl Baigent  Moonstone Press, 1990  by Eunice Brooks  As an older femimst poet, I'm always  •xcited when a publisher decides to pub-  lish work by middle-aged women. So, thank     ]  you Moonstone Press for paying attention.    • j  The three books I review here are Moonstone products—with a Uttle  help from     j  the Ontario Arts CouncU and the Canada      j  Council--books that look good and feel      j  solid  in   the  hand.  And  there's  nothing  throwaway about these examples of what we      j  can do- given funding.  However, apart from sharing a publisher, i  the only thing these books have in common j  is the word 'poetry.' Each is unique. Bever- j  ley Daurio writes prose poems, which look 1  like short stories, with metaphor and irony _ |  blazing forth on every page. Margaret Saun- -S |  ders writes haiku, sparse and forlorn as a " |  Scottish llioor. Beryl Baigent's latest, collec- 'H j,:  tion of long poems is mystical and plulo- "£,1  sophical, dwelling on the many aspects of "^ |  feminism that men hate and fear. ■§.]  Justice, a collection of 14 sketches by  Daurio, looks at the effects on women  of 'ownership' by men. From Ellen, who  cringes each time Harry whispers "mine" as  he hugs her at a party, to Vanessa, a brUUant  high school student, who cannot go to university because she is guardian to her mentally challenged brother—Daurio screams:  "women are not, free."  In the poem "Covenant," Elsie remembers options not taken as she bathes her  husband Bill. She reflects on how marriage  took her out of the world, as she cUmbs int»  bed with him and pulls his arms around her.  With some surprise, I realize she plans to  sleep with BiU as usual, although he had a  heart attack earlier in the day and is surely  dead. Chilling or what?  Some of the pieces seem difficult because  they lack punctuation and upper case letters. The title piece "Justice" is Uke that.  In using tins Uterary device, Daurio slows  the reader over material that cannot be absorbed in a rush. The poem is written from  inside the mind of a woman, esme, who is  shding into a moral abyss, esme may or may  not. have murdered the man who tortured  her. She is so detached from her core that  she thinks in third person. In particular, one  line lingers and haunts me: "They talked  about justice and she told him how she had  always known that she wasn't going anywhere."  This is a book I want- to keep, read again  in a few months and perhaps again in a year.  I especially recommend people watchers, sociologists, psychologists, and lovers of words  to read it. WhUe Daurio has published two  chapbooks (booklets), Justice is her first  major volume of fiction and prose poetry.  Her background as an editor has served  weU—there is not one superfluous word.  Bridging the Gap is about an im-  migrant experience. Saunders arrived in  Canada by boat in 1952 at a. time when  many women foUowed their men to any  place work was avaUable for their husbands.  Any   expectation   she   had   that   Canada  July/Au§T-92   t -*^Sfc, ..". •  would be much Uke Scotland because of  a common language tie and the Commonwealth was soon dashed.  Her straight-from-the-gut poems seal the  bargain many new Canadians make of embracing opportunity while never losing sight  of heritage. She brags:  "I pose beside  each new appliance,  smile on cue  send  picture after picture  back home."  I see her here justifying her emigration,  smirking in "picture after picture" of mate-  '     -altli.  Beryl Baigent  But, in "Steps", there is yet another portrait of Saunders showing deprivation of  summer sun  ! Cover  illustration   , l from Justice  One poem expresses sadness over a first  child born without extended fanuly gathered to celebrate. She compares her solitary  bedside rose to her hospital roommate's  abundance of flowers. Marriage faUs to remain whole under the stress of being a family of two people and their chUdren, with  the man working a steady afternoon shift.  Alonencss is emphasized again when, after the wedding of her youngest daughter.  Saunders returns to an empty house to sleep  with a teddy bear—a reminder of motherhood continuing. This is reinforced in the  final poem. Saunders, visiting her sister in  the homeland, suddenly sees the ocean between her two countries in its entirety:  "We never did  nor can we now  re-settle in the old country  leave our children  and their children  settled down in theirs."  She speaks to someone Uke me, who hstened to a lifetime of reminiscence about my  old country and wondered why mv parents  stayed.  Saunders has published three; chapbooks  of haiku as well as fiction for chUdren.  This C3-poem collection is her life in synthesis. While it lacks the punch of Justice and the mystery of Absorbing the  Dark, the images are strong and the language bittersweet. Bridging the Gap is  about acceptance something I don't have.  It's the kind of book I might give someone  who is living her adult life somewhere different from her place of childhood.  Absorbing the Dark is Baigent's vision  quest. She writes out of a Celtic heritage.  but fuses universal myths and phUosophy  in her work. In her introduction, she writes  that her poems "are about innocence, momentary truth, dissolution, and a constant  search for the permanence of spirit."  The book is divided into four parts,  each with an introduction: The Great Goddess; Woman as Power Channel; Woman as  Crone/Dragon; and Woman as Sacred Vessel. Her 'Goddess' is everywoman, a trinity  of virgin, mother and crone, changeable as a  chameleon and responsible for the creation  of life.  In one poem, "The Blight One," selected  detaUs, such as the cellar floor, connect the  home to Earth, making it holy. Comparing  her grandmother to The Mother, Baigent  writes:  .  "She was shade and shelter  spreading her bounty through  ancestry and miUeu.  Out of her body she created  tissue and bone  within her mind she dowsed  for stories  to water my roots."  That is how it was with me and both  of my grandmothers. I never could hear  enough of their Uves to sate me. Then they  died, leaving me to delve on my own, as  Baigent, has. She finds magic everywhere.  The poUutcd and almost dead Lake Erie  seems an unhkely place to get in touch with  one's spiritual self, but the poet finds five  smooth stones there "with which to conquer  the world." Perhaps these Ontario stones  remind her of the ones her father sent her  mother from the field where he worked the  land as his way of showing love.  Baigent writes a sequence of 21 stanzas  in the second section, each related to birth,  naming, and myth embodied in her family.  The poem "Naming" contains her riddle:  "Then came the names.  Two grandfathers, father, but where  Did the fourth originate?  Was it in honour of JFK  The Pope, the apostle, or my parents'  Landlord a miserly bastard  Who raised the rent every time  He fixed the porch steps?  Maybe my .mother thought he could  Be moUified as 'God ... is gracious and  WUl protect his own.' "  Baigent does not. write about the importance of naming women, or the effect a name  has on the person who carries it.  Another poem. "Chernobyl Summer," is  unsettling and may motivate those of us  who experience eco-guilt. Yes. Beryl, you  wrote your poem and my response is that  I'll do' my best to make certain another  Chernobyl does not occur. I'm switching my  lamp off I shall read your book by sunlight.  The third part. "Woman as Crone/Dragon,'' is the most, powerful section. We see  the crone as necessary to renewal:  "I come from  Life Old  I seek  Life New."  Baigent. writes about, anorexia in the context of Christianity and all those bony  saints. Her theme slides through dream and  nightmare to "Rededicatiou", a poem about  rebuilding the old matriarchal religion and  the beauty of rebirth.  I like tliis book and read it twice in the  time it took to write tins review. The writing is layered with meaning and I gain new  Eunice Brooks is a middle-aged poet  viili,    a    special   interest   in    women's Arts  ////////////////////////^^^^  Women and science:  Despite all the  titit  DESPITE THE ODDS:  Essays on Canadian Women  and Science  Edited by Marianne Gosztonyi Aiidey  Montreal Quebec: Vehicle Press, 1990  by Janet IMicol  Women pursue "a room' of their own" to  do more than write, draw or study—we also  invent. Women lay claim to patents for inventions ranging from the bed pan to a computer for the physicaUy challenged. But we  arc often hidden inventors, write RacheUe  Sender Beauchamp and Susan A. McDaniel.  two of about 30 contributors to a scries of  fascinating essays on Canadian women and  science, edited by Marianne Gosztonyi Ain-  ley and appropriately titled Despite the  Odds.  In their essay, "Women Inventors in Canada: Research and Invention," Beauchamp  and McDaniel say women often did not get  patents for their inventions in the past for  legal or commercial reasons, or occasionaUy  because a patent in a woman's name woidd  not be taken seriously. EventuaUy, in 198C, a  small group of women in Waterloo, Ontario  formed the "Women's Inventors' Project"  with a view to providing collective support  to women inventors in Canada.  Historical and biographical essays in Despite the Odds further Ulustrate the glaring absence of collective support in the Uves  of many Canadian women scientists. Since  the ISOOs. only a small number of women  scientists achieved career goals wdiUe most  have been partiaUy or wholly denied a place  alongside their male colleagues. Women accepted less qualified positions, made contributions through their husbands' careers, did  volunteer or independent work, or gave up  careers in science altogether to become full-  time homemakers.  The women in these essays tended to respond to injustice in an individualistic way.  Women of the "leisure class" of the 1800s  and university educated women of the early  to mid-1900s were isolated from each other  and generally did not form or access advocacy groups. Stories of their attempts to advance, achieve and be recognized may inspire and anger the reader—there were .so  many brick walls.  In one story, a scientist denied a leave of  absence from her employer in 1926, sought  the assistance of a women's group. AUce  Wilson, a geologist, wanted to get her PhD  and was tired of watching the men at work  move ahead of her. She went to the Canadian Federation of University Women who  fought and won on her behalf the right to  an unpaid leave.  jiooh^anfrl  new and  gently used books  Fei  Philosophy - Poetry  Native - General  Open daily 11am-7pm  Coffee Bar  1020 Commercial Drive  Vancouver BC V5L 3W9  (604) 253-1099  Bonnie Murray  Cynthia Brooke  Despite the Odds also recounts the up-  liill struggle women faced to become doctors. At the turn of the century, women  were stiU denied admission into medical  schools in North America. As a result, two  short-lived but successful women's medical  schools were set up in Ontario. Out of one of  these schools came a unique program in its  time—a cUnic addressing the health needs  of low-income v  Despite the Odds contains historical re- -%  search on the technological and social sci- <  ences as well. Writers examine women's -g  roles in photography, advertising and soci- J  ology. 5  While most of the women described in 5  the biographical essays died before society g  recognized their achievements, there were z.  rare exceptions. Margaret Newton (1887- >.  1971), a plant pathologist, made major con- -g  tributions to the cause and control of plant |  diseases, and received recognition for her j  work at both national and international lev- g-  . els. Similarly, Dr. Blossom Wigdor became °>  . head of the Centre of Gerontology (the  study of aging and the problems of aging)  at the University of Toronto in 1979 after  enduring sexism and anti-semitic poUcies at  McGiU University.  Alison Wilson...was  tired of watching  the men at work  move ahead of her.  Editor Marianne Ainley acknowledges  the limitations of Despite the Odds in that  the experiences of many women in science  are excluded in this anthology. In fact, essays focus on Canadian women of middle  class and European heritage. Stories of the  contributions to science of women of other  heritages and jobs not requiring academic  traimng would have given the reader a more  inclusive picture.  The final segment of the collection looks  at contemporary issues, reflecting the in-  iiueiice of feminist and class analysis on  the science community. For instance, in one  essay, "On Being a Woman and Studying  Math," Louise La-fortune, a mathematician  and teacher in Quebec, attempts to find  ways of demystifying math, particularly  for women. She also helps "mathophobes"  (people experiencing math anxiety) to increase their self-confidence in this field.  Lafortune writes that she seeks to change  attitudes about math. "Such an approach  Avould have a greater chance of reaching  girls, who do not relate to the way math  is currently presented: as competitive, rational, objective, rigid and lacking in emotion," she writes.  Karen Messing, a genetics specialist in  Quebec, describes her radicaUzation in her  essay. "Feminist Studies into Genetic Hazards in the Workplace." She was part of  a research team in 1978 that Unked up  with a trade union to examine health and  safety issues in the workplace. The employer  and members of the science community  were not sympathetic. Karen has since organized a feminist research team, '"Groupe  de recherche-action en biologie du travaU"  (GRABIT). The group deals primarUy with  women's health problems within women's  employment ghettos.  In the concluding essay, writer GiUian  Kranias looks at "Women and the Changing  Faces of Science." She quotes Karen Messing, who points out the connection between  the sex (male) and class (upper and middle) of the majority of scientists and the research that is undertaken in the name of  From the cover of  Despite the Odds  •science.' As a result, there is Uttle research  on "occupational exposures that present a  risk to the nursing mother, alternate (non-  hormonal) treatment for the discomforts of  menopause, how a woman can give herself  a safe (and, where necessary, secret) abortion, what work postures increase the UkeU-  hood of menstrual cramps, and how a low-  income family can provide itself with nutritious meals."  On the other hand, says Messing, "there  is plenty of research supported by drug  companies, on drug therapy for menopausal  women, by government on what racial  and income groups have most abortions,  by employers on the relationship between  women's physiological cycles and productivity and by private charity on how to prevent.  a rich fat-laden diet from causing heart dis-  Messing's feminist critique sends an empowering message to present day scientists—if they're Ustening—that shows how  new perspectives could lead to positive  transformations in a field which has a profound influence on our future. I beUeve that  in this anthology, editor Marianne Ainley  succeeds in bringing to Ught important and  groundbreaking information on the work of  women in science in language accessible to  most of us.  Janet Nicole is a freelance writer who  teaches ESL at public schools.  ff  W/B  VANCOUVER  WOMEN'S  BOOKSTORE  Come celebrate our  19th Anniversary  Saturday, July 25th  15% off  everything  Monday - Saturday  11:00-5:30 pm  315 Cambie Street  kVancouver, BC  V6B 2N4  (604)684-0523  KINESIS ^ly/Aug. 92 23 LETTERS  Dear Reader,  Kinesis loves receiving mail. Please get  your letter to us by the 18 th of the  month.  If you can, keep the length to about 500  words (if you go way over, we might  edit for space).  Hope to hear from you soon.  love,  Kinesis  We've got  a fan!  Thanks for running the story '"GLC Cutbacks mean layoffs" in the Movement Matters section of your June issue.  The Gay and Lesbian Centre has a nondiscriminatory policy, as you know, which  means many users of the centre are men. So  we were delighted and surprised that Kinesis picked up and ran the story of our funding woes.  We wanted to let you know that, as a result of publicity both in Angles and Kinesis, we have rccieved a number of donations  and letters of support. However, the biggest  donation to date has come from one of your  leaders. In her letter, she mentions having  read the story in Kinesis and, as a teacher  who often uses the information and material available in our centre, was concerned  the GLC was having to consider serious reduction in delivery of services to the community.  SPEAK  SPEAK is a South African magazine that puts  women's liberation on (he agenda of (he South  African liberation struggle. Through in(ervlews,  photographs, poetry, and stories, South African  women speak out about (heir oppression as  women, and how they are fighting lo change It.  Articles focus on black working class women's  lives in (he townships and in (he factories. They  talk about (heir struggles to challenge tradition in  (he home, and (heir exploitation in the factories.  They talk about the fight to be recognised as  equals by their comrades in community  organisations and In unions. They talk about a  new non-racist, non-sexist, democratic South  Africa where women are no longer beaten and  where women take up their rightful place as  leaders alongside men.  Are you Interested In keeping up to dale with all  of tills? And supporting this non-profit-making  magazine? Then subscribe lo SPEAK!  Send US $20 to:  SPEAK, P.O. Box 45213, Mayfair, 2018,  Johannesburg, South Africa.  The response so far has been encouraging  but the crisis is far from over. With the support of friendly organisations like Kinesis  and individuals Uke your reader, we're hoping we can overcome this setback and begin  to move forward.  On.  again, our ]  apprecia-  In pride.  .Mary Brookes,  Gay and Lesbian Centre  Vancouver, BC  Golly gee whiz  'what a guy'  Kinesis,  I seldom write letters to the editor but  I feel I must after I read the fine investigative piece on the Creston polygamous group  in your June issue called "Breaking the Silence."  What made me do it was turning on the  TV news last week and seeing a Vancouver  station sucking up to one of the leaders. It  was lidndboggling to watch supposedly investigative male reporters lap up a randy  old billy goat's propaganda.  Seemingly stage-managed, they let him  spout. all the patriarchial, hitlerian chche's  such as giving 'pure' people his seed—  45 [chUdren], and he bragged about some  of them being born a few hours apart—  submissive wives, fanuly (sic) values, his  version of Mormon Christianity. He even  had a group of Uttle girls marched out to  sing his praises.  I thought reporters were supposed to ask  hard uncomfortable questions, get their foot  behind doors, block out faces if they had  to, but. get the people talking who weren't  brain-washed. Incredulous, I watched and  Ustened whUe the reporter did his 'goUy gee  whiz, ain't he a great old patriarch' routine.  There was an incest survivor and break-  way victim on the show but she was given  short sluft and Uttle time to tell her story.  My husband, who was also watching, at  first tended to blame the women for putting  up with it. But if you are bom into it and  surrounded by domineering adults, what  chance do you have.  Shame on the Attorney General's Department!  Sincerely,  Winona Baker,  author of Beyond the Lighthouse, Moss-  Hung Trees, Not So Scarlet A Women.  Nanaimo, BC  desktop publishing services  • business cards  • newsletters  • letterheads  • brochures  • flyers  • logos  Gabrielle Mayer  872-8780  What was  my crime?  Kinesis,  It's a year since I attended WestWord  VII, the summer school writing retreat for  women held in North Vancouver. I stiU feel  intellectually gang-raped. StiU hurt. StiU  angry.  Bloodlcssly, I was ostracized from the  first, without knowing why. It wasn't as if  I had stormed in and started shooting my  mouth off. Nor was it as if I were engaged  in conversation, my views tested and found  wanting. If that had been so, I feel sure we  could have established some common points  of reference, some grounds for a feeling of  kinship. Instead, it was Uke being at the  party from heU. What, I wondered alone in  my hot, cpuiet dorm room wldle the others  laughed and chattered down the haU, was  my crime?  I didn't say much from the beginning, but  I felt, even from the opening dinner, unwelcome. As time wore on, it became clear  that there was oidy one pohticaUy correct  thing for me to do—shrivel up and die. Instead, I left a week early (and was not reimbursed. Later, I received a standard foUow-  up package on which one of the organizers  had scrawled. "Sorry it wasn't your 'cup of  tea.' ") If that was a tea party, so was the  assault, by women on Burcu Ozdemir, who  brought her son to the nightclub [see "New  Year's Eve Bash" Kinesis, Feb., 1992].  The level of sanctimony was nauseating. I  felt palpably despised for wearing a skirt instead of the de rigueur head-to-toe black.  Clearly, these people thought you were what  you wore. At one point, when I entered a  room wearing a skirt, a woman looked me  up and down and said loudly in front of  the others, "Think I'll go get my vibrator."  Speaking as a stripper, I've seen better behaviour from men in bars.  I thought we were convening as women  who had an interest in writing, to share our  own views by means of lucid, rational explication and in turn, Usten to those of others.  Silly me. As it was, to bill it simply as "A  Writing Workshop for Women' is mislead-  ing. That, makes it sound as if writing is the  prime selection criterion. But perhaps my  selection was an error on WestWord's part.  Or perhaps—and I can't help but suspect.  this I was selected as a form of entertainment., a token dupe. The organizers knew I  was a stripper. By appearing so stressed, so  intelligent, so complicated, so vulnerable-"  in .^liort. so real I had a sense of having  failed them. Was I supposed to turn up in  a platinum beehive hair-do, I wondered, a  stretch-leopard jumpsuit encasing my pneumatic curves?  It was touching to see how they closed  ranks in discriminating against me regardless of their class backgrounds. For  some were of the starved-from-Uving-on-  politics persuasion, whUe others were driving around in late model cars and vans with  bubble windows, having married wealthy  men and, on divorcing, taken up lesbianism  with great enthusiasm.  If I seem to have little respect for them,  it is because they violate my poUcy: I respect people who respect me, who return  my basic kindness and openness with a Uttle good faith of their own. Instead, they  slut on me. Toward the end, I was told  the reason for my shunning. Quote: "You're  too vulnerable. It makes the others nervous." I must say that tlus "ugliness,"this  ever-so-socially-unacceptable vulnerabUity.  is the source of every seed that germinate*  in me, every plant that springs from me and  leaches for the sun on its tall, strong stalk.  Being gay doesn't automaticaUy make  you a saint. It may make you long-suffering,  but even we 'straights' have our difficulties  in this patriarchal society. (Did you think I  was stripping for the sheer, exhilarating joy  of it? Shame on you). However, if suffering  doesn't translate to tolerance and compassion, what have you learned? Belonging to a  minority makes you a representative of your  group whether or not you choose to accept  the role. It's a drag, but that's the way it  goes. As a product of two Jewish parents, I  am long used to being held accountable for  everything from circumcising baby boys to  beating up on Palestinians.  I deserve an apology but I doubt. I'U get  it. You may take this letter, dear reader, as  a kind of caveat emptor.  Sincerely,  Diana Atkinson  Nelson, BC  WestWord in  defence  Kinesis,  Unfortunately, Diana Atkinson's letter  and notification of it arrived just before  press time so there wasn't time to consider  a full response, particularly without input  from the Women & Words Board.  One staff person from West Word VII was  contacted and was shocked by this letter.  Staff were aware that Diana was feeUng uneasy and were as supportive as possible—  and observed that some of the other students were also supportive. Her departure, a  couple of days before conclusion of the program, was understood as Diana needing to  do so.  Sincerely,  West Coast Women k Words  North Vancouver, BC  VOLUNTEER PICNIC  All past, present & future Vancouver Status of Women & Kinesis  volunteers are invited to our first annual "Pat on the Back" Picnic.  Meet other volunteers and enjoy free food & fun for women and  children.  Thursday July 23 3-8 pm  Trout Lake Park  (Victoria & 13th)  look for the VSW banner  Bring your own BUMP  (blanket, utensils, mug & plate)  Call 255-5511 for details  24 I^INESIS July/^^f_ /////////////////////^^^^^  /////////////////////^^^^^  BULLETIN BOARD  READ THIS  AU Ustings must be received no later than  the 18th of the month preceding pubhcation. Listings are limited to 50 words and  should include a contact name and telephone number for any clarification that may  be required. Listings should be typed or  neatly handwritten, double-spaced on 8 1/2  by 11 paper. Listings wiU not be accepted  over the telephone. Groups, organizations  and individuals eligible for free space in the  BuUetin Board must be, or have, non-profit  objectives. Other free notices will be items  of general pubUc interest and wiU appear at  the discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $8 (plus $0.56 GST) for  the first 50 words or portion thereof, $4  (plus $0.28 GST) for each additional 25  words or portion thereof. Deadhne for classifieds is the 18th of the month preceding  pubhcation. Kinesis will not accept classifieds over the telephone. AU classifieds must  be prepaid.  For BuUetin Board submissions send  copy to Kinesis Attn: BuUetin Board,  #301-1720 Grant Street, Vancouver, B.C.  V5L 2Y6. For more information call 255-  5.499.  EVENTS  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis? We want to get involved  with you too. Help plan our next issue.  Come to the Writers' meeting on Tues.,  Aug. 4 (for the Sept. issue) at 7 pm at  our office, #301-1720 Grant St. If you  can't make the meeting, call 255-5499.  l\lo experience necessary, all women welcome.  NOT JUST ANOTHER PAGE  The Not Just Another Page Collective  welcomes all First Nations women and  women of colour who are past, present  and possibly future Kinesis volunteers to  our next meeting on Thur., Aug 6 at  7:30 pm. For info on location and to arrange childcare subsidies, please contact  Agnes Huang at 875-1640.  VSW WANTS YOU!  Want to get more involved but not sure  where to begin? Join us ... become a volunteer at Vancouver Status of Women.  VSW volunteers plan events, lead groups,  raise funds, answer the phone lines and  help to connect women with the community resources they need, organize the library and other exciting tasks! The next  volunteer potluck and orientation will be  on Tues., July 21, 7 pm at VSW #301-  1720 Grant Street. For more information  call Jennifer at 255-5511.  AUGUST 29th  9:30 a.m.-10:00 p.m.  WOMEN *  EARTH  RAISING CONSCIOUSNESS  A day-long celebration of women's coUective  empowerment on behalf of the Earth!  ROBSON SQUARE  CONFERENCE CENTRE  VANCOUVER,     B.C.  For tickets (sliding scale: S20-S40) and/or further  information, please forward a SASE to WOMEN  AND THE EARTH, BOlBox 74574, 2803 West  4th Ave, Vancouver, BC. V6K 1R2  (604)-737-4302   EVERYONE WELCOME!  EVENTS  VSW RESOURCE CENTRE  Vancouver Status of Women's Resource  Centre is open on Mon., 10 am to 8 pm  and Tues. to Thurs., 10 am to 5 pm  Check out our collection of periodicals  and books.  ASSERTIVENESS TRAINING  Vancouver Status of Women offers free  assertiveness training to women. Next  courses start Wed., July 15 every  Wednesday night for six weeks, 7-9 pm,  and Sat., July 11 for three weeks, 1-5  pm. Pre-registration is necessary. Childcare assistance is available. To register or  for more info., call Cecilia 255-5511.  SOUL MUSIC/BROWN STORIES  Soul Music/Brown Stories at the Station  St. Theatre July 21, at 7:30 pm. Big  Mama Productions and Penny Singh welcome all to an evening of gospel, Billy  Holiday ballads and voices from SOUL  (Shades Of United Liberation). For reservations and info call 736-4052.  WHITE WASHED?  Meet with us at the Vancouver Women's  Health Information Centre for an action  planning meeting on Mon., July 20 at  7:00 pm. #302-1720 Grant St., Vane,  call 255-8285 for more info.  LANTERN PROCESSION  llluminares: An Evening Lantern Procession is the Public Dreams Society's fourth  evening lantern procession, llluminares  1992 will include sculptural installations,  choreography, musical performances and  surprises. Lantern-making workshops will  be held at Trout Lake and Brittania Community Centres. For details call Ann Mc-  Donell or Andrea Fatona 879-8611. llluminares 1992 is a free event. Lantern procession is at sundown on Sat., July 25.  PHOTO EXHIBIT  A photography exhibit "A Day in the Life  of Inner City Schools," jointly sponsored  by the Vancouver School Board and Kodak of Canada will open at the Van East  Cultural Centre on Wed., June 24 at 1  pm. Free. For further info, call 731-1131.  NORTHAMPTON'S LESBIAN FEST  Join other lesbians at the Northampton  Lesbian Festival Main. The festival features the hottest mix of queer musicians.  Festival hours are 10 am-7 pm. Advance  tix $18 for one day $35 for the weekend.  Accommodation is nearby. For info call;  Aliza Ansell or Diane Morgan, WOW Productions, 160 Main St, Northampton Ma,  01060 (413) 586-8251.  EVENTS  GAY PRIDE PICNIC  The second annual Victoria Lesbian and  Gay Pride "bring your own picnic" will be  held at the Beacon Hill Park, Sun., July  12th. The picnic will be held at the north  end of the park between the general picnic ground and "Mayor's Grove." The fun  begins at noon and will last until 5 pm.  For more info., contact Victoria Gay and  Lesbian Pride Society at 1228 Mckenzie  St, Victoria BC V8V 2W5, or call Sam  Archeiz at 382-0837 or Pat Ford at 370-  2964.  OKANO'S "COME SPRING"  Come celebrate the publication of Haruko  Okano's "Come Spring," an art show and  book launch at Tonari Gumi, 378 Powell  St, July 18th 3-4:30 pm. For further info,  call Caffyn Kelly at 929-8706 or Haruko  Okano at 872-3570.  BOOK LAUNCH  The launch of "Women Making Music,"  a history of women's music in Canada by  K. Linda Kivi, will be held at Josephines's  1716 Charles St, Fri.. Sept. 11th, 7 pm.  TWICE OVER  Firehall Arts Centre, presents a portrayal  of love between two older women. July  17-27 at 8 pm. For tickets call 689-0926.  POWELL ST. FESTIVAL  For the 16th year, the Japanese-Canadian  community celebrates its presence in Vancouver with performances of Taiko drumming, folk and traditional dance and  more. The festival will take place at the  Firehall Arts Centre & Oppenheimer Park  Aug 1-2. For info or to volunteer, call  082-4335.  WALK FOR AIDS  An early reminder that Vancouver persons with Aids Society's annual walk will  take place Sun., Sept., 27 on the seawall  in Stanley Park. Registration and pledge  packages will be available at many locations in early Aug. and at the Pride Test.  BLUES IN THE NIGHT  The Arts Club Theatre presents Blues in  the Night, 26 all-time Blues and Jazz  hits and some of Vancouver's best blues  artists, July 22-Sept. 12. Call 687-1644  for details.  DANCING ON THE EDGE  Eleven days of dance performances at  The Firehall Theatre, 280 E. Cordova St.,  Vane, BC. Sept 9-19. Call 689-1926 for  more info.  PRESS  GANG  E    N    E    F   I   T  Born to Shop?!  Join the GANG for an evening of  AUCTION and ENTERTAINMENT  Saturday, July 11 th/92  8p.m. to Midnight  Hastings Community Centre  3096 E. Hastings St.  •Penny Singh   •Random Acts   •Food   •Services  •Artwork   •Books and lots more...  Support your local women's press!  PRESS GANG BENEF  EVENTS  JANICE WONG  An exhibition of paintings, and reception  will be held at the Richmond Art Gallery,  5951 No. 3 Rd Richmond, BC. Thur.,  July 2, 8-10 pm. Call 276-4012 for more  info.  COUNSELLING SERVICES  The YMCA is offering short term counselling service for women, including information, individual counselling or appropriate referrals. Topics cover: Women  Who Love Too Much; Career Exploration;  Women's Sexuality; and Assertiveness.  Call 683-2531 or fax 684-9171 for more  info.  TONIGHT ... PIAF  A tribute to the late director Ray Michal.  Performed by Joelle Rabu. A musical  dramatization of Edith Piaf's last North  American concert, with songs in English  & French. July 14-17, 8:30 pm July 18,  5 pm-8:30 pm $17 Gen. $13 students $1  seniors. At the VECC, 1895 Venables St..  Vane. Call 254-9578 for more info.  VANC FOLK FEST ENCORE  A week of concerts explore the music and  cultures of the Honoras Vietnam, Madagascar and Portugal. July 20-26. Time  TBA. Cost: TBA at the VECC, 1895 Venables St., Vane. Call 254-9578 for more  info.  WOMEN WITH FIBROIDS  The Vancouver Women's Health Information Centre is beginning a research project  around the experiences of women with  fibroid problems. If you are interested  please leave a message with the Centre at  302-1720 Grant St., Vane, or telephone  255-8285. The Centre's hours are: Mon.  Si Thur. 10-1, Wed 6:30-8:30, Sat. 1-4.  Or telephone 298-9924 in the evening.  ALTERNATIVE VISIONS  Reflection/Refractions: Alternative Visions, a special exhibit of work by Northwest Asian Pacific women, will show  at the Cunningham Gallery, University  of Washington, Seattle, July 5-Sept  18. The Vancouver-based group, Rei-  jingu Horomonzu, will play at the opening. Artists include Haruko Okano, Andrea Yim, and Ana Chang. For more info,  call 685-1090.  HARRISON FEST OF THE ARTS  The festival presents African music and  art. Performers include Aya and Four the  Moment. July 4-12. A daily visual arts  exhibit will be held at the Harrison Hotel  Exhibit Centre from 10 am-6 pm. A Writers Evening will be held Thur., July 9th  at 8:30 pm. For more info write: Harrison Festival of the Arts, Box 399, 160 Esplanade Ave, Harrison Hot Springs, BC,  (604) 796-3664, or in Vane, call 681-  2771.  IDERA  The International Development Education Resources Association, presents  Latin America Women Writers in Translation, a six week lecture series examining  aesthetic and ideological contributions of  women writers in the Spanish speaking  world. At the SFU Harbour Centre, Tues.  and Thur., 6:30 pm-9:30 pm. Call 291-  4094, fax 291-5159, for more info.  MATURE WOMEN  The Mature Women's Network extends  an invitation to women between forty  and sixty-five seeking a social and support group. 3rd Floor, 411 Dunsmuir St.  Vane, June 20th, 1 pm. Cost $2. Call  Margaret Crawford, 224-1037, for more  info.  I   T  KINESIS ^ ;s$*S$s^^^^^^^  BULLETIN BOARD  EVENTS  HOUSING OPTIONS  A Provincial Commission on Housing  Options will hold eight public meetings  within the province during June and July.  Groups or individuals interested in the  question of housing affordability should  submit briefs to The Provincial Commission on Housing Options, #1505-4330  Kingsway, Burnaby BC V5H 3G7. Tel.  439-4731, fax 436-3469, no later than  July 31. A meeting for the Greater Vancouver area will be held July 14.  GROUPS       I SUBMISSIONS I CLASSIFIEDS  GROUPS  WORK FOR CHANGE  Oxfam Canada has created an Emergency  Response Team to deal with drought in  Central Africa. To make a donation or for  more info contact Oxfam Canada, 2524  Cypress St Vane, BC, V6J 3N2 (604)  736-7678.  FEEDBACK NEEDED  Is there a need for a support house for  lesbians leaving relationships, who need  a safe temporary place to stay in order to make this change? I want to hear  from other lesbians who believe this need  exists, and who have ideas, input, support for starting one up. Anyone interested please leave names and numbers  c/o VSW 255-5511.  TEEN WOMEN  Women Against Violence Against Women's (WAVAW) Rape Crises Centre  has a support and discussion group for  teenage women who have been sexually  assaulted. For more info, call our 24 hour  crisis Vine at 875-6011.  VANC LESBIAN CONNECTION  The VLC is open Tuesdays and Thursdays, noon-7 pm. and Saturdays noon-5  pm. We have hot coffee, a job and housing board, a lending library and a safe and  friendly atmosphere. Our centre staff offers lay counselling around lesbian issues,  referral services and info about events in  the community. Drop in and see us at 876  Commercial Drive, Vane. The VLC is now  offering free professional short term counselling, alternating Wednesdays, noon-3  pm beginning July 8. By appointment  only. Free admission to Folk Fest if you  volunteer 8 hours of your time at the VLC  Sage's Kitchen Booth. For more info call  254-8458.  FACILITATOR/COUNS. TRAINING  Battered Women's Support Services will  be offering Group facilitators/Peer Counsellor Training in the fall of 1992. Call  687-1867 for an application form.  VLC BLUES  Just cuz it's summer, doesn't mean the  VLC doesn't need 'you.' Volunteers are  needed for a variety of duties, including  peer counselling, helping in the library,  and answering the phone. If you are interested in any of these areas, call Ginger  at 254-8458.  ENDOMETRIOSIS SUPPORT  T.E.N.T. (The Endomtriosis Network of  Toronto) is one chapter of the Ontario Network for Endometriosis (O.N.E.)  which offers support and info regarding this disease. For further info contact  T.E.N.T., PO Box 3135 Markham Industrial Park, Markham Ontario; L3R 6G5  (416) 968-3717, or O.N.E. City Centre  Drive, # 133 Brampton Ont, L6T 3R5.  VOLUNTEERS NEEDED  Have some time to spare? Rape Relief and  Women's Shelter can put you to work on  the crisis line, in the transition house or  fundraising. Interested? Call 872-8212.  WOMEN IN RECOVERY  The Recreation Club for Women in Recovery is an opportunity for women in recovery to get together and socialize with  other recovering women. For further info,  call 876-0078.  OUT/RIGHTS  The 2nd Pan-Canadian Conference on  Lesbian and Gay Rights will be held in  Vancouver Oct 9-11, at Robson Square  Media Centre. The conference will be a  participatory forum for us to discuss and  develop coalitions, strategies and ideas  about our rights. We need your help  with everything from planning to promotion to production. Conference topics include: "Are We Family?", "Rights and  Wrongs—Past and Present;" "Mobilizing  for Change," "Working in Law;" "AIDS  and HIV issues." For details call Donna  at 255-3023 or write to Out/Rights/Les  Droits Visible at #321-1525 Robson  Street. Vane, BC, V6G 1C3.  SUBMISSIONS  VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN  Women's Press in Toronto is inviting submissions for an anthology on women organizing against male violence. Send up to  20 pages, typed, double spaced by Sept  15 to Women's Press, 517 College St.,  Toronto, Ont., M6G 4A2, or for more  info, call Punam Khosla at (416) 922-  0554.  GLOBAL STRATEGIES  Women to Women Global Strategies  needs inf  n on how free trade has,  prou£y presents  . -Toronto dub poet  Ahdri Zhina Mandiela  reading at La Quena  Sunday, July 12th, 8:30pm.  111 Commercial Drive  for more info call Little Sister's 669-1753,1221 Thurlow St. (at Davie) Vancouver, B.C. V6E1X4  and is affecting women in-BC. Please assess, analyze and clip everything relevant  and mail to c/o 1426 Napier St., Vane,  .BC, V5L 2M5.  MUSIC DIRECTORY  The Acoustic Connection, a Vancouver  based non-profit organization of musicians and other professionals in the music  industry is organizing a province wide resource directory for people involved in any  aspect of folk/roots music. Listings are  free. Submission deadline by July 30/92.  For more info, call 732-1305, fax 732-  1397, or write to #1-3630 W. Broadway,  Vane, VOR 2B7  CRIAW GRANTS  The Canadian Research Institute for The  Advancement of Women offers an annual  grant of $25,000 for projects that promote the advancement of women. The  research can be the subject of proposal  that is complete in itself or part of a larger  study. Deadline date Aug 13, 1992. Send  four copies of applications. For further  info write 151 Slater St, # 408, Ottawa,  Ont., KIP 5H3, Tel (613) 563-0681, fax  563-0682, TDD 563-1921.  MENNONITE LESBIANS Si BIS  Looking for all forms of written expression (poetry, rants, journal entries, fiction, etc.) Si art work by Lesbian Si Bi  women who have been or are involved in  Mennonite faith/culture. A small collective of Mennonite dykes associated with  "Brethren Si Mennonite Council for Gay  Si Lesbian Concerns" are producing this  anthology. Send submissions or enquiries  to: PO Box 268 Station P Toronto Ont.,  M5S 2S8 Deadline: Sept., 30, 1992.  RACE, CULTURE & SEXUALITY  Queue, a group of Chinese Canadians  committed to development of contemporary cultural activities are looking for  submissions for a performance exhibition  screening/writing series on intercultural  conditions for construction of sexuality,  sexual orientation and sexual practices in  the context of race, culture and socialization. If you are interested, send info to  2814 Trinity St. Vane, BC V5K 1E9, or  call Cynthia at (604) 254-948?, fax (604)  687-6260 ASAP.  FEMINIST PRACTITIONERS  The Western Canadian Counselling Association invites your monthly proposals for monthly meeting presentations.  Honorarium given. Please mail to: Reisa  Stone, Programming: WCFCA 405-2150  W. Broadway Vane, BC V6K 4L9. Or  phone 732-9753/732-8013.  EXHAUSTED? TENSE?  Jin Shin Do bodymind acupressure. Receive gentle deep release of physical and  emotional stress, fully clothed in a safe  healing environment offering respect and  honour to women with regard to any issues our healing may involve. Our bodies remember our experiences. Feminist  /mom/survivor and certified practitioner.  Call Lisa 685-7714.  FEMINIST COUNSELOR  I work with lesbians and other women.  My interests and experience include  childhood abuse, addictions, relationship issues, panic and self-esteem. I use  Gestalt/experiential work, dreams and visualizations. Sliding scale. Tel: Delyse  873-4495.  COUNSELLING NOW    '  Experiencing difficulties? Feminist counselling in a supportive, confidential atmosphere. For crises, personal growth, parent/teen issues, gay and lesbian issues,  coming out and life passages. Individuals, couples, families. Sliding scale fees.  For free consultation call Eleanor Brock-  enshire, BHEC, MSW, 876-9475.  WHO'S A SURVIVOR?  A survivor is any woman who's around to  read this after experiencing sexual abuse,  anorexia/bulimia, battering relationships,  chemical dependency and other effects of  patriarchy. I offer survivors skilled, commonsense counselling and therapy with  art, breath, music and more. Comfortable  with your anger and your joy. Call Reisa  Stone, 732-9753.  FREE THE SINGER WITHIN!  Singers of all levels can increase range,  tone and power while developing confidence to sing out and speak up! Expert  vocal coaching in a supportive, accepting environment. A holistic and effective  method for personal empowerment, joyful creative expression and a great voice!  On Commercial Drive. $30/ session or 6  sessions/ $150. Penny Sidor 251-4715.  "LOVE" ADDICTIONS  Untangling the "love" addictions: sex, romance, Si relationships...women. Meeting our intimacy needs in healthy ways.  Do you find yourself struggling in repetitive, harmful ways in relationships? In  this group you will identify your intimacy  needs and begin to realize how they are  not being met. Free yourself from obsessions with sex, romance, and dysfunctional relationships; create healthy, positive relationships! Call Eleanor Brocken-  shire, B.H.Ec.M.S.W. 876-9475.  RECLAIMING WOMEN'S HISTORY  POSTER SERIES  Agnes McPhail  The first woman  elected to  parliament.  The Famous Five  who won for  woman the right  to be persons.  Nellie McClung  who, with her sister  suffragists, won  the vote for women.  These women deserve their place in the schools, offices, homes and official  corridors of the nation.  An ideal gift.  Posters are 16 x 20, in sepia tones,  particularly attractive when framed.  $10.00 each or package of all three for $25.00,  plus $3.00 (postage/packaging) for 1 poster ($0.50 for each additional poster).  Laminated copies are an additional $6.00 each.  Women of Vision Series, Box 1402, Station C, St. John's Nfld. A1C 5N5  KjNESIS   ->u'y/Aug. 92 Bulletin board  W%m?//>   w/////nw///////y/z////,.  /////////////////////^^^^^  mm  CLASSIFIEDS I CLASSIFIEDS  SHIATSU  A Japanese form of acupressure. Great for  physical discomforts, emotional release,  or stress relief. To relax, comfort or energize. Phone Astarte Sands at 251-5409.  A WOMEN'S PLACE  Emotional Fitness Centre: New counselling, educational and consulting service on the North Shore. Offers feminist and lesbian affirmation counselling,  workshops, support groups and information. Areas of specialization: low self-  esteem, depression, anxiety, communication, relationship difficulties, addiction,  sexual abuse recovery, coming out. Call  Lou Moreau, Registered counsellor, 922-  7930.  FABRIC BANNERS  Strong colourful long-lasting banners for  indoors and out. Made to order by well-  known Vancouver artist Sima Elizabeth  Shefrin. From the maker of the beautiful  banners for Kinesis, Angles, Ariel Books,  AIDS Vancouver, Tools for Peace Si many  other organizations directly to you. Reasonable prices. 734-9395.  BED & BREAKFAST  Rocking Horse Ini  and breakfast oi  views, hot tub, w  322-0206.  Seattle: Unique bed  Capitol Hill. Great  m hospitality. (206)  HOUSING  How much do you need to buy your own?  What will your monthly payments be?  How much of a down payment is necessary? Where can you afford to buy? Today interest rates are the lowest they have  been in 25 years. Variable rates are about  8 percent. If you are thinking about buying or selling, let me put 14 years experience to work for you: Linda McNeil (298-  0795); Seasons Realty Ltd., (435-8893).  ROOMMATE WANTED  Are you thinking about moving to the  Kootenays? Roommate wanted to share  house with two womyn. No cats. Rural  setting-20 minutes from  Nelson.  Phone  1-359-7601.  SITKA CO-OP  Sitka Housing Co-operative is a 26 unit  housing complex created and designed  by women for women and children. Our  priority is to provide housing for sole-  support women, single mothers, women  of colour, women over 55 years of age  and women with environmental allergies.  Located in the East End of Vancouver,  we are near shopping, schools and community centres. Participation in operation of the co-op is required of all members. At present our one-bedroom waiting  list is closed. Applications from women  needing two- and three-bedroom units are  being accepted. Please write: Member-1  ship Committee, Sitka Housing Co-op, g  1550   Woodland   Drive,  Vancouver,   BC =  V5L 5A5. »   -E  SHARED ACCOMMODATIONS  Roommate wanted for 2 Br house. Bsmt,  backyard Si garden, n/s, m/f $395. 873-  2700.  SAILING FOR WOMEN  Herizen (TM) New Age Sailing for  Women. Personalized sailing and self-  awareness immersion courses for women,  in BC and Mexico. Herizen (TM) is about  sailing and about women's reality, self-  confidence, self-esteem, and belief in ourselves in a concrete way that is transferable to all parts of our lives. Call Trish  741-1753.  SURROGACY RESEARCH  I am a female researcher interested in the  question of surrogacy. I am interested in  contacting women who have been or who  CBed 6 eg/teat^  <P.(D. Qo* 519  Sofa*. <B.C-  Was.  I096 <Pac(Jic <R(m <3dl(gi>u/ag  J\^j idiMb komset'w-fo&ikQQs, to nwtes  uA kotw iho, oamv, % \)iou iottst imH to  fc 'mt and cte to te \Moap- Com mht  cmd Snfy'tyofflm riappifiu utefcang//  $55~7D/wgkt (vctudes qoa) bwkhfit)  SfQCAolAom hot vkofaswvsQ/Mrmil  ' u(g-10it>onm)  CHRONIQUE FEMINISTE N° 42  Matheuses  Les filles seraient-elles moins dou6es que les garcons en ma-  thdmatiques? Leurs performances seraient-elles infeneures?  Manifesteraient-elles moins de gout pour cette discipline?  Le numero 42 de «Chronique Feministe* interroge les theories  a propos de 1'infenorite des filles et des femmes en matherna-  tiques; il fait connaitre les requitals d'enquetes sur les performances des jeunes dans cette discipline; enfin, il rend visibles  des femmes «oubliees» ou meconnues et donne la parole a des  mathematiciennes.  Le h": 200 FB - Abonn. 5 n": 700 FB par mandat postal international (comm.: MP/42) University des Femmes - la, Place Quilelet  1030 Bruxelles - Til: 021219.61.07  Lee Pui Ming, a highly innovative pianist from Toronto will be  appearing at the Vancouver Folk Music Festival, July 17-19 at  Jericho Beach. Ming's style is a fiery blend of Chinese, jazz and  experimental improvisation where the piano is turned into a  multisonic instrument. The music emerges in a dynamic interaction  among the keyboard, the piano and her voice.  CLASSIFIEDS I CLASSIFIEDS  are surrogate mothers. Please contact:  Fiona Green. Women's Studies, University of Winnipeg, Winnipeg, Man., R3B-  2E9. (204) 786-9295.  SHIRLEY TURCOTTE  (To a Safer Place) in Winnipeg, MB-  Nov. 4, 5, 6, Si 7,1992. Nov. 4-Evening  public address-The Healing Process. Nov  5 & 6- Structuring Therapy Groups. Nov.  7-Connecting With the Inner Child.  INVITATION TO PARTICIPATE  We invite submissions for participation in  the 1993 conference "Sorrow Si Strength:  the Process." Participation can take the  form of papers, panel, media presentation, art, poetry, workshops, networking,  etc. Deadline for submissions-Sept. 30,  1992. For more info please contact Creating Connections, 160 Garfield St. S., Winnipeg, MB R3G 2L8. Tel: (204) 786-1971  TRANSITION COUNSELLOR  Relief Transition House Counsellor: To  provide support, counselling and referrals  to abused women and their children seeking safe shelter. The successful candidate  will have experience working with abused  women from a feminist perspective as  well as knowledge of the issues of vio  lence against women and problem solving  skills. Must be flexible and able to work  on day to day notice as well as be on  call via pager after midnight. Hours >  not be guaranteed. Salary $10 per hour.  Clearance of Criminal Record Search is required. Send cover letter by June 22 to:  Program Director, Chimo-personal Distress Intervention Services, 202-4751 Garden City Road, Richmond, BC V6X 3M7.  UPBEAT CALENDAR  Volunteer women of colour (19-30's)  wanted for upbeat gay woman's calendar. Already have several caucasian/asian  women but would like to include women  of other ethnic origins. No nudity. I can't  do this project without you so please write  with photo to # 607- 3760 Albert St.  Burnaby, V5C 5Y8.  APRIL'S DANCE WORKSHOPS  April's Dance Workshops presents introduction to partnership dancing. Includes  Latin, Jive, Country and slow dance techniques. Just for fun. Just for Wimmin,  children welcome, (but dancing is foi  adults) 2 hr workshops Mon's 7-9. Sun  3-5. Only $18 per person. Call April 684-  5347  ROBIN QOLDFARB wrr  Registered   Massage   Therapist  TRAINING  Battered Women's Support Services will  be offering Group Facilitator/Peer Counsellor training in the fall of this year. I  you are interested in working with battered women and would like to be considered for the training program, call 687-  1868 for an application form. We look forward to hearing from you. Deadline foi  application is Friday Sept., 4/92.  r^r=^r^r=lr==Ji=Jr=Jr=Jr=Jr=Jr==Jr=ir==Jr=Jrg  DR. PAULETTE ROSCOE  NATUROPATHIC PHYSICIAN  HOMEOPATHY  COUNSELLING  DETOXIFICATION  HYCROFT MEDICAL CENTER  108-3195 GRANVILLE ST.  VANCOUVER, B.C. V6H 3K2  731-4183  HERSPECTIVES  Make ch.quej p»y«ble to M»rjr B  Box 2047,   SquMdih,   BC Can.  Vd  JOIN TIC KM3IC CIWXE  KINESIS-1 LIB1Z8GRL 4/93  LIBRARY PROCESSING CTR - SERIALS  22% EAST MALL, U.B.C.  VANCOUVER, BC V&T 1Z8  Hit a home run  with Kinesis