 A  MAY 1989  The vision of Aquelarre  No deficit of rhetoric Kinesis welcomes volunteers  to work on all aspects of the  paper. Call us at 255-5499.  Our next News Group is Wed.  May 10 at 1:30 pm at Kinesis, #301-1720 Grant St. Ali  women welcome even If you  don't have experience.  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE:  Marsha Arbour, Colette Beau-  lieu, Gwen Bird, Herta Bul-  ler, Laura Busheikin, Donna  Butorac, Jennifer Ellis, Su-  desh Kaur, Zoe Klaasen-Mil-  ier, Sonia Marino, Allisa McDonald, Joni Miller, Lucy Moreira, Sarah Orlowski, Nancy  Pollak, Noreen Shanahan, Esther Shannon, Bonnie Water-  stone, Jane Withers.  FRONT COVER: Graphic by  Jane Francis.  EDITORIAL BOARD: Marsha Arbour, Gwen Bird, Allisa  McDonald, Nancy Pollak, Noreen Shanahan, Esther Shannon, Michele Valiquette.  CIRCULATION AND DISTRIBUTION: Gwen Bird, Cat  L'Hirondelle.  ADVERTISING: Marsha Arbour.  OFFICE: Cat L'Hirondelle.  Kinesis is published 10 times  a year by the Vancouver Status of Women. Its objectives  are to be a non-sectarian feminist voice for women and  to work actively for social  change, specifically combatting sexism, racism, homophobia and imperialism.  Views expressed in Kinesis  are those of the writer and  do not necessarily reflect VSW  policy. All unsigned material is  the responsibility of the Kinesis Editorial Board.  SUBSCRIPTIONS: Individual  subscriptions to Kinesis are  $17.50 per year or what you  can afford. Membership in the  Vancouver Status of Women  is $25.50 or what you can afford, includes subscription to  Kinesis.  SUBMISSIONS: All submissions are welcome. We reserve  the right to edit and submission does not guarantee publication. All submissions should  be typed double spaced and  must be signed and include  an address and phone number.  Please note Kinesis does not  accept poetry or fiction contributions. For material to be  returned, a SASE must be included. Editorial guidelines are  available on request.  ADVERTISING: For information about display advertising  rates, please contact Kinesis.  For information about classifieds, please see the classified  page in this issue.  DEADLINE: For features and  reviews the 10th of the month  preceding publication; news  copy, 15th; letters and Bulletin  Board listings 18th. Display  advertising: camera ready,  18th; design required, 12th.  Kinesis is a member of the  Canadian Periodical Publishers Association and is indexed  in the Alternative Press Index.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status of  Women, 301-1720 Grant St.,  Vancouver, B.C. V5L 2Y6  Kinesis is produced on an  IBM PC using PC TeX and  an in-house laser printer. Additional laser printing by East-  side Data Graphics. Camera  work by Northwest Graphics.  Young, restless and in jail 7  The incidence of AIDS among women  is rising   INSIDE  0m  1  Shoreworkers bargain for a new contract 3  Rape Relief controversy re-ignites 3  Demolitions smash housing options 4  Women students make less 4  DAWN focuses on mothering 8  FEATURE  ' aTdS: putting women in the picture 5  by Laura Busheikin  Young Offenders Act to be revised 7  by Kim Irving  Consciously interrupting oppression 9  by Celeste George  No deficit of rhetoric 12  by Esther Shannon  Lesbians organize for spousal benefits 14  by Diana Smith  ARTS  Lesbian Ethics: in review 17  by Bonnie Waterstone  Clerical workers power play 18  by CyThea Sand  Aquelarre: the dream comes true 19  by Carmen Rodriguez  /?Eqm/?$  Movement Matters 2  What's News? 6  by Donna Butorac  In Other Worlds 16  by Melanie Conn  Commentary 20  by EGALE  Letters 21  Bulletin Board 22  compiled by Lucy Morelra  Printing by Web Press Graph-  Second class mail #6426  ISSN 0317-9095  KINESIS Movement Matters  Movement  matters listings  information  Movement Matters is designed to be a  network of news, updates and informal  tion of special interest to the women's  movement. Submissions to Movement Matters should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double-spaced on eight and a half by  eleven paper. Submissions may be edited for  length. Deadline is the 18th of the month  preceding publication.  by Terry Gibson  Anti-  psychiatry  group  Phoenix Rising would like to announce  the formation of a new anti-psychiatry  group in Toronto called R.A.P. (Resistance  Against Psychiatry).  This group feels strongly that all women  must unite to oppose psychiatry: "We must  not let ourselves label each other as 'sick'  or 'crazy,' an action which only serves the  interests of the patriarchy. We must not let  male-defined norms make us oppress ourselves or each other."  R.A.P. advises that women start reading  anti-psychiatry literature and speak to survivors of the psychiatric system. It warns  against electroshock and seeing therapists  who are non-feminist. It welcomes calls for  information at (416) 538-7103.  Also of interest along this line is a new  Canadian book entitled Shrink Resistant,  published by New Star books and co-edited  by Bonnie Burstow and Don Weitz. Sixty  percent of contributing writers are women  which promises first-hand experiences to  support the beliefs of groups like R.A.P.  Farmworkers  campaign  The Canadian Farmworkers Union  (CFU) has launched yet another campaign  to fight for Health and Safety Regulations.  Twenty-eight thousand B.C. residents  work in the agricultural field, which is the  third most hazardous industry. They are  continuously exposed to unsafe pesticide  practices—working conditions which have  cost loss of hfe. Ninety-five percent of these  workers are people of colour, 75 percent are  women, most are immigrants.  The CFU is asking people to write or call  the Premier or MLA's and urge them to  support immediate full coverage of Health  and Safety Regulations for farmworkers.  Bringing it to the attention of any community organization can also help. For more information, phone 430-6055 or write to the  CFU, #1-4725 Kingsway, Burnaby, B.C.  V5H 2C3.  CCEC Fair  A Community Fair, organized by the  CCEC Credit Union, will be held on Saturday, May 27th at RayCam Community  Centre (920 E. Hastings) from 10 am to  4 pm. The fair will be open to the pubhc and will be everything from a flea market to a networking forum. There will be  displays, children's programming and entertainment. Proposed workshops include:  leather-working, community radio, workers'  co-ops and democratic management, underground economies and barter, Latin American refugees, alternative education and  fundraising skills.  Merchant discount cards are available for  $5 and will entitle purchasers to substantial discounts with participating community  businesses. Among these are Eastside Data-  Graphics, Airheart Travel, Quintessence,  Spartacus Books, Women's Work Screen  Printing, Isadora's, and Good Life Natural  Foods. Others are in the works. For more  information, call Catherine Ludgate at 255-  2004.  Global  women's  resources  The Canadian Council for International  Co-operation is preparing a Directory  of Women in Canada Specializing in  Global Issues: Development, Environment  and Peace, and related social justice and  economic issues. They are seeking names of  women who have expertise on these global  survival issues.  The Directory will ensure that women  will not be overlooked by those requiring speakers, workshop leaders, consultants,  etc. for conferences, seminars, workshops,  the media, government and NGO's and  other activities. The Directory is seeking  women representing all issues and regions  and from a variety of backgrounds.  H you want to help, send names, addresses and telephone numbers of Canadian  women with expertise in these areas. The  arid books  forvJomen  2766W.4thave.  733-3511  address is: Dorothy Goldin Rosenberg, Directory of Canadian Women Specializing in  Global Issues, c/o Canadian Council for International Co-operation, 1 Nicholas, Suite  300, Ottawa, Ont. KIN 7B7. Financial support is also encouraged.  Courses  offered  Writing  retreat  West Coast Women and Words are again  offering a two week summer writing retreat  for women. This fifth program runs from  August 13-26, 1989 and will feature three  disciplines: poetry, fiction and creative documentary. Classes and housing are at the  Vancouver School of Theology, UBC campus. The fee is $525 which includes tuition,  accommodation and meals (based on single  occupancy).  Applications should include: 15 pages of  your writing (typewritten), a one-page self  portrait (covering as much biographical information as possible), a statement about  why you are interested in the course, and if  you require a scholarship. Postmarks should  be no later than May 1, 1989. For further  information, write to: West Coast Women  and Words, #210-640 W. Broadway, Vancouver, B.C. V5Z 1G4 or call 872-8014.  Lawyer  referral  service  • H you think you might have a legal problem but aren't sure  • H you need legal advice but don't know  where to look  • H you need a lawyer but don't know one  • The Lawyer Referral Service (LRS) can  help you. The LRS is available to anyone. It is designed to encourage you to  seek legal advice early, before your problems become complicated and expensive.  Telephone the LRS branch in your area  and briefly explain the type of problem you  have. The Service will give you the name of  a lawyer. You arrange an appointment with  that lawyer and tell him or her that the LRS  referred you. The lawyer will give you an interview of up to 30 minutes at a nominal fee  of $10. The lawyer will tell you whether she  thinks you have a legal problem, what is involved, how long it should take to solve the  problem, and about how much it will cost.  Then, if you and the lawyer agree, you may  hire the lawyer to help you further at normal fees. But, if you decide not to hire the  lawyer and wish to consult someone else,  or if you are satisfied that you don't need  any further help, it won't cost you any more  than $10. To contact the LRS in Vancouver  call 687-3221  Metro Jobmart—The Creative Career  Counselling and Training Centre—has expanded its program for those interested  in the autobody and repairs industry. As  an Employment and Immigration job entry  program, all young women and men under  25 are eligible. Social assistance (up to 30  weeks) and UI recipients also qualify, with  an allowance received during the entire period.  The training lasts 26 weeks and consists of classes and on-the-job placement  with various host employers throughout the  Lower Mainland. Successful completion of  the course prepares the trainee for entry level positions including trim, detailing,  glass and upholstery.  Registration and information meetings  have already started for the May session.  Seats are limited. For further details, contact Martin Wittman at 875-0899, or go to  Metro Jobmart, 30 E. 6th Ave., Vancouver.  Pro-choice  pamphlet  The Victoria Coalition for Choice has  published an information pamphlet on abortion. While therapeutic abortion has been  legal since January of 1988, the Coalition realized this isn't even mentioned in  provincially-sponsored programs. Information has been scarce, but now that need  has been filled. The pamphlet addresses  commonly-asked questions in an objective  and factual manner.  The Coalition supports reproductive  choice and beheves no new abortion law is  necessary. It aims to provide support and  information to all women making the choice  of having a therapeutic abortion. For further information or assistance, please contact the Coalition for Choice answering machine at 386- 1335 or write: Victoria Coalition for Choice, Box 124, 910 Government  St., Victoria, B.C. V82 1X3.  Good-bye  Kinesis bids a fond, and hopefully temporary, farewell to Yukon-bound Lucy Moreira, our esteemed Bulletin Board compiler,  proofer and lay-out artist. Lucy is hitting  the trail to Yukon in May, where she'll be  compiling as a cook at a gold mine. We are  losing a gold mine of a volunteer to the romance of the far north but we know she'll  be back in the fall. Best wishes in Yukon,  Lucy and many thanks for all your work.  1146 Commercial * 253-0913  KINESIS yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy  ///////////////////^^^^^  ///////////////////^^^^  NEWS  Shoreworkers bargain for new contract  by Nancy Pollak  This summer, British Columbia shoreworkers—the people who  process fish in plants up and down  the coast—will enter contract negotiations with at least two pohtical clouds looming overhead.  The first threatens the industry itseli In late April, Canadian workers lose the protection  of fishery regulations which guaranteed them access to the lucrative salmon and herring processing  trade.  The second relates to unemployment insurance. As seasonal  workers, shoreworkers have difficulty qualifying for benefits under existing UI regulations. Recent  changes to UI lengthening eligibility requirements will make access  that much harder. (See page 12)  The approximately 5,000 shore-  workers in B.C. are about 85 percent women. Many are women of  colour, including people of Chinese, Korean, Indian and Aboriginal descent. Their work consists of cleaning, cutting, roe-  popping (removing eggs) and otherwise preparing fish for market.  Besides these threats to job  and economic security, shoreworkers of the United Fishermen (sic)  and Allied Workers Union have a  full complement of contract demands relating to pensions, equal  pay for work of equal value, daycare, wages, health and safety, and  "equal opportunity"—the right of  women to access to all jobs in the  fish processing trade.  The loss of regulatory protection stems from a 1988 ruling by the international General  Agreement on Tariffs and Trade  (GATT) which judged Canadian  laws requiring that fish be processed in Canada to be an unfair trading practice. The fear that  fish may now be shipped to lower  wage countries for processing is  used against Canadian workers.  Says Kathy Schultz, president of  Shoreworkers Local 2 (Vancouver  waterfront), "the companies are  saying 'you're going to have to  take cuts or the work will go down  to Washington' where wages are  half what we make.  "But we can't negotiate on the  future. We're negotiating on the  companies' profits, and they're doing very well."  The jobs that stand to be lost  are physically trying and seasonal,  but they pay reasonably well. A  15-year veteran, Schultz now earns  $14/hr plus good overtime at the  Canadian Fish Company. H these  positions go, she asks, where else  will women make this kind of  money?  "They're talking about job  training [under the new UI program], but what kind of jobs?  I'm white, at least. The many  workers who are Chinese, Indian,  Korean—who are making a decent wage now—they won't get  job training."  Shoreworkers are frustrated by  the federal government's "you're  on your own" attitude and have  every intention of fighting for their  jobs. "We'll be prepared to stop  trucks going across the border,"  says Schultz.  On another front, shoreworkers are once again tackling the  equal opportunity issue in the  fresh fish—cold storage, as compared to cannery—trade.  The current Group 1 and Group  2 job classifications reflect textbook sexism in the workplace:  Group 1 workers (mainly male)  load trucks, drive forkhfts and do  other hauling tasks. The female-  dominated Group 2 jobs consist of  hne work—repetitive and stationary. Group 2 workers are paid 65  cents/hr less than Group 1.  The problem isn't simply a wage  difference. Kathy Schultz is classified Group 1 and calls it "the  fun work"—varied and mobile. According to Carol Todd, a worker  at the Prince Rupert Fishermen's Cooperative, Group 2 work  is "monotonous, more onerous—  Group 1 work isn't that difficult."  Entrenched ideas about 'women's work-men's work' translate  into lost opportunities for women.  "A man is hired," says Todd, "and  he's given more hours. We [women]  don't get hired for cold storage  work. He ends up with seniority  over women who started 6 months  earlier."  He also ends up with experience  driving the forkbft and "pushing  Vancouver Rape Relief  controversy re-ignites  by Esther Shannon  Criticism around Rape Relief  Women's Shelter, a local women's  service for raped and battered  women, surfaced in the mainstream media this month re-  igniting a controversy that raged  in the Vancouver women's movement in the early 1980's and has  gone underground since. While the  Vancouver Sun, in typical fashion,  framed the criticism around Rape  Relief's pohtics, the real issue is  the service the shelter provides to  victims of violence.  Chris McDoweU, instrumental  in the 1982 founding of Women  Against Violence Against Women  and a former Rape Relief collective member, leaked documents to  the media in an effort to draw pubhc attention to Rape Relief - a  service that McDowell says "hurts  women who have been raped and  battered."  In local newspaper and television coverage, McDowell, and others, charged that Rape Relief does  not provide training in crisis hne  work for volunteers, provides inadequate counselling to victims of violence and refuses to refer women  to hospitals, the pohce or escort  them through the court system.  Rape Relief spokesperson, Lee  Lakeman, a worker at the house  for the past 11 years, denies these  charges. According to Lakeman,  "There is no one clear reason or  answer for these criticisms. This is  where some women put there rage  into attacking other women because its easier to attack women.  And then some individuals are malicious and there are some who  need to debate on the basis of principle."  Saying that she was "really  tired of not being defended," Lake-  man said "Trainees are here, the  work goes on, women who are in  need stiU call, as they always do."  Rape Relief collective member  Regina Lorek, who said the centre has trained 13 new volunteers  in two training sessions this year,  said that the shelter runs training  sessions every year.  "Training sessions happen annually. We evaluate and plan every  year, two or three years ago we did  training in twos, where a couple of  women would get together with a  collective member for training."  Joni Miller, an ex-Rape Relief  member who worked at the shelter  from 1979 to 1986 and finally left  due to major disagreements with  the collective, told Kinesis that  she came into the group at one of  its last official training sessions in  1979.  buttons", as Schultz puts it, because he is allowed/expected to do  that work. The men, says Todd,  are "very traditional" as are some  of the older women workers.  Equal opportunity is Todd's  "big issue. We're capable of doing  all jobs and should have the option  of doing whatever we want." In the  last contract, a memorandum on  equahty was included, yet the in-  plant committee structure to make  actual changes is not yet in place.  This year, Schultz is proposing  for her plant that, after a certain number of hours, every interested worker be given training  in the tasks that relate to Group  1 work. (The traditional classifications would be phased out.)  Schultz envisions a cooperative  training model. "Everyone helps  out, everyone gets the training.  That's better and easier for all.  "Changing everyone's attitudes  is what this is all about."  "There may have been two others after I joined but then Lake-  man moved to abolish training  sessions. In the remaining time I  was there, there were no training sessions, everyone came in  through the groups.(Rape Relief's  Support, Education and Action  groups) Women came in through  the groups and learned constructive criticism. There was no such  thing as medical, legal or counselling training."  McDoweU says that Rape Relief "does not put women who  are raped first" and that its  approach to counselling "is hit  and miss" because they don't  do one-on-one counselling. "Rape  is so traumatic," said McDoweU, "that women need one-on-one  counselling. Women are not given  that option, basically Rape Relief  says to women in crisis 'We do  groups."'  According to Lorek, the centre  is not currently doing groups and  has always provided lengthy one-  on-one counselling. Lorek also said  media reports that the centre pressures women in crisis into pohtical  work instead of counselling them  "are simply not true. The opportunity is there and women are invited to do something, but they  have a choice."  Lorek stressed that Rape Relief does refer to pohce and hospitals and will accompany a woman  through the courts if that is her  choice.  "If a woman wants to deal with  the cops, we will try and make that  system work for her. We might be  able to get the doctor to treat her  decently, or the crown, or we might  be able to get a cop to act. Most of  the women who call are raped by  someone they know, their inclination is not to go to the pohce. One  of the first things a woman often  says to us is 'No cops."'  Lorek also said that many organizations refer to Rape Relief,  including the Vancouver pohce  which was quoted in the Sun as  saying they did not refer rape victims to the shelter.  According to Karen Gallagher,  past president of the BC and  Yukon Transition House Society  and currently co-ordinator of the  YWCA's housing registry, few organizations will refer to Rape Relief.  "The YWCA has had a pohcy  for a long time now of not referring to Rape Relief. Battered  Women's Support Services will not  refer there either and other houses  in the lower mainland also will not  refer there. Once in a while, out  of sheer desperation where there is  nothing available, people will refer  there."  The BC and Yukon Society of  Transition Houses, which provides  support, education and lobbying  on behalf of the provinces' transition houses, will be undergoing  its annual review of members in  June. Carol Ward-Hall, president  of the society, told Kinesis she  "couldn't say" whether the recent  controversy would affect Rape Re  liefs membership in the society.  (Rape Relief has been a member  since 1986.) "We will be reviewing  all member applications after our  annual general meeting in May, as  we do every year. I don't know if  there will be concerns about Rape  Relief's membership."  Vancouver's other rape crisis  centre, which began in 1982 out  of concerns about Rape Relief's  service to women, would make  no comment on the latest controversy. Women Against Violence Against Women spokesperson, Colleen Brown, said that  WAVAW wanted "To clarify that  WAVAW did not initiate this campaign against Rape Relief. We  have told women that and we're  somewhat frustrated because we  feel that people do not beheve  us and, in fact, some one else's  agenda is being imposed on us."  WAVAW will not refer women to  Rape Relief.  Meanwhile, despite criticism of  her decision to go public with  information about Rape Relief,  Chris McDoweU is adamant that  she acted properly in going to the  mainstream media with her concerns.  "I found myself in the position  of having two choices, one to stay  on the road I was on, circulating information about Rape Relief within the women's movement  and the other to go to the public,"  said McDoweU. "I picked the lesser  of two evils. Pohtical movements  cover up problems and nothing  happens, fear happens and hatred of the media is generated  but women who may be looking  for help and end up at Rape Relief don't know what is going on.  Women need to know what is happening. I'm glad it's out in the  public."  KINESIS ACROSS  B.C  xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx  N^-^^^nxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx^^  Demolitions smash housing options  by Noreen Shanahan  When a new budding shoots up  one of the most common questions  asked is 'What used to be there?'  As Vancouver's face changes,  neighbourhood by neighbourhood,  take a look around you. What used  to be there were people—people  who were packed up and swept  away shortly before the wrecking  balls came.  People hke Mabel Adams who,  at eighty-four, was recently evicted  from her home in Kerrisdale—  forced out of her community and  into a suite costing her an extra  $200 a month.  Adams and her neighbours  (mostly elderly women) recently  formed Concerned Citizens for Affordable Housing (CCAH) and express outrage at Vancouver's housing crisis.  "My neighbour down the hall  had a stroke and wUl never recover; several others have had  heart attacks. We're too old to  be told to move and we never  expected it would happen," said  Adams.  Adams' home is one of fifteen Kerrisdale buddings recently  slated for demolition.  I beUeve in sticking up for  what's right," she says. "We're not  hving in a city where freedom is  forbidden but it seems to be forbidden as far as housing goes."  CCAC, along with several other  groups, recently sponsored a thirteen point housing program on 'A  Way Out of the Crisis'.  Endorsers include: the Tenants  Rights Coalition, Vancouver Status of Women, Downtown Eastside  Women's Centre, Downtown East-  side Residents Association, End  Legislated Poverty, and the B.C.  Women's Housing Coalition.  With demolitions threatening  several  Vancouver  communities,  one of the program's priorities is to  save housing by altering this trend.  The program demands a provincial Rental Housing Protection  Act, aUowing demolition of affordable rental housing only where a  developer provides an equal number of affordable housing units or  contributes to a social housing replacement fund.  Furthermore, untU provincial  protections are in place the program caU for a Vancouver moratorium on demolition.  A demolition motion presented  by Vancouver Alderman PuU,  presently before council, contains  two parts: first, that no demolition permit be awarded unless the  budding is vacant; and that a six  month (instead of the present two  months) notice be given to tenants  before demolition.  According to David Lane of the  Tenants Rights Coalition (TRC),  this motion "has a loophole so  large you could drive a truck  through it.  "The six month notice is good,  but the main concern is that the  budding be vacant before a developer's given a demolition permit.  "BasicaUy, the landlord could  use various scare tactics to harass  tenants into moving—providing  himself first with a vacant budding and then with a permit to tear  it down."  Mere rumours of demolition, he  says, are often enough to get people packing.  What's needed in B.C., says  Lane, is a Rental Housing Protection Act such as is presently before  the Ontario Cabinet and expected  to be passed within the year.  It requires municipal approval  of a conversion/demolition and imposes a fine on a landlord for an U-  legal eviction notice and considers  tenant-harassment an offense.  SpecificaUy concerning evictions, the housing program proposed for Vancouver asks that  longer notices be given for "landlord use or redevelopment of property," with the landlord paying a  tenant's moving costs.  Members of Vancouver's English Bay Swim Club hosted the 1989 International Gay and Lesbian  Aquatics Championship at the Vancouver Aquatic Centre in late March. With a total of 200 participants from across Canada and the U.S., the meet gave out-of-town swimmers a chance to preview  pool facilities for Celebration '90. English Bay members swim three times a week for recreation and  competition—more women always welcome! Call 669-2382.  Other points include:  • fair rent review system requiring landlords to justify rent increases on the basis of increased  operating costs;  • city moratorium on conversions  from rental housing to condominiums;  • equitable system of property  taxes to protect low and middle  income homeowners;  • funding for 20,000 new social  housing units in Greater Vancouver as an immediate short-  term goal;  • municipal, provincial and federal funds to help upgrade existing affordable housing, particularly basement suites;  • city pohcy forcing megaproject  developers to provide free land  for social housing, paid for out  of the profits made from rezoning!  • increased pensions and welfare  rates reflecting current rents.  WhUe the program is directly  related to the current housing crisis, it also owes it's existence to  general frustration with the slow  pace at which government is responding to community needs.  SpecificaUy, a city councU  "Housing Symposium" slated for  May 8 deliberately excludes pubhc  input, depending instead on what  Lane calls "a few [of Mayor CampbeU's] hand-picked experts," to de-  taU both crisis and solutions.  According to Lane, CampbeU's  compromise is to 'open the doors'  to the pubhc in another councU meeting on AprU 24—but this  time speakers are given only five  minutes to discuss an "extremely  complicated, crucial issue affecting  many thousands of people.  "With any major issue there's  usuaUy months of pubhc input, including stacks of reports and specific recommendations, to which  people can specificaUy respond or  tailor their presentations. In this  case there's nothing," said Lane.  At press time, TRC intends  to unved the housing program to  council simultaneously with criticizing the process and time restriction.  Initial plans are also underway  for a 'People's Housing Symposium' sometime in the next couple  of months, where 'experts' are tenants and homeowners themselves.  Women students  make less  by Terrie Hamazaki  Women students are earning  less and borrowing more than their  male counterparts, according to  a University of Victoria in-house  study on student summer employment.  In 1988, men were five times  as hkely as women to earn $6,000  in the summer, which stiU isn't  enough to cover costs for the academic year, said Pam Frache, Pacific Region Chairperson of the  Canadian Federation of Students  (CFS).  The implication is that women  students have to take out more  student loans to finance their  education because the odds of  their making enough are pretty  marginal, she said.  Frache pointed to statistics  compiled from Employment and  Immigration Canada data which  indicate noticeable gaps in wage  levels between men and women under their student Summer Experience/Employment Development  (SEED) program. The largest  component of a series of programs  called Challenge, SEED provides  wage subsidies to employers in various sectors and employs almost 20  percent of the student population.  "The program is supposed to  operate on a cost-sharing basis,  but employers aren't topping up  women's wages to the extent they  are men's wages," Frache said.  On a national scale, the hourly  wage rates were higher in the private sector where women were  under-represented, and lower in  the non-profit sector where they  were over-represented. And in  British Columbia, the largest discrepancy occurred in the public  sector where women earned an  hourly wage of $6.73 to men's  $7.56.  "This is particularly reprehensible because of the federal Employment Equity Act, whereby they  are supposed to pay on an equal  basis. Yet here they're doing it  themselves, and they don't care,"  said Frache.  Noreen CampbeU, Challenge  Program Co-ordinator (B.C./Yu-  kon Region), was quick to agree  with the wage gap analysis, but  added that she would be looking  at where and why this was happening in that group.  Added Frache, "Programs hke  Challenge only reinforce the idea  that women are clustered in the  lowest paying jobs. The government should be making sure  there's an affirmative action top-  up program for women, making  sure these jobs are created in decent paying areas."  Jobs under the Challenge program last an average of six to eight  weeks and pay on average $2,141,  compared to the needed $6,000  per year for tuition and hving expenses.  The UVic report cited that men  are nearly three times as hkely as  women to be able to meet aU costs  of attending school. Also, more  women than men can expect to finance their academic year through  student loans.  "This is ironic because we've always said that the best form of student aid is a decent paying summer job," said Frache.  The Women's Steering Committee of the CFS is to develop a campaign around the wage gap issue  over the summer.  4 KINESIS Across B.C.  ////////////////y.  AIDS: Putting women in the picture  by Laura Busheikin  We don't have to look any further than  the comics for some insight into our collective psyche. Doonesbury's recent AIDS series in The Vancouver Sun has, with relentless grim humour, driven home the point  that AIDS is "something society has yet to  come to terms with."  "For most patients, AIDS is a stigma on  top of a stigma," says a doctor in one of cartoonist G.B. Trudeau's sketches.  For most patients. That phase makes  tidy work of the whole issue of women with  AIDS. Of course, for the purposes of a four-  frame comic strip, Trudeau has to keep  things simple, so he sticks with the typical idea of the AIDS patient—a gay man.  At least Trudeau included the brief phrase  which acknowledges that the AIDS picture  isn't so simple.  Unfortunately the "serious" media rarely  does as much as that. It presents AIDS as  a disease affecting primardy gay men, and  secondly, intravenous drug users. And most  people, men and women, think of AIDS this  way.  But the incidence of AIDS among women  is much higher than most people think, and  it's on the rise. It's time people started including women in their mental pictures of  AIDS.  So says Ines Rieder, co-editor of a book  called AIDS: The Women, published by  Cleis Press. She and Patricia Ruppelt created the book to even out the unbalanced  perception of AIDS, to make people aware  that women can and do get AIDS. Their  other aim is to examine the role of women—  mothers, doctors, nurses, lovers, wives—  who've taken care of people with AIDS.  The book tells the stories of 40 women—  heterosexual women with AIDS, lesbians  with AIDS, women whose husbands, brothers, chUdren, lovers and friends have AIDS,  women who take care of AIDS patients,  write about AIDS, and women who are po-  UticaUy active, fighting for better care and  prevention of AIDS.  "Up until this point these women have  not been shown to the world; they've been  kept invisible," says Rieder, who was in  Vancouver in mid-AprU to read from the  book. If information about women and  AIDS is made pubhc at aU, "It's buried  on page 59 in the back of the New York  Times," Rieder says.  The misinformation about women and  AIDS has serious consequences, Rieder says.  It contributes to the incidence of AIDS  among women by lulling women into a  false sense of invulnerability. It means that  women may not get properly diagnosed as  having AIDS. And it means that women  with ADDS often find themselves isolated  and frustrated, because the support and  care-giving systems for people with ADDS  are primardy aimed at men.  For gay men with AIDS, going public  about their Ulness is fraught with difficulties, as most of us know. But less weU-known  are the stresses faced by women with AIDS  who want to come out to the community.  AIDS intensifies  existing problems  Lots of the women have chUdren. The big  fear is that something wUl happen to the  family, that the chUdren wUl suffer discrimination, or be forced to leave school, or even  that their house wUl be vandalized, Rieder  says.  And whereas gay men with AIDS are usuaUy part of a gay community and as a result have community support, women with  AIDS aren't usuaUy part of a social group  that has any experience dealing with the  disease, let alone one that is organized to  provide emotional, financial, political and  medical support for people with AIDS.  Women who take care of people with  AIDS, whether professionaUy or personaUy,  have their own sets of problems.  Program focus on attitudes  by Laura Busheikin  There's more to AIDS education than explaining how and why people get the disease.  Beyond these important issues hes another: workplace discrimination towards people with  AIDS.  A new Vancouver AIDS-in-the-workplace education program focuses on people's attitudes to co-workers with AIDS. The program has been developed by the Vancouver Health  Department for ah 6000 City of Vancouver employees.  The program is needed to prevent a crisis in the workplace, says program coordinator  Lesley Wagman. "There wUl be more and more people with AIDS and HIV-positive working and we want to make sure they work in an environment that's non-discriminatory.  "In the past people have had to quit and they won't make a stink because it often means  coming out as gay. It's an incredible added stress to an UI person.  "People may be knowledgeable (about ADDS facts) but that doesn't mean they'U be any  more accepting of people with AIDS," she says.  The program brings together small groups in a workshop format, with lots of discussions  as weU as exercises which give people a chance to look at these issues.  "People wUl have the opportunity to look at their emotional response to someone with  AIDS. To examine why they're able to offer support and sympathy to someone who got  it through transfusions rather than sex or drugs, why it's so important to find out how  someone got the disease," Wagman says.  "That's the biggest concern people have. When they find out someone has AIDS, the  first thing they want to know is how did they get it," she adds.  People who are away sick from work often return to find co- workers have spread rumours that they have AIDS. "H they're a gay man there's an automatic assumption that  it's AIDS and people stay away from them in the future," Wagman says.  The program is approved by management and labour. It's not mandatory but it wiU occur during worktime and everyone is highly encouraged to attend, Wagman says.  "For a long time, and I think it's slowly  changing now, most of the people who came  into agencies or into hospitals were men.  It was easier for women to distance themselves. I think for any woman who works  professionaUy in the AIDS field, it always  has a big impact when she deals with her  first AIDS patient," Rieder says.  Also, women in general have been more  conditioned to be care- givers, and so they  take on heavier burdens, or feel their burdens more heavdy, than most men, Rieder  says.  "In many situations women are the ones  health care. There's an absolute need, a crying need for a comprehensive health care  system. In the U.S. you hear aU sorts of stories of people who can't afford to pay for  AZT" [an AIDS drug], Rieder says.  The international picture poses even  deeper problems. Rieder, who interviewed  women from aU over the world for her book,  describes the situation in Braril:  "BrazU has the second-highest number of  reported AIDS cases, and the Brazilian government is bankrupt. Period. So the BrazU-  ians don't only have to worry about the dy-  New York City, January 1988.  who end up getting really involved and who  have a hard time distancing themselves,"  Rieder says. "Women get involved to a  greater degree, and then of course become  much more exhausted. So women need to  look at their caregiver roles from a different  perspective.  "And the other thing that happens is  that, as elsewhere in society, women end up  having the lower paying jobs, making much  less money than most of the men who work  in these fields," and getting less input into  decision-making, Rieder says.  Rieder's attention to the role of AIDS  caregivers moves beyond gender-specific  analysis. She calls for better working conditions for aU people working in the social  services.  "People who take care of people with  ADDS—and not only those people but anyone who works in any kind of social service organization—those people have to be  treated with special care by the rest of society. They need lots of vacation in order to  recharge, and if you don't give it to them  they wiU burn out. H you work in a social  service field you need to have three months  paid vacation, just hke teachers. And you  should not be working more than 40 hours  a week," she says.  When Rieder talks about the problems  raised by the AIDS epidemic, she often  moves into wider issues. She makes it clear  that the AIDS epidemic intensifies already  existing problems, and dealing with AIDS is  going to mean making sweeping economic,  pohtical and social change.  In the United States, the AIDS epidemic  sheds a glaring hght on the country's complete lack of medical coverage.  "Millions of people in the U.S. have no  ing rain forests, they have to worry about  the lack of money and the lack of any kind  of [health care] organization. The publi<  health care system in Rio de Janeiro has  been shut down since last faU. The city is  bankrupt. Pubhc hospitals often don't have  beds, don't have enough medication, enough  syringes—they don't have what is needed to  keep a hospital going. What that means is  if you're poor and if you're sick, weU, tough  luck. Stay at home and die.  "Large numbers of people just die without ever getting a diagnosis, without ever  getting to a hospital. The other side of it is  how are you ever going to have a preventative strategy. H you have money you can go  to the private hospitals, but if you're poor  and hve in the slums you might not have access to everything you need in order to have  safe sex.  "This is a question I ask again and  again—what kind of strategies can you have  in countries hke that? And that demands international economic change that far transcends just dealing with AIDS. H you are  confronted with a pandemic, which is a disease that appears in every corner of the  world, you have to come up with global  strategies. This doesn't mean you shouldn't  have local strategies, you need local strategies, but you need the global plan too,"  Rieder says.  In her world-wide research into AIDS,  Rieder did find much that was encouraging.  For instance, a look at Japan shows that  safe- sex practices do work.  "Japan has an extremely low rate of  AIDS and people there have been using condoms for birth control. At most, ten percent  See AIDS p. 8  KINESIS xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx^  Across Canada  ^S^x^^xxxx^^  \**^***SXXXXXXXXX**>N^^  by Donna Butorac  YOOP  yelps  A Yukon woman has won the right to become a member of the ah-male Yukon Order  of Pioneers (YOOP). The ruhng, handed  down by a Yukon human rights board of  adjudication, sets a Canadian precedent, in  that it is the first case on sex discrimination in male-only clubs that has gone to a  tribunal decision. Reacting immediately to  the decision, YOOP filed an appeal with  the Yukon Supreme Court. An executive  member of the Grand Lodge of YOOP says  that the group is a men's order and is not  scream that they are murderers. Chnic doctors say that the constant noise and harassment disturbs a sensitive medical practice  and puts patients at risk.  According to Andrea Knight, director of  the Morgentaler clinic, the success of Vancouver's Everywoman's Health Centre in  gaining a court injunction against protesters  has encouraged them to take simUar action. The Morgentaler chnic hopes that the  threat of prison terms wUl reduce both major blockades and dady incidents of harassment of clinic staff and patients. Lawyer for  Campaign Life, Stephen Jalsevac, says that  they wUl fight the injunction application.  Source: Globe and Mail  Give me  money  about to change. Says Lawrence Cyr, "I  don't want to walk into a meeting and see a  woman sitting there knitting." The YOOP  constitution says that members must be residents of the Yukon for 20 years. There is  no clause which explicitly excludes women  from membership.  The woman, Madelaine Gould, has hved  in the Yukon since 1946 and has worked  for YOOP in many fundraising and social activities. She beheves women hke herself deserve to be recognized as Yukon pioneers. In its submission to the hearing, the  Yukon Status of Women CouncU (YSWC)  argued that YOOP provides a pubhc service by coUecting and preserving the history  of the Yukon. By excluding women from  this activity, YOOP discriminates against  aU Yukon women by putting forward a onesided interpretation of history. YSWC is  seeking legal counsel to help them prepare  for the Supreme Court hearing, and hopes  to receive support through national groups  such as LEAF. Source: OptiMSt  Injunction  sought  The Morgentaler abortion chnic in Toronto has apphed for a Supreme Court injunction to prevent protesters from picketing outside the chnic. After five years of  noisy and sometimes frightening protests,  patients, doctors and staff at the chnic say  they can no longer tolerate the harassment  carried out by the Campaign Life Coalition,  and assisted in recent months by the U.S.-  based Operation Rescue.  Patients often arrive at the clinic in a  distressed state, after running the gauntlet of protesters who wave plastic fetuses  or bloody photographs in their faces and  The Canadian Women's Foundation  (CWF) was launched recently by a handful  of Canadian women. It is the first national  phdanthropic foundation aimed at encouraging the very rich to help women and girls.  According to Toronto feminist Nancy Jack-  man, "Our chaUenge in the next year is to  raise $20 million which, with a government  about to wipe out women's funding, is going to be fun." The money wUl be used to  provide start-up funds for projects that help  eradicate discrimination.  Establishment of the CWF foUows a  trend in the U.S., where aggressive fundraising among the very wealthy to pay the  women's movement's biU is a growing phenomenon. Ms. Jackman said that she is  aware of only a handful of Canadian women  who have donated more than $50,000  to charity. The CWF wUl seek money  from wealthy individuals, corporations and  unions. Source: Globe and Mail  Abuse  epidemic  Studies of chUd sexual abuse in Canada  indicate that the incidence could be in the  range of one in every three or four chUdren.  After 17 months examining chUd sex abuse,  Rix Rogers, special advisor to federal health  minister Perrin Beatty, beheves senior levels of government need to develop a comprehensive strategy to deal with what he considers to be a problem of epidemic proportions.  Existing treatment services and the  courts have been overwhelmed by the scope  of the problem, according to Rogers, who  beheves the social and chUd care system in  Canada wUl need more funds and structural  reorganization if it is to deal effectively with  chUd sexual abuse. Rogers beheves catching and punishing offenders is not enough.  "The attitude that aUows abuse to persist  must be changed," he said. "Long term education is required, because it involves the  male and female roles in sexuahty, the use  of power and the sanctity of the famUy."  Source: Globe and Mail  Job rights  The Saskatchewan government and the  Saskatchewan Government Employee's  Union (SGEU) have signed an interim  agreement on an affirmative action plan to  cover permanent and non-permanent employees in the public service. The plan  wUl target Native people and people with  physical disabilities, who are both under-  represented throughout the entire pubhc service, and women, who are over-  represented in low-paying traditional occupations. As of March 1988, women made up  only 13.5 percent of upper management and  professional levels, and 11 percent of other  non-traditional positions. The interim plan  wUl not address pay equity, but wiU attempt  to encourage the hiring and promotion of  members of the target groups. Source: Network  Native  people  ignored  The annual report of the Canadian Human Rights Commission finds that Native  people face the worst discrimination. According to the report, "The grand promise  of equal opportunity that forms the central purpose of the Canadian Human Rights  Act stands in stark contrast to the conditions in which many Native people hve."  Native people are systematically UI-treated  and their concerns ignored in the justice system, in government and in the job market.  The commission's report suggests persuasive arguments to be made for a royal commission into aboriginal rights, and urges any  kind of inquiry or discussion that would lead  to greater awareness of the human rights  abuses routinely suffered by Native people.  The CHRC report is also highly critical of  the lack of progress being made on women's  employment equity in the private and pubhc sector. It states that "sex discrimination  is the most pervasive and persistent form  of discrimination in our society." The report also states that many disabled people are still patronized or ignored, and that  there is disturbing evidence of racism in  many regions of the country. According to  Max Yalden, chief commissioner, "There are  stUl far too many people for whom the legal promises of equahty are empty phrases."  Source: Globe and Mail  Prison  rights  LEAF has recently been preparing a legal challenge to the Saskatchewan provincial prison facilities for women. The organization has taken up the case of a woman  who was sentenced federally but was transferred to the provincial facility at Pinegrove,  through an exchange of services agreement  between the federal and provincial governments. Such agreements are crucial for  women prisoners as there is only one federal penitentiary, in Ontario, so transferral  means that women are sometimes able to  serve their sentences in their home province,  closer to famUy and friends.  LEAF wUl chaUenge the provincial correctional centre because women who take  advantage of the transfer agreement often  find themselves facing worse circumstances  than they faced in the federal prison in Ontario. LEAF wUl argue that women at Pine-  grove Centre are disadvantaged in respect  of education, recreation, work opportunities  and general Uving conditions as compared  to male inmates and federaUy incarcerated  women. They also do not have the same opportunities for parole as male inmates, as  there is no halfway house for women.  Approximately 80 percent of the inmate  population at Pinegrove is Native, so the  legal chaUenge wUl also Ulustrate the problems of double disadvantage faced by Native  women. Source: LEAF  Doubled  workforce  Statistics compUed by the Department  of Labour Women's Division in P.E.I, show  that the number of women working in the  paid labour force on the island has almost  doubled in the past 15 years. According to  the statistics, the female working-age population increased in size by 27.5 percent between 1971 and 1986. Participation rates  increased substantiaUy for aU categories—  single, married, widowed, separated and  divorced. P.E.I, women continue to work  in occupations which they have tradition-  aUy dominated—clerical, service, medicine  and health, teaching, processing, managerial, administration and related occupations  held 76.6 percent of working women in 1986.  Women continued to form the majority of  part-time employees, but there has been a  shght shift to fuU-time work. Source: Common Ground  Abortion  funded  New Brunswick women wUl now be free  to have abortions performed elsewhere in  Canada and have them paid for by medicare, foUowing a decision handed down by  the provincial court of Queen's Bench. The  court ruhng overturns New Brunswick's  year-old abortion pohcy, under which the  operation was covered by medicare only if  two doctors certified it was medically necessary and if it was performed in an accredited hospital by an obstetrician or gynecologist. The pohcy -was challenged by  Dr. Henry Morgentaler in February, after  he was refused medicare payments for three  abortions he performed on New Brunswick  women in Montreal.  In handing down his decision, Judge  Ronald Stevenson stated that "It is unrealistic to superimpose New Brunswick regulations or pohcies in respect of services furnished to a resident whUe she is temporarily  absent from the province." Lawyer Richard  Scott, counsel for Morgentaler, said Judge  Stevenson's decision was a clear rebuke for  the provincial government's handling of the  abortion issue. Source: Globe and Mail  KINESIS Across Canada  Young Offenders Act to be revised  by Kim Irving  Canada's Young Offenders Act (YOA)  is once again under attack. Not quite five  years old, the legislation has been criticized  for not being tough enough on adolescent  criminals. Federal and provincial legislators  are expected to meet this June to decide on  the amendments to the act which are expected to include extending the maximum  sentence for murder to as high as seven  years (from the present three years) and  unifying procedures for transferring youths  to adult courts.  The YOA became law in 1984 and was  intended to replace the often paternalistic  JuvenUe Dehquent Act (JDA) which had  existed since 1908. The JDA was based on  a "chUd welfare model" which viewed adolescent crime as anti-social behaviour, often based on psychological or environmental factors. The JDA emphasized education  and treatment for convicted juvendes but  was eventuaUy recognized as fading in both  areas. Under the JDA, chUdren as young  as seven could be classified as delinquents  and receive whatever treatment the court  deemed to be necessary.  With the rise of more hberal attitudes in  correctional thinking in the 60's and 70's  criticism of the JDA heightened. Legislators spent two decades hstening to debates  and suggestions for changes in the JDA.  Law enforcement groups argued for more  'crime control" structures that would pri  oritize the protection of communities and  ensure that criminals were punished. ChUdren's rights groups lobbied for "community change" standards that reflected simUar goals as the chUd welfare model but  also took into consideration the inequality  of youth and their class and cultural background. The new act was seen by legislators  as a balance between the offender's rights  and the rights of the community.  The introduction of the YOA presented  a new relationship between young offenders and the courts. The YOA acknowledged  that adults between the ages of 12 and 17  were capable of independent thought and  therefore could be held responsible for their  actions.  However, with the "good" intention of  protecting the special needs of adolescents,  the act also states that young offenders cannot always be accountable for their actions  in the same manner as adults.  As the Conservative government stepped  into office, critics of the YOA soon lined  up at their door. Law enforcers wanted a  lower age minimum and the right to hold  records of convicted offenders. (Records of  young offenders must be destroyed in five  years.) Social agencies beheved the law reflected current trends in the U.S. criminal  justice system where punishment for crimes  is preferred over renabditation or treatment. IronicaUy, the main group that the  act affected, adolescents, were never asked  for their opinion.  Young and  incarcerated  by Kim Irving  The foUowing Kinesis interviews were  conducted at an open custody unit of HoUy  Detention, one of the few and often overcrowded jads in B.C. for adolescent girls. As  stated in the Young Offenders Act (YOA),  adolescents charged with crimes cannot be  identified, so these young women have identified themselves by their street names.  This three bedroom paint-chipped house  is situated along Burnaby's busiest commuter highway. It is an overflow unit for  young women between the ages of 12 to 17  who have been charged with YOA crimes.  It's an open-custody unit, therefore no bars  or lock reinforcements appear on the door  or windows and they sleep two, sometimes  three to a room.  The majority of young women arrive here  because of breach of probation. Either they  missed an appointment with the probation  officer or court; or they chaUenged certain restrictions within their probation order (such as staying out past curfew).  Although sentences vary, staff guess the  average stay in open custody is six months.  Most "crimes" are minor offences such as  shophfting, break and enter or prostitution.  A day at HoUy is hkely spent in school.  After school programs consist of sewing,  cooking, arts and crafts, Christianity and  Alcoholic Anomoymous. The young women  work on a reward system from level 1 to  level 4, where they are rewarded for showing appropriate behaviour. On the program  they can earn up to six dollars a week.  Many girls arriving at these units have  spent time at a JuvenUe Detention Centre  (JDC), a closed-custody unit. The differences are aU too clear. In JDC, offenders  are locked into the grounds and are locked  in their rooms overnight. The young women  of this unit report staff at JDC are too authoritarian, choosing favourites and are inconsistent with the rules. TechnicaUy, to be  placed in JDC is dependent on the seriousness of your crime; in practise it could be  dependent on what judge you get.  Midnight, a 16 year old Native woman  sits quietly whUe the others talk, her slashed  arms hidden by sleeves. She said she was  with Vancouver's Los Diablos street gang  when she was arrested. She got 6 months  for break and enter; 6 weeks for assault.  Midnight confirms that she was weU aware  of her rights when arrested and credits her  lawyer for her reduced sentence. She remains critical of the time she spent in JDC.  "It sucks. There's no outdoors, you can only  see a bit through the fence."  Spike explains she was prostituting from  the age of 13. She's now 17, and has spent  most of her adolescence on and off probation. She describes her parents as always into drugs and alcohol. At one point,  she was shooting drugs. "When I break,  I turn to drugs." She's now in for breach  of probation—'not staying where directed'.  Her usual haunt, Princess and East Hastings is now a restricted area in her probation, as weU as several other locations  throughout the downtown and downtown  In October 1988, the Canadian Journal  of Criminology conducted a study with adolescents on their understanding of the YOA.  Of the mixed group of males and females,  one out of ten said they had never heard  of the YOA (although 75 percent had had  some contact with pohce officers).  In another study by the Canadian Journal of Behavioral Sciences, chUdren between  the grades of five and eight were poUed on  their understanding of crime and criminal  behaviour. Researchers were curious about  the hnk between the young people's under  standing of what criminal behaviour was  and their understanding of individual responsibility. ChUdren in the study generaUy  understood simplistic crimes although thev  were not fuUy aware of the YOA. However,  attitude towards crime varied greatly. Girls  tended to rate crime as less serious depending on the age of the offender. The study  concluded that criminal behaviour was seen  as more acceptable amongst males. However, the males' poU results gave "high gravity ratings" to female offenders, reflecting a  social ideal that women should not be involved in criminal offences.  Three months on the street..."Scary. I didn't  know much and I didn't know how to fight."  eastside. Spike admits that the cops pick on  her, and if they see her in these areas they  nab her. I ask her if she's aware that once  she's 18 and ever charged, she can be sent  to a adult prison. Spike nods, she knows and  almost too casuaUy states, "I have to hang  around with the right crowd. Keep away  from restricted areas."  My last interview is with Christina, a  soft-spoken apprehensive 13 year old. She  is serving time for breach of probation.  She had run away from her foster home in  Courtney, a place she says is intolerable, after being charged with theft (shoplifting).  She spent the next three months on the  street in Naniamo, a first time event she  remembers as: "Scary. I didn't know much  and I didn't know how to fight." Christina  doesn't have fond memories of JDC, where  because of her age and inexperience she  was "heavied"—picked on. She's bitter of  the whole social service system and doesn't  see it as helpful. "They don't care about  me, so I'm not going to care about them,"  Christina said in response to her completing the year and half probation order. "I  get more pissed off in here, but I guess  they're trying to teach us aU a lesson." She  beheves if she had breached in Vancouver,  rather than Courtney, she would have got  less time. Not surprisingly, Christina feels  13 years old is too young to be in jaU. "The  minimum should be 15," she states firmly.  "Younger kids should have to do community work or something."  KINESIS Across Canada  In June 1985, 17 Canadian women with  disabilities gathered to discuss concerns  which were not specificaUy being addressed  either by the women's movement or by  the disabled consumer's movement. These  women saw the creation of DAWN Canada:  DisAbled Women's Network, which aims to  overcome the oppressive barriers of being  female and disabled. DAWN Canada is now  affiliated with the National Action Committee on the Status of Women (NAC) and  an associate member of the Coalition  of Provincial Organizations of the Handi-  tpped (COPOH).  March 23-27, 1989 at Crescent Beach,  British Columbia was an exciting and  ground-breaking weekend for DAWN Canada. The Parenting Workshop, one of the major events of the weekend, saw the first-ever  gathering of mothers with disabilities from  across Canada to discuss the barriers that  we face as parents, such as:  • Myths and negative stereotypes  • Community hving, i.e., inaccessible recreational facilities and transportation  • FamUy housing barriers, i.e., physical, financial and procedural.  Linda Ervin, who facilitated the workshop, led the women through the issues to  formulating recommendations toward overcoming these barriers. The recommendations were brought to the Annual General  Meeting where they received unanimous acceptance. Two of the recommendations are  highlighted here:  DAWN AGM focus on mothering  by Cynthea Topham  • That the DAWN Canada Mothers Caucus act as a liaison with other national  consumer groups on issues of concern to  disabled mothers  • That DAWN Canada apply for and administer a grant for a three to five year  project that would facilitate the resolution of the issues identified and prioritized by the Mothers Caucus parenting workshop, including: mother support  groups, information and referral, technical aids and attendant services, access to  daycare and other services, lobbying for  increased funding and legislation. This  could include: research, a position paper,  resource handbook, community outreach  worker, travel and advocacy work.  The Mothers Caucus was formed at the  Parenting Workshop to review the issues  put forth and to develop specific proposals for the Annual General Meeting. The  Caucus wiU continue to work on behalf of  DAWN Canada and ensure that our issues  as mothers with disabilities are adequately  addressed at the national level.  The DAWN Canada Board of Directors came together to discuss four papers  which had been developed from a questionnaire sent to women with disabilities almost one year ago. The papers, written  by Jillian Ridington, The Only Parent  in the Neighbourhood: Mothering and  Women With Disabilities; Who Do We  Think We Are? Self-image and Women  With Disabilities; Beating the'Odds:'  Violence and Women With Disabilities,  and Different Therefore Unequal: Disabled Women and Employment officiaUy  present DAWN Canada's positions on these  issues.  Three of the position papers resulted in  some very strong recommendations from  the Board of DAWN Canada. No recommendations were written for the paper on  self-image because self-image is so closely  tied in with the other three issues. Some of  the recommendations arising from the papers on violence and employment are as follows:  • That DAWN Canada demand that young  girls and young women with disabilities  have access to high quahty sex-education  materials, and that, whenever and wherever possible, these materials be designed  to take into account the needs of girls and  women with every type of disabihty  • That DAWN Canada demand that aU  monies allocated for the establishment  of transition houses or the expansion of  existing transition houses be conditional  on the houses being totaUy accessible to  women with aU types of disabilities; and  that DAWN Canada and/or its designated affiliates be consulted prior to action regarding accessibihty  • That DAWN Canada work to heighten  the awareness of planners and directors  of job development programs for women  regarding our needs, and work with them  to make job entry and re-entry easier  • That DAWN Canada recommend that  the federal government put in place  stronger sanctions and augment the authority of the Canadian Human Rights  Commission to rigidly enforce stronger  Si/  m  National ACCESS Awareness Week  National Access Awareness Week is being celebrated for the second year from June 4-10, 1989. It is an opportunity for Canadians to participate in making Canada the best place in the world for people with disabilities to hve. Furthering the integration of people with disabilities into the "five star" community areas is what NAAW is aU about. These areas are transportation,  housing, employment, recreation and education.  DAWN Canada is a national partner in NAAW along with many other organizations of and for persons with a disabihty and  private sector sponsors. At a recent annual general meeting we endorsed our participation in this event. DAWN Canada is encouraging all member and affiliate groups to participate in NAAW by sponsoring information forums on the meaning of accessibility for members of the women's community.  We would hke to take this opportunity to invite you to join us in celebrating another aspect of the hberation of women with  disabilities—access—and get in touch with the DAWN Canada representative in your area:  Lona Hobbs, Yukon (403) 633-5850; Joan Meister, British Columbia (604) 254-8586; Reva Hutkin, British Columbia (604) 254-  8586; Tanis Doe, Alberta (403) 963-0650 (TDD or Message Relay Centre); Judy Ryan, Saskatchewan (306) 543-9227; Cynthea  Topham, Manitoba (204) 474-0047 (TDD or Message Relay Centre); Paula Keirstead, Manitoba (204) 943-2092; Pat Israel, Ontario (416) 755-6060; Linda WaUbaum, Ontario (416) 482-8253; Maria Barile, Quebec (514) 725-4123; Anita Matheson, Quebec  (514) 272-0450.  KINESIS      ^T  sanctions against employers who do not  comply with  the  Employment Equity  Act.  AU four of the position papers wUl soon  be avaUable for distribution. We wUl send  them out to anyone who wishes to obtain a  copy of aU or of selected papers for a smaU  cost.  If you wish to get more infon  tion about the position papers or about  DAWN Canada in general you may  contact us at DAWN Canada, 776 E.  Georgia St., Vancouver, B.C. V6A 2A3  or phone (604) 254-3585 (Voice/TDD).  AIDS from p. 5  of women use the birth control pUl for birth  control. Condoms are sold by women condom peddlers who go door to door selling  them to women."  She's also seen that in many places  women are beginning to organize to cope  with AIDS.  "In Europe, women have set up special  caucuses and special task forces just to deal  with women with AIDS and to deal with  women who work in the AIDS field. In many  places in the U.S. there are women's networks, groups, task forces. San Francisco  now has a program to start a women's hospice.  "In Zimbabwe, the women's action group,  a women's organization that's been around  for several years now, is doing AIDS work  now. In Nairobi, women health workers  have made a big effort to educate specifically women sex workers to use condoms.  In Bangkok there's this groups that's going  around working in the bars where the sex  workers are distributing information about  safer sex and handing out condoms and  talking to people about drug use," she says.  The priorities for dealing with AIDS are  very different in different countries, Rieder  says. Canada, and other countries which  have a comprehensive health-care system,  need to focus on coming up with preventative strategies, making AIDS education effective, avoiding society lashing out at people with AIDS, and making hfe for people  who are HIV infected as easy and pleasant  The main message she hopes to pass on to  people reading her book here and in Western Europe is everyone must practice safe  sex.  "I hope people walk away questioning  their sexual practices—what they're doing,  why they're doing it, who they're doing it  with," she says.  For a women to say AIDS has nothing to  do with her is hke seeing a hand in front of  your face and saying it's not a hand, Rieder  says.  Next issue, Celeste George will report  on AIDS and the Native community. yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy/"""""  //////////////////^^^^^^  ///////////////////////^^^^^  International  Consciously interrupting oppression  by Celeste George  The Women Against Racism Committee  of the Women's Resource and Action Centre of the University of Iowa presented a national conference on racism and other oppressions on AprU 6-9, 1989, at the Iowa  City university. Through the generous financial help of my aUy, Sarah Davidson, I  attended as someone who does anti-racism  work through leading and organizing workshops. It was a totally worthwhde experience. I learned from the negative as weU  as the positive experiences. The four-day  conference was dedicated to the memory of  Ricky Sherover-Marcuse, a Jewish American anti-racism activist who died last December. Her vision, leadership and inspiration was apparent in how the conference was  structured.  In the morning of each day there was a  plenary composed of a panel of women activists around different oppressions. Each  spoke on a theme for the day. The organizers were careful to include diverse issues  presented by a multicultural panel.  In the afternoon workshops fiUed three  time slots of one and a half hour each, with  10 to 15 workshops in each slot. There were  over 110 workshops presented with some  added or dropped late. The workshops fell  under categories of either personal, community or academic orientation which helped  in making choices. Some were a mixture of  styles; personal and pohtical, for example.  Myths and Misinformation  The conference began on a Thursday with  the plenary panel addressing the issue of  Myths and Misinformation. Bernice Men-  nis is a Jewish femimst college teacher who  has been published in two anthologies, Nice  Jewish Girls and The Tribe of Dina. She  spoke of how it is important to know where  we are coming from, not to see our experiences as universal, but to see ourselves only  in terms of our identity and our labels, to  see our experiences as totaUy different from  others is equaUy dangerous. It keeps up a  central Ulusion about us— that we're different, not really human beings.  The myths of society that keep the oppressions going she caUed Ulusions. "There  is a difference between our Ulusions and our  "At the risk of being  controversial, in the  1990's all 'white'  women's organizations  should strive to make  themselves obsolete!"  Angela Davis  visions. Ulusions always come from the outside and when our Ulusions are shattered we  feel afraid and disappointed. But the breakdown of Ulusions is the beginning of learning our visions." Myths are a whole set of  attitudes, assumptions, feehngs and behefs  that we have about those we perceive as different from ourselves.  Mennis spoke about the internalized oppression of feehng that "we as lesbians and  Jews somehow invite violence, we are the  cause of our own oppression. We distort  ourselves for their approval. Racism, anti-  semitism, ableism and heterosexism are not  based on anyone's experience of us but  rather they are mindsets that exist completely apart from any experiential reality  and despite the reality." We can "hold on to  our Ulusions hke death untU they kih us."  She said about exclusion, "Sometimes  I'm not aware of the pain of deprivation  untU I feel the joy when the deprivation  is removed. When parents of gays and lesbians spoke with pride of their chUdren at  a march it was my tears of joy that showed  how deeply I was touched by the act of inclusion, how painful the act of exclusion.  "The denial of our own reality is to keep  the Ulusion alive ... Sometimes it's hard  to see the separation of being stuck in the  past and learning from the past ... The  main Ulusion of pohtical radicals is the behef that because we are politically conscious  we are not guUty of being conditioned by  the past. The consciousness of our rational  mind makes us immune to society's poisons.  That we are superior somehow ... We deny  our shadows, project onto others the op-  pressiveness, we become self-righteousness  I talk about disabihty rights, everybody  becomes disabled. People start telhng me  about the time they broke their leg. There is  a concrete difference between someone who  is socially oppressed as a disabled person  and someone who has ordinary limitations  that everyone in the world hves with."  Toni Cade Bambara is someone harder to  quote from, paradoxicaUy because she is so  eloquent. She weaves a tapestry of common  sense, pohtical commentary; stories about  the myths that separate us.  She spoke of her grandma who said that  once upon a time people told stories to explain the nature of things such as their origins. She said it was the explanations industry that created 'myths.' The purpose was  "I come from a long line of resistors and  survivors. I'm not being politically correct  when I do this. It's a necessity."  Lakota Harden    ... There is no credit, no blame. We are  not responsible for how we were socialized.  AU isms wUl be destroyed by respect, love  for our humanness."  Ann Finger is a disabled woman, a student at UCLA and an activist. She said  the first myth she wanted to mention was  that disabled people are inferior. "In the  women's movement we are afraid to talk  about disabihty, using words hke 'physicahy  chaUenged,' 'differently abled.' I am disabled. It is nothing to be ashamed of, nothing to be euphemized over.  "The second myth is that disabled people are not sociaUy oppressed. Our oppression is sort of 'natural.' That therefore we  need to be 'helped.' Progressive people talk  about disabled people needing more social  services. One thing I want to say strongly  is we don't need more social workers! What  we need is an end to our oppression.  "The oppression of disabled people is so  budt into the environment that we don't  even begin to see it. Architectural inac-  cessibdity remains a continuing problem.  Social acceptabihty—how comfortable are  you about someone severely disabled sitting  next to you at a restaurant? We also emphasize separateness of accessibihty, wheelchair ramps are placed to the side disguised  by shrubs, hidden away."  She spoke about the history of the oppression. For example, the eugenics movement in the States was a social movement  to get 'good' people with 'good' genes to reproduce and to keep disabled people from  reproducing. The Nazis took up the concept  using the U.S. model. The first gas chambers were set up for disabled people. Some  80,000-200,000 people were kUled. This was  a training ground for what happened to  Jewish people, and others, later. Another  myth is, "You never had it so good," which  keeps us grateful, keeps us sUent, ahistori-  cal."  There are also counter myths - ones that  disabled people also beheve - that Ann  spoke of as not being useful. She cited some  examples. Counter myth one: All disabled  people can work. Some disabled people  can't work, due to pain, etc. The fact "...  that society uses productivity as a prime determinant of someone's human value needs  to be challenged."  Counter myth two: The wheelchair athlete syndrome. "This is the classic paraplegic, otherwise very healthy, male with big  muscles. This is saying it's okay to be in a  wheelchair, as long as you can do something  that most other people can't do. What these  images don't show is disabled people doing  ordinary things hke surviving."  Finger also talked about how "When  to mask the nature of things, designed to  fuck us up, to master us. Example: African  slaves had something called dipsomania—  the incurable urge to run away. The myth of  inferiority keeps racism going. 'Myths' have  no connections with reality—when they are  used to have connection with reality they  can kdl us. Example: Indigenous men were  used as 'point' men in Vietnam because of  their being warriors—tradition misused.  'Myths' get into our minds, they distort the most basic relationships we have,  even with ourselves. "These myths have the  power, if they go uncontested, to become reality. AU we have to do is behave as though  these 'myths' of hierarchy and exploitation  and domination and difference, with preference for privUege, are natural, normal and  good for you."  She spoke of the historical myth of early  America. The truth was that five out of  seven persons hved in bondage. "My people  were enslaved, five million. Millions of Native Americans were on reservations, Chinese people were indentured to raUroad  barons, several million Europeans hved as  indentured bond slaves, Mexicans were tied  to the mines and the U.S. army. Women  also, both coloured and uncoloured."  Bambara then spoke of myths that are  chains to place on the imagination, the "affliction of the global mind—racism, white  supremacy—this doctrine of 'we' are entitled and everyone else is obliged."  Prejudice Plus Power  Friday's plenary theme was "Prejudice Plus  Power: the dynamics of oppression." Brid-  getta Bourne is an undergraduate student at GaUaudet University, a university  for deaf people, in Washington, D.C. Last  March, she helped lead a successful protest  against the university's board of trustees  when they selected as the school's president  a hearing person with no previous experience with the deaf and no command of sign  language.  Joan Drake is a Native American born in  New York State, now working in Washington, D.C. She spoke of the continuing struggle of the Hopi and Navaho people at Big  Mountain against forced relocation.  Nancy Kato is a Sensei—Japanese-  American—who spoke about the struggle  and victory of Merle Woo who was fired  from the University of California at Berkeley for her activism and her lesbianism. Woo  has been rehired and the university has to  pay compensation.  Barbara Love is a vibrant, Black woman  who is an associate professor at the University of Massachusetts. She does extensive work around the world on racism (i.e.  workshops). She defined oppression as a  system of structured disequahty based on  people's presumed memberships in particular groups. Membership meant a particular  group was targeted for oppression. It is always a presumption.  She spoke of the use of 'myths' in the definition of the word 'race'. Pseudoscience was  used as a justification for separating people  into categories of humans. The sociopolitical realities of the times (eg. colonization)  meant that differences were translated into  deficits. Presumed memberships in the different categories of people meant you could  get the "goodies" of hfe, these "goodies" being basics such as education, health care,  housing.  "It is in the nature of oppression to be  divisive ... There is nothing inherent in  any of us that means we were meant to be  victims or oppressors ... The system has  bought our collaboration ... Our true nature is that we are brilliant, beautiful, powerful, loving connected ... The ideology has  been instiUed in us so that we can participate in it."  Love then spoke of what we can do about  racism.  Number one: learn the ways you have  ternahzed the hes, the racism. Both people  of colour and white people have 'internalized' the racist ideology.  Second: interrupt the oppression. Always  assume that people want to be human  to be reminded of their goodness.  Third: be an aUy.  "...there is one difference we mustn't  celebrate. That is class  We must eliminate it.  Melanie  Kaye/Kantrowitz  Parallels and Intersections  Saturday's plenary addressed models of social change, particularly paraUel and intersecting forms of oppression. Dale Mc-  Cormick is a white lesbian who works with  women in trades and has extensive experience in coalitions in Maine trying to get  sexual preference included in the civU laws.  Consensus decision making in coalitions was  difficult, for example, business and professional women blocked consensus about lesbian and gay rights being included in the  bUl.  Mitsuye Yamada is a Japanese-American  writer, coUege professor, and a national  board member for Amnesty International.  She was born in Japan and raised in Seattle  untU the outbreak of World War Two when  her family was removed to a concentration  camp in Idaho.  She spoke about the cult of the perfect  language and how it affects people whose  first language is not Enghsh. She talked of  her mother and how she has been made to  feel ashamed of her broken Enghsh. When  her oral history was taken she wanted it  translated into correct Enghsh. She didn't  want to appear ignorant and lower class.  But she is in a double bind. Her mother  tongue continues to evolve in Japan wlule  See Consciously p. 19  KINESIS ssssssm,  International  The Palestinian youth uprising—the  Intifada—began on December 9, 1987  as a protest against Israel's 1967 occupation of the West Bank and Gaza.  The Intifada's biggest achievement has  been to revitalize the Palestinian national movement.  as told to Michelle Frey  and Pat Katagiri  Palestinian youth lead the Intifada  Dr. Jacqueline Sfier, Director of  Early Childhood Training Programs at  Catholic University, Bethlehem, was in  Vancouver in mid-April to speak on  the effects of Israeli military occupation on Palestinian children of the West  Bank and Gaza. She is presently on a  speaking tour of Canada sponsored by  the Near East Cultural and Educational  Foundation of Canada. She was interviewed by Michelle Frey and Pat Katagiri.  Kinesis: Dr. Sfier, what is life Uke for  Palestinian children ?  Sfier: Palestinian chUdren are chUdren  d just hke chUdren they play and they  hope and they fear, but above aU they are  not passive beings. I think the most hopeful reality I hve as an early chUdhood educator is in seeing the degree to which these  chUdren are able to reshape our understanding of chUdhood and so reshape our pohtical  and historical realities. We tend to always  undermine chUdren and patronize them and  reduce them to passive, incapable beings.  The fact is these chUdren are able and they  can be responsible. They are responsible  and, in answering the challenges of hfe, they  grow. I do not perceive these chUdren as victims although they are being victimized in  many ways. They are not victims because  they are. people who are resisting and who  through that kind of resistance are becoming better people.  Kinesis: How is life different for a  Jewish Israeli child?  Sfier: The Jewish Israeli chUd hves in a  totally different context. Just crossing the  street in some areas of Jerusalem transports  you back in time. The Palestinian child is  probably hving in the late 18th century,  maybe 17th century and their chUd is hving sometimes on the verge of the 21st century. Our chUd stiU has to cope with survival needs whUe the Jewish Israeli chUd is  having aU the potential and possibihties of  hving out here in the 21st century. So comparing what Jewish chUdren in Israel are undergoing and what Palestinian chUdren in  the West Bank and Gaza are undergoing is  pointless, the struggle for hfe is on a totally  different scale.  I do not think that there are grounds for  comparison except that the Jewish Israeli  chUd is not given a free choice. That chUd  is not aUowed to look at the reality as it is  so that they can make a fuU choice. They  are always being conditioned to think in one  way and that is where the opportunity is being taken away from them and that is why,  when we talk about peace, it is also aUow-  ing chUdren to perceive reality on their own  terms. I assure you, if we should let those  chUdren make a choice it would not be that  of their government.  Kinesis: Could you give a brief history of the present uprising, the Intifada, how it began and who is involved?  Sfier: The Intifada is a result of the  continuation of the hberation process that  started with the beginning of occupation,  21 years ago. The Intifada is different in the  sense that it is very global—it encompasses  aU Palestinian groups—by groups I mean  age groups and social/economic levels.  The most important aspect of the In  tifada is that it is not only directed towards  the military occupation, it is reshaping the  social/cultural realities of the West Bank  and Gaza. This is because, throughout the  21 years of the occupation, the strategy of  the occupier was to destroy the structures  of that society and reduce it to a passive, reaUy, a broken community so that they could  monopolize it. The actual plan backfired because once they destroyed aU those structures, the effects on the famUy structure was  that the dynamic between adults and chUdren changed. The way chUdren perceived  adults and what expectation adults had of  the chUdren changed. That is why the chUdren became empowered and started taking  things into their own hands. That is how actuaUy the Intifada is the act of chUdren who  felt that they could, in a sense, do what the  adults could not do.  Kinesis: The Intifada then, seems to  Kinesis: How do parents feel about  the participation of their children in the  Intifada?  Sfier: Parents are concerned and they  have, just out of their natural needs to be  protective, tried to stop their chUdren from  going on the streets and engaging in direct  confrontation with army soldiers. But the  fact is that the chUdren's motivation to do  that is far stronger. A minority of Palestinians are able to control their chUdren from  going on the streets. Those chUdren are reaUy being suppressed and oppressed doubly, first by not being aUowed to be part of  the reality out there and by being confined  in the protective walls of a house which is  another prison. Parents in the mainstream  do not want to stop those chUdren because  they see the value of what is happening not  only on the level of pohtics, but on the level  of their own chUdren. So you wdl see moth-  February 1988: a Palestinian boy in Jerusalem is apprehended by an  Israeli soldier while his mother holds him back. The boy was accused of  rock-throwing.   be the response of young people to their  frustration. Is this so?  Sfier: The implications of the breakdown of the system is that there is an awful amount of stress and inability to cope  with hfe as it comes and that was the  adult experience of occupation. Now, this  also would be translated into how they react with chUdren and this led to a lot of  tension, anger and frustration on the part  of the chUdren. Once the chUdren identified the cause—which is occupation—they  started going against the occupation.  This is why we say it is an act of hberation, a true act of hberation where chUdren know who they are, they know their  identity and they have come to grasp the  cause of aU these problems. They couldn't  turn to adults to solve the problems because  the adults are incapacitated by the situation. So, they took action and, in a sense,  from a psychological perspective what is  happening in the streets, aU of the fear,  and anxiety and anger and frustration is  being acted out. Instead of it being introverted and turned into complexes, it is being turned into a positive energy.  ers who are very supportive, breaking rocks  (for chUdren to use as weapons).  Kinesis: Do you feel there is no hate  involved in action of the children?  Sfier: It is not that I think that, (but)  from aU of the indications that come out  from things hke chUdren's play, chUdren's  drawings, the way they express themselves,  it is so. When they talk about occupation,  the Intifada, Israel and the army, there are  so many indicators to point to the fact that  the chUdren are not hating. They are angry, yes, they are frustrated, but they are  not fuU of hate.  In a preliminary study to see the effects  of the Intifada on chUdren a hypothetical  question was presented to a seven year old  chUd. He was asked, "Just imagine a situation where you would be able to take over a  soldier, you would be able to take his arms  from him. Would you shoot that soldier?"  The chUd answered, "No, I would give him  the gun back and I would say that my stone  is enough."  In another situation, a chUd of the same  age group was asked, "Do you think that the  soldier who is hitting you and your friends  in the street does that to do his own kids?"  He answered, "No, back there he is a father,  here he is doing his job."  In a drawing, a chUd drew a street with  shops that are closed and one of the shops  has a name that says "The Grocery of  Hope." And the chUd drew a chUd into the  picture who had stones in his jacket and the  chUd says, "After curfew, the Shop of Hope  is stiU closed." What that chUd was representing was that after long curfews—and  that is a tactic used by the army, they hft  a curfew on a strike day to try to force the  people to break the strike—but the people  stiU won't. A 12 year old was able to express  that and understand the complexities of it  and in addition to that, understand that the  effect of the solidarity of the people is hope.  Kinesis: There is now a total curfew  imposed on the West Bank and Gaza.  What implications does this have on the  people ?  Sfier: We are used to curfews by now.  General curfews are sometimes not as bad  as the curfews you never hear about, such  as the 40 day curfew on a camp where no  food, no medication, no journalists, not even  the Red Cross can go in. In one camp last  winter people had to burn their furniture  in order to heat their houses because no  fuel was aUowed in. They (the Israeli government) often cut electricity when people  are under curfew. They are not aUowed to  open a window, a door or go on the roof,  in the garden. In such conditions would be  found families ranging from 10 to 15 people,  age groups from 0 to 80 hving in, at best,  two small rooms. Can you imagine what it  would mean to someone to hve in that, especially chUdren?  Kinesis: On television we watch  young people being beaten and we hear  of very young children being wounded  or killed. The Jewish Israeli people must  know even more about what is happening to the children. What is their response ?  Sfier: I wish that they knew. One of my  deep beliefs is that if only 40 percent of  the Jewish Israeli people knew 60 percent  of what is happening in the West Bank, the  Intifada would be in Israel, not in the West  Bank. They simply do not know and that is  the biggest tragedy of ah. They see events,  they see chUdren being beaten but they only  hear that those chUdren were threatening  the army or threatening the safety of their  own chUdren. They are not aUowed to see it  in a different way. Although this is becoming less so because there are more Israehs  speaking out against what is happening in  the West Bank and Gaza and this is why  we have hope. The security of Israel wUl not  ever be fulfilled unless the people of Israel  perceive their security in terms of justice for  Palestinians.  Kinesis: If the situation continues in  the same way can you see the vision of  hope changing?  Sfier: I can't really look into the future  because a lot of what is happening is a surprise to us as it is to the world. From the  indications we have, no matter how violent  the army response, or how harmful it can  get, the reaction is more solidarity and more  determination.  There is a deep behef that the Intifada  is a real movement for hberation and it is  starting to achieve results. The Intifada is  not just chUdren throwing stones, the Intifada is a process, the budding of a nation,  it is a rebirth and with birth comes pain and  sometimes even agony. Life and death are  so intertwined in such a process and that is  what we are hving.  oKINESIS International,  by Noreen Shanahan  9 to 5 grows up  Fifteen years ago in Boston, a group of  ten office workers talked about inequities  and discrimination they experienced in the  workforce. They surveyed other office workers. The response was overwhelming. No  matter in what field women office workers  were employed, they voiced the same concerns: low pay, lack of opportunity for ad-  Gabriela  banned  Philippine President Corazon Aquino  has banned the women's group Gabriela  as a part of her government's counter-  insurgency program.  Gabriela, a coalition of over a hundred  national women's organizations, is exposing  the economic and sexual exploitation of FU-  ipina women.  With 40,000 members and chapters on  every island of the PhiUppines, Gabriela  organizes women at the grassroots level  around their rights and welfare which  Aquino's government continues to ignore.  They have met with harassment from both  military and armed civilian groups.  To protest the banning of Gabriela  write: President Aquino, Malacanang  Palace, Manila, Philippines and send a  copy to: The Support Group Gabriela  Network, c/o N. Rosa, 57 W. 36th St.,  Apt 4-A, New York, NY 10018.  Source: Gay Community News  vancement, discrimination, sexual harassment, and a lack of respect.  Inspired by the women's and labour  movements, these ten women formed the 9  to 5 Organization for Women Office Workers.  9 to 5 is now a national organization with  members in over 40 states.  Issues that 9 to 5 raised in the 70's, such  as job posting and equal pension benefits,  are now standard business practices. Their  guidelines for worker's health and safety using video display terminals have been implemented in many offices.  Issues for the 80's include: pay equity  (equal pay for work of equal value), sexual  harassment, chddcare needs, flexible work  hours, job sharing, part-time benefits, and  computer-monitoring abuses.  For further information on 9 to 5  write: 145 Tremont St., Boston, MA  02111  Source: Sojourner  Murder: leading cause of child deaths  Murder is the leading cause of death by  injury among very young chUdren in the  U.S., a new study by researchers at Johns  Hopkins University indicates.  The study, released in March, said that  between 1980-1985, a total of 1,250 U.S.  chUdren less than one year old died of homicide.  Murder accounted for 17 percent of aU  the injury deaths among these chddren. The  homicide death rate for the infants was 5.68  People demand justice  A Uruguayan referendum held in April  gives amnesty to any members of the armed  forces and pohce charged with human rights  violations during the military government's  dictatorship (1973-1985).  The referendum, endorsed by 53 percent  of Uruguay's 2.3 million registered voters,  means that about 80 cases of murder, torture, rape, kidnapping and other crimes involving about 200 military officers wUl never  see the hght of day.  Opinion polls had predicted a high proportion of elderly and conservative voters  Global  violence  Domestic violence is a cruel reality  around the world, a global analysis of violence against women indicates.  "H a person is murdered because of his or  her pohtics, the world justifiably responds  with outrage. But if a person is beaten or  aUowed to die because she is female, the  world dismisses it as 'cultural tradition',"  says the report from the Worldwatch Institute in Washington.  Africa and India are identified as particular problem areas, but no society or socioeconomic group has been spared the problem, says the report.  In response, United Nations Secretary-  General Javier Perez de CueUar caUed for  redoubled efforts for women's rights, saying  that violence against women is a major concern.  would support the amnesty out of fear trouble could break out within the armed forces  if officers were summoned to trial.  Tota Quinteras, a human rights worker  in Uruguay, was recently on a speaking tour  of Canada. Her daughter is one of the country's 'disappeared' after her arrest in 1984.  Quinteras said regardless of the referendum's result, "Our struggle has to continue  for the defence of human rights." She wiU  also continue to demand information about  her daughter.  Source: Globe and Mail  In the United States, says Surgeon-  General C. Everett Koop, as many as 15  million women have been beaten, raped or  subjected to other forms of physical and  sexual assault, and the number rises by one  million a year.  The report says societies tacitly condone the violence through their sUence, "or,  worse yet, legitimize it through laws, customs and court opinions that blatantly discriminate against women."  Source: Globe and Mail  per 100,000 a year, fractionaUy higher than  for infants kUled in vehicle accidents, the  most common type of injury among aU other  age groups.  Of the 1,250 infants murdered, one-  third were reported to have died of what  was caUed "chUd abuse," which would include beating and battering. About 11 percent died of suffocation or strangulation,  three percent from drowning, three percent  from stabbing and about five percent from  firearms.  The study finds 6.5 percent of the murdered infants died of neglect-abandonment,  including babies left alone or neglected  "with intent to injure or kiU."  Lesbians  meet  A conference wiU be held in Seattle this  faU for lesbians interested in changing conditions locaUy and connecting with lesbians  internationaUy.  The conference wiU focus on how organiz- .  ing fits into the larger perspective of power  relationships and social change, and other  major issues of lesbian-feminism including  how to increase and sustain a radical movement in the 90's.  Conference organizers see it as "an opportunity to look at our strengths and weaknesses, our knowledge and diversity, and  how to buUd our sense of community.  "Across cultural, ethnic and national  boundaries we have things to share and  learn together and we want lesbians active  in different communities to become involved  in the organizing process."  Canadian lesbians interested in working  on a committee or wanting to attend the  conference write: Lesbian Resource Centre,  1019 E. Pike, Seattle, Washington.  Sentence:  rape  According to Amnesty International,  rape is an institutionalized code of punishment given to women prisoners in Burma.  The 1988 Amnesty Report titled "Burma:  Extrajudicial Execution and Torture of  Members of Ethnic Minorities" interviewed  victims and eye-witnesses, producing evidence of brutal killing and raping of women  by army officers as punishment.  One Rangoon university student willing  to come forward said she was raped by pohce whUe in detention, shortly after her arrest for protesting Burma's military dictatorship.  Source: Amnesty International  The study found that injuries continue to  be the leading cause of death among chUdren under the age of 14, costing about  10,000 hves a year.  Child victims  Amnesty International recently appealed  to Iraq to end what it described as the brutal treatment, imprisonment and execution  of chUdren for pohtical reasons.  The London-based human rights organization said, in excerpts from its March  newsletter, that there was abundant evidence that Iraqi security forces were deliberately torturing the chUdren of pohtical opponents and forcing them to reveal information about relatives.  Amnesty said it had appealed to President Saddam Hussein to take immediate action to tend gross human rights abuses and  asked for the safety of chUdren to be guaranteed.  It also asked the UN Human Rights Commission to keep an eye on what it caUed the  systematic abuse of human rights in Iraq.  Amnesty said schoolchUdren had been  detained, iined up and shot, including 29  chUdren and youths executed in January  1987. The Iraqi government had confirmed  seven of the executions, it said.  Source: Globe and Mail  Pro-choice  march  In defense of legalized abortions in  the U.S., 300,000 pro-choice supporters  marched on Washington in early April.  Pro-choice activists fear a second key  case now before the Supreme Court could  weaken or undermine Roe vs. Wade (the  landmark 1973 case legalizing abortion) by  returning the right to hmit abortions to the  states.  In April, the Supreme Court began deliberating the case of Webster vs. Reproductive Health Services, which has challenged  the constitutionality of a Missouri law barring abortions after 20 weeks of pregnancy  and restricting the use of pubhc funds and  buddings for performing abortions.  Source: Globe and Mail  KINESIS Business and  by Jean Swanson  "Not at aU."  That's how the big Canadian corporations answered their own question: "Won't  Canadian business lobby to reduce spending on social and other programs?"  The question and answer appeared in an  extensive four page ad published in newspapers across Canada on November 3, 1988,  just before the federal election. The ad purported to respond to critics of the free trade  deal.  At the end of the ad, this statement appeared: "This information has been produced and placed by the Canadian Alliance  for Trade and Job Opportunities."  Did these people he to Canadians?  Let's look at what has happened since the  election.  Three members of the Canadian Alliance  for Trade and Job Opportunities are the  Canadian Manufacturers Association, the  Canadian Chamber of Commerce, and the  Business CouncU on National Issues. Another Canadian business group is the Royal  Bank.  On December 22, barely a month after the Tory election victory, the Canadian Manufacturers Association called for a  Royal Commission on social spending. The  Manufacturers Association wants to find  ways to cut unemployment insurance and  other social payments and thereby reduce  the deficit.  By December 27th, the Canadian Chamber of Commerce and the powerful Business  CouncU on National Issues, representing 150  large corporations, joined in. The Chamber  said it wanted the government to cut $4 bU-  hon a year from Canada's unemployment insurance program (UI). The Business CouncU also wants UI cuts.  By January 13th, the Royal Bank got into  the act, releasing a report calling for cuts in  government spending. The Bank's twisted  logic explained that we must cut social programs to preserve them.  Another major institution is making pronouncements on social issues. On January  14th the Bank of Canada released a study  blaming unemployment insurance for unemployment, and calling for pohcies that  keep unemployment high in order to fight  inflation. The Bank argues that when unemployment falls, workers can demand and  get higher wages. Higher wages add to  corporate costs and subtract from corporate profits. Stripping the Bank's corporate  Newspeak down to what it reaUy means is  fascinating and appalling. The Bank justifies a high unemployment on the grounds  that it keeps workers' wages down. Apparently the Bank doesn't even notice that  workers with low wages are poor.  For those of us who are fighting poverty,  the pieces of the post free trade corporate  agenda are falling into place. We are the  hungry chUdren in schools across the country whose parents are hving on welfare rates  that are about half the Poverty line* oWe  —^ngpowc1"^  the big lie  are the  with fresh and trying to disguise it in the  real milk carton so the kids wUl get some  protein. We are the disabled, hving on inadequate pensions. We are the unemployed  for whom there are no adequate jobs.  We are the people who work at necessary  jobs, cleaning, serving, caring. Yet we continue to hve in poverty because our wages  are so low, because the Big Business groups  are using us as their soldiers to battle inflation. Our babies and our chddren are the  ones who pay. They pay with an infant mortality rate that is twice as high as it is for  other Canadians. Adults pay. We pay with  a shorter hfe expectancy. We pay with our  suffering. The poorest 20 percent of Canadians have more of nearly every disease than  other Canadians.  We are the Davids. The Bank of Canada,  the Canadian Manufacturers, the Business  CouncU, The Royal Bank, the Chamber of  Commerce are the Gohaths with huge budgets, and Tory connections. They have access to or own the media. The Gohaths abhor nearly everything that we need to end  poverty in Canada.  • We need higher minimum wages. They  want minimum wages to stay the same  as inflation rises or to be abolished altogether.  • We want equal pay. They think equal pay  would interfere with the market.  • We want the rich to pay more taxes. They  rw^ggy^this would destroy their incentive to  the language of the Gohaths,  money is an "incentive" to the rich, but  a disincentive to low income people.  ► We need unemployment insurance. They  say UI makes workers inflexible.  • We want fuU employment. They say eight  percent unemployment is full employment.  • We need welfare rates that are adequate  for sustaining people with dignity and  keeping our chddren healthy. They say  this keeps us from seeking minimum wage  jobs.  Now that we have free trade, the Gohaths  want their businesses to become competitive with U.S. business. In the U.S. welfare  programs are pitiful. A chUdless person in  Washington State gets $81 a month in food  stamps. In B.C. the rate is $430 per month.  UI serves twice the percentage of people in  Canada as it does in the States. The minimum wage in Texas is $1.40 an hour. Nine  states have no minimum wage. In the U.S.  millions have no health insurance; hunger  and homelessness disgrace the nation. The  U.S. has the highest infant mortality rate in  the industrialized world. In the U.S. the rich  are getting richer and the poor are getting  poorer because of poor social programs, low  wages, laws which make unions weak, and  low social spending.  "Won't Canadian business lobby to reduce spending on social and other programs?" They are already doing it. H we  want to continue to hve in a caring, humane  country, we have to make sure that the Gohaths don't get their way.  Co-operation and Development  lECD), many countries are spending more  on so-called "active" measures designed to  "improve" the way the labour market functions rather than on income support. Si  measures have included diverting funds  Proposals to change Canada's unemployment insurance (UI) plan wdl affect over  three million workers annuaUy, as the federal government gets down to the task of undermining what is stiU one of the most pro-  •+■ gressive unemployment insurance schemes  ..the' industrialized world.(see box:  UI  .anges)  Critics of the far reaching proposals,  point to the Canada - U.S. Free Trade  Agreement as the underlying reason for the  changes which they term "morally shameful." They argue that the UI revisions are  designed to replace the government support  for the labour force adjustment programs  necessitated by the free trade agreement,  which is widely predicted to result in major  of the ec<  te de Grandpre panel also advocated  tax incentives to employers to encourage employer financed training, a proposal  which outraged labour groups who saw it as  yet another tax break for corporate Canada  at the expense of direct financial assistance  for laid-off workers. In announcing the UI  revisions, McDougaU said she has not ruled  out using the de Grandpre tax incentive  According to labour spokespeople, the  government's plan to finance training with  UI doUars (most of the $1.3 bUlion to be  saved by cuts to the program wdl be redirected to training) is a move that forces  the victims of unemployment to pay for  training. (In order to divert UI premiums to training the government wUl have  to practice up on their doublespeak skids  since, under Canadian law, revenue collected through UI premiums can only be  used for UI purposes. The federal finance  DroDosak as a department wdl propose that in future, aUo-  •port issued ear cations to the Canadian Jobs Strategy (the  Iri&eht appointed      >vemment's job creation and training pro-  • ■ t" *f» " gram) wdl be considered as spending on the  The government's proposals '  laSLpolicy closer to th^Sf  to  tighten  unemplo^ajgnt •fljititfe-  nt and shift funds from income r--  *pB9n*£ial phUosophy ot yorkif  "■* * anc£s®^nes.%'re%alnIrV.,/,/^",t'l'Si^  *&£>$■  AINESIS  job training or aiding workers who want to  re-locate to areas with low unemployment,  both these trends are mirrored in the government's proposed revisions.  According to Shirley Carr, president of  the Canadian Labour Congress, the changes  wdl hurt older workers, seasonal workers  and employees in cyclical industries  of whom wdl no longer qualify for benefits.  Many in these catagories wUl be womei  particularly in the seasonal and cycl  catagories. Farmworkers, food  and other seasonal workers, a large majority of whom are women, wdl have an  even tougher time meeting eligibility i  quirements than they do now and wUl  receive less benefits. - y  Overall, stricter rules for qualifying  mean that 30,000 workers eligible for b<  fits last year wUl not be able to claim UI  the changes are implemented. Anti-po1  activists expect many people already on tl  margins of the labour force wdl be forci  on to welfare, a provincial  Canada. This is a partic^^f^oncern, since  ^«p^-pjOTOncea.coKtinitiS?to tighten their  ^velfareehgibihty_T^a(imnents and few pro-  Vide jfeci^ien^^^ran income which is even  ylevel.  ie government's proposals wdl reform  of the current inequities in the UI sys-  As a result of a successful court case  challenging the program's maternity leave  provisions brought by a Toronto area father  last summer, the act wUl be amended to  No deficit  of rhetoric  by Esther Shannon  Last summer, when the country was afire  with the election campaign's free trade debate, one of the most potent arguments critics of the free trade agreement ignited was  that the deal would inevitably lead to the  erosion of Canada's social security system.  Women's organizations, labour, church  and social action groups warned that if the  agreement was approved, Canadian business would argue that their contributions  to social programs—such as unemployment  insurance—lessened their ability to compete with American firms, which contribute  far less to equivalent U.S. programs.  At press time, as we await a federal budget served up to the Canadian pubhc after  months of carefuUy engendered panic about  the deficit, we realize the critics of the free  trade agreement were wrong. Business' bogeyman is not competitiveness with American corporations; it is a home grown product, the federal deficit.  The deficit issue was, in the midst of one  string of expensive election promises after  another, steadfastly ignored by the Canadian pohticians who hustled your vote last  summer. Big business was similarly shy of a  public embrace with the deficit "crisis" during the election.  The federal deficit burst upon the Canadian pubhc within weeks of the Conservative's victory and it has been kept at a furious bod by government and business ever  since. A pubhc which was poised to identify the free trade threat to Canadian social  programs and to hold the Conservatives accountable to their 'no tampering with social programs' pledge, is being cynicaUy manipulated to feel that belt-tightening is inevitable if we are to stem Canada's imminent shde into economic chaos.  The government's solution to the deficit  problem? Cuts to social programs and  higher taxes for both middle income and  poor Canadians. The corporate agenda with  a different name.  With government, business and virtuaUy  every mainstream media outlet in the country arguing that the national debt is out of  control and virtuaUy no sacrifice is too great  to bring it under control, it's not surprising  that what, not whether, something needs  to be done is the only issue presented for  debate. Once again, government and business have framed the debate's parameters;  dissenting voices lose credibility unless they  are prepared to agree the deficit is a major  problem.  But is it?  Drastic Action Unmerited  Any country's debt and deficit position  must be measured relative to its national  income. Some economic analysts argue that  whUe the national debt is large enough to be  a concern, it is not large enough to merit the  drastic action of undermining Canada's social services system. Particularly when the  first focus of attack wdl be to dismantle universality in social programs.  Any attack on universality, where social programs such as famUy allowance and  old age pensions are provided regardless of  an individual recipient's economic situation,  inevitably leads to an inadequate social security safety net. When social programs are  means tested and reserved only for the "deserving poor," such programs are fated to  be poor programs. Budding public support  for their protection or enhancement is a  thankless and often hopeless task, as any  one who has worked to buUd increased support for higher welfare rates or minimum  wages can testify.  In the 1988 fiscal year, Canada's deficit  was $29 billion and the national debt, which  is the accumulated total of these deficits  since Confederation, was about $293 billion,  or about 53 percent of the Gross Domestic  Product (GDP) - the measure of the country's national income.  Many economists argue that this compares favorably to debt levels at other times  in Canadian history. In 1947, the debt was  107 percent of the GDP; in 1937, it was 67  percent of the GDP; in 1927, it was 46 percent of the GDP. The most recent federal  Department of Finance figures project the  national debt to peak in 1991 at about 57  percent of the GDP, before falling off again.  This forecast requires no significant effort  at deficit reduction at ah.  Extensive changes affect millions  The proposed (UI) changes wUl be tabled in the House of Commons in June. H passed, their implementation date would be  January 1, 1990.  • $1.3 billion wdl be cut from payments now made to unemployed workers and reaUocated to other programs through changes  to the qualification rules and benefit periods. Tens of thousands of Canadians claimants wiU have to work longer to qualify for  benefits.  • An additional $800 million wiU be spent on a variety of worker training plans which are supposed to train an additional 60,000  UI claimants a year, help laid off older workers and provide financial assistance to people who are willing to move to regions  of lower unemployment.  • An additional $15 million wdl be aUocated to the existing federal adjustment services to help laid-off workers. These first  three proposals constitute the government's answer to labour force adjustment programs necessitated by free trade. Workers,  in effect, wdl be bearing the costs of free trade by paying for training with their UI contributions.  • $500 million wUl be provided to enhance maternity and parental leave and sickness benefits, and extend payments to workers  over 65. The stumbhng block to the parental benefits scheme is that provincial labour laws will prevent most Canadians torn  applying for the program's expanded benefits.  • Qualifying periods wUl be determined by a shding scale that means claimants must have worked between 10 and 20 weeks. As  a community's unemployment rate rises, the number of weeks a claimant must work fads. According to the Coalition Against  "Free" Trade, the reforms wUl bring Canada closer to the model used in most U.S. states, where employees must work 14 to  20 weeks before qualifying for benefits. This proposal is expected to have a major negative impact on seasonal workers.  • Benefit periods wdl also be on a shding scale, rising as the region's jobless rates go up. Most commentators are concerned that  pinning UI benefits to regional economies wdl further increase regional tensions.  • Penalties wdl be tougher for workers who quit their jobs without "just cause" and claim UI. A person who quits her job could  face a wait of 7 to 12 weeks before receiving UI. Currently the waiting period is up to six weeks. In addition, she would receive  only 50 percent of her salary in benefits as compared to the current rate of 60 percent.  provide either parent with 10 weeks of insured leave in addition to 15 weeks of maternity leave. Laurel Ritchie, a spokesperson  for the National Action Committee on the  Status of Women (NAC) termed the proposal "a long overdue first step. The problem is that over-aU changes (in UI) mean  women wUl be suffering along with men because of the general deterioration of benefits."  Another problem with the proposal is  that millions won't be eligible for the 10  week expanded parental benefit because  provincial labour laws do not make it  mandatory for employers to grant that  much leave. About half the national labour  force is only covered by provincial labour  standards legislation and of those covered  under union contracts, few of those con  tracts have provisions for parental or paternal leave. Employment Canada officials  have deemed this quandary a matter for  the provincial governments to resolve since  the federal government has no control over  provincial labour codes. Presumably, the  $360 million the federal government has allocated to the expanded parental benefits  program wdl remain unspent.  And, in the face of business' relentless rhetoric about costly social programs,  Canada's expenditures on social programs  has actuaUy gone down since 1984. According to the National CouncU of Welfare, social programs cost Ottawa about $44.3 bd-  hon or 33 percent of total spending in 1984,  compared to $44.2 billion or 32.8 percent of  spending this year.  Government is, however, committed to  reducing the deficit, not in itself a bad thing.  To date, their route to reduction consists  of threats to cut programs, increase taxes  for individual Canadians and institute a national sales tax on a wide range of goods and  services.  The national sales tax comes with the  promise of tax reductions in other areas but  such promises have been known to be hoUow  in the past. (When income tax was first introduced during World War One it was supposed to be a temporary measure. Seventy  years later we're stUl paying income taxes.)  The sales tax would have a disproportionately negative impact on people who are  poor because they spend a much higher percentage of their income on goods and services. Poor people pay more in taxes, relative to their income, than any other income  group in Canada.  Other Choices  What alternatives are not being considered?  According to many activists in the social  and economic pohcy fields, three major initiatives could be undertaken by a federal  government committed to an equitable approach to deficit reduction. Most recently,  the Canadian Conference of Cathohc Bishops, about as mainstream a group as one  could find, rejected the government's emphasis on cuts in social spending and urged  Finance Minister Michael WUson to acknowledge that "... the federal deficit has  been caused by a number of complex factors including high levels of unemployment,  subsidies and tax write-offs for corporations  and unjustifiably high interest rates."  The bishops, in common with women's  groups, labour and anti-poverty activists  are calling for government action that promotes fuU employment, a fair tax system  that reverses the recent serious decline in  corporate tax rates and a reduction in interest rates (currently at their highest point in  five years ) which are weakening consumer  and investment confidence and leading to  fears of a severe recession.  The continuing, and increasing, disparity  between personal and corporate income tax  rates is a trend which began with Liberal  governments in the 1970's and continues unabated under Conservative rule. Corporate  tax revenues in the first eight months of the  fiscal year were $5.5 billion, down nine percent from a year earlier. In contrast, personal tax revenues were $29.7 billion, an increase of six percent. Individual taxpayers  shoulder over five times the corporate load.  Since 1950, Canadians have paid $437 bd-  hon more in taxes than corporations.  Nationally, the anti-free trade organizing  of the past has shifted into high gear to  confront a government that has adopted a  narrow pro-business agenda. The furor that  wdl greet the government's upcoming budget wdl recaU the battles of last summer's  election campaign on free trade, a battle the  Conservatives won with the aid of $60 md-  hon worth of propaganda circulated by corporate free traders.  By any measure, that's a lot to spend  on self-interest. But it wdl be peanuts compared to what they'd bank if they can hammer their final agenda home.  Readers interested in organizing  against the federal budget or other attacks on social programs can contact  The Coalition Against "Free" Trade,  c/o 104 - 2005 E. 3rd Ave., Vancouver,  B.C. V5P 3W8 or the Pro Canada Network, 904 -251 Laurier Ave West, Ottawa, Ontario, KIP 5J6  KINESIS Human Rights  Lesbians:  Organizing for spousal benefits  by Diana Smith  An area of ongoing concern for lesbians  and gay men is lack of 'spousal' benefits. In  late March a meeting was held in Vancouver  to share information and discuss what could  be done to achieve equality in this area.  About 30 people attended the meeting, predominantly lesbians from the labour movement. The foUowing article summarizes and  supplements the information and discussion  presented.at the meeting.  Two local lesbians organized the meeting because in their own unions (one large,  pubhc sector union and one smaUer, private  sector union) same-sex partners did not get  any of the same benefits as their heterosexual counterparts, specificaUy dental, medical and extended health care and pension  benefits. This, in spite of the fact that both  had non-discrimination clauses in their collective agreements covering sexual orientation.  At the beginning of the meeting it was  recognized that the goal of achieving equality with heterosexual couples was not necessarily visionary nor, in many respects, desirable. The categorizing of adults into couples and the legal superstructure that institutionalizes this model has its drawbacks  for heterosexuals and homosexuals alike;  the social, economic and emotional consequences not always being synonymous with  physical or mental health and happiness.  Couples don't always want to hve together; people choosing not to be defined as  part of a couple nonetheless can have 'significant others' in their hves. Achieving equality with heterosexual couples would, therefore, not provide benefit coverage to people  in these situations.  But given the above limitations it was  suggested that there were advantages to  getting coverage for same-sex partners who  fitted the heterosexual spouse model. These  included getting benefits for at least some  individuals as weU as some recognition of  homosexuality as a perfectly acceptable  hfestyle.  Where do we stand now in terms of coverage for same-sex partners? First, a distinction was made between benefits that  are governed by provincial or federal leg  islation and those that are not. For example, a dental or extended health plan are arrangements between an employer, employees (whether unionized or not) and an insurer. The only major obstacle is homophobia whether from other employees, union  representatives, the employer and/or the  insurance carrier. Homophobia being the  'only' obstacle is not necessarily easy to  overcome but it helps to first recognize exactly the nature of the particular obstacles.  Locally, employees represented by the  Vancouver Municipal and Regional Employees Union (VMREU) at the Vancouver  School Board and the Vancouver Community CoUeges get dental coverage for same-  sex partners, if certain co-habiting qualifications are met.  Medical coverage is different from dental  and extended health care coverage as it is  governed by provincial legislation. In B.C.  the legislation is the Medical Service Act.  It is here that a major obstacle is found,  namely the definition of spouse, which limits coverage to married couples or:  "... a man or a woman who, not  being married live together as husband  and wife."  So, even though a contract or coUective  agreement has a less restricting definition  of spouse, to date it is the one contained in  the Act that counts in denying medical coverage to partners in same-sex couples.  Restrictions on pension benefits to same-  sex partners depends on the jurisdiction of  the employer. Generally the pension plans  of public sector employees are governed by  legislation that wUl define the terms for  payments to beneficiaries. For example, the  Pension (Municipal) Act, covering municipal employees, states that if death occurs  before retirement, but after 10 years of service, only the (opposite sex) spouse can receive pension benefits. The pension plans of  employees in the private sector in B.C. are  not governed by any legislation regarding  beneficiaries and so is simUar to dental and  extended health care plans.  It was explained that there are two possible routes to go in obtaining coverage, depending on which is considered the most appropriate strategy.  sh, mom, they said we're a family  j Staff Writer  decision by the Canadian Human Rights Commission could mean that gay  couples may constitute a family.  ion, announced by a human rights tribunal in mid-April, found that a gay civd  an Mossop of Toronto, was wrongly denied bereavement leave to attend the fu-  of his male partner's father, who died in June of 1985. In denying the leave the fed-  Treasury Board and a government union disOTtninated against Mossop.  Mossop, who said he fought the case on a matter of principle, told reporters, The prin-  ' le is there shouldn't be any special privdeges for being heterosexual. Everyone should  treated the same."  The implication that gay and lesbian couples can be considered families would have  sweeping implications for gay rights in Canada,  According to Max Yalden, Human Rights Commissioner, "If it (the ruling) should be  later affirmed in the courts its a pretty for reaching kind of statement to make in view of  what we've known of social beliefs in Canada,"  New Democrat MP Svend Robinson described the decision as a "significant victory for  the gay and lesbian community. For too long our relationships have been denied any recognition in law as families," said Robinson, the first openly gay member of parliament.  Because the Canadian Human Rights Act does not provide protection against discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, Mossop fought his case on the basis that he was  d&crimin&ted against because of his family status, which is covered in the Act.  The tribunal ordered the Treasury Board and Mossop's union, the  "onal and Government Employees, to stop applying provisions of  in a discriminatory manner. It also ordered that the coUective  * so that a person of the same sex—who except for their sex t  ion law spouse—be considered a common law spouse for the purposes  leave,  mry Board is entitled to appeal the decision to a Human Rights  aal or to the Federal Court of Appeal. At press time, no decision on wl  would be appealed had been reached, according to Treasury Board officials.  One route, for unionized employees, is  through the grievance procedure. The other  route is through the courts and the legal  system.  Four examples of current cases were given  at the meeting.  Dental Coverage Via  The Collective Agreement  A member of the Pubhc Service Alliance of  Canada (PSAC), whose application for dental coverage for his male lover was turned  down, filed a grievance. The grievance was  denied at the third (final) level. It was re-  the right to famUy OHIP coverage is being  appealed although no date has been set yet.  Old Age Pension Via The Courts  Two gay men in B.C., denied spousal benefits under Canada's Old Age Security Act,  are taking their case to court. They are challenging the constitutionality of the Act under the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. At  the moment the Crown has filed a Statement of Defence in response to their Statement of Claim but no court date has been  set yet.  At the meeting the pros and cons of either route were discussed. It was suggested  IS    SOMEONE     I'D  YOU    WERE      ALWAYS       ASKING      ME  TO    GET    MARRIED?      WELI THERE  ferred to the Board of Management of the  Dental Plan and was turned down again.  The union has appealed the decision to the  Appeal Board of the Plan. A hearing has  been set for May 12th, 1989, in Vancouver.  If denied again, the union wUl be asked to  refer the case to adjudication. The member also filed a complaint with the Canadian Human Rights Commission. This is being kept open pending the outcome of the  grievance procedure.  Dental Coverage Via The Collective  Agreement And/or The Courts  Another member of PSAC is being represented by the Legal Education and Action Fund (LEAF). LEAF was organized to  present cases in court that challenged legislation that discriminated against women.  At present they are deciding which route is  the quickest in this particular case. Is the  member obhged to first foUow the grievance  procedure before the case could be heard in  court or can the member go directly to a  court hearing based on a challenge to the  Charter of Rights and Freedoms that she is  being discriminated against on the basis of  sexual orientation by her employer, the federal government?  The Charter covers aU government legislation as weU as the government as employer. Although the Charter does not  specificaUy cite sexual orientation as a protected class as, for example, sex, race and  ethnic origin are cited, it has been established that the hst is not exclusive (see Kinesis, March, 1989). This means that sexual orientation could be presented as a category deserving of protection by the Charter.  Medical Coverage Via The Courts  A lesbian in Toronto, employed by the Toronto Pubhc Library, is fighting for family  coverage under the Ontario Health Insurance Plan (OHD?) for her partner and their  chUdren. The Supreme Court of Ontario decision that denied lesbian and gay couples  that legal chaUenges to the Charter and  other legislation take enormous amounts of  time, energy and money and are acted out  in an arena which is beyond the scope of  most of us. LEAF representatives at the  meeting, acknowledging that this is true,  emphasized the necessity to confront discriminatory laws since changes could benefit aU lesbians and gays, especiaUy those  not covered by a collective agreement. The  VMREU Staff Representative said that for  those of us in unions much could be done  at the rank-and-file level. Obviously both  routes have merit and do not have to be  seen as an either/or situation.  Discussion also focussed on what could  be done by those of us interested in doing  further work on this issue. About a third  of those present agreed to meet again. Included in what they wiU be doing is:  • getting and disseminating up-to-date information on the status of same-sex benefit coverage.  • deciding how to offer support (and what  kind) to those who need it. Support could  be in various forms such as financial, educational, emotional, pohtical or by doing research.  • acting as a resource for information and  support.  Anyone wanting more information  or who is interested in the, as yet,  unnamed group can contact Carolyn  Jerome at 877-1287 or Diana Smith at  876-1465.  The National Association of Women  and the Law (NAWL) has recently formed a working group on lesbian issues.  The members of the group met for the  first time in Montreal, in February, at  the NAWL conference. The group is  open to all women who are interested  in legal issues affecting lesbians. Anyone who wants more information about  the group can contact Anita or Susan  at 687-3268.  i KINESIS yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyys'  ///////////////////^^^^^  //////////////////////^^^^  Prisons  Jail:  The delicate, cement socio system  hu I miiea Ma noli i "  by Louise Manelu  Quite often on a graveyard shift one  spends two to three hours in the "digger." Digger is jad-talk for the segregation  unit where prisoners are housed for short  term punishment, for round-the-clock medical observation, or when they are generaUy  considered a "management problem" and  deemed unsuitable for hfe within the general prison population.  The digger is in the basement of the jaU;  dimly ht; narrow corridors with very httle  natural hght; ten cells with double doors,  the inside one being a standard jaU grUl and  the outside one a sohd heavy door with a  very smaU rectangular window at about eye  level. Double barriered doors secure the unit  to the outside whUe three additional barriers secure it from other units.  A large bathing room with tub and showers plus some hallway storage shelves are  situated at one end of the hallway. A storage  room the size of a long closet, that has a connecting tunnel under the buUding to various  and sundry places and smeUs obnoxiously  hke cats, is at the other end of the hallway.  A colony of weU-fed cats hves under the accessible parts of the jadhouse and occasionally kittens are sent home with guards or to  prisoner's friends or even to the S.P.C.A.  The digger is always solemn, and eerie  at night and just barely comes alive during  the daytime hours when the prisoners are  aUowed out for their mandatory one hour  time-out for bathing, exercise (pacing the  hallway), telephone calls, or visits.  At night, if you're into it, a two hour  stint in the digger can be very meditative,  introspective, thought-provoking and head  clearing. Everyone is generally asleep and  if they aren't or there is any communication it is in whispered tones. These whispered exchanges suit the eeriness and add to  the existing mystery and intrigue that suggest something sinister or mysteriously important is about to or has just taken place.  You either don't mind the digger or you  do. I don't, as long as I am not behind the  two sets of closed doors. That would be too  much eerie stillness and cement solitude.  On this particular night the buUding |  staff of officers sat in the key control room J  picking Lotto numbers in an idle moment, *  never quite tuning out the sUence moni- jj  tored through the intercom system. Echoed £  coughs and occasional miscellaneous noises J  are usual. Loud banging or yeUing alerts s  aU and commands immediate response.  Tonight it is quiet.  A four-way split on the winning ticket  would mean two and a half million each.  What would it be? One more night on  graveyard or goodbye? We held httle hope  for a real goodbye but a dream is a dream  is a dream and nearly everyone's jadhouse  dream is to get out—be they prisoner or be  they guard. This is the "unholy" bond—we  aU want out whUe at the same time there is  a strange aUure to stay.  Prisoners once out are known to miss the  forced but intimate liaisons they developed  whde inside, often not having been anxious to leave and seemingly quite anxious  to return. Guards, on the other hand leave  quickly or stay forever, some taking extensive respites in mid-career only to return  again.  I don't know yet in which category I  faU but the mystique, the edge, the ever-  changing yet repeating faces, the games, the  excitement, the challenge of not succumbing to emotionlessness, the hope for some,  the resignation of many, the sense of community albeit not always a happy one, etc.  etc., are aU a constant draw. While on the  one hand being drawn, there is also a push  to move away to another reality where peace  and apparent sanity seem to exist because  and only because there appear to be more  options for freedom, power, decision making  and responsibility.  This night in the digger (it seems hke  night but actuaUy it is 5:45 am), I am inspired to do some serious thinking—having  passed the point of needing to fight sleepiness my mind begins to work. I've written  off the lottery so my head clears to more  relevant concerns, to myselL  Many of the world's people hve in pain,  fear and considerable discomfort by our  standards. Survival is a struggle but accepted as such because it is the norm. I wonder about the things we accept as the norm  here in jad—here in the digger. In jad there  Allies and enemies are slowly but surely established in this dehcate sociosystem—the  jad.  Prisoners are the bread and margarine  of the system. They are the absolute necessaries. No matter how good they may be  or how victimized they may seem they are  necessary to the survival of the system ...  the empire! What is a church without sinners? What would be a jad with no criminals, except empty?  Prison administrators struggle with concerns of dollars and cents. They answer to  pohticians and the public. Their bottom  line seems to concern itself with money, efficiency and profile. Their closest contact  is constant tension and turmoU but it is accepted as a way of jadhouse hfe. Some even  appear to thrive on it because presumably  they have adapted and learned to use conflict to their advantage.  Guards struggle with irregular hours,  uncertain shifts, inconsistent and ever-  changing rules and a seemingly unsympathetic management. Guards are buffers, enforcers and rule foUowers, but they are not  rule makers. They answer to their superiors  and they answer to the prisoners.  Prisoners struggle with the rigidity of  their hfestyle; they are told when to eat,  when to sleep, when to rise, when and if to  play. They are given httle if any responsibility. They are the antagonists in a system  that barely considers their phght. They vent  their antagonisms on the guards. These are  the only system representatives within easy  reach. Guards and prisoners are necessary  friends and necessary enemies at the same  time although some guards are always enemies whde others are always friends. Thus  a fragde balance exists—an important frag-  Ue balance that sometimes pits staff against  staff and very often inmate against inmate.  This fragde balance is easdy disturbed but  generaUy most noticeable through gesture,  glance and unspoken attitude and tension.  with their ultimate charges, the prisoners,  is third and fourth hand. They rarely experience the routine functioning of the jad  or have a direct hand in the actual process.  They act through jad house management  staff who are answerable to them and provide the second level buffer zone between  them and the hne staff guards. The front  hne guards can make or break senior management but because power moves from the  top to the bottom it is more hkely that the  front hne guard wdl be broken if any of the  structure appears in danger of shattering.  To rise above the lowest managerial level  a senior guard must produce results satisfying to the administration. Calm and efficiency are in order but a contradiction also  exists. In a jad setting, too much peaceful-  ness, effectiveness and cooperation does not  look good. It makes the task seem too easy,  ensuring a budt-in need to make the prisoners look worse than they are. This in turn  makes the task of containing and managing them seem more valid than in reality it  should be or, in fact, is. The pubUc wants  to know it is protected yet at the same time  does not appear to wish to know how it is  protected and, further, resents the notion  that the punitive process is too rewarding  or pleasant. This inhibits the ability of the  corrections system to perform in the best  interest of its charges for fear of being seen  as either too soft on the one hand and unnecessary on the other. The general tenor is  "no-win."  In a jaU, animosity, confrontation and antagonism between the two "front hne" factions is rewarded. Peace, calm and cooperation become suspect if they are not at least  occasionaUy interrupted. Although the supposed ultimate goal is to provide opportunity for rehabilitation in a manageable environment, in fact, this goal is only expected  to be attained by a very precious few.  H the job of a guard or jaUer becomes  too complex or changes its intent and function, then it demands a different type of  person to perform its duties. Guards, by  virtue of their being human and change resistant, help ensure that the status quo remains. They ensure that the prisoners are  not allowed to become fully competent, responsible, efficient, or to possess commend-  ably human qualities. Even inmate evaluation forms do not contain good or excellent performance categories—only unsatisfactory, fair and satisfactory. One or two  prisoners may prove that it is possible to  surpass the mediocre standards set but for  the majority it is a budt-in lost cause. Some  guards know and see this. Some see it and  quit. Some persevere whde many see nothing.  Humans can be creatures of habit, self-  righteousness and perceived self-preservation. We may go to great lengths to protect those things we have learned to beheve  are good and necessary. Often in the face  of rational thought and argument we have  been known to chng to outmoded, harmful, degenerate and regressive ideals and institutions. Change is slow when hierarchical power structures must give up some of  their power and control. In prisons it appears that change is most often, if not always, initiated in the foundation or roots  of our firmly planted structures. Prison riots, grass-roots prisoner rights organizations, hostage-takings and the hke have aU  ultimately had some positive effect on the  evolution of our jads and the way we treat  those they house. Can guards somehow have  a positive influence too?  As guards, the keepers of the "social misfits," we aUow ourselves to become functionaries of social control as weU as main-  tainers of the status quo. We help guarantee class and race stratifications and ensure  that the ruhng classes are protected and  able to maintain their power. As guards we  are told when, how and where to do our  job. Rarely are we given rationale for policy or procedure. We are expected to answer  to the establishment and when our answers  are not correct we are punished.  Some of us with conscience or in frustration break rules. We are reprimanded or  chaUenged but most often go unnoticed un-  td the broken rule becomes the norm. Often we feel guilt, worry and fear. Nothing  is clear and nothing is straightforward. Little is logical and even less aUowed is adult,  rational, communication and thought. We  do not understand who the enemy is , or  if indeed there is an enemy, but the pervasive feehng that someone is about to suddenly step out and punish us exists. Change  is slow but does and wiU occur. Push for social change, after aU, has always bordered  on the criminal.  In the digger it is 7 am, shift change. I  am released to enter into a different reality.  The digger begins to take on a new aura as  the dayhght starts to fid its guarded spaces.  Is there a chance 111 win the lottery? Not  much.  KINESIS     Mw  89 15 Arts  Conspiracies,  explorations,  and treasures  /N^orvK*  by Melanie Conn  Here's a pot pourri of reviews for May:  two recent books and a look at one of the  pulp magazines that's been publishing science fiction stories for thirty years.  CYTEEN: THE REBIRTH  by C.J. Cherryh  Popular Library, 1988  $4.95  This is the second book in a series by  Cherryh. (The first is Cyteen: The Betrayal.) Cyteen, the most powerful planet  in the galactic Union, is locked in a deadly  struggle to maintain control of the other  worlds. Very httle about the battle is explicit; instead, we perceive the power of the  state through the characters. In the opening pages, a man steps off a plane and moves  towards the airlock, his heart in his mouth.  Any moment Justin expects Security to stop  him, trick him, snatch him away from a  longed-for visit with his exiled father ...  The tension budds and even when he's finaUy in his father's arms, he knows that:  Two high-clearance Security agents  will be sitting in the same room; but that  was all right, right as the cameras and  the bugs that invaded every moment of  his life and left nothing private.  Welcome to Cyteen, where voice-stress  analyzers read the meaning of your words in  case Security doesn't catch the intonation.  Where clones come in two types: the azi,  who are taped to serve as soldiers, nurses,  teachers, bodyguards and the CIT who are  one-of-a-kind rephcas of powerful players in  the pohtical power struggle.  The heart of the story is Ari Emory, a  CIT hving in Reseune, Cyteen's major city.  A precocious eight year old, Ari's favourite  game is to outwit the Minder who spies on  her and her azi. As it turns out, her clever  ness is a sign that the biggest conspiracy of  aU is working, the plan to shape her into the  exact image of her Older, the Ari Emory  who led Cyteen in the battle for Union. The  slow dawning of Ari's understanding of the  situation and her struggle to come to terms  with her nature kept me reading far into the  night.  Be prepared, though, for an up-in-the-air  ending. We don't get the end of the story  untd Cyteen: The Vindication is published.  PENNTERRA  by Judith Moffett  Worldwide Library, 1988  $4.50  Isaac Asimov, a prolific and weU-respec-  ted SF writer, says in his introduction to  Pennterra that the book "takes up the  Be prepared  for an up-  in-the-air  ending.  matter of violence and non-violence." And  it does so in a remarkably inventive way  in this engrossing story about a group of  Quakers who have fled a doomed Earth to  settle on Pennterra.  In the six years since the community  arrived, the Quakers have hved by the  rules laid down by the native h'rossa:  the humans must remain in one vaUey  on the planet, use only passive energy  and maintain the same population. Life  Give Peace A Dance  Vancouver's third annual Give Peace A Dance celebration, a project of the Pacific Peace  Umbrella Society, will take place on Saturday, May 13, 4 pm to midnight at the Plaza  of Nations. Proceeds from the event, which features a long line-up of performers,  will go to the International Defense and Aid Fund for Southern Africa (IDAFSA), an  organization that provides aid to victims of apartheid. Admission is $12.50 until May  11, $15.00 after May 12, children under 12 admitted by donation. Tickets are available  at Ticketmaster. For more information call 732-GPAD.  in Delaware—as the community names the  vaUey—is difficult but vibrant and rewarding. The humans and h 'rossa are mutuaUy  fascinated as they learn more about each  other's ways.  Into this back-to-the-land paradise comes  a second ship, fiUed this time not with  Quakers, but with scientists and explorers  IM&wAlme   w   *  who are astonished (and appaUed) at the  acquiescence of the first group. Despite aU  warnings, "the sixers" are determined to  carve out a proper colony, using the machines they brought with them from home.  Although the drama of the book revolves  around the consequences of the sixers' plan,  the most intriguing aspect of the book for  me was the exploration of sexuahty. For  the h'rossa, sex is joyous, loving and ful-  fiUing, but without passion or infatuation.  As members of the Quaker community sample the h'rossa experience (the h'rossa are  telepathic "senders"), some surprising insights emerge about violence in sexual rela-  o Moffett's portrayal of women is a fit's tie disappointing. Though they're scientists,  |' professionals, etc., the women are mainly  | nurturing mother figures, even when the  3  sexuahty taboos are broken. The author  WOKLt^  does better with the men, particularly the  main character whose new experiences reaUy change him.  THE MAGAZINE OF FANTASY AND  SCIENCE FICTION  Mercury Press  Cornwall, Connecticut  Monthly, $2.00/issue  Fantasy and Science Fiction (F &  SF) is one of the oldest of the "pulps:" it's  been going for more than 30 years. There  are several SF magazines avaUable. They aU  publish short stories and longer "noveUas,"  often giving writers their first big break. I  don't regularly read any of the magazines,  though I hke short fiction, because there's  usually so httle representation of women  writers.  Just lately, I've picked up copies of F &  SF at the library and noticed a change.  The 38th Anniversary Issue (October 1987),  for example, has three stories by women as  weU as a review of Penterra. Two of the  stories are by established SF writers. "The  Colonization of Edward Beal," by Lisa Tut-  tle is a horror story about a pessimistic, individualistic type of man who comes to a  very creepy end. Kate Wdhelm's contribution is about a man whose determination to  take control over cockroaches in New Jersey  leads to some amazing experiences as an exterminator.  But the most exciting discovery in the  magazine is a Delia Sherman. Her story,  "The Maid on the Shore" is about a seal-  maiden who hves "on a rocky coast at the  easternmost tip of Newfoundland, in a stone  cottage huddled under a cliff at the beach's  edge." Sherman perfectly captures the hit  of the Maid's voice as she tells her tale  of tragedy and revenge. Her family brutally sundered by three fishermen, the Maid  hves alone for many years, brooding over  the past. EventuaUy, her solitude is broken when a ship comes by and she has the  chance to observe the "ancient enemy." The  sailors who come ashore are exhausted and  bedraggled, the victims of a cruel and vicious captain. The scene is set for the Maid  to vindicate her family and she does so in a  most elegant manner.  I'm not quite ready to subscribe to F &  SF but it's worth keeping an eye out for the  odd treasure hke this.  AN EVENING FOR WOMEN  ON SEPARATION AND   DIVORCE  WITH FAMILY LAWYER NANCY CAMERON  MAY 18th 7:30 pm  BRITANNIA COMMUNITY CENTRE—ROOM L-4  COME AND HEAR INFORMATION  Child care subsidy—call 255-5511  ASK QUESTIONS  eKINESIS Arts  //////////////////////^^^^^  Lesbian Ethics  What works  what doesn't  by Bonnie Waterstone  LESBIAN ETHICS;  Toward New Value  by Sarah Lucia Hoagland  Palo Alto, California:  Institute of Lesbian Studies, 1988  Lesbian Ethics is an imposing book to  tackle. Sarah Hoagland worked on it for 11  years, drawing together several decades of  lesbian feminist theory. "What I am outlining here is not a program ... for getting  lesbians to act ethicaUy. It is a program for  lesbians who already want to be ethical."  There are no rules to hve by in this book,  only a careful examination of what works  and what doesn't.  Hoagland spins her theory out over 300  pages that are studded with intriguing  'asides.' The 29 pages of endnotes are fascinating in themselves. "Conversation, BUUe  Potts" or "Conversation, Diedre McCaUa"  made me wonder who is BUlie Potts?, did  she take notes whde talking with Diedre?  WhUe reading I had the sense of analysis evolving out of discussion in the lesbian  community as weU as through extensive research.  Lesbian Ethics deals with how to  develop moral agency under oppression.  Hoagland defies the "masculine myth that  says we must be in control of a situation to  make choices" and moves to an analysis of  how dominance and subordination through  social control, or heterosexualism, obstructs  lesbian connection. The weaving of an empowering lesbian community involves the  skids of attending, engaging, avoiding demoralization, integrating reason and emotion, taking each other seriously, and playing.  "Heterosexualism is men dominating and  de-skiUing women," through predation or  protection. Hoagland shows how heterosexualism can be compared with colonialism in  its maintenance through force when paternalism is rejected. She advocates separating  from heterosexualism as a necessary pohtical strategy. To refuse to participate in and  therefore affirm the central values of heterosexualism frees lesbians to focus on a lesbian  conceptual framework and to create lesbian  value.  "The need to control and to be controlled in relationships is central to the  dominant-subordinate values of heterosexualism," Hoagland states. She goes on to  discuss how these values are internalized  through altruism, self-sacrifice, and vul-  nerabdity. To survive under male domination, women developed so-caUed feminine  virtues as a means of control from a position of subordination. Altruism and self-  sacrifice, often considered prerequisites for  ethical behaviour, hinder lesbian integrity  and connection. Altruism presupposes an  inherent conflict of interests, which women  are encouraged to overcome by giving up  their own interests. Hoagland describes the  dangers of self-sacrifice in detad, comparing mothering and amazoning. When self-  sacrifice permeates our interactions, control  is the obvious consequence. Our ability to  remain both separate and related is hampered. "That we have to make choices is not  in itself a matter of sacrifice," and we may  choose freely to help a friend, for example,  without a sense of giving up our own interests.  Vulnerabdity, or self-disclosure to establish trust, has been considered a virtue in  the lesbian community. Hoagland argues  that vulnerabdity can be used between lesbians as a means to gain control in a relationship "without acknowledging either the  attempt or [the] control." Using vulnerabdity as a shortcut to intimacy forces a closeness that does not involve deep understanding of another or of ourselves.  Neither feminine nor paternalistic values  serve the creation of lesbian ethics. "Paternalistic thinking, the behef that it is appropriate to act for (not with) someone" contributes to a lack of respect among lesbians,  perpetuates the power of privdege, and encourages ignorance. When we try to end a  friend's pain or to remove its source, we risk  violating her integrity. However, Hoagland  suggests, when we attend our friend in her  pain, we focus our energy on her, empowering and enabling her. Attending is a two-  way, interactive process that increases our  responsiveness and dispels ignorance. Unlike the therapeutic model, which presumes  a "paid friend" who is supposedly objective, attending is not impartial. Our perceptions and judgments are involved. Therapy,  on the other had, promotes individual solutions to non-individual problems and encourages the idea that the meaning of our  feehngs is introspective.  When emotions are viewed as being integrated with reason their pohtical signifi-  COEC  Saturday  May 27  CREDIT  H'jn.'.l'T.lii J7,lli1  RayCam Community Centre, 920 East Hastings St.  Trade Show •Workshops  Networking Forum •boor Raffle  Childrens Program • Food  Flea Market • Entertainment  Dance to The Tools at the Ukrainian Hall 8 pm -12  cance becomes clear. Feelings contain judgment and perception. When a lesbian feels  angry, for example, she can use that anger  to inform her pohtical perception. A focus on coping with anger is not effective or  helpful for those who hve under oppression.  Rather, being in "a state of anger" develops  our strength to face those who dominate us  and helps to maintain our integrity.  In discussing the integration of reason  and emotion, Hoagland chaUenges the behef  that "to do anything we must be in control  and to feel anything we must be out of control." Focussing on control undermines our  ability to make choices. "Both being in and  out of control are agendas of the fathers."  One aspect of lesbian resistance to healing the fragmentation of reason and emotion  is the tendency to focus on safety as a core  element of lesbian community, particularly  safety in expression of feehngs. Safety is "an  Ulusion under patriarchy" and is not a useful goal for lesbians. "Attempts to guarantee safety involve attempts to control." In  place of safety as a goal, Hoagland suggests  taking each other seriously.  Attending each other and taking each  other seriously calls for choices to be made.  If a friend says she is going to change her destructive behaviour, but does nothing about  it, the choice of withdrawing from her may  be necessary. This is a logical consequence  of taking her seriously, of valuing and acknowledging her. Hoagland is critical, how  ever, of ostracism, a form of lesbian social  control that imphes impartial judgment and  punishing offenders.  Instead of lesbian social justice, Hoagland  says we need more clowns. The clown or  trickster chaUenges our attempts to control  ourselves and situations. Hoagland quotes  extensively from Maria Lugones' article in  Hypatia 2, #2, "Playfulness, World Travelling, and Loving Perception," in explaining the idea of playing through boundaries,  or playful world travel, as a way to embrace  difference and celebrate diversity in the lesbian community, spinning beyond the patriarchal idea of difference as antagonism.  Hoagland sees this type of playfulness as  fuUy attending each other: "by travelling to  their 'world' we can understand what it is  to be ourselves in their eyes."  When my sense of self emerges over  and against you, our identities are primardy heterosexual. Hoagland emphasizes  a concept of self in community, or one  self among many selves, as central to her  theory. Implicit in this concept is self-  understanding, "the natural starting point  of lesbian ethics."  Hoagland's optimism and compassion,  her vision of lesbian creativity and possi-  bUity, inform this book. She beheves lesbians can make magic, can weave a revolution in value. She challenges us to develop  our moral agency, our integrity, and our lesbian connection—to create lesbian ethics.  Refugee/Refugiado  by Cyndi Mellon  10 am  - 4 pm  Throughout the month of AprU, the  Langham Arts Centre in Kaslo, B.C. was  the scene of a unique project dedicated  to examining the situation of refugees in  Canada. The exhibition, entitled "Refugee/  Refugiado" centred around the work of two  Vancouver artists: graphic artist Claire Kujundzic, and sculptor Yoh Garcia, who is  herself a refugee from Guatemala.  The project became an example of how  art can become the focus for a creative attempt on the part of a community to examine an unfamiliar and at times confusing situation. There are several Guatemalan  refugee families in the area and the Lang-  ham Centre director, Bernadette Lynch,  says that it was their presence that sparked  the idea of a show on refugees—particularly  refugees from El Salvador and Guatemala.  Throughout the show's first week, classes  from the schools in Kaslo and the surrounding area traveUed to the gallery. Young chddren were shown a shde show on the hfe of  a chUd hving in a Salvadoran refugee camp  in Honduras, whde older students watched  the National Film Board (NFB) film "Chddren of War," in which young people from  war torn countries talk to Canadian students about their situation.  In the gaUery, Yoh Garcia escorted the  students through her exhibition, explaining  the significance of each piece. Yoh later remarked, "The chUdren don't know what the  word "orphan" means. They've never had  to use it!" (Guatemala has over 20,000 orphaned chddren.)  Claire Kujundzic's colourful record of a  year spent working in Nicaragua brightened  the walls, and the paintings and prints gave  project co-ordinators the chance to explain  a bit about conditions in various countries.  The students also had a chance to look  at photographs taken in various refugee  camps and to hsten to the recorded voices of  refugee chddren. Drawings by refugee chUdren hving in the community were on display.  Teachers whose classes attended the  event expressed positive reaction to the  project. But the real proof of impact was in  the httle groups of youngsters who dropped  into the gaUery everyday after school to take  another, more leisurely look.  KINESIS  May 89 17 Clerical workers power play  by CyThea Sand  What it is like to be an alert, thinking human being absorbed, assaulted by  mindless unintelligent work. The fragmentation. The sense of being scattered. What it is like not to have time  to think, to consider an idea and follow it through to its logical conclusion.  This condition ... is not unique to me  just because I happen to want to write.  Rather it is the common experience that  I have observed and shared primarily  with those who do office work.  Irena Klepfisz  When Nora Rndall introduces Not  Just 9 to 5, a forum theatre event developed and performed by clerical workers, the Van East audience is eagerly  attentive. What are we about to experience? Why does such excitement envelop us before the event even begins?  As she explains the evolution of 9 to  5 and thanks all the people involved,  Nora's gracious and unruffled enthusiasm draws the crowd together and settles us in for an evening of entertainment and fun.  Not Just 9 to 5: Surviving the Modern Office, is divided into two distinct  parts. Part one consists of poetry and music with Sandy Shreve, Helen Potrebenko,  AYA and the Euphoniously Feminist and  Non-performing Quintet. The richness of  AYA's range, the Quintet's knee-slappin'  labour lyrics, and some exceUent work poetry frame the question of the evening: how  can workers improve the quality of their  hves?  Aya's performance of Bernice Reagan's  "Paycheck" is beautiful: "Lend an ear,  'cause it's important that you know, that  with every job there is fear, that disease wdl  take its toU."  One of the goals of the Clerical Workers' Health and Safety Project sponsoring  this event is to draw public attention to the  many health issues and concerns of women  in office work today. This song crystallizes  this concern with its poignant repetition.  Later in the evening we see a character typing away with arm bandages—she is a victim of a repetitive strain injury, something  that six out of every 100 workers suffer from.  I enjoyed the Quintet's "Good Monday  Morning," and "59 Cents," and Aya's rendition of "Borderlines" powerfuUy reminds  the audience of the international scope of  workers' struggles from the mines in South  Africa to the wire slots in Tokyo.  Sandy Shreve's poetry concerns the daUy  frustrations and indignities of the clerical  worker who, by the end of the day, is "reduced to a thin howl" Sandy's voice is  melodic and soothing so the bitter edge of  some of her poems can take one by surprise.  Helen Potrebenko is a dehght. She reads  us poems about typos that get discussed in  the House of Commons, about typists who  long to sing, and about the rules for women  in a society that individualizes stress and  strain and places impossible demands on us.  Helen's sardonic humour has the crowd  howhng and her matter-of-fact presentation  seems to underscore her wit even more. This  is her stage, a set seemingly designed to  highhght her voice with clarity and a sense  of fun. There is a distinct dignity of purpose  here and Part One closes with laughter and  the anticipation of more to come.  The actual play, Not Just 9 to 5 as  David Diamond and Sherri-Lee Gudbert  of Headlines Theatre explain forum theatre, a power play during which the audience can intervene at various stages to help  solve the problems raised in the scenes. H a  member of the audience yeUs "Stop!" they  come on stage, replacing the person they  (see as being oppressed and then act out  a different—and hopefuUy innovative and  positive—approach to the problem. WUl  any of us really have the nerve to do this?,;  I wonder.  The actors in this play are aU clerical  workers who have workshopped for five days  with Headlines Theatre. The whole group  appears on stage at the beginning, introducing themselves and their job titles. Then  David and Sherri-Lee (whose excitement is  contagious) set the tone for scene one: we  are to watch the whole scenario without interrupting and then the scene wUl be replayed. We are then encouraged to inter-  A clerical worker has been sent to a department as a substitute and she is given  an impossible amount of work to do. The  action involves her relationship to the other  workers and to the male bosses.  Seconds after the rerun begins, someone  behind me yells "Stop!" and David orchestrates him onto the stage. He plays the role  of the substitute for a few minutes, suggesting that she should introduce herself to her  co-workers right at the beginning to buUd  up a sense of camaraderie and support in  the face of unrealistic expectations from the  bosses.  In the two scenes presented to us the  dynamics of office pohtics and the nature  of power are dramatized and both the actors and audience are quick to change hnes,  present different perspectives, and to participate in making change happen. The energy in the theatre grows more intense as  the audience and the actors get more and  more involved with the process. I have never  felt this engaged by theatre before and I notice that the people sitting near me are absorbed right to the end.  This is an example of Headlines Theatre's  "Theatre of the Oppressed" which workshops with many community groups. (David  told me of a recent project in Hope in which  teenagers of alcoholic and abusive parents  presented their concerns.) As this evening  of Not Just 9 to 5 demonstrates, this type  of theatre is empowering and fun. I left feeling charged up about the day-to-day drama  of everyday working hfe and about the pos-  sibdities for change. I guess it reaUy is more  than just 9 to 5.  Composers front and centre  by Kinesis Staff Writer  A sonata inspired by contemplating the  stars and a tape composition incorporating  the sounds of trainhorns and foghorns might  appear to have nothing in common. But  "Image Astrale" by Jean Coulthard and  "Fantasie for Horns" by Hildegard West-  erkamp, represent just some of the immense  variety of musical exploration by contemporary Canadian women composers. Both  works wdl be performed as part of two  concerts featuring British Columbia women  composers.  On consecutive Monday evenings, June  12 and 19, as part of the Community Arts  Councd's "Hear and Now" series, the B.C.  chapter of the Association of Canadian  Women Composers (ACWC) wdl present its  inaugural event to showcase music by 15 of  its members. The new chapter has attracted  over 20 composer members and several associated members in the two months since  its formation. Like other ACWC members  across Canada, they write in diverse genres  and styles.  That diversity is evident in the programs  for both evenings. On the June 12 hneup  are chamber works for piano, wind instruments and voice, whde the June 19 program  highlights compositions for tape as weU as  acoustic and vocal works.  Audiences wdl hear compositions by established composers such as Sylvia Packard,  a Victoria resident whose work reflects her  sensitivity to the music of the world's cultures. At the same time they wdl discover  talented young composers hke Ramona Lu-  engen, who, before the age of 30, has been  broadcast on CBC, and had works commissioned by the Vancouver Chamber Choir,  the Vancouver Cantata Singers and others.  The concerts will be held at the  Community Arts Council's gallery, 837  Davie St. Performances begin at 8 pm.  Tickets are available at the door or in  advance from ACWC members.  For more information about the concerts or the organization, contact Ina  Dennekamp of the ACWC Steering  Committee at 255-  Consciously from p. 9  her spoken Japanese is frozen in time. She  is embarrassed to speak Japanese. Her Enghsh is not perfect so she is spoken to and  treated hke a cluld.  Yamada spoke about English-only laws  in the States carrying an underlying subtext of'English is a superior language so the  white race is superior and I must learn to  speak as the whites.' She also spoke of internalized racism where Japanese-American  people have tried to whitewash their accents and mannerisms in order not to 'invite  racism.' She said the only Japanese women  who got invited to feminist conferences in  Japan were bilingual. This had a message  that if you were a monolingual Japanese  woman you were inferior.  Vivian Carlo is a Latina who is a member .  of the Women Against Racism Committee.  She began her speech by speaking in Spanish for three minutes. This was to dlustrate  the discomfort of being made to feel invisible as a Latina. It was effective. She spoke of  her Puerto Rican heritage as that of being  a mixture of African, indigenous and European. "I need to reclaim all of my heritages.  HI participate in not doing this, I'm divided  and then I'm conquered."  Alliance Building  Sunday's theme was alliance budding.  Rachel Sierra is a Chicana who has been  involved in community organizing, particularly with poor people. The day's theme was  alliance buUding so she spoke of the difficulties of working together. The contradictions of herself working in coalitions for social change and poor people remaining poor.  Talking of disappointments and burnout.  Leaders trashing each other. "Power defined  as 'If I need power then I need to take some  of your power.' In order for me to be powerful I had to buUd an alliance among my  various selves. My pohtical self, my spiritual  self, and my heart centre. That no longer  can we say, 'I'm doing personal work then I  don't have time for pohtical work.' Or vice  versa. 'The movement is too important, the  revolution might start whde I'm doing therapy or something!' We must put our hurts  and disappointments within a context, it's  a process."  Lakota Harden is a Native American,  raised in Porcupine, South Dakota, where  she was a member of the 'We WUl Remember' survival school, a group organized by  the American Indian Movement. She presented on how to be an aUy from her experiences in New Bridges, a multiracial project  founded by Ricky Sherover Marcuse.  "I come from a long hne of resistors and  survivors. We're stiU here. Every possible  power has been tried to make us disappear  ... The most insulting thing for me is for  anyone to say to me 'I understand you'...  I'm not being pohticaUy correct when I do  this. It's a necessity ... A lot of my allies  are trying to be me, this is insulting, white  women being Indian in another time for example. I'm willing to share, but don't steal  my voice away. Let me write my own books,  let me teU my own stories."  Melanie Kaye/Kantrowitz is a Jewish  woman who was editor of Sinister Wisdom  and co-editor of The Tribe of Dina: A  Jewish Women's Anthology. She started  by thanking the organizers for making the  conference free. Also for serving kosher  food, this made her feel welcome even if  she was secular. She said she had a faUure  of courage when a performer sang a song  called, "We AU Came on Different Ships  But We're in the Same Boat Now." She  said she waited for the song to mention that  there were people here already. And waited  for a Native person to speak out, chickening  out hersetf.  She said that recognizing and celebrating our differences had become such a  catch phrase but there is one difference we  mustn't celebrate, that is class. We must  eliminate it. see next page  sKlNESIS Arts  y^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^  Aquelarre: The dream comes true  by Carmen Rodriguez  It was a year ago that we met for the  first time to talk about our dream. Some  of us had worked together in other projects  in the past; others just knew each other so-  iaUy, as members of the Latin American  ommunity in Vancouver. That evening, we  first went through the necessary coffee and  cookies ritual, whde talking about this and  the other. Then, httle by httle, our individual visions of the dream began to emerge,  only to find out that the coincidences were  astonishingly and pleasantly simUar.  Yes, we needed a pubhcation, a space to  dialogue, explore, tell, show, discuss, share.  Yes, we wanted it to be not only serious  and important, but also beautiful and with  touches of humour. Yes, we wanted it to  be bilingual and to reach every corner of  the continent. Yes, we wanted a magazine  that would bring together Latin American  women hving both here and there, plus  Canadian and other women interested in  the Latin American continent.  When we left Irene's house that night, the  spark was already burning in each one of us  and the dream was now out there, by itself,  doing its own thing and having its own fun.  For us, the work had just begun.  Week after week we met and discussed  our goals, our basis of unity, our differences,  our concerns, the hurdles to overcome, the  thriU of creating a new project. Every week  we planned, scratched the plans, got discouraged, started aU over again, got a httle better organized, got excited, accomplished something. Slowly, and almost inadvertently, the pieces of the puzzle began to faU in place and to look hke something coherent. But, the puzzle stiU needed  a name! What to call this attractive, interesting, socialist-feminist, bi-hngual, artistically conceived, international, quarterly  publication?  Names came and left. We also went  looking, made hsts, repeated syllables, put  them on paper, played with sounds, concepts and languages, untd we found a word  that nobody really used in dady hfe, but  that seemed to capture the essence of what  we wanted to do. Aquelarre, a word of  Basque origin meaning "dlegal gathering of  witches."  You see, organization and collaboration  are necessary when we want to do things.  People meet and talk, people meet and tell,  remember, decide, act. They don't ask anybody's permission to meet, they just meet  out of their own wdl and the conviction that  working coUectively can change the world.  In our continent, with its long history of  Aquelarre: "illegal gathering of  witches." They used to call us  witches. What do they call us  now? Arpilleristas, weavers,  union leaders, women in exile,  political prisoners, mothers of  the disappeared, artists....  Aquelarre: " concilidbulo de  brujas." Antes se nos llamaba  brujas. ;C6mo se nos llama  ahora? Arpilleristas, tejedoras,  exiliadas, prisioneras politicas,  sindicalistas, madres de los  desaparecidos, artistas   oppression and repression, dlegal meetings  are nothing new; furthermore, very often,  they are the only way to go. So, it seemed  to us that the "Ulegal gathering" part of  the meaning of Aquelarre was quite in line  with our idea of creating, taking over a  space where Latin American women and  their friends could meet and dialogue.  As far as the "witches" part of the word  is concerned, we felt that it could not be  more appropriate. Women of power, women  that in some way or another have decided to  act on their convictions, have been labeUed  many things throughout the history of patriarchy. The most common name has been  "witch" and its variations.  Yes, we women are witches. For centuries  we have sdently fed the history of humanity  without the other half of the planet's population even realizing it. For centuries we  have kept in our memories that which books  don't say. The time has come for aU of us to  gather and share our past, work the present  together and thus, make a conscious contribution to the buUding of the future.  So, every week we continued our "aque-  larres" and from the name we moved on  to the brochure and the mailing hsts, the  contacts, the gathering of material, the  fundraising, the files, and the hundreds of  big and httle things that need to be tackled when wanting to produce a pubhcation.  The newly rented P.O. Box remained pa-  theticaUy empty for weeks, untU one day in  August, when the first letter addressed to  Aquelarre made its way into the httle space  and waited for my hand to take it out. I  must confess that I kissed it; serious. It was  hke breaking a sped, because from then on,  and increasingly so, we have been receiving  letters of encouragement and materials from  all over the continent.  We wUl be sharing these contributions  and our own work with you in doses of 50  pages every three months. There wiU be interviews, poetry, stories, testimonies and articles to read, art work and photography to  indulge in, you name it! Aquelarre wUl be  one of those pubUcations you won't be able  to resist. Just wait for a couple of weeks and  see!  Aquelarre hopes to publish its first  issue this spring. To subscribe sent  $18 (for one year) or $35 (for two  years). International subscription rates  are equivalent in U.S. funds plus one  dollar per magazine for postage. Latin  American rates are one-half equivalent  U.S. funds. Donations are gratefully  accepted. Volunteers are welcome. For  more information or to subscribe write  to Aquelarre, P.O Box 65535, Stn. F,  Vancouver, B.C., Canada V5N 5K6  From previous page  She spoke of the pain and fear that accompanied her journey of dlumination in  her being an aUy to both Jews and Palestinians after the invasion of Lebanon. The  historical Jewish terror that Israeli actions  would be used against Jews. She read a  poem about Kaddish, the Jewish prayer of  mourning, that she wrote about the suffering of the Palestinians. I felt 20 minutes was  too short for aU I wanted to hear from this  eloquent woman.  Angela Davis spoke last about alliances.  There is not enough space here to recount  aU she said but she rightfuUy holds the leadership role of women of colour because of  her wide-ranging, brUhant analysis of our  hves in terms of racism, sexism, heterosexism and classism. She was interrupted many  times by the joyous applause of women responding to home truths. Some quotes:  " 'People of colour' has to be used carefully because we're not a generalized people.  'People of colour' is used when we want to  share something. But do not turn it into an  abstract generalization, a shield to reality  as opposed to Uluminating ... White people did not cease to be racist only because  they allied themselves with words against  racism ...  "At the risk of being controversial, in  the 1990's, aU 'white' women's organizations should strive to make themselves obsolete! The structures of domination can stay  in place by how one structures organizations ... The use of the word 'minority' is  the language of domination ... It's important for white people to conceptualize themselves as a minority, especially white men.  "White women talk of bringing women  of colour into 'their' organizations. We have  understood instinctively that these organizations have not been ours, the agenda has  already been set, the leadership has been  set. This is going to mean restructuring ...  The impact of racism is that white women  don't think that we as women of colour can  take leadership. And we as women of colour  are uncomfortable with our abihty to give  leadership. This hurts us aU.  "We don't have a right to call ourselves  women of colour if we are only aware of our  own particular oppression. It is my respon-  sibUity to inform myself about the experiences and agendas of my sisters who are  Latina, Native, Asian, and so on ... As  women of colour it is important to understand our special relationship to our Jewish sisters because racism and anti-semitism  are always hnked together. The first allies  of Black people in the South were Jews ...  "Women of colour, it's our responsibU-  ity to chaUenge homophobia where we work  and in our community." In fighting oppressions, "You must recognize that there is a  pohtical context to aU this work you are doing. Don't ever forget that."  The workshops ranged from bad to good.  Every proposal or paper was accepted, this  gave a 'supermarket' feel to the conference.  There were no workshops for Native  women; four that were submitted were can-  ceUed. This resulted in a statement to the  conference from the Native American caucus about invisibihty. Welfare mothers also  protested invisibihty.  The accessibihty provisions were excellent. In signing they had women of colour  doing this as weU as allies. The signers were  also bdingual in Spanish.  The Women Against Racism Committee  deserves applause for the two years of work  to put this conference together.  Video tapes of the conference's plenary sessions are available by writing the conference organizers. The final  plenary session, in particular, features  powerful speeches about alliance building. For information about tape purchases contact: The Women Against  Racism Committee, Women's Resource  and Action Centre, 130 North Madison,  Iowa City, Iowa, 52242.  KINESIS Commentary ^  EGALE demands action on gay rights  Open letter to: The Right Honourable Brian Mulroney, PC, MP,  Prime Minister of Canada from Equality for Gays and Lesbians Everywhere  We were pleased that your party saw fit  to send a Member of Parfiament to the annual fundraising event of the organization  EGALE. It spoke weU to us of the government's intention to deal honourably with  your three year-old pledge to "take whatever measures are necessary" to end discrimination in aU spheres of federal jurisdiction and we were gratified to learn that  Mr. Monteith was in attendance as the representative of the Minister of Justice.  We are writing to you now because we  are convinced that you do care genuinely  about the integrity of human rights, and  of the fundamental importance of ensuring  that there exists an accessible remedy to  discrimination.  Mr. Prime Minister, we must tell you how  deeply the insult cut when a representative  of your government suggested that there is  not a need to amend the Canadian Human  Rights Act so as to prohibit discrimination  on the basis of one's sexual orientation.  Mr. Monteiths's address said to those  present that the government feels that the  rights of gay and lesbian Canadians are secure, since it is the widely-held legal view  that section 15, the equahty rights provision  of The Charter of Rights and Freedoms, embraces this minority.  IronicaUy, in discussions with other community leaders, we were in the position of  arguing that this is in fact not an indication of a cowardly stance, that it cannot be  a suggestion of a retraction of earlier commitment, that Mr. Monteith hkely was weU  aware that he would face an uneasy reception between hostility and distrust when he  agreed to be present at our fundraising vigU  of hope.  Gay and lesbian people and their families, Mr. Prime Minister, understand fuUy  the dUemma you face regarding the controversy in certain elements of society on  the introduction of such an amendment. We  need an assurance, though, that Mr. Mon-  teith's address was not a suggestion that we  wUl be forced to press issues through the arduous and costly circuits of the legal system.  No doubt you have been made aware that  there are constitutional challenges being developed to seven areas of federal law that  unjustifiably discriminate on the basis of  sexual orientation. We played a key role in  the articulation of this case development,  and remain active on several fronts in this  respect.  The recent articulation of the meaning  of the Charter's equahty provisions by the  Supreme Court of Canada in the Andrews  case (see Kinesis, March, 1989) lift any  hngering doubts that one might have had  with regard to the validity of such claims  to equahty. Mr. Monteith was clearly correct in suggesting that there is a constitu-  sity as a virtue in and of itself, and with a  recognised history of hving up to our commitments to human rights.  On the other hand, there has been ample  opportunity to respect your commitment.  Failure to do so has been perceived by some  to be a suggestion that the promise was in  itself aU smoke and mirrors. It has been suggested to us that the only valid conclusion  to be drawn is that the government did not  have even a shred of sincerity when that  moldy promise was made, but we do not  buy this cynical stance.  ...there is a  constitutional basis  for our claim  for equality...  tional basis to our claim for equahty and for  protection from discrimination. We have no  quibble with that stance.  What concerns us above aU else is the impact on individuals hstening to Mr. Monteith who have not been to law school, who  might not understand that Canadian constitutional premises of equahty wdl even-  tuaUy come to enforce our rights to work,  to housing, to service, to an existence free  from harassment and discrimination. Many  of the people in the gay and lesbian community, and their families and friends, who  were present became extremely angry.  Two things remain with us: a phdosoph-  ical debate on the nature of a society that  wUl stand idly by whde a minority group  struggles to assert rights already promised;  and a real fear for the people caught in the  middle.  On the one hand, in 1986, your Minister of Justice, John Crosbie, rose in the  House of Commons and pledged to take  action to end discrimination against gays  and lesbians, which he vowed was unacceptable in a civilised society. Three years ago,  when Crosbie voiced your intent to protect  our people's rights, we were deeply satisfied  with the commitment. Canadian society is  blessed both with understanding of diver-  We cannot for one instant beheve that a  government of Canada could pretend so flippantly to support human rights, and then  blatantly flout them because of perceived  opposition to the legislative implementation  of such protection. The two clearly do not  foUow, but the appearance of insincerity is  so pronounced that we are having trouble  convincing our people that such is not the  case.  What we need as a community is a  prompt reassurance that the Canadian Human Rights Act wUl indeed be amended in  this session of Parhament to prohibit discrimination against gays and lesbians. The  first step to dehver this assurance of your  sincerity would be, in our view, to insert an  explicit pledge to this effect in the Speech  from the Throne. (Editor's Note: The recent  Speech from the Throne did not include any  such reference.)  However, this assurance is couched, let  us suggest to you in unequivocal terms that  gay and lesbian Canadians need and deserve nothing less. Various officials aUude  to the possibihty of a non-specific terminology in an amendment which could evade direct mention of equahty protections for homosexuals, and we can say to you now that  such would never do. Far more has already  Vancouver Rape Relief  &. Women's Shelter  WALKATHON  DOES YOUR BOYFRIEND THINK YOU'RE  TOO POLITICAL?  WANT TO FIGHT PATRIARCHY  § PATRIARCHS?  COME WORK WITH US!    We need good  receptionists and women interested  in training as transition house  staff, crisis workers, educational  speakers and  all  round  troublemakers . .  CALL  11:00 am  Sunday, May 28, 1989  872-8212  Please come out and help support Ihe  been promised, and to dehver any less would  enrage an already critical group.  We are deeply concerned for Canadians who, without financial and professional  privilege, are enduring harsh treatment  which they are not empowered, neither po-  liticaUy nor financiaUy, to resist.  We are thinking of Derrick Dwyer, a corporal in the Canadian Forces in Montreal,  whose security clearance was revoked last  autumn only because he happens to be gay.  Corporal Dwyer has httle faith in our assurances that the Andrews case assures him  of a Federal Court with a broader test of  equahty. He needs only to know that his job  will be waiting for him next week; that he  can continue to serve his country with accolades, as he has done for 11 years, quietly  and with no fear of harassment.  We are thinking of Karen Andrews, who  has been denied health insurance extension  in the province of Ontario to her dependent chUdren simply because her spouse is  female. Ms. Andrews has limited resources,  and chddren to support, and represents a  host of similar families. Ms. Andrews lacks  influence and wealth. What are we to teU  her and her chddren?  We are thinking of Kevin Brown, who has  been denied access to life-extending drugs  by the British Columbia health plan because he happens to be a person hving with  AIDS, and—not insignificantly—a gay man.  Mr. Brown, unhke us, lacks time. What are  we to teU him?  We are thinking of elderly Canadians  such as Jim Egan and John Nesbitt in the  smaU city of Courtenay, B.C., who in their  42 years as a couple together have contributed significantly to the shaping of our  nation. They seek, in applying the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, to legitimize  their relationship so that young people today need not struggle with oppressive social forces in order simply to hve together.  The government has responded to their petition by implementing every legal staUing  device imaginable, with the apparent hope  that these two seniors wdl die before the issue of their equahty is decided.  Messrs. Egan and Nesbitt, unhke many  Canadians, represent the courage to face opposition and the faith in government to act  on its commitments that many Canadians  lack. What are we to teU them?  We are thinking of Joe Rose, a young gay  activist brutally assaulted and stabbed to  death by a gang of thugs screaming "faggot" on a Montreal bus.  Mr. Rose has httle left but a legacy of  good work in the community and a circle  of grieving friends and family who beheve  the government, in not legaUy condemning  such discrimination, approves of such senseless butchering. What are we to teU them?  We are thinking of nameless, faceless  young people in far-flung parts of Canada  who are coming to recognize the reality of  their identity, and who are burying any notions of dignity and pride because of an  overwhelming social oppression.  These young Canadians, unhke us, lack  the world view to see that some day, some  Chief Justice wUl inevitably come to assert  their innate dignity and equahty. What are  we, in the meantime, to teU them?  We remain more convinced than ever  that direct action must be taken to ensure that the Canadian Human Rights Act  is amended so that discrimination against  gay and lesbian people in Canada be condemned. We strongly urge that evidence  of your commitment to equahty be demonstrated.  We would welcome the opportunity to  discuss this further with you and your staff,  and look forward to your prompt reply.  Thank you for your kind attention.  0 KJNESIS yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy.  ///yW////////////^^^  //////////////////////^^^^^  LETTERS  The media  and Rape Relief  Kinesis:  On Thursday April 6, 1989, the Vancouver Sun published an article by Pamela  Fayerman "Rape Relief Centre Under Attack." It is a misleading, confusing and irresponsible article.  Since I am quoted in the Sun article,  I want to clarify my involvement with it  and speak to Kinesis readers and women's  groups about some of the issues the article  raises for me.  In mid-March, I received a phone call  from Pamela Fayerman who was writing a  story about Vancouver Rape Relief based on  documents critical of Rape Relief which she  had received from some Vancouver women.  I had no idea that anyone had made a decision to give any documents to the mainstream media. I worried about which documents they were since minutes of at least  one meeting I'd attended contained information I assumed was for use among  women's groups only. Fayerman said she  had a letter I'd sent to Ishtar Transition  House and asked me to explain to her the  criticisms of Rape Relief and Lee Lakeman  contained in that letter. I said that the  WRC and other women's groups, such as  WAVAW, had maintained for years that we  should not co-operate with a story initiated by mainstream news organizations (including the Sun) on our concerns regarding Rape Relief. I said my experience indicated that the mainstream press invariably turned this kind of issue into a story  about "fights within the Women's Movement" which would do nothing to report or  explain the issues clearly or fairly.  I said I would not co-operate with her.  Fayerman said she wasn't interested in  pohtical disputes among women's groups.  She said the documents she'd received indicated that women have had serious concerns about Rape Relief for many years and  that, since we'd been unsuccessful in dealing  with these concerns within the Movement,  we had, in her opinion, a responsibility to go  "pubhc." I disagreed with her. She pointed  out that she could use my letter to Ishtar as  weU as other documents she had if no one  would comment but she said she'd call me  back as the story progressed. Fayerman not  only didn't caU me back, she used a quote  from my October '88 letter without making  it clear she was quoting from a letter at ah.  Thus, she left the impression that I'd actuaUy been interviewed and had agreed to be  quoted for an article she knew I opposed.  More important, though, the article Fayerman produced is precisely what she said it  wouldn't be: it's a muckraking story about a  pohtical dispute within the Women's Movement, not a story about services for women  in crisis. I fear it's an article that wdl confuse and mislead those very women who  most need to know what services are avaUable to them in Vancouver. I fear the lingering doubts that may plague women who've  read the article as they, in crisis, reach  for the phone and hesitate, trying to recaU  which group the article said was bad, which  is good, "who should I call?" Let us hope  such confusion wUl not prevent women from  making that important call.  The article is a sorry mistake that should  never have happened. The women who  leaked the information to Fayerman were,  I beheve, weU-intentioned but tragicaUy  naive about the mainstream media. They  acted independently without consulting or  even informing other feminists. They betrayed the trust of women they had strate-  gized with and women who had trusted  them with accounts of their painful experiences with Rape Relief.  The women who leaked the information  to the Sun have said they felt compeUed  to do it, that they were frustrated by what  they saw as the Women's Movement's faUure to chaUenge Rape Relief successfuUy. I  share their frustration but since when does  frustration or even good intentions justify  or excuse unprincipled acts and breaking  trust? Since when is it acceptable for a few  feminists to override the coUective decisions  of their sisters? Such abrogation of feminist  principles is a serious problem we must face  up to in the Women's Movement to prevent  this from happening again.  Unfortunately, there are few forums for  discussion of matters hke these. Perhaps the  pages of Kinesis can be one forum. There  may be others. But whatever forums we can  find, this irresponsible Sun article and the  events behind it tell me that we urgently  need to find ways to tackle these important  questions of principle.  Unity and sohdarity in the Women's  Movement wdl only be real and effective if  we budd them out of open discussion and  debate, especially of our disagreements. In  fact, I find myself in at least partial agreement with a comment attributed to Lee  Lakeman in the Sun article: "Lakeman says  she doesn't care about being 'in passionate  disagreement' with other feminists." WhUe  I do care, I accept that disagreements are  inevitable in a Movement hke ours and are  not to be feared. I beheve there are times  when it's necessary to declare that some disagreements are too profound to be bridged  and, therefore, that unity is not possible.  I came to that conclusion about Rape Relief seven years ago and have said so. For me,  the disagreements I have with Rape Relief  are not a "personal and pohtical vendetta"  as Lakeman characterizes them in the Sun  article. They are honest and fundamental  pohtical disagreements based on my knowledge of the experiences of women who've  worked with Rape Relief or gone there for  help and been damaged and hurt.  To do nothing about these women's experiences, to lad to chaUenge the pohcies and  practices that harmed them, to paper over  the disagreements or pretend they don't exist would be irresponsible. That is why the  "in-movement" meetings with Rape Relief  in the late 70's were important and why the  WAVAW/RCC meetings around its founding in 1982 were too. They provided forums for the debates and discussions feminists had a responsibility to engage in then.  H the AprU 6 Sun article, and aU that  was behind it, does nothing more than spur  us on to develop ways to discuss and debate,  we'd at least be making the best of a bad  situation and, at best, we'U be strengthening the Women's Movement.  Jan Barnsley  Display  Advertising:  Ask us about discounts.  Phone 255-5499  rbECKVJOMAN\S  StoRe^okt art stvoio Gins  131 fr COMMERCIAL ORWIE  UTS*-: CMUfc,5EWELlEfW  905T CARD5. CLOTHES.  JOURNALS.M0B1LE5.CHIME6  KINESIS Bulletin Board  Read this  AU listings must be received no later than  the 18th of the month preceding publicar  tion. Listings are limited to 75 words and  should include a contact name and telephone number for any clarification that may  be required. Listings should be typed or  neatly handwritten, double-spaced on 8 |  by 11 paper. Listings wiU not be accepted  over the telephone. Groups, organizations  and individuals eligible for free space in the  BuUetin Board must be, or have, non-profit  objectives. Other free notices wUl be items  of general pubUc interest and wUl appear at  the discretion of Kinesis.  Classified are $6 for the first 75 words or  portion thereof, $2 for each additional 25  words or portion thereof. Deadline for classifieds is the 18th of the month preceding  pubhcation. Kinesis wdl not accept classifieds over the telephone. AU classifieds must  be prepaid.  For BuUetin Board submissions send  copy to Kinesis Attn: BuUetin Board, 301-  1720 Grant Street, Vancouver, B.C. V5L  2Y6. For more information caU 255-5499.  EVENTS  FREE LAW CLASSES  Custody and Access May 25, 7-9 pm, at  the People's Law School (688- 2565); Divorce Law May 18, 7-9 pm, at Fraserview  Library (325-4522); Marriage—Legal and  Common Law May 23, 7-9 pm, at Kitsi-  lano House (736-3588); Power of Attor-  ney/Committeeship June 6, 1:30-3 pm,  at 411 Senior Centre (684-8171 loc. 7);  Starting a Small Business May 25, 1:30-  3 pm, at False Creek Centre (665-3425);  Welfare Rights and GAIN May 17, 7-  9 pm, at Trout Lake Centre (876-9285);  Women, Money and Relationships May  29, 7-9 pm, at Kerrisdale Centre (266-  8331). Please pre-register by phoning the  number in brackets  EVENT SIG R O U P SlCLASSIFIED  BARN DANCE  The VLC is holding a Barn Dance May  12, 8 pm-1 am at 3925 Fraser St. Tix are  $4-$6, available at Ariel Books, Women's  Bookstore and the VLC at 876 Commercial Dr. Childcare provided, wheelchair  accessible. For more info call 254-8458  THEATRE  Heroines, written and directed by Judith  Hogan, will be showing at the VECC,  1895 Venables St., May 4-6 7:30 pm.  Tix: $7 general, $4 students and seniors.  Four women escape from different folk  tales to challenge their oppressors, save  their own lives, and make individual decisions regarding princes  SONG, DRUMMING $ DANCE  South African Women's Day Committee  is holding a fundraising benefit at La  Quena Sat. May 20 at 8 pm. The South  African Gumboot Dancers, Ojib-Cree Native Drumming Group and AYA will perform. Tix $3-$5 at the door. All women  and children welcome  WOMEN'S BASEBALL  Fourth annual Women's Baseball Tournament June 17 &. 18, (June 24 & 25 if  it rains) at Britannia diamond. All teams  welcome. Registration is $20. Volunteers  and umpires needed. Refreshments, trophies, fun in the field, fun in the stands.  Don't miss this highlight of the summer  season. To sign up your team or to volunteer call Kate at 732-0787  Display  Advertising:  Ask us about discounts.  Phone 255-5499  2K!NESIS       May89  PRESS GANG PRINTERS  Press Gang will be holding two benefits.  May 7: Pancake brunch at 4381 James  St. (near 28th and Main) 11 am-1 pm.  Sliding scale $5-$15 and children are free.  All women and children welcome. June 4:  screening of Born In Flames at VEC, 7th  and Commercial 12 noon. Sliding scale  $3-$10. To arrange for childcare call 255-  4812. Everyone welcome.  WOMEN'S FESTIVAL  The West Kootenay Women's annual  summer festival will be held Aug. 12-  13. Workshops, music, dance and lots of  Kootenay hospitality. For info contact the  Nelson Women's Centre, 601 D Front St.,  Nelson, B.C. V1L 4B6 or phone 352-9916  BRITISH VIDEO  Inside Thatcher's England, an evening of  documentary videotapes, off-air excerpts  and videoclips about union issues in England will be shown at Video In, 1102  Homer St. (downstairs) May 6 at 8 pm.  Admission $3-$4  BY HERSELF  Doris Chase presents three videos from  the By Herself series which focus on  women's experiences in their middle years  May 19 at 8 pm at Video In, 1102  Homer St. (downstairs). Admission $3-$4  LINDA WATERFALL  Flying Fish recording artist Linda Waterfall will be performing in concert at La  Quena, 1111 Commercial Dr., May 19,  8 pm. Tix: $5-$7  SUBMISSIONS  FIREWEED  Like to spell your own way? Is your form  against the norm? Have you no time for  punctuation? The Weird Writing Collective wants your material. Deadline for  submission June 30. Send to: Fireweed,  P.O. Box 279. Stn. B, Toronto M5T 2W2  (please include a SASE)  WORKSHOPS  UNLEARNING RACISM  An Unlearning Racism weekend workshop will be held June 9, 10, 11 at  Camp Alexandra in White Rock. Childcare subsidy is available, sliding scale fee:  $20-$150. Register between May 1-15 by  calling Celeste George 251-2635 or Mari  Wright 872-4079.  v?amum 6k>t-scD ^UNNIE*  TENANTS RIGHTS CLINIC  The Tenants Rights Coalition will be offering free legal advice and information  every Sat., 9 am-12 noon at 191 Alexander St.  LESBIAN SUPPORT SERVICES  Battered Women's Support Services offers counselling, information, referral and  support groups for lesbians who are, or  have been in abusive relationships. Lesbian counsellors available. Confidentiality  assured 734-1574  TENANTS RIGHTS  The Tenants Rights Coalition has reopened the Information Hotline. Tenants  needing basic information on their rights  can call the Hotline at 255-0546, 9 am-5  pm Mon.-Thurs., and 9 am-12 noon on  Fri.  ASSERTIVENESS TRAINING  Van. Status of Women will be holding a  six week program of assertiveness training on Thursdays, starting May 11 from  7-9:30 pm. The course is free and childcare expenses are available. Please preregister by calling Trisha at 255-5511  KARATE COLLECTIVE  We are looking for women interested in  joining an all women Karate Collective  Tues. & Thurs., 7-8 pm at Carnarvon  Community School, 3400 Balaclava  M   I    S   C  AIDS VANCOUVER  Volunteers needed to work on the hotline.  If you have a fixed availability one day a  week, please call 687-AIDS  DONOR INSEMINATION  The Van. Women's Health Collective is  offering a three evening donor insemination course for lesbians on June 6, 13,  20, 7-9 pm. A $20 fee will be requested  for materials (negotiable). Phone 255-  8285 for more info and to register. Enrollment limited  SAGE'S RESTAURANT  Memberships are still available. Support  your local women's restaurant to open  soon. For more info call 254-8458  STRESSED?! BURNT-OUT?!  Do you believe that if you relax you won't  get anything done? You may be surprised  to learn how effective you can be without feeling stressed. In this participatory  workshop, we will use body awareness to  explore the effects of stress and to experiment with simple stress-reducing techniques that will leave you feeling at ease  yet alert. The workshop, available on request, is especially designed for community groups and can be altered to suit  the needs of any particular group. Offered  for donations or honorarium. Astarte 251-  5409  WOMEN'S COUNSELLING  My specializations include depression,  sexuality, sexual and emotional abuse,  adult women survivors of childhood sexual abuse, identity issues, self-awareness,  relationship issues, decision-making and  career explorations. I work using verbal and expressive therapies, gestalt and  guided imagery. Sliding fee scale. Janet  Lichty. B.A., M.Ed. Counselling Psychology. 874-2593.  GOLDEN THREADS  A contact publication for lesbians over  50 and women who love older worr  Canada and U.S. Confidential, warm, reliable. For free info send self-addressed envelope (U.S. residents please stamp it).  Sample copy mailed discreetly. $5 (U.S.)  Golden Threads, PO Box 3177, Burlington VT, 05401.  ALCHERINGA  Springtime comes to Salt Spring Island  where that special hide-a-way cabin for  women awaits you. Isn't it time you  treated yourself and took a break from  regular life? Rates are $30 single, $40  double through May. Call Phyllis at 537-  4315 for information and reservations  (evenings are best).  SHIATSU TREATMENTS  Need to relax, slow down, unwind? Shiatsu can help you do that. Want to feel  more energized, alert, alive? Shiatsu can  help put the spring back in your step.  Because the aim of a Shiatsu treatment  is to restore balance, Shiatsu can sedate  or invigorate. Treatments are designed to  meet the needs and tasks of each individual. Call Astarte 251-5409  VAl\)D£fc"ZflLMlC>(Y1S  THa ffEDEfcftL  HUMFIN ftiioKTS  DECISION THTfT  HOMOSEXUftL  G0UpL££ MftV.  \  k.C0N£>T'W FA Ml UES  Ccials ^EftN Ttfry  would %e/\uoWEDTo  ADOPT CftlLD1^  in The tfuurw ftGtrrs cdp^  tOO N\£D\Cftt-, PEtvT/VL. oft  PENSION 6^Er\TS> HO  ,*Wr\ftTrWES H-INl  °TBl^OURFl^r  peioRnv will gETO  ftDDpT CttlLD^EW  \  -DON'T ^  i like/j ///////////////////^^^^^  //////////////////^^^^  BULLETIN BOARD  CLASS IFIED1CLASSIFIED  WOMEN'S STUDIES INSTRUCTOR  There will be an opening for a part-  time instructor in a team-taught, interdisciplinary Women's Studies Program at  Vancouver Community College, Langara.  It will begin in January, 1990. Submit resumes immediately to Ingrid Laue, Coordinator, Langara, 100 W. 49th Ave.,  Van. V5Y 2Z6  HOUSEMATE WANTED  Congenial lesbian wanted for housemate. Share 5 bedroom house near Jericho beach with 4 stable dykes and 2  cats. (No more pets please.) House has  washer/dryer, fireplace, garden, etc. Rent  $300/month plus utilities. No smoking.  Available May 1. Call 737-0910 for details  RED DOOR HOUSING SOCIETY  Red Door Housing Society is an organization that pursues funding, builds, maintains and administers non-profit social  housing throughout the lower mainland.  Our goal is to provide affordable housing  communities for everyone. We are currently seeking persons for positions on our  Board of Directors. Volunteers interested  in working with Red Door may submit a  resume and covering letter to: Red Door  Housing Society, 927 W.8th, Van., B.C.  V5Z 1E4  SUBLET WANTED  Woman from out-of-town wanting to sublet a place for the months of July and August. If you are interested phone collect  423-3868  WELLS BOOK GROUP  Autobiographies, biographies, books by  and about women. Adams, Barrett-  Browning, Brontes, Carr, Dinesen, Davis,  Farraro, Earhart, Freidan, Gonne, Greene,  Hickok, Joplin, Laurence, Mandela, Mil-  lett, Roosevelt, Rhys, Roy, Sackville-  West, Stein, Suyin, Steineim, Wilson,  Wolfe ... are just a few of the books  for sale. We also sell Arctic and Sea materials. To order write: Diane Wells, The  Wells Book Group, 958 Page Ave., Victoria, B.C. V9B 2M6. Women Booksellers  SHARED HOUSING AVAILABLE  Looking for woman housemate to fit in  with us, or would consider renting out  quiet daytime workspace. Vacancy July  1. House is on 2nd Ave. East, $280/  month each, includes utilities. We are two  women—semi-vegetarian, feminist, recycles, tend to the quiet. No four-legged  pets please. Call 251-4231  WAXING MOON RETREAT  Waxing Moon Healing Village Society is  hosting a week-long healing retreat in late  August. We are looking for a suitable location for about 50 womyn, with camping and kitchen facilities, near a river or  a lake. If you know of any place or are interested in offering workshops or participating, please call Brenda or Jan at 536-  2960, or write WMHVS, c/o 14115 Marine Dr., White Rock, B.C. V4B 1A6  Position Available  Kinesis, a Vancouver-based monthly feminist newspaper  fiublished by the Vancouver Status of Women, requires a  ull time Editor beginning June 1. The Editor will work with  the Kinesis Editorial Board and will be a staff member of  the Vancouver Status of Women.  Duties  With the cooperation and assistance of the Kinesis Editorial Board, the Editor will:  maintain and expand Kinesis' contact with women's and other social and political groups, and information sources who may be a source of articles for  the paper; actively solicit copy, write articles, copy edit and make decisions  regarding final copy; actively assist and, where necessary, train contributing writers; assist in the coordination of volunteers involved in Kinesis; work  closely with the Production and Advertising Coordinators and VSW Administrator; where necessary, operate computer systems with respect to Kinesis needs; prepare Editorial Board agendas and bring items of importance  to the Board's attention; assist in VSW activities where feasible.  Qualifications  The successful applicant will have the ability to:  work collectively with Kinesis volunteers and workers, the Editorial Board and  VSW staff and Board; translate Kinesis editorial policy into a visible product each month; initiate and maintain contact with the local community and  make provincial, national and international contacts; extensive and broad  based knowledge of women's issues across Canada with particular emphasis on developing awareness of the struggles of women of colour and/or  working class women; extensive knowledge of mainstream institutions; excellent editorial, writing and copy editing skills with a special ability to work  under deadline pressure; knowledge and skill in the vanous aspects of small  newspaper production, computer desktop publishing experience is an asset;  administrative skills, especially office systems  Closing Date:  May 18,1989  Please send resumes to:  KINESIS EDITORIAL BOARD  ATTN: HIRING COMMITTEE  301 -1720 GRANT ST.  VANCOUVER, B.C.  V5L 2Y6  For further information call:  (604) 255-5499  Singer, pianist, guitarist, composer—Linda Waterfall is coming to Vancouver  (see Bulletin Board notice). Based in Seattle, Waterfall's music is eclectic—  from country to juju—"layers of golden sound," according to one critic.  •#'0>«>C>t*0>*«>Q'»0»  NfrO^K  • OR AT MK erUPio--  I  f    NORTH VAAty&C* I  68S-613S  311 W.HASTINGS ST.  Over 250 periodicals  Drop by & check out  SPARTACUS  the  Fair!  ccTec  iill  Eastside DataGraphic's booth  will feature a complete desktop  publishing system,  including computer  games for the young  at heart. Also we'll  have a display of  art supplies.  fc§r May 27th  at RayCam Community Centre  Doors open at 10:00 am  COMMUNITY FAIR  1460 COMMERCIAL  DESKTOP PUBLISHING ■ STATIONERY ■ ARTIJ  255-9559 Fax 253-3073  KINESIS [ndTi^ce. Continm ,  m diversity and gwi-     tiailturaliem  ^■.inematic world is  _^M* only participated as  '"ml will "... also be  riBifafififnlniirlnfrr  ol culture, to give  LIBRARY PROCESSING CENTRE - SERIALS  2206 EAST MALL, U.B.C.  VANCOUVER , B.C.  VST 1Z8       INV-E <  "}■'■"<;^ :-'L?:'  Published 10 times a year  by Vancouver Status of Women  #301-1720 Grant St, Vancouver, B.C. V5L 2Y6  □ VSW Membership-$25.50 (or what you can afford)-includes Kinesis subscription  □ Kinesis subscription only - $17.50  □ Institutions - $45  □ Here's my cheque  D BUl me  □ Sustainers - $75  □ New  □ Renewal  D Gift subscription for a friend