  paper. Call us at 255-  99. Our next News Group  s Thurs. Sept. 7 at 1:30 pm  at Kinesis, #301-1720 Grant  St. All women welcome even if  ou don't have experience.  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE:  Marsha Arbour, Becky Berger,  Gwen Bird, Linda Choquette,  Donna Dykeman, Sylvia Ful-  er, Sylvia Hunt, Faith Jones,  udesh Kaur, Zoe Klaasen/  Miller, Joni Miller, Nancy Pol-  ak, Winnifred Tovey, Heidi  Valsh  FFICE: Esth.  mesis Is published 10 times  year by the Vancouver Sta-  js of Women. Its objectives  e to be a non-sectarian fem-  : voice for women and  work actively for social  hange, specifically combat-  ng sexism, racism, homopho-  a and imperialism.  iews expressed in Kinesis  re those of the writer and  o not necessarily reflect VSW  ilicy. All unsigned material is  he responsibility of the Kine-  Editorial Board.  UBSCRIPTIONS: Individual  ubscriptions to Kinesis are  117.50 per year or what you  n afford. Membership in the  ancouver Status of Women  $25.50 or what you can af-  >rd, includes subscription  'inesis.  UBMISSIONS:   All   sul  5 are welcome. We resei  right to edit and submis-  on does not guarantee puliation. All submissions should  e typed  double spaced  and  must  be signed   and   include  address and phone number,  lease note Kinesis does not  ;ept poetry or fiction con-  ibutions. For material to be  ;urned, a SASE must be in-  ided. Editorial guidelines are  iinesis is a member of the  lanadian Periodical Publish-  s Association and is indexed  i the Alternative Press Index.  'RRESPONDENCE: Kine-  Vancouver Status of  'omen, 301-1720 Grant St.,  'ancouver, B.C. V5L 2Y6  'inesis is produced on an  SM PC using PC TeX and  ri in-house laser printer. Ad-  itional laser printing by East-  le Data Graphics. Camera  work by The Peak. Printing  y Web Press Graphics.  0¬£^r  It's been a long, hot summer on the reproductive  rights front 3  An art gallery in Surrey will be transformed into a prison-like  labyrinth by Doing Time 12  INSIDE  Women have a lot to say about AIDS. Are the  "experts" listening? 9  0$  Abortion: tremendous anger at judges' contempt.... 3  Pay inequity at City Hall 3  Endangered species: daycare   5  R^MAi  Movement Matters.  What's News?   by Linda Choquette  Chipping away at our health care 5  by Isobel McDonald  Invisible lesbians, visible homophobia 6  by Diana Smith  Fetal rights: patriarchy's latest hook 7  by Nancy Pollak  AIDS: less talk, more care for women needed 9  by Theresa Dobko  Nicaragua: fighting the war for legal abortion 11  by Ann Thomson  A0  Carel Moiseiwitsch: art that illuminates 15  by Holly Owen  Beth Brant: telling the truth for each other 16  by Kerrle Charnley  Bulletin Board   compiled by Donna Dykeman     Second class mail #6426  ISSN 0317-9095  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status of  Women, 301-1720 Grant St.,  Vancouver, B.C. V5L 2Y6  KINESIS Movement Matters  Movement  batters listings  Information  p Movement Matters is designed to be a  network of news, updates and information of special interest to the women's;  movement. Submissions to Movement Mat^  ieis should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double-spaced on eight and a half byj  ieleven paper. Submissions may be edited for  length. Deadline is the 18th of the month  preceding publication.  VLC weathers  storm - for now  The Vancouver Lesbian Connection is  pleased to report it has weathered its recent  financial crisis—thanks to a heartwarming  response from the community—but more is  still needed before they can relax.  Happily, VLC now has charitable tax status and donations will be tax deductible.  Supporters are asked to ante-up by becoming sustainers (donating a sum each month,  $5-$10, or more if you can) or offering onetime donations. Various benefits are in the  works, including an October 27th Halloween  dance.  VLC is also planning major home-  improvements and a change of hours. To  find out more about VLC programming or  to offer help, contact them at 876 Commercial Drive, or phone 254^8458.  Maureen McEvoy ba ma (Cand.)  Counselling  Psychology  732-3227  Areas of expertise:  sexual abuse, relationships,  sexuality, depression, ACOA  Housing co-op  first in Canada  The Brambles Housing Cooperative was  founded by women in 1987 and is the first  co-op in Canada dedicated to serving the  housing needs of mature women. Scheduled  to open in early 1990, the Brambles is located in the Station Hill area of Burnaby  (near the Edmonds skytrain stop), 20 minutes from downtown Vancouver. The coop has 25 one-bedroom suites and 17 two-  bedroom suites; 15 units are adaptable for  people with special needs, and 13 units will  be subsidized.  Women interested in Hving in the Brambles should contact Louise at the Access  Building Association, 875-1836. As of July,  half the units were spoken for and all subsidized units were filled; there is, however, a  waitlist.  Market value rents are $560 for one bedroom and $695 for two bedroom. Share  prices are $1120/one and $1390/two.  WAVAW launches  support group  Has your psychiatrist or therapist ever  touched you in a sexual manner? Have  you ever been forced or coerced into sex  by them? Does your psychiatrist/therapist  touch you in ways that make you feel  ashamed? Have they ever engaged in sexual  practices with you under the guise of therapy?  A therapist engaging in sexual contact  with a patient is breaking one of the most  basic rules of therapy contact. It can damage the woman's trust not only in her therapist but also in other people. Sexual contact  with a chent of any kind, whether it be sexual hugging and kissing or genital contact,  is never a legitimate form of treatment.  WAVAW/Rape Crisis Centre is planning  a support group for women who have been  sexually or physically abused by their psychiatrists, therapists or doctors. Feehngs  of guilt, shame, anger and confusion are  -—   FOR  Feminist  THE0RY&  JTERATURE  sl r t a c u s  BOOKS  311 W. HASTINGS ST. VANCOUVER  V6B1H6 TEL. 688-6138  1146 Commercial * 253-0913  CROSSLAND CONSUL! ING  Personal Management  Services for Artists  Resumes  Arts Organizations Career Counselling  Grant and Proposal Writing Bookkeeping Services  * FIRST CONSULTATION FREE*  Jackie Crossland  By Appointment Only 682-3109  i to women who have been sexually abused in these situations, and talking  about the experience can help.  Contact WAVAW/Rape Crisis Centre at  875-6011 for information.  Disabled and  looking for work?  The B.C. Coalition of the Disabled is  helping to keep people with a disabihty attuned to today's job market. The BCCD  will be working with Canada Employment  counsellors on a job skills upgrading program which will help people get on-the-job  training or attend training courses.  The program also provides grants to help  cover the costs of renovations to the worksite or special needs for training, such as a  sign language interpreter.  For more information, contact the BCCD  in Vancouver at 875-9227.  Videos on  women and work  The Labour Canada Women's Bureau  has produced two videos related to women's  experience at work. Sexual Harassment in  the Workplace (1988) is a 20-minute video  which explores the issue through vignettes  and interviews that outline the responsibilities of employers and the rights of employees under the Canada Labour Code. Information on redress is provided.  Working for Equality (1988) highlights  the changing situation for women in the  Canadian workplace and explains the role  of the Women's Bureau in dealing with  women's employment issues. Nine minutes  long, the video is designed to stimulate discussion of women's employment issues at  meetings, seminars and career days.  Both videos are available in VHS and  Beta formats on a loan basis from the  Women's Bureau, Labour Canada, Ottawa,  ONT. KlA 0J2. Telephone (819) 997-1551.  Ageful women  made Visible  Visible is a new publication born of a  combining of the newsletters Our Own and  A Web of Crones. For older women, the  first issue of Visible introduces its readers  to the invented word "ageful—an antidote  to 'youthful' and a way to describe us well  chronologically," says editor Vashte.  Visible welcomes contributions: letters,  arts, poetry ideas, announcements, reports  and visions. Subscribers are also welcome: a  year's worth costs US $12—$20 (what you  can afford). Write to Vashte Doublex, Visible, PO Box 1494, Mendocino CA 95460  Inside  Kinesis  i"  by Nancy Pollak  We don't publish in the month of July  and it's just as well.  On the evening of July 25th, a time when  we would normally be running at full tilt—  in the direction of the printer—we instead  sat down with representatives from the Secretary of State Women's Program.  SecState is the major funder of Kinesis' publisher—the Vancouver Status of  Women—and provides the salary for the  Kinesis editor. The meeting was attended  by women from the VSW board of directors,  staff, Kinesis volunteers and VSW members. It was our first opportunity to meet  face-to-face with SecState since they cut  VSW's funding by 15 percent last spring.  This column is not the place to present  either a blow-by-blow account of that July  25th meeting, or an analysis of what is going on—we'll provide that in an upcoming  issue. Suffice to say the message from the  SecState bureaucrats was discouraging and  infuriating.  As we've reported, the Conservative's rationale for cutting Women's Program funding was The Deficit, that handy economic  excuse for withdrawing public funds from  whatever they don't politically support.  Well, the SecState bureaucrats had their  economic arguments—VSW and Kinesis  should be more market-driven; and their pohtical arguments—Kinesis' coverage of lesbian issues and abortion makes it hard for  them to defend our funding.  There is a wall here, and on the wall is  writing. VSW has been warned not to pursue SecState funding for Kinesis next year.  Regardless of how the organization deals  with this warning, the ground under Kinesis has shifted.  In the short term, we are making some  obvious moves. Our cover price is going up  to $2.25 as of the November issue. This is  our first raise in 3 years and we had been  discussing it for some time. We are conscious that price increases can be hard for  some women, so we remind you that subscriptions are "what you can afford."  Subscriptions. The regular subscription  rate will also be going up. Details haven't  been worked out yet but the smart money is  subscribing—or renewing—now. (The government is in the process of increasing publishers' mailing rates, a serious problem for  all Canadian magazines.) We are, as part of  our survival strategies, in the process of improving our subscription/renewal systems.  A position is available under a UI Top-  Up Grant, so if you're on UI, interested in  Kinesis and have design and/or computer  skills, call us at 255-5499.  Now, onto some cheerier news. A Kinesis writer, Nora D. Randall to be exact, has been cited for an honourable mention in the third annual Goodwin's award  for excellence in alternative journalism. The  awards, created by the Ottawa-based Goodwin's Foundation, are to encourage "better  alternative media." Nora's former column  Beans earned her the honourable mention.  Congratulations, Nora,  As you may recall, we advertised news of  our annual retreat in the last issue. Due to  the difficulty of planning over the summer  months, plus the need to focus on more immediate (read: funding) concerns, the Editorial Board has decided to indefinitely  postpone the weekend get-together. We're  both sorry and relieved to take this break.  To any woman whose appetite was whetted by the prospect of the retreat: give us  a call; there are many ways to connect with  the paper.  Noticed any changes in the look of this  month's issue? If you have, you're detecting the deft touch of our new production  coordinator, Winnifred Tovey. Winnifred is,  by all accounts, a catch. She brings years  of collective newspaper experience (notably,  SFU's The Peak), training skills, design  sense, computer savvy—and a calm, welcoming manner. Women new to the Kinesis production room are in for a treat.  Pleased to meet you, Winnifred.  KINESIS ■•'syyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy/yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy  NEWS  mm  Montreal  "Tremendous anger  at judges' blatant  contempt"  Pay inequity  at City Hall  by Terrie Hamazakl  Only three weeks after Vancouver City Council's own Finance  and Priorities Committee voted to  move towards pay equity by equalizing the entry-level salaries of employees, the plan was abruptly defeated in regular council debate,  June 25th.  "What council's NPA majority voted for instead of pay  equity was time-consuming job-  evaluation studies that save them  money now, and also don't cost  them politically with their business friends," said Pat Davitt and  Judy Lynne, Vancouver Municipal  and Regional Employee's Union  (VMREU) representatives to the  Women's Committee of the Equal  Employment Opportunities Program (EEO) which had prepared  the initial pay equity report.  The report had called for the  immediate equalization of the  entry-level salaries of Clerk Typist II (a female-dominated clerical  classification within the City) and  the male-dominated Labourer I, as  well as the elimination of increment steps.  In the debate, NPA council  members, along with the City  Manager and EEO Program Director Judy Rogers alluded to "affirmative action" or "employment  equity"—instead of pay equity—  suggesting that perhaps women  should move into non-traditional  jobs which offer higher rates of  Pay-  Judy Rogers' role in the pay equity debate has caused grave concerns about her effectiveness as a  women's advocate. The EEO program is designed to ensure that  women, disabled people and people of colour are fairly represented  in the civic workforce.  According to Davitt, "Judy  Rogers sat on the Women's Committee with us and did not tell  anyone her real position on pay equity until it went to council.  Said Rogers, "Well, I think  women's work has been undervalued and certainly they [the  Women's Committee] would've  been aware that rather than equalizing base rates, I fully support  equal pay for work of equal value  through a systematic job evaluation. After all, the past Director  had also put forward the same  ideas."  "But the past Director [Leigh  Wo Peng]," said Lynne, "was not  a feminist. And she left before  the argument of systematic job  studies—and what they don't do  for women. Judy was part of that  discussion."  Added Davitt, "Judy did not  make her position clear with the  Committee, and her position was  very clearly to side with management."  Job evaluation studies attempt  to determine which jobs are of  equal value, but usually reflect the  sexism of the system that created  pay inequities in the first place by  undervaluing women's work.  NPA councillor Sandra Wilk-  ing expects women clerical workers  earning $1500/month "to wait"  while the evaluation studies are  conducted. "We want to make sure  that her salary is adjusted without  distorting historical internal pay  relationships," said Wilking.  But the historical relationship  is that men get paid more than  women, said Lynne. "Is it okay  for women to subsidize the city by  not getting adequate wages?" said  Davitt.  "It's clearly an issue whose time  has come, and we will continue to  put pressure on the City. We're  looking at the possibility in the fall  of a community coalition to further pay equity—and not only in  City Hall. Watch out for it."  by Lou Nelson  Once upon a time, in a province  far away, there was a health clinic  called the Centre de sante des  femmes de Montreal. The women  at this chnic went about their  work, doing referrals, examinations, and, among other things, arranging for women to have abortions. Business as usual. Until  one day in July 1989, an injunction was launched against Chantal  Daigle, prohibiting her from having an abortion.  Women from the chnic were  instrumental in helping Chantal  Daigle obtain an abortion in the  U.S. before the Supreme Court of  Canada dismissed the injunction.  On August 22nd, I interviewed  Monik Audet, the External Relations Coordinator, at the Centre,  a converted apartment on a residential boulevard in Montreal, to  find out what effect the injunction  had on the Centre.  Monik Audet started working  for the Centre in late June. Ironically, when she was hired, she was  told that since the 1988 Supreme  Court decision nullifying restrictions on abortion, the situation  was not too bad and that this year  their focus would be the Law Reform Commission report on "fetal  rights."  How did the women who  work at the Centre react to the  Quebec Supreme Court ruling  upholding the injunction?  I was in Quebec City when the  ruhng was handed down, and I  felt completely devalued, hke I was  worth less than nothing. Jean-Guy  Tremblay's lawyer was there saying, well the fetus is not really  a human being, but it does have  When the injunction was upheld against Chantal Daigle, there  was tremendous anger among the  women in the Chnic  Of course when you're involved  in a pohtical struggle, there are  no guarantees. You work for 15  years to ensure safe access to abortions and then with one flourish of  a judge's pen, your rights are denied. There is no protection from  the moral judgment of judges. The  only real protection is to have the  public behind you, ready to show  their support, ready to take to the  streets.  That's what happened in Montreal. We organized a march and  rally. This was during a two-week  construction holiday, when everyone leaves town. Forty-five minutes before the march was to  start, there was a huge storm. We  thought we might have to cancel. We dismantled all the sound  equipment.  We couldn't beheve our eyes  when people just continued to  show up. Ten thousand people, according to pohce estimates.  There was tremendous anger at  the judges' blatant contempt for  women, at being told that we  do not make responsible decisions,  that we do not have the right to  control our own bodies.  Did you feel that there was  support for you, for the struggle here in Quebec, from other  parts of Canada ?  Oh yes, the same day we had  that big rally there were rallies right across Canada, in Newfoundland, Toronto, Thunder Bay,  Vancouver. People in the other  provinces were not going to accept that the right to abortion  Women who have fought for years, like  Lea Roback and Madeleine Parent, were  there with tears in their eyes...  some rights ... and I was thinking, if this fetus which is not quite  human has more rights than Chantal Daigle, where does that leave  women?  Women who have fought for  years, hke Lea Roback and Madeleine Parent, were there with tears  in their eyes, saying it's hke being  back in the 40's when women were  lumped in with the insane and feeble minded. It was degrading.  We were outraged and indignant when the injunction was  brought against Barbara Dodd  in Toronto, but it seemed hke  an aberrant situation, especially  when the injunction was denied.  had been reduced to such a low  level, the social impact would be  too great. Women in Toronto organized a post card campaign. There  was definitely support.  Did the injunction affect the  day-to-day work of the Centre?  The injunction did not have any  effect on our work in the sense  that referrals still continued. But  it had a huge effect on us in  terms of responding to the crisis.  We are members df the Coalition  pour l'avortement libre et gratuit  ^Coalition for free, accessible abor-  /tions], so there were meetings to  attend, strategies to plan, and letters to write.  We received hundreds of phone  calls from people wanting to know  if there was any way they could  help, or asking for information. We  stayed in close contact with clinics in the regions. There were interviews and radio talk shows. I  spent two solid weeks working on.  that issue alone. For three weeks  we talked of nothing but the abortion situation.  Have any new strategies for  protecting access to abortion  come out of this latest attack?  We feel we were vindicated by  the ruhng from the Supreme Court  of Canada. But there must be concrete steps taken so that abortions  We couldn't believe  our eyes when  people just  continued to show  up   are actually free and accessible to  any woman who wants one. Currently in Quebec, access to adequate abortion services has diminished. There are no longer separate  family planning programs in the  community health centres. They  have been lumped in with other  programs, and in some cases doctors have left and set up private  chnics, without the support services that are available through  the community clinics.  It is another aspect of the health  services crisis that hospitals, which  are best equipped to provide safe  abortions, especially for post-16  week ones, sometimes simply have  no beds.  In terms of the legal situation, there should be no new laws  controlling access to abortions—  it should be regarded as a medical act hke any other. If there has  to be a law, we would hke it to  be an amendment to the Charter  of Rights, guaranteeing women access to abortion, on the same basis  as any other health service. Not a  law setting out dates and limits.  It is clear that the next battlefield is in the area of fetal rights.  That is the last means by which  men can try to exert control over  women's bodies. H fetal rights are  recognized, it gives men a hold  over women. We don't think the  fetus has rights.  I think Chantal Daigle is a very  courageous woman. It takes guts  to take your case through to the  Supreme Court. She has done us  all a service. I just hope the governments agree to recognize the  rights that women have already  fought for and won.  See page 7 for more abortion  coverage.  KINESIS ;s$sss**ss***sss?s^^  NEWS  Fear, confusion  thanks to  government  Staff, volunteers and women of DEWC  Poverty is the issue  by Cyndi Mellon  The half-block stretch along  Vancouver's Cordova Street—between the Downtown Eastside  Women's Centre (DEWC) and  the Crabtree Corner Day Care  Centre—has come to be known  as the "women's section" of the  Downtown Eastside. In an area  with a high male population, these  two centres of women's activities  represent a safe place for women,  since centres for mixed use, such  as the popular Carnegie Community Centre, are full of men.  DEWC worker Kim Nightingale  says the ratio of men-to-women  in the area has traditionally been  about nine-to-one. Women now  make up 30 percent of the neighbourhood and this figure is growing as single mothers on welfare  are finding affordable housing in  other parts of the city increasingly  out of reach.  "Poverty is the issue," says  Nightingale. "The goal of the centre is to increase the quahty of hfe  for women in this area."  The centre is weU-used. An average day will see as many as 100  women come through the door,  about 60 percent of whom are Native. They come to rest and relax  in a safe atmosphere where they  can have a cup of coffee, do their  laundry, take a shower, read, type  or take advantage of the centre's  many programs. There is also a  clothing room where women can  try on and help themselves to good  quahty donated clothing.  Nightingale explains that many  women who use the centre hve in  hotels in the area. Rent is high  compared to the actual size of the  rooms and some hotel owners are  taking advantage of the changes  in residential tenancy legislation to  charge apartment- rate rents.  Many hotels do not allow people to cook in their rooms and balanced against the size of welfare  cheques, the nutrition of Downtown Eastside residents is not  good. The centre tries to offset this  by providing soup and bannock at  lunch time two days a week. Crab-  tree Corner provides the same fare  on three other days. Thus the  women in the area can get a hot  meal every day without having to  wait in hne with men.  Unhke most other women's centres in B.C., the DEWC has never  received operational funding from  the Secretary of State Women's  program. The reason given was  that the centre was too "service  oriented" to qualify. But Nightingale stresses that the DEWC is really a community centre that functions as a communications centre  as well. Volunteers and staff at the  centre will take phone messages  for women and women can receive  their mail there. There are also  typewriters, a computer and low-  cost photocopying available for  women to use as they make their  way through a job search or a welfare appeal.  "It is causing a lot of fear and  stress for people. Even workers  within the system are at a loss as  to how to deal with the new ruling."  As one woman who uses the  centre put it, "Women have been  caught up in a sick welfare system, where the 'father' is the welfare man, and you have to answer  to him for all your needs."  A two-year Health Directorate  grant has enabled the centre  to make women's health a major focus of DEWC activities.  Health education is emphasized  and videos are frequently shown  on topics of interest to women in  the Downtown Eastside. The centre houses a menopause support  group as well as support groups  for women dealing with alcohol  and drug dependency. Information  on sexually transmitted diseases is  available, as are workshops to support women coming from abusive  situations.  Recently, women at the centre  ...Women have been caught up in a sick  welfare system, where the 'father' is the  welfare man...  While housing is always a problem, at the moment a major issue  affecting people in the area is the  most recent attempt by the Ministry of Social Services and Housing to cut so-called "employable"  people off welfare. Nightingale, a  welfare advocacy worker, says that  the sudden move on the part of the  provincial government took people  by surprise.  "People found out about it from  the newspaper," says Nightingale.  began making their own videos  on health-related topics, including  one on Native healing techniques.  All stages of the video production have been done by DEWC  women, and the video will soon  be available for purchase by/6ther  women's centres. /  The Downtown Eaitside Women's Centre is Ideated at 44  East Cordova Street. It is open  weekdays from 10 am to 5 pm  and Tuesdays from 11:80 to 5.  by Cyndi Mellon  In August, 49,000 B.C. welfare  recipients got a surprise in the mail  when a letter signed by Minister of  Social Services Claude Richmond  arrived, informing them that they  would not be receiving their next  cheque unless they filled out the  enclosed job search form.  It appears that the letters were  mailed out indiscriminately, and  that in doing so, the minister had  bypassed the usual working channels of the established welfare system. In many cases, people 50 and  years old, who hadn't worked in  a number of years, were informed  that they were expected to begin  a job search. No advance warning  was given.  Residents of Vancouver's Downtown Eastside, where a high proportion of the population receives  some form of social assistance,  were hit hard by the minister's  measure.  At a meeting held August 20th  at Carnegie Community Centre,  welfare recipients and their friends  expressed their anxieties and their  anger.  ees Union told the crowd that  workers in the welfare system were  against the measure. She said they  had not been consulted and had  not been part of the planning.  Fruman added that the government workers would be meeting with the ministry to register their disapproval, but that any  personnel who spoke out publicly  against the minister's action would  be fired.  So what did happen on cheque  day?  When word reached Victoria  about the impending chaos at the  welfare offices, the minister responded by flying in a number of  management-level people to help  with the workload.  According to Sheila Baxter,  a Vancouver welfare advocacy  worker and a member of End Legislated Poverty (ELP) and People on Welfare (POW), people who  showed up at the offices to collect  their cheques were not unduly hassled.  The job search forms were not  even scrutinized and people who  did not bring one were simply told  "How can you leave a phone number if  you haven't got one?"  As one woman put it, "How can  you leave a phone number [with a  potential employer] if you haven't  got one?"  The meeting began with advice  from a legal aid worker and a welfare advocate on how the new requirements should be handled. Legal Services' Pat Nelson said that  the ministry was within its legal  rights to require people to fill out  the forms, and urged people to do  so to prevent their being cut off for  non-compliance.  Advocates at the meeting promised to help people with the job  forms and said they would be on  hand on cheque day (August 23) to  accompany people to the hne-ups,  which were expected to be massive.  People were urged not to go beyond their means, to ask the ministry to provide them with bus  fare if they needed it, and not to  go looking for work in ways that  woulrLeost them money.  was pointed out that the  iinimum wage jobs the government seems to expect people to  accept would mean more hardship  for poor people, since they would  lose the benefits available to them  while on welfare (such as dental  coverage) without being able to  pay for such things with a minimum wage income.  Sheila Fruman, spokesperson  for the B.C. Government Employ-  to fill one out for next month.  Calling the unprecedented move  on the part of the minister "unethical," Baxter said it had ultimately  cost taxpayers more money, since  highly paid people were brought in  to clean up the mess. The result:  Everybody loses.  "There is a system in place for  evaluating people on a case-by-  case basis," said Baxter. "By ignoring decisions made by the social and financial aid workers, the  minister has denied people their  right to be evaluated as individuals. We [the workers and the recipients] seem to be united on this is-  VSW's  AGM  The Vancouver Status of Women will hold its Annual General  Meeting on Wednesday, September 6 at 7:30 pm at our premises:  Suite #301-1720 Grant St., Vancouver.  For more information call 255-  5511.  4 KINESIS ////////s////////y/y//yyyyyy/yyy/yy///yyyy/yyyyyyyyyyyyy/y///yyyyyyyyyyyyy/yyyyy/yysy/yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy/yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy  /////////////////////^^^^^  //////////////////////^^^^  ACROSS B.C.  Privatization  Chipping away at our health care system  by Isobel McDonald  In last month's Kinesis we featured  "Chile: How to destroy a health care system," the story of how privatization has created a health care system that serves only  the wealthy, about 20 percent of the Chilean  population.  Could this happen in B.C.? The Social  Credit government certainly views the privatizing of health care services as one way  to cut health care costs. For example, American health care corporations such as the  American Shared Hospital Services of San  Francisco have met with officials from the  B.C. Health Ministry to discuss ways of pri-  Endangered species: daycare  by Anna Blume  When the North Shore Children's House  in North Vancouver was forced to vacate its  under-three daycare space on August 31st,  only 15 children lost a safe, caring place to  go-  Those 15 children, squeezed out of their  classroom portable by an increase in elementary school enrollments, have joined the  ranks of literally tens of thousands of B.C.  children and parents who do without accessible, hcensed daycare.  Throughout the lower mainland this  summer, private and non- profit daycares  and preschools were served notice to vacate  their leased school board premises to make  room for this fall's crop of students.  The centres' scramble to find new, affordable space has underscored just how feeble  government support for child care is.  "The situation is reflective of the fact  that child care has traditionally rehed on  'found' space in church basements and  schools," said Penny Coates of the Canadian Daycare Advocacy Association.  These 'found' spaces are not only being lost, they are proving hard to replace.  Coates knows of a group in Surrey which  has obtained their own portable but cannot  find land on which to park it.  Purchasing a portable, however, is usually a massive challenge to private and nonprofit centres alike. Beth Proctor, owner  and operator of the North Shore Children's  House, has been unable to put her hands on  the $40-60,000 she needs to buy a portable.  Lending institutions, Proctor said, "turned  us down because daycare centers are low in  collateral [and] show no profit ...  "We have looked into leasing portables  but the monthly payment of $2,600 would  be impossible for us to pay."  The over-three program at the Children's  House is stiU open: the Capilano Elementary School, where the under-three program was also housed, won't be needing  that classroom for another year. Proctor has  searched for suitable rental space, without  success, in North Vancouver, New Westminster, Coquitlam, Port Coquitlam and Port  Moody.  The loss of any daycare spaces is cause  for alarm—the province has only 20,000 licensed spaces and approximately 300,000  children needing care, said Coates. Losing  the Children's House, however, is cause for  particular alarm.  The Children's House, said Proctor, is  there to serve the families who need service  the most: children and parents who "fall  through the cracks of normal daycare centres due to emotional, economic or need related problems."  Special needs, battered and single-parent  children—as well as kids from families in  crisis—have been welcomed at the Children's House. Not all daycares are willing  to take on these families.  In mid-August, the five North Shore facilities facing closure due to school expansion  appealed for help to their district council.  While council agreed to research the problem, mayor Marilyn Baker was clear that  she didn't "think that it is ultimately a municipal responsibility to go out and build  buildings and lease them for a private enterprise to run."  Four of the five centres are privately  owned but, said Proctor, "if we had been  non-profit, we would have been told to go  fund raise."  In the absence of any real commitment to  childcare by either Ottawa or Victoria, fund  raise is exactly what the provincial government expects non-profit centres to do. In the  spring, the Socreds made non-profit daycares eligible for B.C. Lottery monies, for  up to one-third the capital costs of a centre.  Daycares can now stand in hne with  sports stadiums and band stands for the  gambling tax dollar. "This is not effective  capital funding of daycare," said Coates.  The provincial NDP agrees. On July  17th, MLA Darlene Marzari presented to  the legislature "An Act for Better Child  Care" (Bill M227), a blue-print for a  daycare system that is accessible, affordable and accountable. Under the Socreds,  Marzari's bill can do httle more than stimulate discussion.  In the meantime, daycare centres will  close.  vatizing some services now performed by  acute care hospitals.  American Shared was encouraged by the  government to come up with other proposals for privatization. The B.C. Business  Council also met with them to identify and  discuss medical services investment opportunities in B.C.  According to the Hospital Employee's  Union (HEU), there are several things a  government can do to make the privatizing  of health care services more acceptable to  the pubhc. The basic idea is to chip away  at the current service to the extent that a  demand is created for privatized services.  We need to watch out for:  • dehberate government underfunding  • increased user fees  • long and frustrating waiting hsts for essential surgical procedures  • running down the quantity and quality  of the public health system by laying off  staff and closing hospital beds.  This rationing of health care creates disenchantment with the publicly funded system, opening the door to privatization.  And, as the door opens, we will see increased use of private, for-profit management of hospitals; increased private funding for capital replacement or facility and  program expansion; and the introduction of  "co-payment" schemes (where the government and the consumer each pay a portion  of health costs).  How Far Gone  How far has this already gone? First of all,  it's important to understand that, although  we have medicare, we do not have "socialized medicine." Ninety-five percent of physicians work for themselves, not for the state  (and in B.C. their average gross income is  $165,000 a year), 90 percent of hospitals  are private, non-profit corporations. What  we do have is a publicly funded system  Cutting Costs a Cutting Wages  Another aspect of privatization concerns  the workers providing the services. Melanie  Conn of the Vancouver-based Community  Economic Options has studied the role of  privatization on the health care providers.  We need to watch out  for...government  underfunding.  "One of the main objectives of privatization or contracting out in the public sector  is to lower wages," says Conn. "The work is  transferred from adequately-paid unionized  workers to low-paid non-unionized workers.  "In Canadian hospitals, for example, the  increased use of contracting out and employment of part-time workers is already  underway in an attempt to cut costs. This  bottom hne approach to health care sets the  stage for U.S. health care multi-nationals to  establish themselves as supphers of health  services.  "There is no way to escape the gloomy  conclusion that free trade and privatization  cause downward pressures on wages and  working conditions in health-related service  sector occupations that have traditionally  been a source of employment for women."  The conventional wisdom in favour of  privatization is that it increases efficiency  and cuts costs, even if it means decreased  quality to the consumer and poorer working conditions for the employee. The irony  of tliis argument is that an American-style  health care system costs significantly more  than Canada's publicly funded system. In  1987, Canada spent 8.6 percent of its gross  national product on health while the U.S.  spent 11 percent. At the same time, nearly  40 million Americans have no health insur-  Why is the Women's Health Collective  severely underfunded if there is $46 billion  in Canada's health care budget?  which pays private providers as opposed to  a largely privately funded system, which is  what the U.S. has. The issue is how pubhc  funds are allocated: for example, are government funds used for profit or non-profit  facilities?  What we are seeing is the contracting  out of services formerly- done by government employees, as well as health care sectors that have already been profit-oriented  for years. For example, 50 percent of long-  term care homes in B.C. are run for profit—  and, on average, the elderly are the poorest  section of the population and the least able  to pay user fees. Women, in particular, are  affected by this as they tend to hve longer  and have less money than men.  To see the effect of this type of health  services we can look to the U.S. where 75  percent of nursing homes are run for profits. About two-thirds of middle income residents in nursing homes in the U.S. spend  their hfe savings within two years of admission.  In 1984, an HEU study on long-term  care found that, on average, non-profit facilities provide superior care to residents.  The study also found that for-profits tend  to select residents with greater health care  needs than non-profits because the government subsidy is higher. Staffing levels are  not always adequate.  ance at all. A major illness can mean lifelong poverty.  Canada will spend $46 billion on health  care in 1989. How much of this money  is going to American management teams  who tend to institute management procedures which were designed for health care  in the U.S.? Can we expect computerized  patient classification systems which identify  the amount of nursing time to be allocated  to each kind of illness, with nurses' hospital work scheduled on a day-to-day basis accordingly?  Beyond the issue of privatization itself is  whether or not the services offered now are  actually inadequate. Canadians in general  are proud of their health care system, but  is this justified? As more and more people  are spending money on alternative health  services hke massage and counselling—not  usually covered by medicare—it becomes  obvious that a better system is needed.  Why is the Women's Health CoUective  severely underfunded if there are $46 billion  in Canada's health care budget? How much  funding is aUocated to relieving poverty, unemployment, social stress and inadequate  housing, aU of which adversely effect health?  Privatization is not the way to save money  or increase efficiency. Using public funds  through non-profit agencies to get to the  roots of UI health is.  KINESIS Across Canada  \\\\\\\NN\N\\N\\\XX\\X\XXX\\X\X\N\^^^  \^^^^^^N^^XXX^^^^  Invisible lesbians,  visible homophobia  by Diana Smith  This summer I attended a two-day conference on Equal Opportunity organized by  my union. Something happened there which  I thought provided a good Ulustration of two  common characteristics of oppression.  One is how often events are not isolated  but are part of a snow-baU effect. The other  is how, a lot of times, what's going on is  subtle or can, at least, be interpreted more  than one way.  Svend Robinson was the guest speaker at  the first morning plenary. He spoke about  gay and lesbian oppression, particularly our  invisibihty. He ended his short speech by  pointing out that none of the five workshops  (racism/sexism; union participation; affirmative action; technological change; working famihes/single parents) planned for the  two-day conference aUowed any inclusion of  discussion of sexual orientation, providing  another example of invisibUity.  FoUowing his remarks, I—one of the 81  participants—invited anyone interested in  doing gay and lesbian support work within  the union to meet in my hotel room at  5:30 that evening, a time between the day's  workshops and the evening banquet.  We then went to our pre-selected workshops. One aim of the workshops was to generate resolutions for future union conventions. I attended the racism/sexism workshop and was encouraged by the facilitators to present sexual orientation resolutions through this avenue.  Throughout the workshop, as each resolution was presented, I requested that the  phrase "aU forms of discrimination" be substituted for "racism/sexism," to broaden  the scope. Every time the change was read-  Uy accepted but then was not incorporated  into the next resolution.  I presented a resolution to change the definition of "spouse" in our coUective agreement to include same-sex partners. It also  was readdy accepted. At the end of the  workshop, two or three people were needed  to stay behind to 'fine tune' the resolutions  to make them appropriate for the next day's  plenary.  From past experience I know it's important to be there if you actually want certain resolutions to make it to the plenary  floor, with the content intact. I stayed behind. However, I could only stay untU 5:25  pm as the lesbian and gay support group  meeting (which had to be squeezed in between scheduled events because it was not  included as a workshop topic) was at 5:30  pm.  I left saying, jokingly, "Now FU be reaUy  mad if that resolution on the definition of  spouse doesn't get in." Ha, ha.  Ha, ha, indeed.  The resolution was not included. I knew  without asking (because similar mishaps  have happened before, elsewhere) that everyone involved would have a perfectly  reasonable explanation about how it was  missed. And they did. "I never wrote them  up," "I thought it was in there," "I don't  know how it got missed," etc.  This httle incident did provide an opportunity at the plenary to give an actual example of how oppression/in visibUity/  homophobia work, ever so subtly. And the  facilitator assured me the resolution would  be included in the proceedings, to be mailed  out later. (It wasn't.)  Several other resolutions about lesbian  and gay discrimination that the five of us at  the 5:30 meeting had developed were presented at the plenary and were included in  the mail- out.  There are two reasons, I think, that the  resolution was left out. First, some people  didn't understand the issues and, second,  some people didn't want to understand the  issues. Both reasons are rooted in homophobia where our fear and prejudice create barriers to understanding. Because of this the  specific significance of each resolution was  not realized. For example, the other 'gay'  resolution from the workshop about including sexual orientation in the hst of protected  groups in the Canadian Human Rights Act  is quite distinct from the resolution about  getting the definition of spouse changed in  our coUective agreement.  It should be noted that several people at  the conference were very supportive. I only  heard, indirectly, of negative comments such  as a complaint made, at a union seminar,  about members' dues being spent on something that included discussion of gay and  lesbian issues. Apparently this remark went  unchallenged.  As lesbian and gay issues are discussed  more and more in the labour movement,  we wUl experience, to at least the same degree, homophobic reactions. It only underscores the importance of being more visi-  Please see Bias page 7  South  African  Women's  Day  The Gitksan Dancers (left) were among a  number of Native participants who sent  messages of solidarity to South African  on August 12th. Anna Riopelle  (above) was one of the day's organizers.  Myalgic encephalomyelitis:  Suffering a kind of living death  by Joni Miller  This is the second of a two-part series on myalgic encephalomyelitis. Part  one "We're dealing with an epidemic"  ran in July/August '89.  Sufferers of "myalgic encephalomyelitis"  (ME) also known as "chronic fatigue syndrome" and popularized as "the yuppie flu,"  describe their hves as a kind of hving death.  However, 98 percent wiU eventuaUy recover,  according to Dr. Anne Mildon of Toronto.  She warns that recovery can take years and  most victims wiU never be able to resume  their former levels of activity.  When the syndrome is in its acute phases,  it is characterized by extreme muscle fatigue. Pauline ChUton, 56, a member of the  Vancouver ME self-help group, describes  some of the side effects of the muscle weakness.  "We have a characteristic shuffle walk,"  ChUton says. During acute stages, sufferers  may find themselves lacking the strength  to even get out of bed. On a more subtle level, the muscles of the eye, bladder  and mouth can be affected. This can cause  blurred vision, incontinence and dribbling  saliva. In some cases, patients experience  painful muscle spasms.  The current number of sufferers is unknown, but the syndrome has been diagnosed worldwide under various names. One  researcher estimates that five percent of the  population wiU be stricken within the next  decade. Like most of its victims, ChUton was  healthy and active before becoming UI. Also  hke most of its victims, ChUton is a woman.  Dr. MUdon estimates that 70 percent of  sufferers are female. Surveys have also found  that most victims are between the ages of  22 and 44. So far, medical researchers cannot explain these demographics. ME seems  to contradict popular theories that Ulness  can be prevented with the right combination of diet, exercise and hfestyle. As MUdon  says, "Most patients, before their Ulness,  were proud of what they thought of as a  weU- rounded hfe: socializing regularly with  friends, exercising several times weekly, a  good diet and healthy hfestyle."  Mildon divides the Ulness into three  stages. The acute phase lasts 6-15 months  and includes severe headaches, attacks of  pneumonia or bronchitis, kidney infections,  arthritis and hver aUments. During this  stage most people sleep 12 or more hours  a day. The chronic phase can last a year or  more and involves periodic attacks of symptoms. Patients typically sleep only eight or  nine hours a day but rest for an additional  12 to 15 hours.  During the last stage, there are periods of  weU-being and some physical activities are  possible. However, attacks can occur with  stunning suddenness, landing the sufferer  back in bed.  Although there are no recorded deaths  directly attributed to ME, a number of victims have committed suicide—usuaUy after  the profound depression that is part of the  syndrome was exacerbated by shuffling from  doctor to doctor in search of answers. Others have died from pneumonia or cancer.  The disease has a profound effect on the  brain. In the acute stages, it becomes difficult to foUow sentences and words become  confused. Patients may use "cold" when  they mean "hot."  ...it may be the  physician who  is deluded  In most cases, the Ulness starts with an  upset stomach, fever, sore throat and respiratory tract infection. These are common symptoms and, as a result, ME has  been misdiagnosed as a shopping hst of  other illnesses. These include toxoplasmosis,  coUagen vascular disease, arthritis, AIDS,  hepatitis, candidiasis, hypothyroidism, allergies, multiple drug use, tuberculosis, anemia/and cancer. For a case of ME to be  confirmed, the patient must experience prolonged Ulness of six months or more.  Cause Unknown  The cause of ME has yet to be isolated.  Like AIDS, it attacks the immune system. As a result, most patients show elevated antibodies to the Epstein-Barr virus.  Epstein-Barr is a type of herpes virus responsible for mononucleosis—another disease ME has been confused with. Almost  every adult has encountered Epstein-Barr  and has developed antibodies to it. What  is unusual in ME patients is the elevated  levels. Unchecked, Epstein-Barr can cause  healthy cells to turn cancerous. In a person  with a healthy immune system, this is eas-  Uy warded off.  Although there is not yet a cure or prevention for ME, Dr. Paul Cheney of Nevada  has successfully treated patients with dox-  epin, an antidepressant drug. Doxepin also  has antmktaminic and anti-inflammatory  effects. Cheney's theory is that once the depression is reheved, the patient is able to  rest more effectively, and the body's natural ability to fight disease kicks in.  Some physicians stiU do not beheve that  the disease exists at aU and others persist  in describing it as a psychiatric ailment.  Male patients are considered hypochondriacs and females hysterical. Some female patients have been advised by physicians to  "have a baby"—presumably to take their  mind off their troubles. Besides being sexist,  this is very bad advice. Raising babies takes  energy—something ME sufferers are very  short on. One doctor documents a 50 percent miscarriage rate in ME patients. The  babies that survived were often premature  or of low birth weight.  As one Ottawa doctor says, "I have seen  a few patients with ME labeUed, medicated  and treated as schizophrenics who are so totally mentally normal (sic) that the psychiatrist would have had to stand on his head  to make and maintain such a diagnosis ...  psychiatrists and psycMatric-minded physicians beheve that these patients are suffering from a delusion that they have an illness  ... In fact, frequently it may be the physician who is deluded."  KINESIS Across Canada^  Fetal rights: patriarchy's newest hook  by Nancy Pollak  The summer which saw the spectacular  personal and legal battle between Chantale  Daigle and her pro-choice supporters, on the  one hand, and Daigle's ex-boyfriend and his  anti-choice sponsors, on the other, has given  way to a season of waiting.  But whUe Canadians wait—for the Supreme Court of Canada to issue its reasons  for dismissing the Daigle injunction, and for  the Conservatives to reveal new abortion  legislation—pro-choice activists are again  on the move.  Our work is cut out for us.  The central demands of the pro-choice  movement—no recriminahzation of abortion, and enforcement of the Canada Health  Act to guarantee free, equal and unrestricted access to the service nationally—  bear httle resemblance to the state's framing of the issue.  Justice Minister Doug Lewis has cited  the 'ex-boyfriends seeking injunctions' phenomenon as grounds for introducing legislation this faU.  "Injunctions are not a sign that a law is  needed," says Shelagh Day, a Vancouver-  based human rights activist. "Injunctions  are a sign that men want to assert their  dominance over women ...  "In the absence of any criminal law on  abortion, it's no surprise men would look to  the courts to assert their dominance. The  courts have traditionally been men's allies."  Day beheves women now have to persuade  pohticians there is "no reason to panic, no  need for a law."  This summer, there were three attempts  by Canadian men to gain injunctions preventing their ex-girlfriends from having  abortions: two were successful untU overturned by higher courts (in the cases of Barbara Dodd and Chantale Daigle) and the  third, in Manitoba, was denied outright.  Canadian courts are by no means the  first to confront this civU law approach  to controlling women's bodies. In fact, the  Supreme Court of Ontario had already  ruled in the 1984 Medhurst case that a father had no legal right to prevent an abortion. Courts in England, Israel, the United  States, Yugoslavia and Australia—as weU  as the European Commission of Human  Rights—have established that men (including husbands) have no right to veto an abortion.  WhUe not widely reported in the media, the Quebec Court of Appeal gave considerable weight to "father's rights" in upholding the injunction against Daigle (see  below). The same court seemed unmoved  by Daigle's uncontested claim that her ex-  boyfriend had beaten her and she feared for  the safety of the cluld.  While "father's rights" had a relatively  low profile in the media, so-called fetal  rights are currently centre stage in the abortion debate. The fetus has become the new  An Illegal Gathering of Witches  Margot Lacroix, Irene Boisier, Carmen Rodriquez, Margarita Sewerin and Jaz-  min Miranda are six of the twelve-woman collective which has given birth to  Aquelarre, a Spanish/English magazine devoted to exploring the realities of  Latin American women—wherever they may be.  The first edition of Aquelarre, published in Vancouver, includes an interview  with author Isabel Allende, a study of political radio in Argentina, poetry,  reviews and much more. Subscriptions are $18/one year, $35/two years. Send  cheques or money orders to Aquelarre, Box 65535, Stn. F, Vancouver BC V5N  5K6.  route by which men wiU assert their control  over women.  "These injunctions are a backlash against  the women's movement," says Shelagh Day.  "The rights of the fetus are not what it's  about at aU—it's a red herring which confuses people. It is patently evident that the  anti-abortion movement is not interested in  chUdren but in women not gaining equahty.  Their goal is to re-subordinate women so we  don't get any further than we have."  Feminist lawyer Gwen Brodsky sees the  Daigle case as a clear Ulustration of the dangers of according the fetus independent legal status.  "It's not that fetuses aren't a form of  hfe or an important form of human hfe,"  says Brodsky. "The question is, who is in  the best position to assume responsibility  for that hfe? There is every indication that  women are really concerned with how fetal  hfe is cared for. When people other than the  mother gain control, there wUl be conflict  with her interests."  In the Supreme Court of Canada hearing on the Daigle injunction, the Women's  Legal Education and Action Fund (LEAF)  (see below)axA the Canadian Abortion  Rights Action League (CARAL) acted as  intervenors, with the Canadian Charter of  Rights and Freedoms providing the backbone to their arguments. LEAF stressed  the sex equahty provision of Section 15 and  CARAL the "security of the person" guarantee of Section 7.  Fundamental to both approaches is that a  woman and her fetus are inseparable. Such  common sense is certain to be ignored in  any new abortion law.  Bias from page 6  ble and having more discussion in the workplace so that deep-rooted and unconscious  biases can be brought out and confronted.  A local group of mostly lesbian,  unionized workers has recently been formed to confront homophobia and specifically to get equal benefit coverage for  same-sex partners. The group is open  to gay/straight, union/unorganized women and men. For information phone  Diana at 876-1465.  What the court said, what LEAF said  Excerpts from the reasoning of Mr.  Justice Yves Bernier of the Quebec  Court of Appeal:  A person who freely commits an act must  bear the consequences. Pregnancy is not by  itself an attack on the physical integrity of  the woman, an interference with regard to  her body but a function which forms a fundamental part of her nature. The law of nature is that pregnancy must be brought to  term. The right to the voluntary interruption constitutes an exceptional right...  ... But when the interests of the mother  are contrary to those of her unborn chUd,  when she wishes to put an end to her pregnancy and where the public interest is not at  stake, the right unquestionably comes back  to the father in the first place, for serious  reasons not contrary to the interests of the  unborn chUd, to be opposed to the abortion.  This legal interest is founded on the fact of  conception of which the father and mother  " lave equaUy been the cause. It is his cluld  s much as that of the mother, neither more  nor less ...  ... the fact that the appeUant [Daigle]  broke off the common hving arrangement  does not constitute, in my opinion, a sufficient reason for putting an end, in spite of  the opposition of the father, to a pregnancy  so far advanced. To aUow the abortion in  these circumstances in spite of the opposition of the father would be to sanction abortion on demand in aU cases unrelated to the  domain of pubhc law. It would be to deny  any legal interest to the father who as much  as the mother and with her was the author  of conception. It would be to consider the  chUd conceived but not yet born as a nonentity.  And from Mr. Justice Marcel Nichols:  ... When it is a question of arbitrating  the conflict posed by the free disposition of  her body by a woman and the right to hfe  of the being she carries, a case such as this  tUts the balance on the side of the fetus as  much because of the apparent rights with  which he is endowed as because of the balance of inconvenience ...  Excerpts from LEAF's presentation  to the Supreme Court of Canada re:  Daigle:  ... In sex equahty terms, this case  presents an attempt by a man to control the hfe of a woman by forcing her,  through government intervention, to become a mother. The uncontradicted evidence concerning the respondent [Daigle]  shows this: "She made the point that the  applicant had no interest in the case other  than to maintain control over her."  A woman's relation to the fetus is unique  and inseparable: what happens to it, happens to her. He who controls it, controls her,  as this case makes abundantly clear. Indeed,  this case is an example of an attempt to  control the woman through controlhng the  fetus. Several justices misconstrue this case  as a conflict between the mother and the fetus. It is a conflict between a woman and a  man over that woman's body, hfe, and relation to her fetus ...  ... The Court of Appeal has stated that  this is a matter of private law: "The question before this Court is about the right of  the father to prevent the mother from terminating her pregnancy, a question at quite  another level, namely, that of private >w."  On the contrary, this is not, and cannot be,  a "private" matter. Hthis is opeUtor other  men to do the same to other women they  can get pregnant, by rule of law. This is a  pubhc matter of the status of the sexes ...  ... Maternity imposed by a court is  a deprivation of Charter-based sex equality. Access to abortion is a necessary means  for women to survive in their unequal circumstances. However difficult an abortion  decision may be for an individual woman,  it may provide some rehef in a hfe otherwise led in conditions that preclude choice  in ways she cannot control—for example,  rearing a cluld in an abusive relationship.  Women's access to legal abortion is a remedial attempt to ensure that women and  men have more equal control of their reproductive capacities, more equal opportunity to plan their hves, and more equal abU-  ity to participate fully in society than if legal abortion did not exist—a spectre clearly  raised by this case ...  KINESIS Across Canada  WHAT* S NEWS?  Bobbi-Jo Hansen and her son  by Linda Choquette  N.S. women  off to court  This month, the Canadian Abortion  Rights Action League is going to court in  Nova Scotia to put that province's controversial Medical Services Act on trial.  Passed in July, the act prohibits abortion outside provinciaUy-approved hospitals. The province swiftly enacted the legislation when plans for a Morgantaler abortion clinic were announced last spring. The  clinic is now open in Hahfax but can only  counsel and refer women.  CARAL's court documents say abortion  is a federal matter and the provincial government has no right to regulate access.  CARAL also advances the constitutional argument that the act violates the Charter of  Rights and Freedoms.  They're "enacting criminal law under the  guise of health law," said Kim Holmwood,  CARAL president. She caUed for federal  government intervention in the case to ensure that women in Nova Scotia have the  same right to abortions as women in other  provinces. Holmwood observed that if the  Nova Scotian precedent is aUowed to stand,  other provinces may foUow suit and ban  abortion chnics through simUar means.  No record  for batterer  Outraged CounseUors of women battered  by their male partners are demanding the  removal of Nova Scotia Provincial Court  Judge Ronald MacDonald who pleaded  guUty to assaulting Janet MacDonald, his  spouse, during an argument in their home  in May.  The admitted assaUant, a judge since  1981, was given an absolute discharge in  FamUy Court which means he wiU have no  criminal record.  "We are furious with the decision," says  Wendy TruU, executive director of Bryony  House, a Hahfax home for battered women.  "It's clearly giving the message that any  male no matter what his position in society  can slap a woman and get off scot-free."  Cheryl Downton, who counsels battering  men, faults the decision and says it wUl  undo her work in convincing men that there  is no excuse for hitting their wives. Saying that women would have no confidence  in the courtrooms of MacDonald or Judge  Butler who granted the discharge, Down-  ton's remark is a reminder that the majority of the judiciary are men from an ehte social class—appointed, not elected. For MacDonald, his case was heard by his peers, and  his absolute discharge granted by a feUow  judge.  Calling on provincial Attorney-General  Thomas Mclnnis to remove MacDonald  from the bench, Downton and TruU were  joined by CounseUors from other parts of  the province and by the Hahfax-Dartmouth  District Labour CouncU.  CBC's picture  needs adjusting  The CBC is in trouble with the federal  Human Rights Commission (HRC). Charging employment discrimination and non-  cooperation, Deputy Chief Commissioner  MicheUe Falardeau-Ramsay said there was  "difficulty making contact" with the corporation and as of July, the CBC was resisting "voluntary reviews of their employment  practices with us."  In making the discrimination complaint,  HRC officials revealed that the percentage  of women in the CBC's middle management  category (14.1 percent) is less than half the  national average (33.1 percent). Comparisons for other categories of female workers  also led to dismal findings, as did statistics  on people of colour, disabled people and Native people. The HRC has called for a thorough enquiry into hiring and employment  practices and with the CBC now disputing  its authority, the two bodies are headed for  the courts.  Midwifery  soon legalized  It looks hke Ontario may be the first  province to legalize midwifery. In July,  provincial Health Minister Elinor Caplan  appointed a council to set standards and  certification requirements. Legislation next  year is expected to establish a CoUege  of Midwives, an independent professional  body simUar to those which now regulate  doctors and nurses.  Robin Kilpatrick, legislation committee  chair for the Association of Ontario Mid-  wives caUed the move "extremely positive"  and "a concrete step." According to KU-  patrick, an estimated 3,000 Ontario mothers chose midwife-attended deliveries during the past five years.  Far behind world standards, Canada is  overdue to recognize midwives as independent, autonomous professionals within  the health care system. Nationwide pressure from women who want choice in  birthing procedures continues despite opposition from the medical establishment.  To date, the only other province seriously  studying regulation is Quebec. The recommendation for legalization made by a 1988  B.C. coroner's jury has not yet received a  Socred response.  Young woman  tells off teachers  A courageous New Brunswick high school  student hauled school officials before the  Human Rights Commission and forced their  apology after they stripped her of student  councU duties because she was pregnant.  Bobbi-Jo Hansen, a 17-year old whose son  Andrew was born during the 1988-89 school  term had been told she would be "bad for  the school image" and not "a proper role  model." Hansen successfuUy argued that  her continued school attendance and involvement would have a positive influence  on other pregnant young women.  Last September, faculty advisor Raymond Cholohan ordered the visibly pregnant Hansen had to relinquish the student  president office, won the previous spring,  and become vice-president. She refused and  was then stripped of pubhc duties, pushed  into the background and routed from a  province-wide student leader conference.  She was ultimately denied the traditional  special role at graduation ceremonies.  Hansen was supported in her complaint  by her mother who first made the issue  public, and by a local agency which helps  pregnant teenagers. Linda Farrell, speaking for the Single Parents Resource Centre,  observed that because of problems encountered, most pregnant teens quit school. She  championed Hansen's right as a student in  the public school system to be "treated hke  any other student."  Day care centre  for shift workers  The Canadian Auto Workers Union beheves in workplace day care and Windsor-  area workers' kids will be the first to benefit. A model for other organizations, the  CAW day care centre, due to open this fall,  is a joint venture by the union and the three  auto makers who dominate the industry.  CAW project manager Laurel Rothman  said the union is responsible for organization and operation of the innovative facility.  A non-profit community group wiU handle  the centre's day-to-day operations. The centre wiU be open from 5:30 am to 1 am, five  days a week, to meet shift-workers' needs.  About 54 infants, toddlers and preschoolers wiU get the worry-free care so scarce for  Canada's working parents.  The union negotiated chUd care as part  of the 1987 CAW contract. Joint contributions from auto maker employers and union  members help fund the centre.  Big bucks for  old news  It took $275,000 to tell Canadians that  BiU C-49,  the anti-soliciting law, hasn't  made street prostitution disappear. A study  obtained under access-to-information legislation was recently made public. Entitled  Street Prostitution: Assessing the impact of the law, the costly 120-page federal justice department report—a compUa-  tion of studies done in Vancouver, Calgary,  Toronto, Montreal and Hahfax—concluded  what any hooker, John, cop, interested or  disinterested observer knows—street prostitution didn't disappear, it just moved on.  Referring specificaUy to pohce enforcement, the report states "the main effect  was to move street prostitutes from one  downtown area to another." Almost 12,000  charges were laid in the first two years,  but there are no fewer prostitutes working  the streets. As prostitutes predicted, heavier penalties are leveUed at them than at  their customers.  Not in the report is C-49's human cost.  For Vancouver's prostitutes, forced from the  relative security of a brightly-lit and heav-  Uy populated West End to the shadows and  secluded parking lots of East Broadway, increased violence, rip-offs, harassment—and  murder—are direct results.  The law, which makes communication in  a pubhc place for the purpose of prostitution Ulegal, carries a maximum penalty of  six months in jaU and a $2,000 fine for both  parties. Appeal courts in Ontario, Manitoba and Alberta have upheld the law, but  Nova Scotia ruled in 1987 that it violates  the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. The  law is set for review by a commons committee later this year and several challenges  on constitutional grounds currently await  Supreme Court rulings.  Racism, not  just "scraps"  Black leaders are demanding a pubhc enquiry into racism in the Nova Scotia education system and criticize Attorney-General  Thomas Mclnnis for his refusal to even  knowledge the problem. Three days of bitter  fighting at Cole Harbour High School last  January were racially motivated, say community spokespeople, but officials continue  to view the events as nothing more than  "schoolyard scraps."  Evangehne Cain-Grant, head of the  Parents-Students Association of Preston,  home for most of the students involved, said  "something so serious happened and now  it's being sloughed off as nothing." Black  students feel hostUe towards a system they  feel cheats them out of a good education,  she said. In Cain-Grant's opinion, charges  stemming from the fights were fabricated.  While over 100 students were involved, only  18 were charged.  The Attorney-General's department further angered the Black community by dropping charges, early August, against seven  more people. A total of 13 have now been acquitted or dismissed. Lawyers and community leaders contend that all charges should  be dismissed but Attorney-General Mclnnis who earlier insisted that aU charges  be brought to trial seems to be reversing himself. He was publicly embarrassed  in May when leaders of the Congress of  Black Women of Canada asked him to leave  their banquet because he refused to consider  dropping the charges.  Referring to Mclnnis' attempts to promote better understanding between racial  groups with cross-cultural programs, Cain-  Grant said, "We know racism exists. We  have to have solutions to deal with it, not  multiculturalism."  Sources:  Globe  and Mail;   Vancouver]  Sun  KINESIS Across Canada^  International AIDS conference  Less talk, more care for women needed  by Theresa Dobko  Every conference I've ever been to develops a certain flavour by its end. The Fifth  International Conference on AIDS in Montreal last June can best be described as "pohtical activism confronts pure research." I  would even hazard a guess that the activists  won the first skirmish.  Whether we challenged the researchers  sufficiently to change how and what they  study remains to be seen. For the women  present, it was very clear that our needs  were not being clearly addressed and that  we need to question this fact.  I long ago gave up the behef that conferences were the place to go to look for  answers—yet I hold fast to the behef that  they should at least be a forum for asking  the right questions. At this AIDS conference, as at so many other conferences, the  questions asked about women during the  scheduled workshops were sadly inadequate.  This was in sharp contrast to the conversations that took place informaUy, and  at a series of evening meetings organized  just for women by the International Working Group on Women and AIDS (founded  at the Third International Conference in  1987). During these informal meetings I always managed to find the women asking the  necessary questions and we even found answers and directions to some of our shared  problems.  I say that the conference itself was inadequate to women's needs knowing that  in fact this International Conference had  devoted more time to questions about  women than any other International Conference. The women present acknowledged  these improvements in quantity. Yet the formal panels and papers hteraUy talked about  women: women as transmitters of the HIV  virus to chUdren; heterosexual transmission  patterns from women to men; and female  prostitutes as a transmission route into the  "general population."  Virtually aU of the papers presented  studied only the most basic questions about  women—how many women in each group  studied are infected with HIV? Known as  "seroprevalence studies," researchers at this  conference seemed fixated on knowing exactly what percentage of women around the  world have HIV. This research trend is especially disturbing to women working in  nations such as Canada, England and the  United States where it is weU-known that  the percentage of women with HIV is stiU  smaU (less than 1-5 percent of the whole  population of women).  The deluge of seroprevalence studies  left women wondering about the sanity of  spending millions of doUars worldwide just  to study the extent of a problem when those  millions might be better spent on prevention programs or support services.  No More Scapegoating  Then there was also the matter of which  women were being studied and commented  on at this conference. With rare exception,  the presenters targeted women working as  prostitutes and pregnant women as risk  groups for AIDS/HIV. Almost half of these  presenters were men studying the question  of women with AIDS.  Their rationale for studying these two  groups is obvious. Researchers are not  studying these women because they are concerned about how these women are getting infected and how to protect these  women. They are primarUy concerned with  the question of how these women are infecting others—men and babies. Such research perpetuates the myths and stereotypes about which women get infected, how  they get infected and their abihty to pass  the virus to others.  The question of studying women working as prostitutes was challenged the most  at the conference. Women and men who  work as prostitutes in western nations were  present at the conference and protested the  scapegoating of women by researchers and  the media. Prostitutes and their supporters  held demonstrations, handed out condoms  to participants and intervened in the various panels on prostitution.  Their goal was to clarify that women  working as prostitutes are no more hkely to  transmit HIV to men (or to get HIV) than  women who are not prostitutes. Indeed, untU we break the myth that only women who  Female "condom"  A soft, polyurethane sheath with 2  diaphragm-like flexible rings. One lies  inside. It acts as an insertion mechanism  and anchor. One forms the outer edge and  remains outside protecting the labia and  the base of the penis.  trade sex for money get HIV, women who  view themselves as "the girl next door" wUl  continue to get infected by their regular  partners—and pohticians wUl stiU use HIV  as an excuse to crack down on prostitution.  One of the most effective champions of  women working as prostitutes was Carol  Leigh of California, In full costume as  "Scarlet Harlot," Carol confronted the anti-  prostitution laws that hold women down in  her song "Bad Laws" (sung to the Donna  Summer tune Bad Girls):  Bad laws, talking 'bout bad laws, bad  laws.  See them doing it in broad daylight,  Hoping  they  don't catch the  latest  blight.  They don't get laid 'cause their butts  are too tight.  And so they make it a crime ...  The question of prostitution in Third  World nations is even more complicated. In  many areas of Central Africa, Central and  South America and Thailand, HIV infection in women working as prostitutes has  risen dramatically. The combination of drug  use among some, and the uiUivaUabUity and  cost of condoms for most puts prostitutes at  great risk for AIDS. StiU, studies of percentages are not what these women need either.  Many women from Third World nations criticized the emphasis on prostitution  in their nations as also being racist. Researchers from European or North American nations are given large grants to study  HIV in countries hke Tanzania—and then  focus only on transmission from female  prostitutes to men. The implications of  these studies are that somehow there are  more prostitutes in Africa than elsewhere,  that aU African men visit prostitutes, and  that Africans are less hkely to want to practice safer sex.  As Theresa Kaijage from Tanzania pointed out, researchers rarely mention that  as many non-prostitute women are infected  as prostitutes, or that safer sex guidelines  which work in Europe or North America are  impossible in Third World nations due to  poverty. The cost of condoms in Haiti might  cost a woman—any woman—a whole week's  salary—if she can find condoms and if she  can convince a partner to use them.  What Shall We Tell A Woman ...  The Fifth International conference was also  known for the extent to which marketing  companies were aUowed to show their wares.  The makers of the so-called female condom, caUed WPC-333, were quite evident.  The company was leaving participants with  the impression their product was a boon to  aU women and was somehow being blocked  from distribution by feminists who opposed  women having to take responsibihty for disease control as weU as birth control. A press  conference by women of the "International  Working Group on Women and AIDS" encouraged research into this and other products for women, but not without strong  safety testing and promises of avaUabUity  for all women, regardless of income. The  current product uses, a polyurethane sheath  and rings and is inserted inside the woman.  Clearly safety testing, costing and the wUl-  ingness of women and men to use'them must  be examined.  WhUe criticizing the questions that were  asked, it is also important to confront  the organizers on which questions were  not asked. Only a handful of papers  were presented on the medical picture for  women and HIV. Hundreds of papers documented men's symptoms, and treatment research based on men with HIV was prominent. Only two papers tried to investigate  whether HIV might take a different course  in women and how HIV might affect our reproductive and hormonal systems.  Many of us looked for some acknowledgment of the role of women in the AIDS  crisis—of women as partners of men with  AIDS, of the grandmothers caring for whole  families infected with HTV, here in Canada  and particularly in Third World nations.  What shaU we tell a woman with HIV  who is pregnant and is considering abortion, or wants to carry a foetus to term?  H breast milk can transmit HIV, what does  this mean for women in Great Britain versus women in Zaire? Who wiU develop drug  treatment programs for women with HIV?  WiU their chUdren be allowed to hve with  them in residence? Who is developing the  foster care and adoption programs for HIV  negative chUdren who survive their parents?  We still have such a long way to go. The  International Working Group on Women  and AIDS, as in previous years, has drafted  a pohcy document for the organizers of  next year's International Conference in San  Francisco. These and other questions have  been highlighted. But, we have also decided  that waiting for our questions to be addressed is insufficient. The Working Group,  spearheaded by Cindy Patton of the United  States, has decided to organize a conference  just for women. Whether we meet as a pre-  conference in the few days before the San  Francisco conference or at another time, we  wiU determine the agenda and questions  that women need. We wUl be the speakers  and the participants.  The conference promises representation  from around the world, with strict limits on  North American numbers and full funding  for women from Third World nations. Now  perhaps we wiU not need to react only to  the questions of others. Now we can begin  to decide for ourselves what is a woman's  agenda for AIDS/HIV. I look forward to the  Sixth International Conference on AIDS—  but now it is not the only forum I have to  look forward to. Commentary  Ecofeminism: a plot by Green women?  by Debby Gregory  This article is an opportunity for me to  explore some of my doubts and apprehensions about ecofeminism, and to sort out  my thoughts on the ecofeminist movement.  My own experience in feminism goes back  nearly 20 years. In that time, I have become  suspicious of attaching prefixes to feminism,  an act I see as the desire to make women's  hberation acceptable to those who would  otherwise be implacably hostUe.  Is ecofeminism a plot by Green women  to make ecofeminism acceptable to Green  men?  I spoke with two Victoria women, Laura  Porcher and Suzanne Klausen, who are both  active feminists and active environmentalists. Our conversation dispeUed some of my  misgivings and highlighted others. Working to dismantle the patriarchy by fighting power-over and hierarchy wherever they  exist, both women said they call themselves feminists without further elaboration.  They see concentrating on the environmental aspect of feminism as analogous to other  women's concentration on male violence or  pay equity.  This went some way to allay my fear that  after aU these years, concern for women  is stiU seen as narrow and sectarian, and  somehow not worth aU the bother. For me,  the feminist concepts of Sisterhood and  The Personal Is Pohtical are as broad as  the ecofeminist slogan Everything Is Connected. Since women's oppression is inti  mately hnked with every aspect of human  hfe, women's hberation would necessarUy  involve a total transformation of the pohtical structures which determine the ways we  all hve on this earth.  I worry that ecofeminism tries to legitimate feminism by attaching it to something else which is already legitimate. This  further marginalises and delegitimates feminism. Simply drawing useful paraUels between the treatment of women and the  treatment of the environment doesn't challenge the way that both women and the  earth are seen as the objectified recipients  of men's violence and greed.  I don't see the basic problem as the fact  men treat us badly, I see the problem as the  fact we are treated at all and it is men who  do the treating: that men have the social  power to define how women are treated.  Another concern of mine has been that  ecofeminism posits women as being somehow closer to nature, more in tune via  our menstrual cycles with the rhythms of  the earth, than men. Suzanne and Laura  quickly assured me that ecofeminists do not  make this claim and, in fact, take pains to  refute it. Similarly, they see women's heightened power of nurturing, and men's relative  lack thereof, as sociaUy trained and not as  biological essences. It is only the fact that  women and our planet "are both on the underside of the power game," as Suzanne puts  it, that makes for a certain identity.  Laura's use of daUy temperature charting as part of her natural contraception  VANCOUVER OUTDOOR CLUB FOR WOMEN  10th  ANNIVERSARY  CELEBRATION  Friday, September 29, 1989  Heritage Hall  3102 Main Street, Vancouver  Guest Speaker: Dr. Wendy Wickwire  Co-Author of the recent best selling book  Stein - The Way of the River  Dinner includes  Salad - vegetarian or chicken dish  assorted fruit - roUs - coffee/tea  Doors open: 6 pm  Dinner: 8 pm  Program: 6:45 pm  Dancing 9 pm - midnight  Cost: 17.001 Per son  Reservations must be received by noon, September 15, 1989, however, we expect this  event to sell out quickly so you should return the attached form as soon as possible.  Tickets will not be mailed out. Your reservation will be honored unless you are contacted  and told otherwise, therefore, please ensure you indicate your telephone number.  *Note: No one will be admitted while the program is in progress.  Reservation Form  Telephone No. - Day:.  Please complete a separate reservation  form for each person wishing to attend.  Cost$17.00/Person  Amount enclosed: $  Evening:   Mail to:  10th Anniversary Celebration  Vancouver Outdoor Club for Women  P.O. Box 2681, Main Post Office  Vancouver, B.C. V6B 3W8  does keep her in touch with her body's  rhythms. Her partner's participation in this  also makes him more aware. I wondered  why he didn't take his own temperature and  thus have direct access to his own body's  rhythms. For men to have that kind of relationship to their bodies would require a major shift in thinking. None of us could imagine men easUy agreeing to make that shift.  I do hke the idea of applying the insights  of feminism to other movements for pohtical change—because otherwise, I doubt that  real change is possible. I hke the idea of feminist knowledge filtering through the general  population by as many avenues as possible,  coming from many different directions and  perspectives.  Laura, a Green Party activist, says it is  true that Green women are trying to convince Green men that women are important and that our ways of working to create change are crucial. Those men are fairly  radical and open to change, and they know  something is wrong with the way things  are now. Ecofeminism is a way to broaden  their point of view by reassuring them that  feminism is explicitly concerned about the  survival of the planet—and that feminism  holds the key to that survival.  To the extent that some women are  trying to create change with the men in  their hves, ecofeminism can help bridge the  gap between feminist analysis and pohtical  practice. Those of us who don't work directly with men can also use ecofeminism  to make clearer to progressive women how  THE  VANCOUVER  OUTDOOR  CLUB  FOR WOMEN  ORGANIZED AND RUN BY WOMEN  FRIENDLY, NON-COMPETITIVE  ATMOSPHERE  LEARN NEW SKILLS  SHARE THE EXCITEMENT  OF THE OUTDOORS  Monthly meetings are held  the first Wednesday of each  month at Sitka Housing Coop (common room) 1511  Graveley St. 7:30 p.m.  For information:  Gail 734-3007  Jan 251-2974  Linda 294-9734  their own position is stiU tenuous despite  the goodwill of their male partners.  Knowing that something is wrong and  doing something about it are, of course, two  different things. Laura, Suzanne and I agree  that meaningful change comes only with the  kind of inner revolution which includes taking personal responsibility for our own behaviour, recognising our own potency, and  consciously working at doing things differently. Our vision for the future includes a  more positive valuing of women and female  qualities, however these may be defined.  I see an obvious paraUel between men  recognising their male privUege and refusing  to give it up, and people in industrialised  countries recognising their contribution to  environmental degradation and refusing to  hve differently. An obvious difference is in  the degree of urgency accorded to the oppression of women and the poUution of the  planet. As far as the daily violence done to  women and the systematic constriction of  our power in every area of hfe, we wearily  acknowledge that the amount and rate of  change in our hves has been minimal: after  aU these years, they're stiU calling us girls!  When we talk about the destruction of  the planet, there is always an urgency to the  conversation. The sense is that we haven't  much time to make changes before they become irreversible and fatal. There was once  the same apocalyptic intensity about feminism. Possibly the main value of ecofeminism to feminists is that it could help us recuperate some of that intensity on behalf of  aU women.  S       H BAY  SWIM CLUB  invites     you     to  fata CC&f  1989/90 season begins  Thursday Sept. 21  We are a lesbian/gay recreational and competitive swim club, meeting three times a  week at the Vancouver Aquatic Centre.  For more information:     Sheila       736-6393  Dirk 669-2382  Host of swimming events for Gay Games 111  I050 Beach Ave, Vancouver. V6E 1T7  KINESIS ,/syyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy  /////////////////^^^^^  ///////////////////M^^^^  International  Nicaragua  Fighting the war for legal abortion  by Ann Thomson  In Nicaragua, they speak of contradictions. The realities of hfe, 10 years into the  Sandinista Revolution, are contradictory—  unequal, with a broad general pattern of  support to the workers and peasants, but  with many irregularities and unexpected  gaps.  On my third visit to Nicaragua in July,  I was able to participate in celebrating the  tenth anniversary of the revolution, and also  to witness the dreary effects of continued  U.S. aggression.  The economy is devastated. In 1988, inflation topped 30,000 percent—the highest ever in the world. At the beginning of 1989, the National Assembly, led  by the Sandinista majority, enacted harsh  measures forced by the economic reality.  Thirty thousand state employees were laid  off. Spending on social services was cut  back drastically. Attempts to stabilize the  national currency—the cordoba—through  state subsidies were abandoned, leaving it to  float on the world market. Its value plunged.  The immensely popular president, Daniel  Ortega, does not deny these measures have  "an International Monetary Fund profile,"  resembhng those imposed by the U.S. controlled banking agency on many Third  World countries. But, he points, out, as  though to Ulustrate the popular slogan  "Reagan goes; the Revolution stays," the  Sandinistas have stiU managed to honour essential points of their program.  Elections wUl be held in February 1990,  for the second time since the Sandinista triumph. The Electoral Law adopted in 1984,  Confrontation on the  matter is inevitable  and hailed internationaUy as extremely  democratic, has been liberalized further.  The FSLN, or the Sandinista Front for National Liberation, wiU be opposed by 20 registered parties. No restrictions are imposed  on donations from abroad, and the U.S. is  expected to heavUy subsidize the main opposition bloc.  Women in Nicaragua Libre, many of  whom were guerriUeras or were active in the  urban underground and some of whom now  hold responsible and non-traditional posts,  are stiU bound by the legacy of machismo  society. There is inadequate housing, un  equal job opportunities and httle daycare.  Few sexual unions are formalized; many  women are abandoned by their lovers as  soon as they become pregnant; contraception is seldom used, and STDs are rampant. The UN has estimate that 40 percent  of Nicaraguan women are in battering relationships.  During my stay, the papers reported extensively on the proceedings of the First National Seminar on Young Women. In keeping with the concept that both women's hberation and socialism entail getting women  into the workforce, the final report to  the conference was given by Olga Maria  Espinoza Baquedano of the Agricultural  Workers' Union (ATC).  oned in a machista mentality by their lack  of education and, it is frequently said, by  the attitudes of men—be they husbands or  ' men in positions of control.  At the same time, the Cathohc hierarchy and members of the medical profession maintain their conservatism regarding  women's role.  The most vigorous and successful inroads  into this conservatism have been carried  out by feminist doctors. Dr. Ana Maria  Pizarro, in particular, has done groundbreaking work. Dr. Pizarro's report to the  First National Seminar on Young Women  was given dramatic coverage in El Nuevo  Diario, an independent daUy sympathetic  to the FSLN.  Not unexpectedly, in a country long dominated  by Catholicism, reproductive rights are a thorny  issue.  Companera Espinoza pointed to hard-  won gains, but she also outhned the obstacles women face. Of the paid agricultural  workforce, women now comprise 27 percent. Many of them receive the benefits of  union contracts. But, Espinoza emphasized,  these contracts have not obtained equahty,  and wages for women and chUdren remain  marginal. Women are the first to be laid off,  often with the coUusion of the union, and  they meet with sexism from male co-workers  if they aspire to non-traditional jobs such as  driving a tractor.  StiU, the principal achievement of women  in the countryside has been the right to organize to defend their interests. These interests are primarUy, according to Espinoza,  women's rights as workers and their right to  education about their sexuahty and about  birth control.  Reproductive Rights  However, birth control is hard to obtain in  Nicaragua and difficult to use even when  avaUable. Espinoza reported that, in many  regions, sexist practices prevent women  from receiving contraceptives unless they  have approval from their husbands.  Not unexpectedly in a country long dominated by Catholicism, reproductive rights  are a thorny issue. For several years, Sandinista leaders have worked to pierce the  thick screen of prejudice that continues to  limit the status of women. For those who  can read, there is much in print about the  need for women to control their bodies.  But Uhteracy is on the rise again. Seven  years of contra war have eroded the achievements of the Literary Crusade of 1980. Indeed, a new hteracy campaign is presently  getting underway. Many women are impris-  In an article on July 31, this newspaper gave two columns to a description of  the sufferings of a 19-year old woman who  died from complications of an Ulegal abortion. The headline quoted Dr. Pizarro calling for the necessity to depenalize abortion  in Nicaragua. Citing detaUs from her research into the havoc caused by Ulegal abortions, Dr. Pizarro was quoted as critical of  the Ministry of Health "... which, despite  being presented with dramatic studies on  the terrible consequences occasioned by the  penalization of abortion in the country, during these 10 years, has maintained closed  eyes before this reality."  Ixchen  If the FSLN has not made abortion legal in  Nicaragua Libre, the need is dire and a confrontation on the matter inevitable.  In January 1989, a step was taken towards helping women reclaim their dignity  as sexual beings. A women's health centre was opened in a barrio in the centre of Managua. CaUed Ixchen (pronounced  Eesh-chen), after a Mayan goddess of fertility and love, the centre is supported by  grants from the European Economic Community. The Sandinista government could  not afford to fund it.  Ixchen offers two main forms of service.  The first is educational. Workshops are  given in sexuahty and relationships, in famUy planning, sexuaUy-transmitted diseases,  and women's legal rights in cases of abuse,  divorce and custody. The second strand is  medical and consists of gynecological consultations, pap smears, birth control information and devices, treatment of STDs—  and performance of safe abortions, up to 10  weeks of pregnancy.  "Both the FSLN and the opposition know  that abortions are being performed here,"  said Dora Mercedes Olivera, Director of Education at Ixchen, when I visited the centre. Despite its reluctance to change the  law on abortion, the FSLN has announced  publicly that it wiU not prosecute women  or medical centres that perform abortions  safely. Just to be sure, however, Ixchen has  three doctors and a lawyer sign each abortion patient's papers—an interesting reversal of the feminist position in Canada. At Ixchen, abortion is avaUable on demand; it is  sufficient for a woman to say she wants one  to obtain it. The signatures of the four professionals are to back her up, should prosecution be threatened.  Many of those on staff at Ixchen are also  associated with Bertha Calderon Maternity  Hospital, where Dr. Pizarro carried out a  study of 561 patients admitted for complications of abortion between 1985 and 1988.  The complications were grave, usuaUy requiring Intensive Care and major surgery to  attend to massive haemorrhage, perforated  uteruses and intestines, or tetanus, resulting from the use of rusty wire instruments.  The results of Dr. Pizarro's study have  been widely published in Nicaragua, particularly the finding that Ulegal abortion is the  main cause of maternal death. Of every 100  women who die during pregnancy or chUdbirth, 37 die of Ulegal abortions. This rivals  the number of women kUled in the war with  the contras.  No wonder women have been flocking to  Ixchen. In its first month of operation, 500  women used the centre. That doubled to  1000 by July. On average, Companera Olivera told me, 30 to 35 women per week are  accepted for abortions.  Although Ixchen performs abortion by  suction, its equipment is not the best.  Therefore, a manual method is used for  abortions in the first weeks; a mechanical  method is used in the 8th and 9th week. Patients whose pregnancies are more advanced  are, I beheve, referred to Hospital Bertha  Calderon.  The work done at Ixchen is being carefully documented and wUl provide the basis  for opening centres in two more barrios of  Managua and in five other regions. Despite  the criticism noted in El Nuevo Diario,  the Minister of Health, Dora Maria TeUez,  recently visited Ixchen to applaud its work.  As I stood in the midst of a singing,  chanting, glowing crowd of nearly 500,000  Sandinistas on July 19, to celebrate the  anniversary of the revolution, I was very  moved. We must join with international solidarity groups in demanding that "Nicaragua  Must Survive" and in sending aU possible  aid. But Nicaragua has survived, against aU  odds, for 10 hard but joyous years.  KINESIS AfrtflM^f  Doing Time is a monumental depiction of women surviving the hell of prison. Four women—Lyn MacDonald, Geri Ferguson,  Michelle Kanashiro- Christensen and Bea Walkus—and artist Persimmon Blackbridge collaborated in creating the sculptural installation which will exhibit at the Surrey Art Gallery from Sept. 8—October 8. The 25 life-size paper casts of the four women—  mounted on granite-grey walls and accompanied by their written commentaries on life before, during and after prison—will literally engulf the Gallery, transforming the public space into a prison-like labyrinth.  Doing Time will be reviewed in the October issue of Kinesis. Here, we present a small sample of this remarkable work, with a  reminder that the Surrey exhibit, curalcd by Susa.n Stewart, may be the only chance residents of the lower mainland have to see  Doing Time in its entirely.  .KINESIS  When i was transferred from one jail to another, they gave me a vaginal "exam"—whole  hand style, before i left. After being in a van under the surveUlance of a guard for the entire trip, they told me to strip for another vaginal exam upon arrival at the next jaU. I refused. They told me that the doctor only worked twice a week and if i refused to let him  "examine" me, i would be locked in isolation untU he returned. I submitted.  The full exam went hke this—vaginal—speculum and bi-manuaUy and checks through  all your bodyhair; nose; mouth; ears; between toes; bottoms of feet. We had hce shampoo  squirted into our hands and had to rub it into our pubic hair and shampoo with it whUe  one or two guards watched. We stood naked and spread-eagled whUe these guards circled  us with clipboards noting our various scars, birthmarks, and tattoos. I flipped out when  the nurse stuck her hand in me and stated, "You've been pregnant." I couldn't stand her  having that knowledge without me telling her. I felt hke they could start peeling me in  layers, down to my raw nerves.  I start screaming at her/them, backing into the wall, hugging myself, threatening them.  Fortunately, another nurse quickly covered me with a robe and led me to a chair. I got  myself together (fast)—these outbursts are usuaUy punished with isolation or worse.  —Lyn MacDonald  Here we sit, the last day of 1986 and the guards have us locked in our cells. They're  searching for homebrew. There actuaUy is a brew some women are making and we aU know  where it is, but they won't find it. They are really stupid because they are looking in our  pUlows. Like I really want to rest my head on fermented fruit and potato peels and pretend  I'm floating on the sea or maybe a waterbed. An hour later, they finally unlocked us.  12 midnight, women setting their fire alarms off, banging the locked doors, screaming  Happy Fucking New Years.  —Geri Ferguson  I was in prison again, and my friend Cat was sharing a room with this woman named  Gay. She had that kind of personality you just naturally gravitate to.  We used to sit up nights and Cat would get really stoned and Gay and I would just talk  for hours. We'd talk about anything. I remember one night, sitting up and talking about  clown faces for hke 6 hours. It was great. We got to be really close. And when I found out  that my mother-in-law was taking my kids away, Gay really helped me. It was the hardest thing, sitting in jail and you can't call anybody, and you don't know what's happening.  You don't know where your kids are or what your husband's doing. But Gay would hold me  and let me cry, and talk sense to me. She's the one that told me they couldn't take Joey,  and she was right. On the birth registration it had father unknown, so I got him back.  Gay was my first female lover. It was scary at first cause I always thought the guards  were gonna walk in. But the guards don't care. They're there to get their pay, and as  long as you're not doing anything they could get blamed for, it's OK. Then I'd get embarrassed that the other women knew I was sleeping with Gay. I was so naive, it was unreal. I  come from a really strict, straight family, right, we don't talk about sex, hke us kids were  brought by the stork or something. But Gay's real upfront. She'd just laugh at me, and  after a whUe we were just hke an old married couple in there.  —Michelle Kanashiro- Christensen  mm  mmmwmmm  mnmmtnm***  mm  mm  You people who drive by in your cars and look the other way, I want you to know that  it's hard for people hving downtown. I know them, they want out, but they're stuck. They  don't know where to go, they don't know where to turn, some of them are too far gone  into alcohol to get out, or they don't have experience or family to back them up. They got  no jobs to go to, they can't get work. And welfare's way below the poverty hne, it's hard  just to survive.  I want you to understand the way they are, the way we are, cause I'm one of them. We  look out for each other. If you try to go somewhere to get help, hke welfare, those people  just give you the run around. But the street people, they'll help you out, even though they  don't have much. They're the best people. That's what I want to say.  — Bea Walkus  A*  DOING TIME:  Sept. 8th - Oct. 8th at the Surrey Art  GaUery, 13750-88th Avenue, Surrey, B.C.  Hours: Tues.-Thurs. 9 am-9 pm; Fri. 9 am-  5 pm; closed Mondays and holidays. Telephone 596-7461.  Artist's Talk & Opening Reception:  Sunday, Sept. 10th, 2:00 pm (free). Persimmon Blackbridge on Doing Time and  the artist as social critic ...  P4W (Prison for Women)  Film Screening  Sunday, Sept. 24th, 2:00 pm (free),  P4W is an award-winning film by Janis  Cole and HoUy Dale. The film wUl be followed by an audience discussion of women  and prison issues.  Meet The Sculptor  Sunday, Sept. 17th; Sunday, Oct. 1st  and Sunday, Oct. 8th from 1:00—5:00  pm (free). Persimmon Blackbridge wUl be  on hand to greet visitors and answer questions.  KINESIS .<sfc*sas**ss$*ss*ss*s^^  ARTS  The Names Project  The Quilt: celebrating the love of its makers  by Sima Elizabeth Shefrin  For five days this July the Vancouver Art  GaUery was transformed by the enormous  Names Project Memorial QuUt which remembers and commemorates many victims  of AIDS.  The Names Project, begun in San Francisco in 1987, consists of thousands of three-  by-six foot panels, each one a memorial to a  lover, a friend, a fanuly member. OriginaUy  an American project, the qvhlt was first displayed in Washington D.C. in 1987 where  21,900 people came to see it. What we saw  at the Vancouver Art GaUery was a portion  of the American QuUt plus about 300 Cana  dian panels just completing a cross-Canada  tour.  When I visited the Names Project with  my small daughter, aU around us people were quietly weeping whUe she and I  laughed and chatted about the butterflies  and the ghtter and the teddy bears and the  music and the bits of clothing aU incorporated in the quilts. I felt at odds with the  crowd, but not with the spirit of the qiult,  for in many ways it is a celebration of the  love of its makers.  At the same time it is almost unbearably sad. I am afraid to read the names for  fear of finding someone I know. I am sad  for the "Donald"s and "Ed"s who have no  CCEC Credit Union  777c? credit union for co-ops, community business  and the non-profit sector  is  2250 Commercial Drive  2 blocks north of Broadway, effective October 2, 1989  New Services Available  • The Advance Card: Cash machine, withdrawals  and deposits for members who qualify.  • Saturday Hours: 10 am -1 pm; in addition to  Mon. & Wed. 11 am - 5 pm and  Fri. 1 -7 pm.  • Night Deposit Machine: A  secure and convenient  way to deposit after  hours.  ■Hln   hndbti***-*  Call 876-2123  New telephone number to be confirmed Oct. 2  last names, who are not able to be out, even  in death. I am moved by the dates, the hfe  spans of so many of the men: 1945-1988,  1952-1989, 1956-1988.  This is my generation. This virus has, in  North America, mainly touched gay men so  far. I imagine what it would be hke if it had  been the lesbian community, if we had to  grieve for so many of the women we love.  The idea of using quilts for emotional  pohtical expression is not new. For many  years women have stitched their innermost  feehngs (including their grieving) as weU as  their opinions into quilts.  The women's Peace Camp at Greenham  Common, England, has been the scene of  a number of multi-paneUed fabric pieces  which, hke the Names Project, were sent in  from aU over the world. On one occasion,  2,000 women sewed a four-and-a-half mile  fabric serpent which wove its way in and out  of the fence of the military base.  But the project which most directly influenced the Names Project is the Pentagon  Ribbon Project. In August 1985, a 10 mile  fabric "ribbon" consisting of many thousands of individual panels encircled the Pentagon. The ribbon segments, sent in from  aU over North America, as weU as Europe,  Latin America, Africa and Japan, had as  their theme, "What I cannot bear to think  of as lost forever in a nuclear war."  Like the Names Project, the panels are  apphqued, batiked, painted, quUted, in ev  ery conceivable material and fabric art  form. Like the Names Project they are made  by ordinary people, some of whom consider  themselves neither artists nor sewers, but  have taken this opportunity to express their  fear and sadness and protest at hving constantly so close to death.  As the Names Project grows it fiUs many  purposes. It provides a means of creative  expression and rehef for people whose hves  have been affected by the epidemic. It raises  funds for local services to people with AIDS  and their families. It educates people about  AIDS in a world that is stiU overrun with  misinformation, and encourages awareness  which is based on compassion and concern  rather than fear.  And perhaps, most important of aU, in a  battle in which it is hard to pinpoint the enemy, it is a form of fighting back.  Surviving  day one  HARD-HATTED WOMEN:  Stories of Struggle and  Success in the Trades  Edited by MoUy Martin  Seattle: The Seal Press, 1988  by Joni Miller  Too many women are stuck in the wage  ghetto where work gobbles up their hves  for httle financial reward. Hard-Hatted  Women is a series of first-person stories  about women who decided to get out of the  ghetto and into the trades. There is struggle  here, but also pride, accomplishment and  joy. As Naomi Friedman, a plumbing contractor puts it, "I enjoy my job ... I hke  being able to solve problems ... I hke the  satisfaction of having produced something  tangible at the end of the day."  The occupations explored here include  firefighter, policewoman, carpenter, plumber, electrician, stationary engineer, ironworker, truck driver, phone instaUer, subway operator, sprinkler fitter, welder.  More than one woman remarks that the  hardest part of the job is not the work itself,  but dealing with male co-workers. Many  faced open hostility. There are stories of  women who were never expected to survive  their first day on the job—after the workload was dehberately increased to discourage them. Says Pat CuU, a carpenter, "On  my first jobs, they gave me the hardest tasks  they could find and then sat back to watch  me struggle."  Nina Saltman, a Carpenter Foreman (sic)  describes the typical "speech" that greeted  her on many jobsites: " 'WeU, uh, er, we  have had other girls work here before'  (PUFF, PUFF, on the cigar). 'And, uh, er,  they just haven't been able to handle the  work.' Translation: we don't really want  you broads here, but we're being forced to  hire you. The other women couldn't take  the abuse ... wUl you?' "  Sexual propositions were experienced by  almost aU of the women. A lesbian talks  about coming out to a young co-worker in  order to get him off her back. "You mean  I'd be the first man?" he exclaims. Miriam  Swerdlow, a subway conductor, was propositioned so often she joked about giving a  civU service exam for the position.  On the positive side, women also report  encouragement and assistance from their  male co-workers. Says Vicki Smith, a sprinkler fitter, "My male co-workers are truly  amazing mechanics and very hard workers. Their years of experience in the fire  4   Please see Hardhat page 17  KINESIS Arts  ///////////////////^^^  Carel Moiseiwitsch  Art that illuminates you  by Holly Owen  Carel Moiseiwitsch's current show Siren  provokes a rush of adrenaline as the escalator crests at the fourth floor of the Vancouver Art GaUery. The opposite wah and  either side are covered with densely packed  images which convey ideas just as densely  thought-provoking.  Moiseiwitsch's statement accompanying  the work reads, "According to psychoanalytic theory, we repress aspects of ourselves  and others which we are unable to confront and accept. Ancient primitive cultures  who worshipped the female principle of the  Great Goddess provide aspects of women  that our patriarchal christian culture represses, i.e. marginalizes, outlaws or denies.  Siren is a search for visual representation  of this repressed female energy and power,  the shadow of the Virgin Mary.  "This instaUation has a traditional format of guardians—four Demons—and attendants—twelve Sirens—flanking a central  throne. HistoricaUy the Goddess is often  represented by a bird or seat—the Primordial Lap. The Winged Throne depicted here  is therefore a site of original female power  and the whole piece posits an opportunity  to behold and confront a primal force."  Moiseiwitsch, the 1989 co-winner of the  inaugural VIVA award, cites a dictionary  definition of siren: "(1) ... device for emitting a loud wailing sound as a warning signal; (2) ... nymphs whose singing was beheved to lure sailors to destruction; (3) ...  a woman considered to be dangerously alluring or seductive. Siren is "a search for visual representation of repressed female energy and power, the shadow of the Virgin  Mary."  The shadow, according to analytical psychologist Carl Jung, whose thought has influenced Moiseiwitsch, is "the sum of aU  the personal and collective psychic elements which, because of their incompati-  bUity with the chosen conscious attitude,  are denied expression in hfe." Conscious  attitudes throughout Western history are  symbolically aligned with masculine values and instincts. Thus, in the currency of  Western cultural history the symbohc identity of women is a dichotomy of the good  and passive, unattainable Virgin Mary and  the evil, wanton sexuahty personified by  the Prostitute. This narrow and safe definition functions weU for patriarchal ritual and law. Psychoanalytic theory reveals  that the "whole" psyche—consciousness,  the personal unconscious and the coUective  unconscious—is symbolized by the femimne  archetype of the Great Mother, the giver  and taker of aU hfe.  Spiderwoman  "...to tap into and sight, glimpse the  potential of this enormous powerful   chaos and energy"   Psychoanalytic theory of the way in which  symbols and the unconscious function in  sexual identity and culture are replacing  and transfiguring rigid and fixed christian  myths whose mascuhne values and patterns  of thinking are the matrix for all of our institutions: science, rehgion, law and art. WhUe  being clear about the pathology one-sided  symbols perpetuate, psychoanalytic theory  also Uluminates the way to affect changes in  values, a process Jung calls individuation.  As he explains it, individuation involves  "coming to selfhood, the process by which a  person becomes a psychological individual,  a separate, indivisible unity or whole ... Individuation "does not shut one out from the  world, but gathers the world to one's self."  An aspect of this process is confrontation  with the shadow and Moiseiwitsch's Siren  is just such a confrontation. "I'm trying to  find the length and breadth of who I am as  a human being in a way that my culture  does not readily acknowledge my possibilities and potential," says Moiseiwitsch. Her  work in Siren is a response to the shadow,  creating potential identities for women and  men to acknowledge.  When confronting the shadow, deep fear  and taboos are called up in vUe and threatening forms. Such confrontation presents a  moral problem that chaUenges the whole  ego personality. "For no one can become  conscious of the shadow without considerable moral effort," said Jung. In Siren (produced with a Canada CouncU grant) as in  her other work—graphics for mainstream  and underground comix—Moiseiwitsch calls  up subject matter in a style which is in itself  a confrontation. Not pretty pictures, Moiseiwitsch's drawing is beautiful in that it is  haunting and masterful.  Moiseiwitsch prepared for Siren with exhaustive reading and research, "looking for  clues about who the goddess is and how she  manifests outside this patriarchal description of women." Ancient cultures, folktales,  songs, pottery, jewelry and myths provided  clues to this repressed identity, "to tap into  and sight, glimpse the potential this enor  mous, powerful, chaos and energy."  In confrontation with the shadow—the  collective unconscious—Moiseiwitsch is her  self the source for the work. In Siren  shapes hold together and break away into  orbit around Sirens and Demons which  erupt violently into disfiguring images.  The process of executing Siren, 17 drawings four-and-a-half by ten feet in blacc  and fluorescent pastel orange, began with  nothing more than a simple rough sketch  of where the Demons/Witches/Sirens wouh.  take shape. In the initial layer of drawing  with fluorescent orange pastel, its hues anc  presence are "fugitive" and anything can be  put down—grocery hsts, names, numbers—  as she works amidst the complexity of fam  Uy hfe. "I am totally free to do anything  to include anything that comes up," she  says. Siren is in fact composed of a rela  tionship between Moiseiwitsch's highly per  sonal response or excavation of the shadow,  and ideas which are embedded in and span  recorded cultures and time.  Siren reclaims symbols whose origina  meaning has been lost or appropriated. For  instance, the swastika was originaUy the  wheel of hfe, a symbol of the great goddess  In Siren's manifestations of the shadow  the simphstic dichotomies for good and evi  faU away, its meanings are ambiguous, anc  there is active transfiguration of values.  As Moiseiwitsch says, she is "trying to  find and extend, as the function of art, the  parameters of human experience and our  understanding of ourselves. That is the job  we aU have to do whether in our daUy hves  or in our art or in anything. And if art does  that, if it gives you back yourself, or it en-  largens you in any way, or Uluminates you  it's worked."  Siren is Moiseiwitsch's deeply felt response to the pathology of our culture. lithe  source of cultural pathology is a lack of self-  knowledge based on the pretense that anything nasty or uncontrollable wiU go away  if we ignore it, then the remedy lies in becoming conscious of the shadow. That con  sciousness is, said Jung, "the essential condition for any kind of self-knowledge, and i;  therefore, as a rule, meets with considerable  resistance."  Moiseiwitsch acknowledges this resistance to her work when she says, "I am  not who you teU me I am, I am much more  profound, I am much more energetic, I am  much more wonderful, and I am much more  capable than any of you have ever perceivec I  that I would be because you are only going  by previous expectations of women."  Siren is at the Vancouver Art GaUery  to October 22, 1989.  KINESIS $sssss*sss$*ss*s**^^  ARTS  ARTS  //////////////////////^^^^^  as told to Kerrie Charnley  Beth Brant  Telling the truth for  Beth Brant was a guest lecturer at this  year's Women and Words intensive two-  week writing retreat in Vancouver. She is  a Mohawk from Tyendinaga Mohawk Territory and she now resides in Michigan. She is  the editor for A Gathering of Spirit, a Native women's anthology published in 1983,  and author of Mohawk Trail, it a collection of her poetry and short stories. Brant  has published works in Fireweed and Sinister Wisdom, it as weU as other publications. She is a mother, grandmother, lover,  and writer.  Kerrie Charnley is a Katzie Salish residing in Vancouver. She produces a one-hour  Native arts and music show on Co-op Radio, Fridays between 11 pm and midnight.  Kerrie: The piece you wrote entitled "A Long Story," that's probably  my favourite piece. It really hit me. It  was in the Fireweed Native Women's Anthology. You talk about "out of a past  where amnesia was the expected," where  you're supposed to keep your secrets  hidden and you're not supposed to tell  anyone because they could use it against  you.  Beth: When I first started writing I reaUy was writing stories about the family  because that was my experience. Then I  started writing things about myself—my  own personal struggles and victories—and  now I'm starting to make up people to write  about and that's setting another kind of a  freeing thing to do.  I try to be really honest in everything I  write but you know there are some things  that maybe you don't want non-Indians to  know about because they wUl use it against  you. WeU, I have that same problem with  making up things to write about because  I'm usuaUy writing about Native people,  but in the family there's a real sense of  Beth: I know I feel that way too. I reaUy write for Native people but in the writing I'm also hoping that non-Native people  are going to see this and make some sort of  connection in their head and change their  hearts and once you change your heart you  change your mind and once you do that, you  want to do it to others.  Kerrie: I find that there's a lot more  Native women getting published. Do you  have any ideas about why that's happening now and where it will go from  here. I'm thinking of Lee Maracle and  Jeanette Armstrong, and Chrystos, and  Paula Gunn Allen, and Joy Harjo, and  on and on.  Not Nearly Enough  Beth: Not nearly enough, of course. I'm  never satisfied. I'm not sure about that because most of the women that you named,  except for maybe one, is published in a smaU  press. Some are self-published, some are Indian publishers of which there are hardly  any in North America, hardly any at aU.  Kerrie: The dominant majority of  European descendants aren't really rec-  ...It suddenly came to her  that the craziness was being  an Indian living in the white  culture  "don't say too much or you reaUy wUl be  betraying us."  This culture, this, white western culture  that we hve in especiaUy encourages amnesia. I mean we don't know any of the real  history of this continent especially concerning indigenous people. That internalized oppression is really carried through to Native  people who then keep as many secrets as  possible. I think we reaUy gotta start telling  the truth for each other—not for anyone  else, but for each other.  Kerrie: That's one of the most impressive things about your writing, that  you courageously face those secrets and  bring them out and talk about them,  just the way that they are. I think that  keeping ourselves silent and not talking  about our experiences the way they are  in reality is what keeps us invisible to  the dominant culture and keeps us in  our place.  They want to keep us in our place so  we won't change the way things are. But  by talking about it, we will be changing  our situation and they'll have to change  too.  ognizing them yet.  Beth: I think they'll recognize them if  they say what the Europeans want to hear.  If it's the old stereotypes about praying to  the four winds and the earth is my mother  and things hke that. They want to hear that  kind of stuff. We do write about that but not  in such a simplistic stereotyped kind of way.  But I think the feminist movement, especiaUy the women of colour's feminist movement, has been the encouraging force in  hearing more indigenous women writers.  Some of these presses hke Press Gang or  Firebrand Books—they're run by women,  white women, but who see with a different eye than the pervading culture and we  can only hope that more and more of those  women are able to establish those kinds of  things.  Of course, every time I pick up a journal  or something I look to see if there's a Native  woman in it. I read the biographies first unless I know their names or something just  so I can see. I'm not satisfied that there's  enough. But that is why is did A Gathering of Spirit. Because I wanted the women  who had never been published or who had  maybe been published but were never heard  about, I wanted to put us aU in a book  where aU our voices would be hke one: the  famous with the not-so-famous, the women  in prison, the women who hve on reservations and reserves, the women who hve in  urban areas.  I wanted us to create a community of a  kind that has not existed, maybe in memory, but to put it back together so that we  have this revolving circle where we can always pick up each other. Since A Gathering of Spirit and all the manuscripts I  got from that, I hear from more and more  women all the time who are wonderful writers and who need to have their voices heard.  I have a few resources and contacts and  what I'm able to do to see that they're pubhshed somewhere, I wUl do. Because I feel  that is a responsibility that I have as a Native writer.  Kerrie: Do you want to talk a little bit about the process you go through  when you're actually writing something? There was the piece you read at  La Quena and you'd written it in the  last two days and it seemed so complete  and together.  Beth: My process is one of thinking  about something for a long time. Suddenly  something takes up space in my head or  they make a home in my head and I start  to see things through their eyes. It sounds  very insane and actuaUy there is a kind of  insanity to it. Especially if you're writing  about human beings, you know, they take  up a place in my head. Just ordinary things,  hke I'm going to the supermarket and I'm  wondering what they would buy.  Like that story "Marie," I had been  thinking about that for about a month. And  I finaUy decided that I can't fool around  with her anymore, she can't fool around  in my head anymore. She's got to get her  story out on paper 'cause they're very real  to me—the people that I write about—and  so I sat down and I just went through it.  I wrote it out and I left it for a few hours  because I knew that I would hate it if I  picked it up immediately after finishing it.  And a few hours later I went back to it and I  made changes and I made a section longer.  And then I put it aside again and then I  didn't look at it untU the next day. The next  day I just kind of cleaned it up—commas  here and getting rid of some of the "and's"  and the "the's."  Even when I think I'm finished with a  story I'm never really finished with it and  I'm not sure if that's just that I don't want  to let go. So that's when I ask for feedback,  hke what did the story make you think of,  and what did it remind you of, and what  were you feehng when you heard the story.  Then I can know if I presented Marie properly, the way she wanted to be.  I guess in the end I write for myself and  whoever it is that I'm thinking about. WeU,  they're making me do that but when you're  ready to let go of it, you want it to get out so  different eyes can see it and take away from  it what they possibly can. So it's a strange  process but not so strange—everyone has a  different way of doing it.  I have a friend who writes every day. She  sits down and it doesn't matter if she is  writing something purposefully she just says  she sits down at the typewriter and plays  around with words and you know that's her  way of doing it and it's very successful for  her. For me it would kill me. I've just gotta  have it, somehow, in this place in my mind,  before I can, you know, actually put the  truth out. It's a funny tiling.  I  each other  Kerrie: Can you talk a little bit about  the piece "The Fifth Floor, 1967?"  There was one line in it that really  struck out to me and it was, "At home  this woman was a cry baby but the tears  never came out of her eyes." And there  seems to be this recurring symbol of salt  in it and I was wondering why it was  such a strong force ?  Beth: Gosh, nobody has ever asked me  that before. The story is about me and when  I was put in the mental institution by my  husband. I was just fiUed up with all the  salt water. I had no release for this terrible  depression. I didn't know what the depression was. I didn't even feel hke a human. I  was this thing that could be destroyed by a  shove or a push.  I guess at the time I was writing it the  image just seemed appropriate to me to put  it that way. In a lot of ways, the experience  as horrible as it was really taught me a lot  of things about myself. I was separated from  everything that was driving me crazy. And  I also found a part of myself that I didn't  even know existed and I was able to take  that with me. I think I spent a month there  maybe, I can't even remember quite how  long. But I was able to take that with me.  And you know it kept me strong enough  to be able to divorce my husband who was  abusive, and alcoholic, and it also gave me  something to love my chUdren more. I loved  them but I also felt that they were eating  away at me. I mean chUdren do that, they  need all the time. I learned a lot from that  experience. And being able to write about  it was really freeing to me, oh god it was so  freeing, it 's hke it's out there and I don't  have to think about this anymore.  Kerrie: I think for myself when I  started reading This Bridge CaUed My  Back and A Gathering of Spirit and Lee  Maracle's book Bobbi Lee —it was just  like "holy cow!" My whole life, you  know.  Beth: I know.  Kerrie: Because for twenty-three  years of my life or whatever it was at  the time, I'd been living this really isolated life, my experiences were very isolated, they were different from everyone  else's or so I thought. And it was really  lonely, and I was depressed a lot and I  wondered why. Then I started reading  these works{ these other women's stories and thinking "holy cow," you know  this is natural, this is the way it is for  And that isolation went away and my  experience became clear, I was able to  express myself and I got angry and I  thought I will be courageous and I will  face these painful experiences. And by  reading other Native women's stories I  became freer. It was just really liberating.  Someone's Going To Hear  Beth: I know because the first Indian writer  I read was Linda Hogan—she's a Chickasaw from Oklahoma and she hves in Colorado now. And she's also a half-breed hke  I am. And she was writing about that and  I thought, "oh my god," you know, here's  somebody who knows.  And when I read This Bridge Called  My Back—to read Barbara Cameron's and  Chrystos' stuff who are also Native lesbians  hke I am—I felt so free of aU this pain and  this rage that I carried around with me just  to know that you could put that out and  someone's going to hear what it is you have  to say.  And then of course you start looking for  more and there's not enough. And that's  probably another reason why I did A Gathering of Spirit. I did it to read more Native women's work.  Kerrie: Yeah, I think that was something that came to me too when I read  these stories and realized that I wasn't  alone in my experiences, there was this  rage because I'd been led to believe I was  alone. Right.  Beth: They want you to think that you're  *   alone.  |       Kerrie: And that's where the crazi-  "it   ness comes in too.   Where you start  thinking that maybe you're crazy because you have these feelings and experiences and you're the only one who  sees them that way and then you find  out that other people are having those  experiences and seeing things the same  way.  Beth: WeU, Linda Hogan says that when  she was growing up she thought she was  crazy and then one day the realization came  to her that she was an Indian. She always  knew she was an Indian, but it suddenly  came to her that the craziness was being  an Indian hving in the white culture. And  once she came to that conclusion in herself  she started writing. And then she was able  to...  Kerrie: Blossom.  Beth: Yeah, she was able to blossom  and she used to make other things blossom too. And I think in a lot of ways one  of the most wonderful things about Native  women's writing is that it encourages others to do the same.  Except for very few, none of the Native  women writers that I know write from an in-  teUectual and academic standpoint. I mean,  aU of us really write gut stuff. It can be  beautiful and it can be ugly but it's gut and  heart and you know aU the insides of our  body instead of this disembodied head. And  so you read that stuff and you think, weU,  then, it might be possible for me to do it.  And it is possible. It is possible.  I want to encourage anybody that's ever  even just had a fleeting thought about it, to  pick up a piece of paper and a pencil and  just put it down whatever it is. It can just  be a story, it can be a few hnes of something  that you remember, it could be a few hnes  of what you want for the future. Anything  just to start you . Just to get you going, to  know that you can do that.  That forced sUence you were talking  about, you know that's a type of genocide.  And we just keep sUent untU we blow away,  you know, and never make a difference to  our own people. And if we don't make a  difference then there's not going to be any  change and we aren't going to survive. And  every one of us has to do that in her or his  own way. I think for your own real sanity as  a Native person in this culture you have to  be able to do that. I mean it's too crazy out  there.  What sohtude we have I reaUy feel oughta  be spent in putting down those stories and  those poems and those memories. It's just  gotta be done. We can do it ourselves, we  can write it down, we can put it on tape, we  can film it, and so it's going to be there. So,  as the elders we become, we wUl have that  in addition to what we speak and say.  Hardhat from page 14  protection industry, their skiU and their  seemingly inexhaustible knowledge deserve  a great deal of respect."  The women in this book come from  all walks of hfe. Some are mothers, some  are young women, some are middle-aged,  some were university educated before they  switched occupations. One thing that is  common to many of them, however, is that  they came into their present occupations as  a result of openings created by law. Affirmative action works. More than one woman  reports being hired initially simply because  an employer needed to fiU a quota of women.  These women are go-getters—many have  become active with their unions and/or  with local tradeswomen support groups.  You'd be proud to work beside any of them.  They enjoy their roles as torchbearers and  are often actively engaged in encouraging  other women to join them.  The stories in Hard-Hatted Women axe  readable, hvely and weU-edited. It's a book  you should have in your resource library,  and it ought to be available in high schools.  iMS-riu-   Js/U«T<JKIN& y >,  tic n-Competitive vaujes J  INTO    YOU.    -,     ANp    THEM      /   .  i our of you*. Mouth x \  \j he-at^ these: hipbous, m)  * PATRIARCHAL WAS, CRIES*  ^WHEKfT DO YOU &CT  ITFROM^  K'NESIS  KINESIS  KINESIS i^^>^^^^^^^^^5^^  Arts  Lighting a fire with video and film  by Dorothy Kidd  Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India—Home of  Gandhi's Ashram—November, 1988  Across from Victoria Park the afternoon  sun bleeds in through the purple curtains.  A woman motions to me to join her and  I weave my way past three women ironing  some exquisite pieces of saree cloth. The distraction of a foreigner's entrance over, the  group of forty women sitting cross-legged  on blue carpets goes back to watching the  SONY video monitor.  I have come in on a showing of Video  SEWA, the Self-employed Women's Association of 22,000 that is part trade union, part  co-operative. Members work in the informal sector—in jobs unrecognized by government and unorganized by mainstream trade  unions—either at home making goods, as  labourers in construction or domestic work,  as vendors in the market.  This first tape documents SEWA's fight  to start a co-operative bank where women'  can save regardless of their marital status,  earnings or literacy skiUs. I can't foUow the  spoken Gujarati, but I have no trouble with  the visual language—of talking head inter's. Yet towards the end of the tape,  the song they're singing sounds so strangely  reminiscent that I start to get disoriented.  Aha! "We Shall Overcome" in Gujarati!  In the next tape I see another set of familiar protest symbols. Picture a long shot of  a demonstration of 5,000 street vendors and  their supporters. The screen is full of waves  of women marching with fists and placards  the air. They are taking out a Gandhian  style "gerao" to the pohce station to protest  pohce harassment. Cut to a medium shot  as the camera pans across a smaUer group  shouting slogans. "SEWA Zindabad!"  "SEWA Zindabad!" The chant rings out  in stereo in the room as everyone takes it up,  led by a woman standing off to the right who  appears to have jumped out of the monitor.  She takes up the same raised fist pose she  has in the demonstration on the screen.  On that sunny day in Ahmedabad we see  a Tinmber of similar videos whose aim is to  motivate and organize. Working women on  the screen speak to the needs of the working women in the room—for official recognition and an end to harassment and for better working conditions. Others talk of how  to organize other common interests, such  as banking, health care, or educational services for themselves and their families. The  women watching speak the same language  as those behind and in front of the camera.  One of the producers is Chandraben,  a vegetable vendor and one-time vice-  president of SEWA.  "Women workers are reluctant to join,"  says Chandraben. "It takes a long discussion and we go on talking untU we reach  their hearts. Any problem can be solved  with organizing ... I am a great believer in  organizing. It also depends on us, how we  deal with people. Now nobody harasses us  because we are organized ... Women are  afraid of the government and even of middle  class women, but not of women hke me ...  We should aU get united as Gandhiji did."  While many of the women video and  film-makers I met in India last faU speak  of women, hke Chandraben, from the  Gandhian and nationalist movements, some  would define themselves more explicitly as  feminists. Yet almost aU define their work  in a pohtical way.  Meera Diwan is no exception. At a symposium at Vancouver's Video In last spring,  she talked of videos and "films as secondary  to the [activist] process" of working for the  popular movement—for economic and civU  rights of women, of the rural and urban  poor, of aboriginal and lower caste people.  Getting It On TV  Beginning as a film-maker for the government film service in Bombay, Diwan sought  as much exposure as possible for feminist  ideas and actions by showing her films on  the national tv system. Her early film, A  Gift of Love, brought one of the key issues  of the contemporary Indian women's movement to the growing number of tv sets in  middle class homes throughout the country.  ... "We Shall Overcome"  in Gujarati...  The film is a documentary about dowry  burning, a particular kind of violence  against women which is increasingly common in northern India. Brides are burned  by their in-laws as a means of getting dowry  payment from their families. It's not an easy  film to watch as it includes an interview  with a burn victim in her hospital bed. Diwan was reluctant to show the film in areas  where dowry burning was not widespread,  but eventually it was shown aU over the  country. As a result, many women wrote to  the producers talking about their fears and  asking for the addresses of women's groups.  Dowry burning was the cause of controversy for another productions team  in Ahmedabad three years ago. Dinaz  Kalwachwala was a free-lance producer for  a community-oriented program service run  by a national government agency. The Development Education Communications Unit  broadcasts to 400 vUlages in the Kheda Distract near Ahmedabad, where people who  can't afford sets of their own can watch community sets in schools, viUage council offices  or farm co-operative buUdings.  While many of the shows are on subjects  hke agriculture, animal husbandry, education and human rights, there are a number specificaUy oriented to women. Some of  the most popular have been documentaries  and dramatic serials where viUage characters have discussed or acted out issues such  as women's education, chUd marriage, discrimination against girls, wife-beating, divorce, widow remarriage and dowry.  One series on legal alternatives for  women looked at the story of a woman who  had died under suspicious circumstances. It  included reports from neighbours, the doctor, witnesses, social workers and women's  groups demonstrating at the Pohce Office.  When the husband started legal action, the  program was in a strong position. Yet the  pressure of three years of legal battle, combined with other pohtical pressures, led to  reluctance on the part of the television management to do more experimental programs.  But not before Kalwachwala and others had  produced some very innovative women's  programs. Questioning the ethics of "lighting afire and not being there to fight it out,"  Kalwachwala told me they tried a number  of different strategies. Careful not to create a women's program ghetto, they made  sure to involve both women and men in aU  the interviews and dramas. They also made  sure to protect individual identities by dramatizing any controversial issue.  As the shows developed, they became-  more and more participatory and true  to real-life. They tried to deal not only  with problems, but with alternatives—  particularly economic alternatives for women. Taking the organization that already  existed in the viUage, they created a serial  about a bhanjan or religious singing group.  The serial dramatized the social problems of  the viUage through the story of each character in the group, whUe the group as a  whole was organizing a co-operative project  to generate income.  Kalwachwala's last serial, The Phoenix,  was even more explicitly pohtical, about  campaigns of a women's group for economic  and social independence. Reflecting her concern about not exploiting other's experiences, the plan was to help start a real-life  coaUtion between urban and rural women  and then dramatize it. Unfortunately the  show was cancelled after 10 episodes, and  Please see India page 18  >etween^hedines  Ursula LeGuin, Dorothy Dinnerstein,  Helen Forsey and others discuss the  vision and challenge of the  ecofeminism movement. Their voices  are gathered around four themes:  ecofeminism, politics, spirituality,  and community.  $15.95 pb. $34.95 cl.  Write for a complete catalogue of titles.  394 Euclid Ave. Toronto, M6G 2S9  CRITICAL PATHS  Organizing on Health Issues  in the Community  Keck et al.  "I would recommend this for any  group involved in a community  health project. The examples used  are detailed, well-organized and  practical."  Planned Parenthood  "A clear and helpful guide."  June Call wood  $11.95 pb. $34.95 cl.  KINESIS Arts  ^*^%mi%^%^m%?*%^  Old favourites singing in the rain  by Maura Volante  Much as I enjoyed the feast of music  avaUable as always at the Vancouver Folk  Music Festival, this year's experience was  somewhat scattered. Despite large chunks  of chUdfree time, I was stiU there with my  two-year-old daughter, and I discovered how  different two years old is from one. Also,  it rained on Sunday, which diminished the  enjoyment, especially as my daughter's Ups  turned blue. So this is less of an overview  than a patch-work of fragments.  Friday night's program was thin on  women in leading roles, although they  played important vocal parts in such  bands as Kolinda from Hungary and Kin  Lalat from Guatemala. Loreena McKennitt  played prettUy on the harp but made no  lasting impression, nor did Jennifer West  beyond that of a pretty voice. LUlian AUen  and the Revolutionary Tea Party Band were  great as usual, with Allen's fiery delivery of  her dub poetry making her seem much bigger than she really is, and her band offering polished and tight reggae/rock rhythms.  The only thing missing from Allen's performance was more new material. Most of her  stuff was famihar to her regular audience.  But the real showstopper that night was  the Haitian dance and drum troupe from  Montreal, La Troupe de Danse Rada de  Georges Rodriguez. The drummers may  have been men, but the impression was of  women, singing and dancing in a magical  tradition closer to its African roots than  much North American Black music. This is  due to Haiti's early break from colonial rule  and subsequent nurturance of its African  culture. There was tremendous power in  these songs and dances.  As usual, the first women's workshop was  offered bright and early, ten o'clock Saturday morning. My friend and I were grumbling about this whUe running around getting kids, food and assorted paraphernalia  ready that morning. She complained that it  isn't fair, considering aU the stuff women  have to get organized. I speculated that  they do it because that way the women wiU  then get their families there on time.  Whatever the reasoning, it was, as usual,  worth getting out of bed early to hear the  sampling of Frankie Armstrong, Karen Sta-  ley (of Women in the Round), Lucie Blue  Tremblay, Terilyn Ryan, Suzanne Bird, and  Cathie O'SuUivan (of the Australian band,  the Larrikins). It was difficult, though to get  a real sense of any one of them. The ones  who stand out in memory are those I'd seen  before, hke a perennial favourite, Frankie  Armstrong, the great Enghsh unaccompanied singer, and the ever maturing talent  of Lucie Blue Tremblay. Her voice has gotten richer and gutsier, nicely balancing her  sweetness.  The next women's workshop was devoted  to the local singer/songwriters, of which  Vancouver can boast quite a few. Hosted  by Shari Ulrich, this session featured Tami  Greer (of the Dots), Terilyn Ryan, Mae  Moore and Sue Medley. They were quite  varied in style and content, from the dramatic sophistication of Ulrich at the piano  (and doing fiddle fiUs on the other women's  songs) to Ryan's down-home easiness. AU  had interesting things to say, and there was  a humourous camaraderie onstage, coining  out of a common home base.  Barbara Higbie is amazing, whatever she  does. Folk Festival regulars wiU remember  her in a variety of configurations, singing,  playing fiddle and piano in styles ranging  from bluegrass to blues, as weU as a kind  of new age/jazz fusion. This year she was  invited to play solo, and she really shone  in the keyboards workshop Saturday afternoon.  Her compositions showed a depth of vocabulary reflecting her broad experience,  and she rocked it up good on a jam session  with all the other participants, as they doubled and tripled on piano and synthesizers.  I missed her solo concert later that day, but  was pleased to catch her in the international  workshop the next morning. Having hved in  the U.S., Ghana and Paris, France, she has  some grounding in music of other countries.  Out of all the new acts at the festival  this year, I was most impressed by the hip  hop (rap) group composed of Tissa Far-  rell, Thando Hyman, M.C. Motion and D.J.  Power from Toronto. (Watch for interview  in a future issue.) Using a variety of musical  forms, these three young women rapped out  direct and strongly stated messages whUe  Power provided the recorded and sampled  musical accompaniment. Dealing with such  issues as pohce brutality against Black people, the oppression of Black South Africans  and the multi-layered oppression of Black  women, they didn't pull any punches. And  yet, it wasn't a tedious lecture. It was aU  done in clever and humourous rhyme, with  infectious enthusiasm.  I was intrigued to hear that Lillian AUen  was doing a kids' concert, thinking that  she might do some from her book of poems for chUdren, If You See Truth. But  circumstances demanded that she abandon  most of the quieter material in favour of  her more standard repertoire: this was because the Oyster Band was doing a concert at a stage placed back-to-back with the  chUdren's stage. Although I'm sure I would  have really enjoyed the Oyster Band (an English rocking ensemble) if I intended to hsten to them, their volume made it almost  impossible to hear AUen and her band, even  on fairly powerful pieces. See Box  Saturday evening I missed several acts  due to transportation of the httle one. To  my great disappointment one of these was  Hazel Dickens, who was here with an aU-  star bluegrass band.  India from page 18  Kalwachwala now works free-lance for a variety of women's and other activist groups.  Meera Diwan has been working with simUar questions since her move to Canada last  year. Making a film about Indo-Canadian  women with the National Film Board means  more facUities and material support than  ever before, but without the support and  collaborative environment of the Indian  women's and activist movements. She has  made links with groups in Vancouver and  Toronto, and her "focus is South Asian people talking to ourselves."  Yet this is a shift in audience from the Indian mainstream and she is concerned about  how to talk to the larger Canadian community.  "How do you talk without exoticiz-  ing, sensationalizing or reinforcing stereotypes?" asks Diwan. "How do you turn images of passivity into resistance?" Questions  that Vancouver audiences wiU have a chance  to consider at In Visible Colours, the international film and video festival of women  of colour and Third World women, to run  November 15-19.  The female star of the evening was  Heather Bishop, whose mass appeal I have  never understood, as I find her derivative  and self-conscious with nothing out of the  ordinary to recommend her, either in voice  or in guitar skiUs. She also has a very  annoying habit of not crediting the composers of the songs she sings. I wonder how  many of her audience assume that she wrote  one of her biggest hits, "Did Jesus Have a  Baby Sister?", which was actually written  by Dory Previn.  In contrast to Saturday, there was nothing in the program strong enough to get  me out of bed early on Sunday morning when all I heard through the window  was a steady rain. The only workshop that  day that stays vivid in memory was caUed  Relatively Speaking—FamUy Songs. Marie-  Lynn Hammond did her wonderful songs  about her grandmothers, taken from a play  she wrote about these two pivotal influences  in her hfe. Judy SmaU offered her droU humour on a song about the joys of being the  fanrily maiden aunt, having the nieces and  nephews for fun stuff but taking them back  at the end of the day. And LUlian AUen's  daughter, Anta, joined her mother on the  story of her own birth, "Birth Poem."  By the time the weather cleared, I had  already been home and dried out for hours,  far too exhausted to consider going back to  the site for the evening, though I heard it  was worth it for those who stayed.  In the final assessment I would have to  say that, although I may not be reporting  on next year's festival, I would not miss it  for the world.  Doing it for the children  by Maura Volante  "I think the most important thing you can do if you're concerned about this earth, if  you're concerned about the ideals of justice, equahty and peace, is to instiU an obligation  in your kids to transform the world," said LUlian AUen, speaking at the Folk Festival about  her current projects aimed at chUdren's audiences.  The Jamaican-born dub poet, hving in Toronto, has worked with kids in various ways  for several years, although she is best known for her high-powered performance poetry  done with a reggae band. As weU as publishing a book of poems for chUdren, If You See  Truth, in 1987, AUen has been going into schools doing presentations on Black history.  "I go into a class for a period or two," she explained, "and talk to the kids about Black  history using materials that I've researched and written, and stuff that they've been doing  in school—sort of contextuahzing the hves of Black people in this country. Once you start  to work with kids you realize that they know a lot. If you establish some basis of respect  they're willing to hsten. And it has to be hvely. You can't go in and expect that they're  going to hsten to you because you're a singer or a poet or whatever. You have to put some  energy into it."  Now AUen is working on pulling together material for an album for chUdren that wUl  combine stories, songs and poems. "I'm working on developing dub stories, 'cause that  seems hke a great form for communicating ideas and messages and feehngs for kids," AUen  said. She also doesn't see a big separation between kids' material and adults', acknowledging that a lot of her work is accessible to kids. "Certainly," she said, "when I record the  kids' album FU be doing the Birth Poem." '  KINESIS Letters  A voice from  inside the tent  Kinesis:  In the July/August Kinesis Sylvia Fuller  raises important questions about the difficulties feminist groups have involving new  members ("Young women tired of ageist attitudes.") Unfortunately, Fuller presents the  issue very narrowly and proposes Uttle in  the way of solutions.  Women who have worked in the women's  movement for a length of time speak a particular language, one which is based on and  reflective of our analysis. In turn that analysis derives from experience. The challenge is  to avoid speaking in code, to make our feminist language, and hence analysis, accessible. More than that, though, the chaUenge  is to impart our history—what we have  hved through and what we have learned—  without being condescending and to continue to add to it by integrating the experience of women new to the movement. All  this we must do whUe still getting the work  done.  I disagree with FuUer's claim that the issue is simply one of ageism, for it affects  aU women new to the women's movement.  I reject her charge of "in-group mentality"  and I am offended by her dismissal of other  feminists as *a closed community of self-  righteous converts." Name-calling and disrespect are neither helpful nor appropriate  in a movement founded on respect and support for women.  Fuller suggests women's groups should  be "recruiting" in university women's studies classes. This ignores the many women—  young and older—who do not attend university. More than that, the problem doesn't  end at recruitment. In the last issue of Kinesis there were seven notices of groups  looking for volunteers. The real challenge  comes once you're in the tent, so to speak.  Again, how do women new to feminism  learn our history in an environment of respect and support whUe contributing to the  pressing work of under-staffed and underfunded groups?  Throughout the women's movement women have organized out of their own oppression. It was lesbians, not heterosexuals, who  first spoke of homophobia. It was women of  colour, not white women who first named  radsm. And, contrary to FuUer's claim that  the women's movement has not considered  ageism, it was older women who first described their experience of being ignored,  devalued or shut out. So maybe it's time  for younger women to come together to  describe and analyze the particular issues  which confront them and to identify the action required. The rest of us can and should  support them in their efforts but we can't  do it for them.  Women's groups aU over the country  struggle to find ways to encourage participation whUe ensuring that what we have  learned isn't lost. In our National Advisory Committee we've discussed the issue.  We've fantasized about setting up a feminist history group, a place where women  new to feminism can learn where we've  come from, the struggles of the past and  how they shape our work and analysis in  the present. Women Uke Fuller could help  groups be more accessible, but not by name-  calling and indulging in sweeping accusations. Don't we get enough of that already?  Lisa S. Price, for the  Women's Research Centre  Vancouver, B.C.  Sylvia FuUer responds:  / was profoundly disappointed to read  Lisa Price's response. While I hoped  that my article would raise awareness  about the necessity of making feminist groups more accessible to younger  women, it seems that, in Price's case, I  provoked only defensiveness and anger,  rather than thought. In fact, her letter demonstrates more clearly than any  thing I would write the kind of condescending attitudes and refusal to reaUy listen that younger women are confronted with.  Price accuses me of presenting the  issue narrowly, yet in asserting that  the issue affects all women new to the  movement equally, she sidesteps the issue altogether. Of course ageism is not  the only problem (nor did I claim it  was). But young women attempting to  find their voices within the feminist  movement face particular obstacles that  are not present for all new members and  which Price is unwilling to recognize.  The fact that feminists have considered the problems of older women is irrelevant to the questions of ageist attitudes towards their younger counterparts. Young women do not expect older  feminists to fight our battles for us, but  wouldn't it be nice if we did not have to  waste our energy in combat with each  other at all?  Betraying  women?  Kinesis:  As a woman who existed for three years  in a women's prison and is presently incarcerated in a men's prison, I have become  acutely aware of the significance of male/  female methods of relating to, and communicating with, others.  After being provoked into an altercation  with a female guard here, I found myself  comparing the female staff with those at  both the Prison For Women in Kingston,  Ontario, and at Lakeside Correctional Centre in Burnaby, (OakaUa). Upon reflection  on my experiences and observations, I concluded that the importance of the responsibility carried by female guards in men's  prisons cannot be undermined.  Overt behaviours of all women, be they  prisoner or guard or in any other capacity,  greatly influence the men with whom they  are in contact. Having the distinction—  good or bad—of being the only female prisoner here, I am very consdous of my respon-  sibUity to represent my biological gender in  the best way possible, given the limitations  of the circumstances.  I am concerned that if I, as a woman,  am outraged when my personal dignity is  denied by another woman, how much more  intense then, is the outrage felt by men?  The behaviour and actions of a woman in  an authoritative role may have grave consequences for aU women. If she abuses that  power by treating men with neglect, inhumanity, insensitivity, or degradation, then  surely she is a blight upon womanhood itself; she may indeed cause further erosion  of any semblance of respect for women that  the men may stiU have. A woman in a role  of power has an obligation to all women,  to preserve what is inherent in women—  sensitivity and caring. To do otherwise, is  to betray women everywhere.  I'm fed up with the denial and the refusal of some women to take responsibility  for their won contributions toward the ongoing brutality of men towards women.  How can abusing people teach others  that abusing people is wrong ?  Gayle K. Horii  Matsqui Penitentiary  Abbotsford, B.C.  Rape Relief  and classism  Kinesis:  I haven't Uved in Vancouver for almost  six years, so I don't know what this current Rape Relief stuff is all about, but I do  know it was going on before I left. No doubt  there is truth on both sides. I do know this.  When I spoke to Regina Lorek about the  feud years ago she told me it was partly  based on class prejudice and I beheve her,  because class prejudice is a part of the Vancouver women's movement, and I've been a  target of it.  After the birth of my first cluld I was suffering from a severe identity crisis and felt  the need of a support group of my sisters.  Despite the agony of depression and loss  of self esteem I managed to phone a number, given to me by the Vancouver Women's  Health CoUective, of a contact person for a  women's group that was forming. When I  phoned, this person informed me that the  group was for women with a "certain feminist and poUtical stance" and was I sure I  qualified?  My God! When they told the Health Collective about their group they didn't expect  people off the street to phone!? I wondered  if I should drop names to show I reaUy was  someone who probably knew someone she  knew, dedded that was beneath me, and  told her that I considered myself to be a socialist and a feminist but didn't know what  her definition would be.  That phone call set the tone for the relationship I had with the group. I constantly  felt I wasn't measuring up. I was first a  housewife, then an office worker during my  time with them, and they aU had "cool  and groovy" jobs working at something that  connected with their pohtical beliefs.  I was put down a couple of times for admitting I hked staying home with my kid  better than working at my mind-numbing  job. I guess they couldn't conceive of boring jobs because theirs weren't. And even  though two of these women had boyfriends  who should have qualified for the M.C.P.  of the year award, I was the one everyone  dumped on for being too wimpy to leave her  husband. I couldn't tell these women how I  really felt, because my anger was too great  and I had to repress it because I felt too  needy and desperate for their approval. I  thought they were the only show in town.  WeU, when I went to a Rape Relief Radical Therapy session it was a whole different thing. I felt accepted and enfolded  right away. The group was a motley crew  of women from aU walks of hfe and I'm  sure many of their feminist credentials were  more faulty than mine. Rape Relief's concern seemed to be our human need and the  system that oppresses us aU. They weren't  into preaching to the converted.  Another thing. I understand perfectly  why Rape Relief would not want the kind of  "credibility" that comes with co-operating  with the establishment. Professionals no  longer have any credibihty with me. In the  seven years since my marriage break-up I've  been really screwed in what was supposed  to have been a safe place for women (a  family drop-in centre) because some male-  identified bitch who is supposed to be helping women and kids, decided my ex had  more credibihty than me because I had the  bad taste to cry out in pain when he was  psychologicaUy torturing me, whUe he was  able to be calm.  Since then I've heard of a couple of  very questionable chUd apprehensions from  Transition Houses that I beheve to have  been a direct result of middle class feminists  not understanding that women in pain may  not have perfect chUd-care skUls. (One was  because a transition house board member  was MSSH personnd.)  I'm a welfare mother and into anti-  poverty activism now. I've been patronized  by enough middle class intellectuals by now,  both male and female, that I know who the  real human beings are!  Sincerely,  Anne Miles  Gibsons, B.C.  Ed. Note: Kinesis will not  publish any more letters  relating to last May's Rape  Relief story.  The last  I would call  Kinesis:  I am at the present time watching Pacific Report about Rape Relief, 7:10 pm  Monday, AprU 24, 1989. I was a rape victim in October 1976. I was found in the  street by a doctor, or rather I found him,  not knowing he was a doctor at the time.  It was obvious from the condition that my  face had been beaten and the fact that I  was half naked and barefoot in October at  3:30 am that someone had hurt me badly. I  had been raped at knife point, sodomized,  my ribs had been broken, etc. The doctor  said he would ask his girlfriend if I could  use her phone. He then refused to let me  in the lobby of her apartment buUding even  though I told him I was terrified the rapist  might come back and find me standing in  the street alone as he had just dumped me  out there.  His girlfriend (an intern at VGH) came  running downstairs to get me and when he  didn't want to let her take me upstairs alone  she literaUy told him to "Fuck off."  She was very understanding, encouraged  me to call the pohce and Rape RelieL The  Vancouver City pohce were also very compassionate and helpful to me. I called Rape  Relief and they said, "We'll be in touch with  you tomorrow." This is 13 years later and I  have dealt with my feehngs about the rape  but not with my anger towards Rape RelieL  Rape Relief called me late the next afternoon, long after I needed help. The intern I  met helped to caU pohce. The pohce helped  me to fill in all the reports, waited for me  at Lions Gate Hospital and gave me emotional support immediately after my medical exam. The pohce were also supportive  when I had to pick the rapist out in a lineup. They also came to see me before the  court date and gave me understanding and  strength during the court appearances.  When Rape Relief caUed the day after the  rape, I asked, "Where were you last night?  I needed you last night!" She had no answer but to say that if I needed someone  to help me through court appearances that  they would be there for me. At that time,  just as now, Rape Relief would be the last  I would caU if I were to find myself in any  other rape or abuse victim or survivor situation.  A few years after my rape I had occasion to run into a volunteer counsdlor from  Rape Rdief. I told her about my rape, at the  time thinking it was possible that mine was  an isolated case of neglect by a service or  that I had over-reacted to their response to  my situation. She said one statement to me  only—"Women that have been raped have  to stop thinking of themselves as victims."  This distressed me very much at the time  because I though she meant I was responsible for the rape. I said, "If we are not victims then what the heU are we?"  She spoke not one more word to me but  looked afraid and guilty. It was two years  later that I learned from Sexual Abuse Act  II in Port Coquitlam the term rape or sexual abuse survivor. Today I certainly beheve  that I am a survivor.  "We'll caU you back tomorrow." I think  it's a bloody good thing the suidde hot  hnes don't operate that way. We need you  when we need you and god help us if you're  not heart-fiUed and honest about wanting  to help.  This letter is meant to support Chris McDoweU and her actions. In the meantime  it has helped me vent disappointment and  pain that has been pent up in me for years.  Thank you,  Vivian Brede  North Vancouver, B.C.  , K'NESIS ///////////////////^^^^^  /////////////////////^^^^^  BULLETIN BOARD  Read this  AU listings must be received no later than  the 18th of the month preceding pubhcation. Listings are limited to 75 words and  should include a contact name and tele-  phone number for any clarification that may  be required. Listings should be typed or  neatly handwritten, double-spaced on 8 \  by 11 paper. Listings will not be accepted  over the tdephone. Groups, organizations  and individuals eligible for free space in the  BuUetin Board must be, or have, non-profit  objectives. Other free notices wUl be items  of general pubhc interest and wiU appear at  the discretion of Kinesis.  Classified are $6 for the first 75 words or  portion thereof, $2 for each additional 25  words or portion thereoL Deadline for classifieds is the 18th of the month preceding  pubhcation. Kinesis wiU not accept classifieds over the tdephone. AU classifieds must  be prepaid.  For Bulletin Board submissions send  copy to Kinesis Attn: Bulletin Board, 301-  1720 Grant Street, Vancouver, B.C. V5L  2Y6. For more information caU 255-5499.  EVENTS  BENEFIT DANCE  To support America Latina Al Dia, Coop Radio's Latin American news and information program. Sat., Sept. 2, 8 pm  at the WISE Hall, 1882 Adanac St. Music by B-Cuadro of Nicaragua.  VSW AGM  VSW's Annual General Meeting will be  held Sept. 6, 7:30 pm at our offices,  #301-1720 Grant St. All members are  asked to attend.  WOMEN AT THE FRINGE  "Postcards from Hawaii," written and directed by Jackie Crossland, performed by  Nora D. Randall. A working woman loses  her job but takes a vacation anyway ...  stories, memories and experiences carried  from Northern Ontario to a tropical paradise. Anza Club, 3 W. 8th Ave., Sept.  12-13, 9:45 pm; Sept. 15-17, 1:30 pm.  Tix $3-$5.  MORE THEATRE  The Philippine-Cdn. Women's Assoc,  presents "If My Mother Could See Me  Now! Imay, Kung Alam Mo Lang!" A  story of domestic workers' struggle for  dignity, equality, and justice in Canada  and the Philippines. Written by Fely Vil-  lasin, directed by Cynthia Grant and Fely  Villasin. Performed in Filipino and English. Sept. 11-12 only, 8 pm, at the  VECC, 1895 Venables. Tix $5-$10. Reservations: 254-9578.  WALK FOR THE ENVIRONMENT  Join Canada's first Walk for the Environment Sat., Sept. 16. Show gov't, industry and the public your support for this  critical issue and learn how to be more  environmentally responsible. Walk starts  at 12 noon at Kits Beach, follows False  Creek shoreline to Cambie, and ends at  Queen E. Park. Speakers include Elizabeth May and Bob Hunter. Garbage-free  event. For more info call 683-8220.  PRINCIPLED INVESTMENT  Panel and discussion on the topic "Your  Principles Can Direct Your Investment."  Thurs. Sept. 21, 8:30 pm at La Quena,  1111 Commercial Dr. Sponsored by  CCEC Credit Union. Call Cindy Shore,  876-2123 for more info.  ANDREA DWORKIN  The Victoria Status of Women Action  Group and the UVIC Students' Society  present Andrea Dworkin Fri., Sept. 22 at  8 pm. University Ctr. Auditorium, University of Victoria. Tix $7-$12. For more info  call Victoria SWAG, 381-1012.  'choice malesU ^  X DON^T WOW 70Uj  £UT J- 6£T 10 DErClDrl  wHffT WILL mftttt  TU V01A IN* THE MEXT  ^ MO/v/TuS,  Kf\ND IVE  DEGiPeD  7&U iV£Ed!  i^fj  M  y\  ^>%^^^mm  FiRST yolA vulLLWEflR  /t WEEK'**  fNSlD£  JT ARE SbrAZ  SPECIAL f EATUfcES*.  A LfcOSS-  V  .^fDU WILL AL60 6E  GIVEN DIET       ,  GET NO ^EDUCATIONS  ,yolAVvMLL SLEEP OW  vfOltf SIDE ONUS  » \/0U WILL NOT FIT  eJftlroP  T^EEL,  OF 70\tf CA&M«&&*  .VD* WILL HAVE TO  LEAVE   YOUR J0&  AWP "WEN   VOW  WILL  &E GIVEN  LESBIAN FEMINIST CONFERENCE  A Northwest U.S. and Western Canada  regional lesbian feminist conference will  be held at the University of Washington,  Seattle, WA. Sept 22-24. Workshops include Fighting the Far Right, Internalized  Racism, Lesbian Teachers, Political Song  Writing and more. Wheelchair accessible,  childcare available. For more info, call  (206) 726-9763.  WOMEN'S STUDIES CONFERENCE  The Women's Studies Program Committee of UBC is organising an interdisciplinary conference on Gender and  the Construction of Culture and Knowledge. Woodward Instructional Resource  Ctr., Sept 22-24, $30 emp., $5 unemp./  student. Opening speaker is Dr. Alexandra Kaplan of Wellesley College. Speakers, workshops focus on the implications  of feminist theory for research and teaching. For more info call 228-4033.  FROM PERU  The president of PUM (the largest organization in the United Left Coalition)  will speak at La Quena, 1111 Commercial  Dr., on Sat. Sept. 23 at 7:30 pm. Music by Ancient Cultures and Francis York.  Call 879-3246 for more info.  E V ENTSIEV E NTS  ART EXHIBIT  "Would You Put This on Your Bed?"  draws on conventions of quiltmaking to  express concerns about contemporary society. Paintings by Debbie Bryant, Quilts  by Wendy Lewington-Coulter. Women in  Focus Arts and Media Ctr., 849 Beatty  St., noon-5 pm, Wed.-Sun., Sept 28-  Oct. 22. Opening Wed. Sept 27, 7:30  pm. Artists' talks Wed. Oct. 4, 7:30 pm.  Call 682-5848 for more info.  BENEFIT FOR SACTU  The 3rd Annual South African Congress  of Trade Unions benefit will be held  Sat., Sept. 30 at the Maritime Labour  Ctr., Ill Victoria Dr. Ghana Dance  Troupe, Total Experience Gospel Choir,  Bafo Nyanga (SACTU Cdn. Rep.), and  Tropical Breeze. Doors 7 pm, Tix $8-$12.  Wheelchair accessible, childcare provided.  Call 421-3795 for more info.  PID CONFERENCE  "PID: The Costs." Speakers, panels, discussion groups on prevention and social,  infertility, and health care cost of Pelvic  Inflammatory Disease. Sat., Oct. 28, 9  am-4 pm; Segal Conference Ctr., SFU  Harbour Centre, 515 W. Hastings. Everyone welcome. Registration free. Lunch  provided, childcare available. For info call  Cdn. PID Society, 684-5704.  WOMEN'S STUDIES CONFERENCE  aSr * &  GENDER  and the Construction of  Culture and Knowledge  September 22 -24,1989  Friday evening, Saturday & Sunday  Registration: $30 employed  $ 5 student or unemployed  Woodward Instructional Resources Centre  University of British Columbia  For more information call: 228-4033  A  GREEN  PARTY  OF  B.C.  STAFF POSITION AVAILABLE  Half time Administrator to manage resource ctr. "for prov. political  party. Office mgt., database mgt., coord volunteers. Enthusiasm,  interest in Green issues, attention to detail important qualities.  Send resume to 831 Commercial Dr., Van. V5L 3W6, Att'n  Personnel Cttee., by Sept 30. Hours and salary negotiable.  Desirable skills:       •Basic computer, Good communications  •Basic bookkeeping,  •Accurate typing (speed not essential)  RACE RELATIONS CONFERENCE  "Beyond the Komagata Maru: Race Relations Today." What has changed in the  75 years since this incident? Exploring  new directions for Canada's multi-racial  future. Sat., Oct. 7, 8 am-5 pm, New  World Harbourside Hotel, 1133 W. Hastings St. Keynote speaker: George Watts.  Panel discussions, workshops. Tix $20-  $30 (incl. banquet). Childcare available.  To register call 594-3833. Sponsored by  the Progressive Indo-Canadian Community Services Society.  SEE NEXT PAGE  WOMEN,  WORK AND  UNIONS  TUESDAY EVENINGS  October 3 - November 28,1989  Robson Square Media Centre  800 Robson St.  Vancouver, B.C.  sponsored by  The Women's Studies Program  The Ruth Wynn Woodward Endowed Chair  in Women's Studies at  Simon Fraser University  VIDEO SERIES:  Oct. 3:      Keeping the Home Fires  Burning; The Women of  Summer  Oct. 10:    Good Monday Morning;  Moving Mountains; It's  Only Fair  Oct. 17:    Caught in a World of  Pesticides;  Sexual  Harassment in the  Workplace;  Yes We Can  PUBLIC LECTURE: October 24  Marjorie Cohen  Women, Work and the Canadian  Economy with the forum theatre play;  NOT JUST 9 TO 5  DISCUSSION SERIES  Nov. 7:      Privatization, Free Trade and  Contracting Out  Nov. 14:    Transforming the Workplace:  Toward Equity  Nov. 21:  Nov. 28:    Home and Workplace:  Sharing Responsibilities  FOR FURTHER INFORMATION  CALL WOMEN'S STUDIES AT SFU:  291-3593  KINESIS Bulletin Board  From previous page  MOJrtm:MJ3  'ORKSHOPSIG ROUPS  IN VISIBLE COLOURS  Tix on sale in Oct. for Int'l Women of  Colour and Third World Women Film and  Video Festival and Symposium. Volunteers are needed for this event which will  run Nov. 15-19 at Robson Square Media  Ctr., SFU Harbour Ctr. and the Van East  Cinema. Sponsors: NFB, Women in Focus, Van. Society on Immigrant Women.  For more info call 685-1137.  TAKE BACK THE NIGHT  The annual Take Back the Night will take  place Sept. 15. Gather at 8 pm in front  of the Via Rail Station at Main and Terminal. A women's dance will follow at the  Heritage House Hotel (upstairs), 455 Abbott St.  DOING TIME  The sculpture/installation by Persimmon Blackbridge, Geri Ferguson, Michelle  Kanashiro-Christensen, Lyn MacDonald,  and Bea Walkus will be shown Sept. 8-'  Oct. 8 at The Surrey Art Gallery, 13750-  88th Ave., Surrey. For more info call the  gallery at 596-7461.  DOMESTIC WORKERS' PANEL  A panel discussion will be held on  Canada's Domestic Workers' Program on  Sun., Sept. 17, from 2 pm - 5 pm at the  Robson Square Cinema. Organised by the  Coalition for Domestic Workers' Rights.  Call Many, 875-8431 for more info.  ELIMINATING RACISM  A workshop for women of colour. A positive, non-threatening environment to explore a variety of issues connected to  racism, internalized racism and internalized sexism. Sept. 8-Sept. 10, Camp  Alexandra, White Rock. Facilitator: Gloria Yamato. Cost for weekend $20-$150  sliding scale. Wheelchair accessible. Call  about childcare and access needs (i.e.  hearing impaired, special diet, poverty).  Registration: Barbara, 251-4356 or Mari,  872-4079.  WORKSHOP FOR JEWISH WOMEN  A group of Jewish women is organizing two weekend workshops for women.  The first, for Jewish women only, is Nov.  10-12, at Camp Alexandra, White Rock.  Facilitator: Bria Chakofsky. An opportunity for Jewish women to explore issues of anti-Semitism, internalized anti-  Semitism, assimilation and Jewish culture. A second workshop for Jewish and  non-Jewish women will be held May,  1990. Sliding scale registration $20-200.  Subsidized childcare. Wheelchair accessible.  SOUTH SURREY/WHITE ROCK  The South Surrey/White Rock Women's  Place #1-1349 Johnston Rd., White  Rock, will offer various workshops, support groups, training sessions and seminars this fall. For complete info on topics, times and costs, call 536-9611.  POSITIONS AVAILABLE  The Vancouver Status of Women  has 5 positions available under a  Section 38 (UI Top-Up) Grant. Applicants must be on unemployment  insurance. Benefits will be topped  up to $339/week.  Applicants must have an interest in-  working with a feminist community  organizaton and a general knowledge of feminist issues.  The positions start September 18th  and run for 26 weeks.  Community Educator  Immigrant Women's Assertiveness Training Project  (Preference will be given to immigrant women)  Public Relations Officer  Door-to-door Canvassing Project  Kinesis Subscription Officer  Subscription Renewal Project  Writer & Researcher/Designer (2 positions)  Single Parent Survival Guide  (Preference will be given to single parents)  The deadline for applications is  September 11th, 1989.  For information about these projects  and the qualifications required, please  call 255-5511 after Sept. 5th. Mail or  drop off applications to VSW, #301-  1720 Grant St., Vancouver, V5L 2Y6  YWCA OFFERINGS  "Theatre For The Terrified." The object  is fun! Theatre games, exercises, sound  and movement, improvisation and character work. Mondays 7-9 pm, starting  Sept. 11.  "Women Who Love Too Much." Based  on Robin Norwood's book, this session  offers a small confidential group setting  with a trained facilitator. Wednesdays 7-  9 pm, starting Sept. 13.  "Career Direction or Redirection." Assess  your career interests, skills, values, and  the type of person you are. Tuesdays 7-9  pm for 4 wks., starting Sept 5.  For more info call the YWCA Counselling Services Coordinator, 683-2531,  local 305.  KINESIS NEWS GROUP  The Kinesis news group meets monthly to  plan for the upcoming issue. Next meeting is Thurs. Sept. 7, 1:30 pm at the  Kinesis office, 301-1720 Grant St. If you  are interested in writing for Kinesis, come  to the news group meeting. If you can't  make the meeting, call 255-5499 to find  out how you can get involved. No experience is necessary.  KINESIS EDITORIAL BOARD  The Kinesis Editorial Board meets every  month to discuss upcoming issues and  ongoing planning for the paper. Kinesis  readers and women interested in getting  involved in the paper are welcome to attend. Next meeting Sept. 13, 7 pm at Kinesis, 301-1720 Grant St. For more info  call 255-5499.  ASSERTIVENESS TRAINING  Vancouver Status of Women will be running Assertiveness Training for women  this fall. The course runs for 6 wks., one  eve. a week for 2 ± hrs., at 301-1720 Grant  St. Childcare and bus fare funds available.  Pre-register after Sept. 5 by calling Tr-  isha, 255-5511, Mon.-Thurs., 1-5 pm.  WAVAW GROUPS  WAVAW Rape Crisis Centre is looking for  women at least 19 years old to do volunteer rape crisis work. Must be supportive  of women and want to work towards ending violence against women. Training be-,  gins Wed. Sept. 20 and runs for 10 wks.,  Wed. 7-10 pm, and Sun. 11 am-5 pm. For  more info call 875-1328.  Women are looking to form a support  group with other women who have been  sexually or physically abused by their  psychiatrists/therapists or doctors. See  Movement Matters for details. Call 875-  6011 for more info.  BECKWOMAN'S  1314 Commercial Dr.  (New Location)  • Greeting Cards   • incense  • Crafts   • Helium Balloons  • Political Posters & Buttons  • Earrings   • Ethnic Clothes  100% Cotton   £  Draw String     Jp  Pants & Shirts  For Large/Tall  People Too!  Open Tues. - Sat., 10 a.m  25  ■6 p.m.  COMMUNITY HOUSING  The Tenants' Rights Coalition reminds  you that a Community Housing meeting  will be held the 1st Wed. of every month  at 7:30 pm, #203-2250 Commercial Dr.  For more info call 255-3099.  COMING OUT GROUP  The next VLC coming-out group starts in  Sept. Call 254-8458 for more info.  INT'L LESBIAN WEEK  The ILW organizing committee will meet  Sun., Sept. 10 and 24 at 7:30 pm. All  lesbians welcome. For more info call 874-  8567 or 662-8309.  POCO LESBIAN GROUP  Meets the 2nd Sun. of every month, 2-4  pm, and the last Mon. of every month,  7:30-9:30 pm. Call the Port Coquitlam  Women's Ctr., 941-6311 for more info.  UBC LESBIAN GROUP  "Dykes Unlimited," the UBC lesbian discussion and support group, meets Sept.  14 and every Thurs. thereafter at 12:30  pm. Women's Ctr., SUB room 130, UBC.  WOMEN'S DROP-IN BASKETBALL  Runs from Sept. 16-Dec. 9 (except Nov.  11) Saturdays, 10:30 am to 12:30 pm, at  Britannia Gym B, (opposite the parking  lot), 1661 Napier St. Emphasis on participation and fun. Cost for ten sessions $10.,  or $2 per drop-in visit. For further info call  Britannia, 253-4391 or Esther, 255-6554.  AIDS VANCOUVER  Volunteers needed to work on the hotline.  If you have a fixed availability one day a  week, please call 687-AIDS  REDEYE WANTS YOU  The Sat. morning arts and public affairs  show on Co-op Radio needs your help,  whether it's once a week or once a month  For more info, call Jane at 255-8173  HEALTH COLLECTIVE  The Van. Women's Health Collective will  be holding training sessions for new volunteers in Oct. If interested call 255-8285  WOMEN'S MUSIC FESTIVAL  Looking for 4-5 women, motivated and  committed to organizing an ongoing,  annual Womyn's Festival in the lower  mainland—to come together and create  a womyn's community for 3-4 days a year  where we work, play and celebrate together. (Meanwhile, it's possible to get  an indoor event organized for this year.)  Skills needed: business, including financial  planning, budgeting, fundraising, knowledge of music industry contacts, and a desire for this to happen. Call Pat 253-7189  FINANCIAL COORDINATOR  Full-time position available with Toronto  feminist book publisher. Call Women's  Press at (416) 598-0082 for more info.  KINESIS  L  VANCOUVER  WOMEN'S  BOOKSTORE  315 Cambie Street  Vancouver, B.C. V6B 2N4  (604) 684-0523  Hours: Monday - Saturday  11:00-5:30 pm  7%  J ///////////////////^^^^^  ///////////////////M^^^  BULLETIN BOARD  HftWIrfl=f»J WgAMUJJB  PEACEFUL RETREAT  Bed and Breakfast located on Salt Spring  Island. Close to Fulford Harbour and  Ruckle Park. Cozy rooms with private entrances. A comfortable setting for women  in a feminist home. Phone Maureen at  653-4345 for info and reservations.  TRAINING AVAILABLE  The Learning Resource Group does research and education on women and  work. We also co-sponsor self-help groups  to assist women seeking or changing jobs.  These groups meet for 9 two-hour sessions in the fall. For the program this  fall, Learning Resources will be providing  a three-day training workshop to women  interested in becoming volunteer facilitators. Training is scheduled for Sept. '89.  Women who are interested in becoming a  volunteer facilitator should call Bonnie or  Donna at 251-7476.  HOME TO SHARE  Quiet feminist lesbian, non-smoker, wants  same to share spacious Oak Bay Home  in Victoria. I like a peaceful home life,  am in a 12 step recovery program, and  would like to live with someone who is  also on a personal recovery path. House  is huge with fireplace, washer/dryer, large  yard with trees and garden. Lots of room  for taking space. Ideal for someone who  wants to share the work of making a  house a home. Rent $338/mo. plus utilities (each). Available Sept. 1 Call Deb  at 1-598-6183.  ALCHERINGA CLOSING  My son has rejoined me and this has necessitated the closing of Alcheringa for  the time being due to space limitations.  I want to thank all the women who have  supported me; I have thoroughly enjoyed  meeting all of you! Best wishes, Phyllis.  WELLS BOOK GROUP  Autobiographies, biographies, books by  and about women. Adams, Barrett-  Browning, Brontes, Carr, Dinesen, Davis,  Farraro, Earhart, Freidan, Gonne, Greene,  Hickok, Joplin, Laurence, Mandela, Mil-  lett, Roosevelt, Rhys, Roy, Sackville-  West, Stein, Suyin, Steineim, Wilson,  Wolfe ... are just a few of the books  for sale. We also sell Arctic and Sea materials. To order write: Diane Wells, The  Wells Book Group, 958 Page Ave., Victoria, B.C. V9B 2M6. Women Booksellers  GOLDEN THREADS  A contact publication for lesbians over  50 and women who love older women.  Canada and U.S. Confidential, warm, reliable. For free info send self-addressed envelope (U.S. residents please stamp it).  Sample copy mailed discreetly. $5 (U.S.)  Golden Threads, PO Box 3177, Burlington VT, 05401.  AD SALESWOMAN  Kinesis has a part-time commission position open for an advertising saleswoman.  We're looking for someone who is well-  organized, responsible, creative and committed to Kinesis. Send applications to  #301-1720 Grant St., Vancouver V5L  2Y6 or call 255-5499 for more info  VICTORIA GALA  2nd Annual Lesbian dinner/dance on  Sept. 23 at the Crystal Gardens with  dance band from Seattle. Call 381-1012  ADRIANNE ROSS M.D.  Adrianne Ross M.D. wishes to announce  the opening of her practice in family  medicine with special interests in preventative medicine, obstetrics and pediatrics  with a holistic and practical approach.  659-B Moberley Rd., Van., V52 4B2; 874-  0261.  VILLA DE HERMANAS  Our All Women's Caribbean Beachfront  Guesthouse awaits you. Beautiful, LF  owned Spanish style villa on long, secluded beach in the Dominican Republic. Small tropical gardens, oceanside  pool, spacious comfortable common areas with large balconies and magnificent ocean view. Private, large, airy guestrooms, sumptuous meals and drinks, relaxing massages and healing crystal readings. Room rates: $300 single; $400 double per week. For reservations call our  Toronto friend, Suzi, at (416) 462-0046,  9 am to 10 pm.  COVER ALL PAINTING  Specializing in residential interior and exterior decorating with a personal touch.  Roller and brush painting, staining, wall  papering. All our work is guaranteed,  quality and clean. For a free estimate call  Barbara Sarahan at 321-9985.  SEEKING ACCOMMODATION  Fifty year-old lesbian N/S N/D moving  from interior of B.C. to Vancouver area,  would like shared or other accommodation for Nov. '89. Responsible and mature. 2620 P.V. Rd. S., C #2, RR #1,  Armstrong B.C.  ACUPRESSURE-REIKI  Give yourself the gift of loving healing energy with a Jin Shin Do Acupressure or  Reiki session to relax and balance your  body and mind. I also use stress management techniques and applied meditation. Independent distributor for Pure  Life products—nutritional maintenance,  colon cleansers, yeast-aid programs, skin  care and herbal remedies available. Call  Sarah L'Estrange at 734-2950 for more  info.  Postcards from Hawaii, featuring Nora D. Randall, plays at the Vancouver Fringe  Festival this month. See detailed listing in Bulletin Board.  SPARK NEEDS A HEARTH  Two women and a friendly cat seek one  or two rooms in a lesbian household in  Van. for Oct. 1. Let us clean up your  junk room. We're willing to sign a 6  month lease, longer if agreeable to all.  Please write or phone Hazel, Box 85, Lake  Louise, Alta. T0L 1E0; (403) 522-3656.  POSITION AVAILABLE  Information Coordinator needed by Vancouver Status of Women. Contract position: Oct. 1, 1989 - Feb. 28. 1990 (4  day wk.) Salary:$1725/mo. plus benefits.  Role: to develop mixed political/cultural/  educational events series, plus perform  some VSW internal work. Qualifications:  ability to organize public events, good  working knowledge of women's issues,  ability to work collectively. Application  closing date: Sept. 18. Please submit resume to #301-1720 Grant St., Van., B.C.  V5L 2Y6. For more info call 255-5511 after Sept. 5.  Woman . .  Let the Healing  Begin . . .  Mm.  Shirlayne's Personalized  Service Includes:  ■ Retreats for Women Only  ■ Therapeutic Body & Mind  Techniques  ■ Home Cooked Meals  ■ Comfortable. Safe. Loving Setting  ■ Cozy Fireside & Bedroom  ■ Nature & Ocean Nearby  -Yoga Workshops -Tai Chi Chih  LAYNE HEALING  CENTRE  133 Spinnaker Drive  C 14, RR1 Mariner's  Way  Mayne Island, B.C.  VON2JO  1-604-539-5888  CHARLES SQUARE CO-OP  Charles Square, a 36 unit housing co-op  in East Van has an open waiting list for 1,  2, and 3 BR units. Rents are $460, $570  and $705 with $1,000 share purchase (financing can be arranged). Near park and  community centre; meetings run by consensus. To get on waiting list, send SASE  to Membership Ctee., 1555 Charles St.,  Van. V5L 2T2  KINESIS LIBRARY PROCESSING CENTRE - SERIALS  2206 EAST MALL, U.B.C.  VANCOUVER , B.C.  V6T 1Z8       INV-E 9004  What goes up must go up  The Kinesis cover price will be going up in  November. Our subscription rate will also be  rising.  Now is a very good time to get - or renew -  a subscription for yourself or 400 of your  closest friends...  Published 10 times a year  by Vancouver Status of Women  #301-1720 Grant St, Vancouver, B.C. V5L 2Y6  □ VSW Membership-$25.50 (or what you can afford)1-mciudes Kinesis subscription  □ Sustainers - $75  □ New  □ Renewal  □ Gift subscription for a friend  □ Kinesis subscription only - $17.50  □ Institutions - $45  □ Here's my cheque  □ BUl me