 *f  Subscribers please see page 7  J  July/August 1987  KINESIS  ^^News About Women That's Not In The Dallies  i_ SUBMISSIONS:   All   s  missions are welcome.  |   reserve  the  right to  edit  i   and  submission  does  not  guarantee  publication.  All  submissions should be typed double spaced and must  be signed  and  Include an  address  and  phone  number. Please note that Kinesis does~not accept po-  |  etry   or   fiction   contrlbu-  j  tlons. For material to be re-  I  turned, a SASE must be Included. Editorial guidelines  are available on request.  ADVERTISING: For lnfor-  |   matlon  about  display  ad-  '   vertlslng rates, please con-  |   tact   Kinesis    For   Information   about   classifieds,  please   see   the   classified  page In this Issue.  DEADLINE: For features  and reviews the 10th of  the month preceding publication; news copy, 15th;  letters and Bulletin Board  listings, 18th. Display advertising: camera ready,  18th; design required, 12th.  Kinesis Is published 10  times a year by the Vancouver Status of Women.  sexism,    rac-  jphobla  and  imperialism.  Views expressed in Kinesis are those of the writer  and do not necessarily reflect VSW policy. All unsigned material Is the responsibility of the Kinesis  Editorial Board.  Eva Kupczynski (fibre) artist  21  INSIDE  0&  fomen's program Review supports equality goals   3  Customs seizes feminist books     4  Prochoice victories in hospital elections     5  Saskatchewan: Conservative government slashes services . 6  Philippines: forced female boxing protested     8  erence a first for Latin American lesbians       9  by Kim Irving  Women and community economic development  12  by Deborah Prieu'r  Legal victory: lesbians together "in sickness  and in health" 13  by Barbara Findlay  Reproductive technology: Will the real mother  please stand up    14  by Pat Feindel  Women's studies: the challenge continues 16  by Margo Dunn  First Peoples Conference 17  by Ezzell  rolk festival preview   19  by Karen Shave  Eva Kupczynski: (fibre) artist    21  by Jill Pollack  Women and Jazz: The joint is jumping    22  by Carolyn Bell  Press Gang: Live at the American Booksellers Association . 23  by Delia McCreary  'ĢfiBffflrifif  Movement Matters     2  In Other Worlds 20  Letters    24  Bulletin Board 25  by Jody McMurray  CORRESPONDENCE^^  Kinesis, Vancouver Status  of Women, 4.00A West 5th  Ave., Vancouver, B.C. V5Y  1J8.  Kinesis Is a member of the  Canadian Periodicals Publishers Association.  ^TVDeseulna^and^camera  work by Baseline Type  and Graphics Cooperative  and Marlon and Sarah.  Laser printing by Vancouver Desktop Publishing  Printing   oy   Webb   Press  Graphics.  Second class mall #6426  mm  j  Jul/Aug '87       1 Movement Matters  LIL needs  volunteers  LIL  The Lesbian Information Line (LEL) is in  a desperate situation. The LIL collective is  down to three women who are responsible  for answering the LIL phone lines two nights  a week as well as all the other important  work that goes with running a volunteer organization.  LIL, an institution in the Vancouver lesbian community, has been working since the  mid 70's assisting women in coming out  as lesbians, in dealing with family, friends,  lovers and children. LIL is a resource that  provides anonymity to isolated women who  have no one to turn to. Whether a caller  lives in Vancouver or Nelson, LIL has helped  hundreds of women.  LIL is appealing to the lesbian community for caring, collective minded feminist  lesbians to come and volunteer with LIL.  Volunteers with some experience with counselling and referral work are requested but  training will be provided for all. A commitment of a one year term is also preferred.  If you are interested please call Kate at  732-0786 or write LIL, 400 A West 5th, Vancouver, B.C. V5Y 1J8.  Labour  posters  Labour history  The Vancouver Centennial Labour Committee has produced a series of six art  posters which explore labour issues and  are intended as a visually powerful reminder of issues such as Immigrant Workers' Rights, Technological Change, The  Right to Organize, Equal Pay and others.  Poster artists included Billie Carroll, Craig  Condy-Berggold, Ken Hughes, Carol Moi-  seiwitsch, Fred Peter and Susan Stewart.  Funds from the posters will be reinvested  in further art projects oriented to working  people and in labour history research and  writing.  The poster series was financed by federal  and municipal governments and the B.C.  Government Employees' Union. Artists' fees  were paid by individual unions.  Posters are available in sets or individually. Sets cost $25 unemployed, $40 employed, $75 for institutions plus a $5 handling charge. Individual posters are $8.  To order, write The Vancouver and District Labour Council, Suite 300, 33 East 8th  Avenue, Vancouver, B.C. V5T 1R6. For further information call Sara Diamond, 254-  5210 or Bill Darnell, 437- 0678.  Successful  conference  The most successful B.C. Regional Lesbian/Gay Conference ever, number four was  held at the University of British Columbia  in May.  The Conference Organizing Committee  focused on issues surrounding accessibility  to in a change from past conferences which  primarily focused on the concerns of white,  middle-class men. Realizing that financial  constraints had often prevented people from  attending the conference a sliding scale was  introduced for registration.  An opening political issues panel featuring Kevin Brown (PWA), Bet Cecill  (VLC), Sara Diamond (CRTV) and Svend  Robinson (NDP-MP). The issues were: concerns of Persons With AIDS; combatting  R.E.A.L. Women; Censorship Legislation;  and Sexual Orientation Legislation.  Registration alone met the expenses and  sor the money raised from the dance enabled the conference to make a large dona  tion to the Persons With AIDS Coalition,  Lesbians of Colour and the Gay/Lesbian  Food Bank.  While the sliding scale was taken advantage of by the majority of the conference  participants, the conference was accessible  in ways other than financial, including a  signer f:>r the hearing impaired and cliild-  care for all events.  Tangible outcomes of the conference  were: an ongoing group for political action  fronted by F.A.G.S., $200 dollars and increased awareness for the Gail Bezaire Legal Defence Fund and telegrams concerning  sexual orientation legislation and censorship  legislation sent to Brian Mulroney and various Members of Parliament.  The conference lacked representation by  self-identifying men of colour and the disabled. A more concerted effort must be  made in the future to include the disabled  and people of colour from the planning  stagej onward. Also, there was very little  representation from groups outside of the  lower mainland. More active liaison with  groups throughout the province is needed in  the future.  Disabled  awareness  Disabled  Cities and towns across British Columbia  are being asked to declare September 12,  Disabled Awareness Day by the British Columbia coalition of the Disabled (BCCD).  The BCCD is promoting the day of recognition on behalf of its Moving into the Marketplace: Disabled Consumers campaign.  BCCD wants local municipalities to plan  special projects to mark their commitment  to improving conditions for disabled people.  Suggestions include anything from implementing an affirmative action policy for employing disabled workers to conducting educational programs to making a local recreation centre 100 percent accessible.  Local areas are also urged to hold a special event on Disabled Awareness Day to  raise funds for a local self help or advocacy  group for disabled people.  The Moving into the Marketplace campaign commenced last March and focuses  on transportation, accessibility to the marketplace and recreational facilities and highlights the potential of disabled and elderly  people as consumers.  If you want to support the BCCD and  contribute to better employment and living  conditions for disabled people write your local mayor and alderpeople urging their support for the BCCD campaign.  For more information about the awareness campaign contact Geoff McMurchy or  Shirley Masuda at 875-0188 during regular  office hours or write the BCCD at 203A-456  West Broadway, Vancouver, B.C. V5Y 1R3.  Legal  resources  on video  Resources  A new ninety-six page booklet on Women  and the Law has been produced by the  The video is produced on high quality  one half inch betacam and is available in  VHS, Beta or three quarter cassette. Purchase price is $85 for VHS and Beta tapes  and $110 for three quarter inch. The VHS  and the three quarter inch versions are also  available on a loan basis.  To order either booklets or tapes or for  more information contact the Public Legal Information Society, 900 Howe St., Vancouver, B.C. V6Z 2M4 or call 688-2565.  Vancouver Public Legal Education Society. The booklet provides a range of up to  date information on topics such as equal-  ity rights, employment laws, marriage laws,  wills, welfare rights, and many, many others. Single copies of the booklet are available for $1., three to five copies cost $2 and  larger orders are welcome.  Also available from the Society is a  twenty-five minute video Canada's Charter of Rights and Freedoms which examines some, not all, of the provisions contained in the Charter and attempts to contrast the situation of Canadians to that of  people in other countries. Information on  human and legal rights in Chile, Iran, and  Argentina is provided.  Lesbian and  gay rights  Human Rights  Equality for Gays and Lesbians Everywhere  (EGALE) has launched a letter writing  campaign to members of parliament seeking their support for the inclusion of sexual  orientation in the Canadian Human Rights  Act.  In March 1986, the federal government  tabled Towards Equality, a parliamentary  report which called for major changes in the  Human Rights Act. Among them it called  for "measures to ensure that sexual orientation is a prohibited ground of discrimination in relation to all areas of federal jurisdiction."  Draft legislation for changes to the Human Rights Act are now before Cabinet and  there are many rumors and leaks swirling  around Ottawa as to whether sexual orientation will be included in the legislation. Of  course there are many representations from  right wing groups against the inclusion of a  sexual orientation clause.  EGALE, an Ottawa based gay and lesbian group, has been monitoring the situation and lobbying members of parliament  and Cabinet Ministers. They need your support as fears are growing that the Conservative government, wishing to avoid taking  a stand on the issue, will delay introduction  of the new legislation until it is too late to  go forward in this session of parliament.  You are urged to write your member of parliament, Justice Minister Ramon  Hnatyshyn and Prime Minister Brian Mulroney demanding that the government take  action on the amendments to the Canadian Human Rights Code. Please write c/o  House of Commons, Ottawa, Ontario KlA  OA6 (no postage required).  EGALE is also seeking donations to enable them to carry on their work. If you  would like to make a contribution or receive more information about the organization and its campaign please write EGALE,  P.O. Box 2891, Station D, Ottawa, Ontario  KIP 5W9.  CN offers  scholarships  Scholarships  Canadian National (CN) is offering sixty-  eight CN scholarships for women, worth  $600 each, across Canada for the 1987 fall  semester. The scholarships are to encourage  women to seek careers in non-traditional  fields and increase the number of women  available in such fields.  CN defines a non-traditional field for  women as a "technical and/or skilled trade  field in which the participation of women  has been limited or non-existent."  The scholarships are awarded regardless  of any other financial assistance obtained by  applicants and may be used by recipients in  any way they choose.  Any woman, whether continuing her  studies or re-entering the school system as  a mature student, may qualify for the scholarships if she has been accepted for the  fall 1987 semester in a specified program of  study at specific educational institutions. A  list of the acceptable institutions is available from CN. Scholarship applications are  available from the appropriate institutions.  Application deadline is July 31, 1987 and  applications received after the deadline will  not be accepted. Applicants will be judged  solely on the basis of their demonstrated interest in a blue collar career and selection  will be made by the school independently.  For information on which educational  institutions can accept applicants contact  CN Employee Relations, Box 8100, Montreal, Quebec, H3C 3N4 or Vancouver Vocational Institute (WI) 250 West Pender,  Vancouver, B.C. (telephone 681-8111).  Meeting  in Toronto  Lesbians and gays of colour conference  Lesbians and Gays of Colour of Toronto is  planning Canada's first international conference for gays and lesbians of colour, for  1988. This will be the fourth conference of  its kind following up on three previous conferences held in New York, Chicago and,  most recently, Los Angeles.  The conferences are great opportunities  for individuals and groups to meet and find  out what we are doing in our various communities. More than two hundred lesbians  and gays of native, black, latino, Asian, Indian and other backgrounds attended the  Los Angeles conference. That conference included entertainment, informal discussions,  workshops on inter-racial hostility, fundraising and organizing and gave lesbians and  gays from England, Canada and the United  States a chance to meet and create links.  Grassroots is the theme for the 1988  Toronto conference and organizers are planning a series of workshops, films, speakers  and lots of time for informal meetings and  The conference is planned for July 29-  August 1, 1988. As part of the conference  planning, Grassroots needs to hear from  you. Organizers need to know how many  people will be coming and are asking people  to write and confirm their interest.  For more information write to Lesbians  and Gays of Colour Conference, P.O. Box  6597, Stn A, Toronto, Ontario M5N 1X4.  COPE meeting  A Committee for Progressive Electors  (COPE) Women's Conference will be held  on September 27, 9:30 to 4 pm at the  Trout Lake Community Centre. Cost $5  for employed, $2 unemployed. Lunch and  childcare provided. For further information  write COPE Women's Conference, c/o 1503  Graveley St., Vancouver, B.C. V5L 3A5.  Movement  matters listings  information  Movement Matters is designed to be a  network of news, updates and information of special interest to the women's  movement. Submissions to Movement Matters should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double-spaced on eight and a half by  eleven paper. Submissions may be edited for  length. Deadline is the 18th of the month  preceding publication.  Apologies  In the map of Africa published in Kinesis'* June issue, Mozambique was incorrectly labelled Zimbabwe, and Zimbabwe  was unlabelled.  KINESIS  Jul/Aug '87 ////////////////m^^^  ////////////////////^^^^^  NEWS  Lesbian mother convicted of  abducting her own children  by Emma Kivisild  There was good news and bad  news for Canadian mothers last  month when the trial of Ontario lesbian mother Gayle Bezaire  wrapped up in Toronto.  Gayle will not be going to jail  for abducting her children. But she  was found guilty on four charges  of abduction and one count of harboring. It is expected the sentence  and conviction will set precedents  for future cases.  Gayle took her two children  from their father's home in 1980  when she discovered her daughter  Lisa was being sexually abused.  She was subsequently charged  with two counts of abduction and  one count of harboring her son.  When Canadian law changed in  1983, another two counts of abduction were added to the original  charges. Gayle and her son Sean  surrendered to the police in 1985  after Lisa voluntarily returned to  her father.  Gayle's abduction of the children came after protracted divorce  proceedings. Upon the Bezaires'  initial separation, Gayle won interim custody. When she came  out as a lesbian and divorce proceedings began, she was again  awarded custody, but this time on  the condition she not get involved  in a lesbian relationship. When  Gayle became involved with another woman, her husband George  was awarded custody.  Gayle says George denied her  her legal access to the children,  and when she finally saw them  there was evidence of abuse. According to Gayle, the children's father had physically, sexually, and  emotionally abused both Gayle  and the children while they lived  with him.  Gayle's trial began at the end of  May.  As well as giving testimony herself, she brought forward a series of  'expert witnesses'. They testified  about battering and child abuse in  general, and her case in particular.  Among these witnesses were Phyllis Chesler, a well known feminist  author; Kathleen Lahey, a lawyer  from the University of Windsor;  and a psychiatrist who did a study  of the Bezaire family when Gayle  and George first began their battle around custody.  According to the psychiatrist,  if Lisa and Sean Bezaire had not  been sexually abused "it would  have been a case for medical journals.'' She also noted that at that  time she had found George a violent man, and recommended that  the children be returned to their  mother.  A Toronto psychologist with  a background in issues of family violence described the behav  ioral patterns of children who  have been abused. "Without having met Lisa, she described her to  a T," says Gayle.  In his time on the stand George  admitted that he had assaulted  Gayle during their marriage, but  insisted he had "just" slapped  her across the mouth. George was  twice convicted of aggravated assault against Gayle while they  were married. He was fined $50  each time.  The key legal issues in the case  ended up being whether the court  believed there really had been  abuse in George Bezaire's home,  and whether the jury felt that  Gayle had abducted her children  Con't on page 7  In late May workers at three Vancouver hotels were locked out hours  before the beginning of negotiations for a new contract. The workers, members of the Canadian Hotel and Allied Workers of CAIMAW.  had offered a three year collective agreement with wage increases  below the projected costs of living as an alternative to the B.C. Hotel's Association's concession demands. The lockout was lifted after almost four weeks and the workers will go back to work under  the old collective agreement until a new agreement is negotiated.  The 220 workers will go into a bargaining backed by a recent successful strike vote. Vancouver hotels involved in the walk out were  the Centennial, the Ming Court and the Pacific Palisades.  REAL Women continue to lose out  by Noreen Howes  The radical feminists all said  'give us more of the same, sir,  more more and more.'  — Gwen   Landolt,  R.E.A.L. Women  Once again, R.E.A.L. (Realistic,  Equal, Active for Life) Women of  Canada lose out on federal government funding.  According to the recently tabled  parliamentary report "Fairness  in Funding", criteria for funding under the Secretary of State  Women's Program require that  groups "work to advance the  equality of women" as stated in the  Charter of Rights.  Although R.E.A.L. was not  specifically excluded in this report, the funding criteria which  previously denied the anti-feminist  group operational funding remain  intact.  Gwen Landolt, vice president of  R.E.A.L. expressed disgust with  the report's findings saying that as  for the women presenting briefs,  "there were only a handful of  grassroots women, all the rest were  radical feminists hand-picked from  NAC" (National Action Committee on the Status of Women). The  hearings were "well orchestrated",  she said, proving that the government is only interested in feminist groups. "Feminists don't support the reality for women in the  1980's" she said. "Today, unlike  in the 60's and 70's, women need  more choices." She added that  R.E.A.L. promotes women's equality "in every way possible," just  not the 'radical' positions of NAC.  "We have a more moderate position" she said.  Some of the recommended changes in the report are:  • the current funding level must  at least be maintained and indexed to a cost of living allowance  • increased funding to meet the  needs of new groups and address  emerging priorities  • increased public awareness of  the activities of women's groups  through an insert included in  family allowance, unemployment insurance and old age pension cheques  • more thorough and critical ongoing evaluation of the funded  organizations  • that self sufficiency be encouraged and every attempt made to  achieve it before further funding  is approved  It was also recommended that  special consideration for funding  be given to rural women, visible minority women, immigrant  women, elderly women and victims  of violence.  Lorraine Greaves, vice president  of NAC, calls the report "a victory for the women's movement".  "Whether or not we get the increase," she said "it's an affirmation of the program". She particularly finds the emphasis on doubly discriminated against women  important.  However, not everything in the  report is positive, Greaves said,  and some items could have detrimental affects on women. For instance the report states: "Those  whose primary purpose is to promote a view on abortion or sexual orientation" are not eligible for  funding.  This exclusion, Greaves says,  contradicts the 'equality' requirement as it clearly discriminates  against lesbians. "Of course we are  concerned and should be asking  for some interpretation of that ...  " The Tory government, she says,  has been trying to separate out the  most 'contentious' issues (abortion  and lesbianism) so that the rest of  the Women's Program can carry  "Ninety percent of a workshop's  funding might be available" she  explained "but not the ten percent  ... the question is do you take the  ninety or risk losing it by fighting  over the ten?"  The Standing Committee on  Secretary of State decided last  year to review the Women's  Program due to criticism from  R.E.A.L., who claimed the Program's refusal to fund them was  discriminatory. The Committee  was comprised of a majority of  Tory members, and one representative from both the Liberal  and New Democratic Party respectively.  C-OA/IA/IEINITARY Letter carriers' strike has serious implications  by Marion Pollack  Marion Pollack is the Vice-  President of the Vancouver Local of the Canadian Union of  Postal Workers (CUPW) and  a long-time feminist activist.  In the following article she describes why the current strike  by the Letter Carriers Union  of Canada is of importance  to women as workers, trade  unionists and consumers.  The current strike by the Letter Carriers Union of Canada  against Canada Post has serious  implications for women. It raises  four important issues: the nature of services to the Canadian  public, equality for women, the  Progressive Conservative government's agenda for labour, and the  spectre of privatization.  The postal strike is equally  about the issue of service to the  Canadian public as it is about  jobs and job security. The Tories want rollbacks in the Letter  Carriers collective agreement that  will mean that all delivery routes  would not have to be covered if the  post office judged the mail was not  "important." This is the thin edge  of the wedge; if the Tories can dismantle the postal service what will  be next? The fight by the postal  unions is a struggle to maintain a  universally accessible service.  The second issue of concern is  the two tier wage system. Canada  Post wants a collective agreement  where new workers will be paid 20  percent less than current workers.  This gap would never change. Ken  Swan, the Conciliation Commis  sioner in the Letter Carriers dispute, has stated that this makes  a mockery of the federal government's commitment to equality for  women and minorities. A two tier  wage system would further expand  the wage gap between women and  men.  The third reason the postal  unions' struggle is an important  fight for everyone concerns the  Conservatives' agenda for labour.  The Tories are out to weaken the  Canadian union movement as a  necessary precondition for a free  trade agreement. If the combined  forces of the Conservative government and the Canada Post Corporation are successful in undermining the postal unions, all workers  in Canada will be at risk. If unions  lose their ability to fight for de  cent wages and working conditions  those with less power (unorganized  women) will be forced to accept  poorer wages and working conditions.  (The postal strike also demonstrates some fairly evident problems with Tory job creation plans.  In the past couple of weeks  the Tories have created several  thousand jobs—for strikebreakers.  While these jobs give short term  employment a whole new meaning the violence such 'employment'  generates is a growing and serious  problem.)  The last reason women should  support postal workers is that  the Conservatives want to privatize Canada Post. The government  wants to sell off the most profitable  parts of the Post Office, marking  the start of a dangerous precedent  where public services will be sold  off to private bidders. Experience  has shown that privatized services  guarantee neither better access to  nor high quality of services. Privatization leads to a decline in wages  and a worsening of working conditions.  If the strike continues, show  your solidarity and show your support for the postal workers. Please  write or phone your Member of  Parliament and tell her/him that  you want improved and expanded  postal service not cutbacks. Make  it clear that you do not want your  tax money going to recruit strikebreakers.  A decent contract for workers in  the Post Office is a step forward  for everyone.  KINESIS ACROSS  BC.  Customs seizes  feminist books  by M. McPherson  In early June, Canada Customs  officials seized two books intended  for sale at a conference of B.C. and  Yukon Women's Centres at Simon  Fraser University in Vancouver.  Caught Looking: Feminism,  Pornography and Censorship, a  graphic depiction of examples of  pornography and Sexworks, an  anthology of writings by women  working in the sex trade, were  "classified as prohibited under the  provisions of Customs tariffs."  Gloria Greenfield, a worker at  the Vancouver Women's Bookstore which ordered the books,  said, "We haven't had trouble with  Customs for at least 12 or 15  years." After speaking to three different Customs officials, none of  whom could tell her the appropriate appeal procedures, the Bookstore was finally sent an appeal  form in the mail.  The seizure was eventually reviewed by Customs and both  books were finally released because of their educational value.  According to Customs, the books  "would teach people what is pornography and what is not."  Before the books were released,  Jancis Andrews, a member of the  Customs Advisory Committee attempted to question Customs officials on the bookstore's behalf.  They refused to give her any information saying they needed proof of  who she was before they could discuss the case with her. According  to Andrews, the 21-member Customs Advisory Committee advises  the Minister of Customs and Excise on public opinion on all imported goods, "from vegetables to  computers to pornography."  Andrews, who said she "has ^  the ear of the Minister" admitted -Q  "there is no point to my being on -g  the committee." •§_  John Russell, spokesperson for  the British Columbia Civil Liberties Association, called the Customs action "An example of the  insidious nature of the power of  the state to interfere with the exchange of ideas ..." Russell says  that Customs "... Has consistently applied a broader interpretation of the obscenity provisions  of the Criminal Code in their decisions to seize material than the  courts have upheld."  Canada Customs' Regional Director of Public Relations, Claire  Martin, was unable to tell Kinesis  how the books violated Customs  guidelines, but objected to the use  of the word seizure to describe the  books' detainment. "Seizure," said  Martin, "is for narcotics."  According to Martin, Customs  does have "an eye on the public  good" and its services are "dictated by the public as far as the  laws are concerned."  The Women's Bookstore is the  second alternative bookstore in  Vancouver which has had books  seized by Customs. Little Sisters  Bookstore, which caters to gays  and lesbians, is currently involved  in court proceedings to overturn  Customs seizures of their material  that have occurred over the last  two years. According to co-owner  Jim Deva, the bookstore expects  to spend up to three years in court  and $50,000 in legal costs fighting the case. Deva called the latest Customs action "...an abuse of  power."  Over 200 women met at Britannia's baseball diamonds for a weekend tournament sponsored by the  Lesbian Information Line (LIL). Teams made up from women's organizations and groups in Vancouver and the lower mainland competed. The championship game, played on Sunday, pitted the Steppers against the Slugs. The Steppers were this year's tournament champions posting a 22 to 14 win  over the Slugs in a hard fought and exciting game.  BC Women 9s Centres meet  by Kinesis Staff Writer  The weekend of June 21 brought  delegates from women's centres  throughout British Columbia to  the first annual general meeting of  the B.C. and Yukon Association of  Women's Centres (BCYAWC).  Held in Vancouver at Simon  Fraser University, the three-day  conference tackled the creation of  a constitution, by-laws, and policy objectives as well as the election of a regionally-based executive. Delegates from the Caribou  region agreed to take on the work  of an executive steering committee for the following year and the  Lower Mainland region agreed to  organize next year's conference.  One of the major questions confronting delegates centred on the  issue of whether or not BCYAWC  should restrict its membership to  women's centres. After some debate it was agreed that the focus of the organization would remain on women's centres at this  time, although the definition of  a women's centre would be sufficiently broad to include any feminist group meeting the Association's objectives and the basic  functions of a centre.  In addition to business and  internal matters, the conference  also sponsored four special inter  est workshops on such topics as  Board and staff relations, homophobia, fundraising, and strategies  for dealing with the new Right.  Throughout the weekend, delegates shared information and concerns with one another committing  themselves to building an organization that would see secure funding for individual centres and political lobbying as major goals for  the Association.  Despite the frustrations felt  by limited time, delegates pronounced BCYAWC's first annual  general meeting a success, taking  home with them new contacts and  information to help their work in  the coming year.  Second annual La Quena Fiesta is a real community event  hi  by Tia Benn  The Second Annual La Quena  Fiesta in Grandview Park will  combine seven hours of music, culture, politics and dancing on Sunday, July 26. The Fiesta promises  to be an exciting reflection of the  Eastside's solidarity with Latin  America and our own community.  Music from four continents will  be featured; fifteen bands in all.  The Mexican group Mez-Me; playing a fusion of traditional Mexican and Bolivian music will headline, followed by the great British songwriter/singer Roy Bailey.  Playing their blend of rock, jazz,  reggae, and rhythm and blues will  be Roots Roundup, a local crowd-  pleaser.  Women's culture, a strong force  on the Eastside, will be represented in part by Aya, an all  women's a cappella group which  combines harmonies with feminist  material. Jazz singer Colleen Savage will also appear.  The rest of the line-up is  equally impressive: Mecca Normal,  The Tools, The Industrial Waste  Banned, Wyckam & Monty, and  Chilean bands Santiago and Ay  Muray.  For the kids, a program to  be remembered: construction of  a "peace village", face painters,  clowns, puppets, jugglers and a  kids' favorite— "pinata" bashing.  AYA, one of Vancouver's best known a cappella groups, will be featured at this year's La Quena Fiesta. From right to left Micki McCune. Norma Jean McLaren, Uschi Schnel, Bev Bradshaw and Jane  Whelton.  Along with the musical program, there will be speakers from  El Salvador's FDR/FMLN support team, Karensa Lai Thorn  from the African National Congress and Helena Cynamon from  the women's section of B.C.'s  Nicaragua Solidarity Committee.  A volunteer-operated community coffeehouse, La Quena has  served as a centre for political  and cultural exchange for over  four years. This role has been  enhanced by the diverse organizations which use La Quena as  a place to hold benefits, meetings, and educational and political  events.  La Quena  "is unique in that  we let other people make money  there,"   says   volunteer   Cindy  Shore. Organizations and groups  can use La Quena's facilities for  basically anything as long as the  group's goals are compatible with  La Quena's statement of principles.  Shore, who has worked at La  Quena for three and a half years,  helps raise funds to enable the coffeehouse to serve the community  better. Last year's Fiesta proceeds  have gone into building a kitchen.  This Fiesta will mark the end of a  six-week fund raising drive to keep  La Quena in operation.  "In some ways it's quite amazing that La Quena is still around,"  says Shore. "It exists mostly because of political bonding."  Women have been a force in the  continuing operation of La Quena.  Of the present sixty-three volunteers, forty-eight are women.  "Men and women have worked  hard to make La Quena a non-  sexist environment. It's a space  women can come to and hold political events and know it's alright  to do that," says Shore.  People can support the July  music festival (Fiesta) by purchasing a button for $3 unemployed, $5  employed, a minimal contribution  considering the hours of great entertainment at the Fiesta.  Grandview Park is in the 1200  block Commercial Drive. The Fiesta will begin at noon and run until 7:30 pm. The Fiesta promises  to be symbolic of what people in  the Eastside community are striving for: solidarity, peace, justice,  and a strong sense of community.  See you on July 26!  KINESIS  Jul/Aug '87 across B.C.  Kamloops, North Van  Pro-choice  wins hospital  elections  by Esther Shannon  While the province's doctors  call on the Social Credit government to reform the hospital board  election process, B.C.'s communities have been embroiled in battles  over who will control local hospitals.  North Vancouver, Kamloops,  and Vernon have, over the past  month, been the scenes of board  elections and controversies which  pit pro-choice and anti-abortion  forces against one another.  B.C. Medical Association president Dr. John O'Brien has implored Health Minister Peter  Dueck to establish a study group  to determine ways the public  should be represented on hospital  boards.  Warning Dueck that the abortion struggle is "tearing apart  communities" O'Brien said that  hospitals are too vital to be subjected to "this kind of warfare." He  recommended that such a study  group would include representatives from the B.C. Health Association, the nurses union and the  health ministry.  Dueck, while he didn't rule out  O'Brien's suggestion completely,  said such a proposal was problematic since it might eliminate community involvement in hospitals.  O'Brien's plea comes on the  heels of hotly contested elections in  Kamloops and North Vancouver.  In Kamloops a mid-June election saw six pro-choice candidates  win positions on the Royal Inland Hospital Board. Abortions  at the hospital were halted last  April when the predominantly  anti-abortion board tightened eligibility rules. The new board,  which now has nine pro-choice  members to the four positions held  by anti-abortionists, is expected to  liberalize the hospital abortion criteria as soon as possible.  The old board suffered through  a motion of non-confidence from  the hospital's doctors who demanded that the provincial government remove the board of directors because they were ignoring the advice of medical professionals. A board decision to refuse  an abortion to a fourteen year  old Dawson Creek girl also generated strong criticism throughout  the province.  The organizing efforts of Kamloops Citizens for Choice, formed  last March after anti-abortionists  took over at Royal Inland, sv. J.._d  the hospital membership from  1,414 members a year ago to 5,800  prior to the election.  At North Vancouver's Lions  Gate Hospital the annual board  elections have been a source of  community division for the past  eleven years.  This year, for the ninth time,  pro-choicers retained their majority. The hospital's membership  continues to grow from a 1977 low  of 316 to this year's membership  of 4,700, up 1,200 from last year  alone.  Vernon's Royal Jubilee Hospital  membership now stands at 3,076,  up from 800 a year ago when anti-  abortionists gained control of the  hospital board. 3)  The hospital's sixty-four doctors resigned from all hospital  committees to protest the board's  stringent new abortion committee  guidelines. No abortions have been  performed at Royal Jubilee since  last November.  In response to criticism from the  doctors that the board didn't represent the community, the board  passed new bylaws to open membership to the public, including  waiving the $5 membership fee  and expanding the electoral district to include Vernon, Armstrong, Enderby, and Lumby. Appointed trustee positions from the  community are eliminated and the  new thirteen member board will  have nine elected trustees with appointments from the medical staff,  the hospital auxiliary, the provincial government and the regional  district.  Both pro-choice and anti-abortion groups are actively organizing  to win control at the next Board  election slated for September 29.  At Vernon's only pregnancy  counselling service, The Problem  Pregnancy Centre, the message is  explicit—abortion is wrong. The  Centre which offered advice to 100  pregnant women last year uses  graphic visual material, including slides, to promote its anti-  abortion message. The Centre's  anti-abortion stand is endorsed  and promoted by almost all of Vernon's forty churches which regularly slip anti-abortion pamphlets  into church bulletins.  According to pro-choice organizer Diane Baldwin the split in  Vernon is between "Saved versus  secular."  A weekend protest gathering against Bills 19 and 20. sponsored by  All Women Opposed to (the) Labour Legislation, drew over 200 people to Grandview Park in Vancouver's East End. The rally, which  lasted most of the day. featured speakers from labour and poverty  groups as well as music and theatre.  Fetal apprehension violates rights  by Margaret Boyes  In late May, an unidentified  woman in Grace Hospital had her  fetus apprehended by the British  Columbia Ministry of Social Services and Housing one hour before birth. She had refused permission for a caesarian section to be  performed and the Ministry apprehended the fetus as "parents" and  gave permission for the surgery.  It was expected that the Ministry would withdraw the order to  apprehend the fetus and replace it  with an order for apprehension of  the child, but this did not happen.  Peter Beaudin of the B.C. Human Rights Coalition says, "Action in these circumstances takes  place under the jurisdiction of the  Family and Child Service Act.  The definition of a child under this  act is a person under 19 years of  age. It is illegal to apprehend a fetus under this act because legally a  fetus is not a person. The Supreme  Court has ruled continually that a  fetus is a non-person.  "Pregnancy is conditional to being a woman, and discrimination  according to sex is against the  law. Medical treatment without informed consent is battery. If a  pregnant woman is not capable of  giving informed consent, there is  sufficient law to cope with the sit  uation. The test for competency  should be the same test given to  all other persons."  According to Nonni Graham of  the newly formed Ad Hoc Committee for Maternal Autonomy,  "Apprehending the fetus renders  the mother a fetal container. It  robs the mother of her status as a  person and the protection afforded  her under the Charter."  Unconfirmed reports state that  there is a high probability that  the woman is a native Indian and  was undergoing methadone treatment. She was in a prenatal program and there is no evidence she  was putting the fetus in any danger.  An American study on fetal apprehension, reported in the May  1987 New England Journal of  Medicine, shows that in 81 percent  of the fetus apprehension cases  studied the mothers were black,  Hispanic or Asian; 44 percent were  unmarried; and 24 percent did  not speak English as their primary language. AU were treated  in teaching hospitals. (Grace Hospital is a teaching hospital.) The  study also reported that out of  15 cases of fetal apprehension, six  were found to be unnecessary.  Grace Hospital is the tertiary  hospital for all of British Colum  bia's high risk pregnancies. The  Hospital's Ethics Committee has  not yet discussed the issue of fetus  apprehension.  A court hearing regarding the  apprehension was held in early  June. At the hearing, the Legal Education and Action Fund  (LEAF) applied for intervenor status on the case. LEAF's position  is confined to the validity of the  apprehension. Because the woman  was neither present nor represented, the hearing was adjourned  to June 29.  Another hearing has been set  for July 13 to address the issue  of the Ministry seeking custody of  the child. If LEAF is granted permission to intervene they will appear at this hearing.  With regard to the future status  of the child, Beaudin says, "If the  mother is not available, this should  not be used against her in awarding custody of the child. She has  gone underground because of the  intervention of the state. Action in  a custody hearing should be temporary and reviewable."  For information about or  support from the Ad Hoc Committee for Maternal Autonomy,  write c/o Maternal Health,  P.O. Box 4656S, Station G,  Vancouver, B.C. V6R 4G8.  BC Coalition for Abortion Clincics plans Oct. demonstration  by Christine Arrand  The British Columbia Coalition  for Abortion Clinics decided at  its late June general meeting to  mount a demonstration for the  weekend of October 17 to coincide  with demonstrations planned by  pro-choice groups across Canada.  The sixty members attending  the meeting heard reports that  indicate the Coalition is making  good progress towards its interim  goal of establishing an abortion  clinic in Vancouver. The long-term  goal is to establish women's repro  ductive health clinics throughout  the province.  Broad-based community support will be necessary to reach  that goal. Toward that end, the  Coalition is encouraging both individual and group membership. A  letter and information package has  been sent to over 700 groups. An  education pamphlet intended for  wide public distribution will soon  be available.  On the political front, in May  the Coalition sent a letter to Peter  Dueck, Minister of Health, regard  ing the report commissioned by  his Ministry entitled "Prevention  and Handling of Unwanted Pregnancies". The Coalition pointed  out the report's deficiencies, and  criticized its major stated goal  to limit the number of abortions  in B.C. The letter also outlined  the objectives of the coalition and  adamantly took the stand that  "It's time that a woman's absolute  right to control her own reproduction be recognized."  A Coalition sub-committee has  drafted an outline  of the kind  of services the clinic would ideally offer, the staff it would need,  the hours of operation and the  preferred location. They are now  working on finding a suitable site  and will be approaching potential  medical staff. A representative of  the sub-committee will attend the  next Physicians for Choice meeting.  For information contact the  B.C. Coalition for Abortion  Clinics, P.O. Box 66171, Star  tion F, Vancouver, B.C. V5N  5L4, tel. 87S-5455.  KINESIS       87JU./AUA Across Canada  Saskatchewan  Conservatives  slash social services  by Nancy Pollak  Restraint is alive and well and  knocking the stuffing out of Saskatchewan, courtesy of a govern-  ment whose politics mirror British  Columbia's Social Credit to an uncanny degree.  Since re-election in October,  1986, Premier Grant Devine's Progressive Conservatives have applied a keen and broad razor to  countless social,, health and education programs. The justification? A resource-based economy  (wheat and potash) damaged by  falling world prices and the need to  tighten belts and reduce deficits.  The solution? A strategy for economic rebirth based on privatisation, contracting-out, smashed  unions and a hungry work force.  Beer and Bingo  Women and children will be particularly hard hit by the PC measures. Social assistance and minimum wage rates are frozen (as  are government employees' wages),  and a whole range of services for  poor people have been slashed.  These include family workers,  the Regina Native Women's Association, counselling services for  low-income single mothers, transition houses and home care programs.  The Saskatchewan Association  on Human Rights lost all core  funding, as did Planned Parenthood.  A recent study of Regina residents revealed a massive hunger  problem, especially among primary school children. Nevertheless, the minister, responsible,  Grant Schmidt, has refused to either raise welfare rates or provide  additional funds to school hot-  meal programs.  Schmidt, a newcomer to the  cabinet and the first to inhabit the  mega-portfolios of Minister of Hu  man Resources, Labour and Employment and Minister of Social  Services, is a Vander Zahn-type of  guy: offend and blame and, for variety, say really dumb things.  Schmidt has suggested that welfare recipients overspend on beer  and bingo, hence their budgeting;  dilemma. He has more than suggested that workfare is preferable  to increased assistance: one hundred people are presently cleaning ditches and clearing brush near  Prince Albert in a program that  offers them $60 a month more  than welfare. (In the budget released mid-June, the government  declared its intention to expand  workfare programs.)  Native people face serious losses:  the Gabriel Dumont Institute, an.  educational facility for Natives,  has been axed by twenty percent,  all Native court werkers eliminated, and aid to no: t\ern and rural communities decreed on nu-  i fronts.  Cuts to programs for the elderly  and the handicapped, legal aid and  health services (Saskatchewm hospitals, like B.C.'s, are chro.iically  understaffed) and education at all  hours of work) and generally erode  labour's ability to bargain collectively.  As in B.C., Ball argues that  his rulings actually favour the  individual worker, implying that  the union somehow represents  an intrusive—and self-interested—  third party in the deal to be struck  between employers and their work-  Fighting Back  For all the similarities with the  B.C. scene, there are also important differences. Devine's Conservatives appear to have learned  from Socred excesses and, rather  than ramming a slew of repressive bills through the legislature, have proceeded by gradual,  department-by-department budget  cuts.  Social service agencies were divided into 'advocacy' or 'service'  levels—make Saskatchewan news  read like a replay of B.C.  Union as Villain  The labour front is another blast  from the westcoast past—and  present. But unlike B.C., where  change has largely occurred  through legislation, the Conservatives have simply installed an active reactionary in the Labour Relations Board chair. Dennis Ball,  a lawyer with no previous labour  experience, has overseen LRB decisions that are rapidly reshaping  the province's labour terrain.  Ball's unorthodox rulings have  set precedents which hasten union  decertification, enable employers  to unilaterally alter contracts (affecting workers' rates of pay and  categories, with advocacy groups  slated for complete funding loss.  Organizations felt compelled to  prove how service-oriented they  were, becoming reluctant to do  just exactly what an advocacy  body does: chastise the government for its policies.  As one commentator said, "Silence became the dominant self-  defence strategy ... (and) we were  treated to the spectacle of groups  thanking the government for cutting them by only twenty-five percent."  But other self-defence strategies have emerged. The Coalition.  for Common Sense, rooted at thei  University of Regina, is focusing;  on educational concerns. In Saskatoon, the Social Justice Network,,  composed of welfare, labour and  student activists, is calling for'  Schmidt's resignation.  Public sector unions are banding together, and another coalition of Native and Metis peoples,  farmers, trade unionists, transition house workers, feminists and  churches is in the formative stages.  WHAT' S NEWS?  by Patty Gibson  Child rape law  A federal law that creates three  new offenses to deal with child molesters was passed in late June.  The law makes it a crime punishable by up to ten years in prison to  touch "for a sexual purpose" anyone under the age of 14.  The new law comes at a time  when there is growing concern  about the impact of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms on  the prosecution of child sexual assault cases. Recently the trial of a  twenty-nine year old Halifax man,  accused of the rape of a thirteen  year old girl, was cancelled when  the Nova Scotia Supreme Court  ruled that statutory rape provisions in the Criminal Code violated the accused's right to fundamental justice. The indictment  was quashed because the defendant was not permitted the defenses that the girl consented or  that he did not know how old she  was.  Dalhousie University law professor Christine Boyle told the  Globe and Mail that Canada ...  "has a massive problem of sexual  abuse of children. We need to mobilize our resources to do something about that ... but instead  we now see some judges saying  there is a constitutional right to  have sex with a consenting child."  AAeech Lake  National women's groups who  fear the Meech Lake constitutional  accord will limit Charter equality  rights for women and minorities  are stepping up efforts to block the  accord's approval by federal and  provincial legislators. (The Quebec legislature has already approved the accord.)  According to Mary Lou McPhe-  dran, a lawyer and LEAF member, the special mention of multiculturalism and aboriginal people  and the absence of other groups  in the clause setting out Quebec's  distinct society could easily "create a context where other groups  take second place. The risk is a potential, but it is a risk."  Organizing for a delay in the  ratification of the accord are the  National Action Committee on the  Status of Women (NAC), the Federation deS Femmes du Quebec  and the Women's Legal, Education and Action Fund (LEAF).  The Federation des Femmes is concerned with the accord's wording  on spending powers on national  programs that the provinces may  be permitted to opt out of.  Gradsearn less  A recent study of 1985 graduates from 15 Ontario universities  and colleges shows that university  graduates fared almost as badly  as the rest of the labour force  in finding jobs. The study also  shows that although slightly more  women than men graduated, males  earned more on an average than  women. The starting and current  salaries of women graduates was  88 percent of that for men. Men  continue to be over-represented  in the natural sciences, engineering and mathematics; women still  dominate in teaching fields.  Abuse of disabled  Disabled women are more likely  to be victims of violent assault  than non-disabled women, according to a recent study by Joanne  Doucette of the Disabled Women's  Network (DAWN). Funded by  the Ontario Ministry of Community and Social Services, the  study's sample population of 30  disabled women and 32 non-  disabled women was self-selected  from women attending two feminist conferences held in Ontario in  late 1986.  Almost half of the disabled  women reported they had been  sexually assaulted as children compared to a third of non-disabled  women. Sixty-seven percent had  ben battered by other children.  Thirty- three percent of the disabled women reported being battered as adults compared to 22  percent of the non-disabled. One  in four had been sexually assaulted.  The report calls the study a  "first step or a sign post pointing at a problem and a challenge."  Currently, programs and services  for victims of violence are not accessible to or geared to disabled  women. (Healthsharing  Welfare  discrimination  An Ontario woman who was denied rental of an apartment because she was receiving public assistance has been awarded $1,274  by a Board of Inquiry.  In his February 18 decision,  Bernard Adell said the fact of  receiving social assistance has  been explicitly made a prohibited  ground of discrimination, just the  same as other awards, but he also  said "The fact of being in receipt  of public assistance does not go  to the core of a person's being in  the same way as race, creed, sex,  age or most of the other attributes  which are prohibited grounds."  This is the first ruling made  under the Ontario Human Rights  Code involving discrimination in  rental against persons on'welfare.  Canadian Human Rights Advocate  DES risks 3rd  generation  A researcher at Michigan State  University has found that a large  percentage of the granddaughters  of mice injected during pregnancy  with the synthetic hormone di-  ethylstibestrol (DES) developed  tumors in the uterus and ovaries.  In addition, as the daughters  of the mice injected with DES  reached old age, a large number  developed tumors, suggesting DES  daughters may have a greater risk  of developing vaginal or cervical  cancer later in life.  It is not known whether the  mice are an accurate predictor or  whether the drug caused a genetic defect. In the meantime, researcher Dr. Bruce Walker is conducting further experiments to determine whether the defects are  transmitted genetically. He estimates it will be at least twenty  years before it is known whether  women will react to DES as the  mice have.  6    KINESIS      JUI/AUQ'87 Across Canada  /#*%<%^#s###^  Federal government slams  door shut in refugees' faces  by Karen Shave  In late June the Vancouver Status of Women and the Vancouver  Society on Immigrant Women presented an evening of discussion on  Canada's proposed refugee bill.  Canada began assessing it's  refugee policy with a royal commission in 1985, headed by Rabbi  Gunther Plaut. His recommendations were ignored by current Employment and Immigration Minister, Benoit Buchard, in the drafting of the new refugee legislation.  Plaut has said, "Ottawa is  intentionally fostering dangerous  myths about immigrants and refugees to justify turning a cold  shoulder to the persecuted."  Last November Canada received the Nansen Medal for its  generosity towards the World's  refugees. In her acceptance speech  Governor-General Jeanne Sauve  said the medal "will inspire even  greater generosity on our part."  But this past May the Canadian  government slammed the door  shut on refugees with the introduction of Bill C-55. The government  says the bill is necessary to control "abuse". But the number of  refugees taken in by Canada between 1978-86 was only 6,376. Bill  C-55 will stop up to eighty percent  of refugees at our borders without  even granting them a hearing.  Camia Weaver, a lawyer who  represents refugees, spoke against  the changes to Canada's refugee  policy at the meeting. Weaver says  there is too much discretionary  power in Bill C-55 for immigration officers. The speed at which  refugee claims will be processed  will not allow refugees time to obtain counsel or prepare for an inquiry.  Weaver also mentioned the  "safe third country lists" called for  by the proposed bill. Refugees can  be deported to a "safe" country  within three to seven days without  any opportunity to explain her/his  case. The definition of what constitutes a "safe third country" has  been left to the government to decide.  Weaver says, "The chances are  very good that the United States  will be considered 'safe', meaning that Central American refugee  claimants could be returned to the  United States which presently deports about 500 Central Americans a month.  The personal evidence of a person claiming refugee status will  not be considered. Only the general view of how our government  sees the situation in the claimant's  country and also the previous  cases from that country will be  considered. "This basis of credibility is totally inadequate," says  Weaver.  Nancie Miller from the Inland  Refugee Society, who also spoke al  the meeting, agreed that the government is proposing an adversarial system. Miller feels that Bill C-  55 will be passed and that amendments to the bill is the best that  can be hoped for.  Frances MacQueen, a refugee  coordinator with Amnesty International, told the meeting that "  ... refugee law is a mirror of its  society." MacQueen says Canada's  refugee claimants are judged on  a point system. "The only way  for an uneducated refugee to get  through is walk across the border  at Canada or fly in ... we take the  cream."  MacQueen spoke of the proposed transit visa, which directly  effects Chileans. People arriving  by air claiming refugee status upon  arrival are now banned. Chileans  travelling by air found without a  transit visa will be sent to the  "third safe country", who may not  want to accept the refugees either.  MacQueen's powerful talk was  more hopeful than Miller's. "Write  your Members of Parliament and  insist that the legislation be withdrawn. Please write ... they count  letters." MacQueen also suggested  people sponsor refugees.  Maria, a Salvadorean refugee,  also addressed the meeting telling  people of her own experience as a  refugee. She encouraged people to  help refugees all over the world.  If it is passed refugees everywhere will suffer the effect of Bill  C-55. The public outcry must be  strong enough to force the government to amend the bill.  zzja.v *.* *f.# *ljm* m Vfc.  con't from page 3  with the intention of returning  them eventually. The viability of  the original custody order was also  called into question.  In her charge to the jury, Judge  Sidney Dymond (a woman) told  them to bear in mind that if they  felt Gayle had intended to return  the children, and was removing  them to protect them, then they  would have to find her not guilty  of the two abduction charges that  allow for a defense of necessity.  The jury (eight women and four  men) deliberated for less than  three hours before returning guilty  verdict on all five charges.  A week later, Judge Dymond  gave Gayle an unconditional discharge on the harboring count,  and a three year suspended sentence on the last four charges.  Gayle is to report once a month  in that time and do 300 hours of  community service. She was also  ordered to seek therapy with the  feminist therapist who did the presentence assessment.  Judge Dymond said the guilty  verdict from the jury legally meant  that Gayle's allegations of sexual  abuse were not true. However, she  said that Gayle truly believed the  children were in danger from their  father. "I think she (Judge Dymond) really believes there was  abuse," said Gayle in an interview  with Co-op Radio's Lesbian Show  last month.  Dymond also said she did not  believe a jail sentence would deter another parent from doing the  same thing.  Gayle was understandably relieved by the sentence but says she  would have gone to jail to protect  her children if necessary.  George came out of the courtroom "enraged", according to  one observer. "I've had it with  these lesbians," he told reporters.  "Where is justice?"  According to the Globe and  Mail, he then hit his mother on  the chest with the back of his hand  to silence her when she tried to interrupt him.  At press time, it was unclear  whether the Crown would be appealing the sentence, and Kinesis did not know whether Gayle  would be appealing the conviction.  Gayle has expressed concern about  the fact that the suspended sentence requires that she stay in the  court's jurisdiction (the Toronto  area) for three years. She is worried about death threats she has  already received.  The Women's Legal Education  and Action Fund (LEAF), which  had at one point said they would  take the case if it went to appeal,  has since said they would not do  so, because, says Gayle, they do  not feel it is an issue of lesbian  oppression. They did donate $500  towards the cost of the evidence  about battering.  "This case is far from over,"  says Sage de Belle, of the Vancouver Gayle Bezaire Defense  Fund. "There are still lots of legal  costs, there may be an appeal, and  Gayle is still in danger."  A publicity campaign for the  summer months is underway, and  a fundraiser is planned for early  September. The Defense Fund  hopes to raise $4,000 of the estimated $10,000 Gayle still owes.  They have also committed themselves to keeping the community  informed about further developments in the case.  "This is not just an issue for  lesbians," says de Belle. "It could  happen to any mother. We're  counting on women to understand  that and get involved in helping  Gayle out."  Donations to the Gayle Bezaire Defense Fund should be  sent to c/o Vancouver Lesbian Centre, 876 Commercial  Drive, Vancouver V5L SW5.  The fundraiser, which includes  entertainment and speakers,  will be held at the VLC on  September 6th in the evening.  For more information on the  Defense Fund, or the case itself, contact VLC at 254-8548.  Subscriber info  Subscribers,  First we'd like to say welcome to the over  175 people who have recently joined Kinesis as subscribers. We hope, and expect,  that you will find your first ten issues exciting, informative and, of course, addictive.  Now on to the question of where old and  new subscribers will find Kinesis during  the current postal strike.  First of all, we hope that many of you will  have received your Kinesis via the mail in  a reasonable amount of time.  However, if you have no* received Kinesis by July 10th (Lower Mainland subscribers) or July 15th (elsewhere), we  clearly have a problem. There are a number  of options:  If you live in Vancouver, you can drop by  the VSW office at 400A W. 5th and pick up  a copy. We're open Monday-Thursday, 9:30  to 5:00.  If you don't live in Vancouver or if it's  inconvenient to drop by, you can pick up  the paper at any of our outlets. See this  page for a complete list. At an outlet, of  course, you'll have to pay and, since you're  already a paying subscriber, that will be an  noying. So, if you've decided to buy this  July/August issue rather than miss out due  to the postal situation, drop us a line or give  us a call and we'll extend your subscription.  If the above suggestions are unworkable  for you and you don't get a July/August issue (you're reading a friend's right now, let's  say), let us know and we'll extend your subscription.  Have a great summer and we'll see you  in September with another terrific issue of  Kinesis.  KINESIS IS AVAILABLE AT:  VANCOUVER AND AREA:  Agora Food Co-op  Ariel Books  Beckwomans  East End Food Co-op  English Bay Books  Granville Book Co.  Little Sisters  Manhattan Books  McLeods Books  Octopus East  People's Co-op Books  Peregrine Books  Simon Fraser University  Bookstore  Spartacus Books  U.B.C. Bookstore  Vancouver Lesbian Connection  Vancouver Women's Bookstore  West Coast Books  Women's Health Collective  IN B.C.:  Everywomen's Books, Victoria  Haney Books, Maple Ridge  NDP Bookstore, Gibson's Landing  Nelson Women's Centre  Port Coquitlam Women's Centre  Quesnel Women's Resource  Centre  Terrace Women's Resource Centre  IN CANADA:  Halifax  Atlantic News  Red Herring Co-op Books  Montreal  Androgyny Bookstore  Librairie Alternative  Winnipeg  Dominion News & Gifts  McNally-Robinson Booksellers  Ottawa  Globe Mags and Cigars  Mags and Fags  Octopus Books  Ottawa Women's Bookstore  Newfoundland  Sayer's Books and Co.  Toronto  A & S Smoke Shop  Bob Miller Book Room  Book City  Book Loft  DEC Bookstore  Glad Day Books  Lichtman's News & Books  Longhouse Bookshop  Pages  Readers Den Inc.  SCM Bookroom  Toronto Women's Bookstore  World's Biggest Bookstore  York University Bookstore  IN U.S.A.:  Chosen Books, Detroit, Mich.  A Woman's Place, Oakland, Ca.  Laughing Horse Books,  Portland, Or.  Old Wives Tales,  San Francisco, Ca.  Room of One's Own, Madison, Wi.  NEW ZEALAND:  KINESIS International  Philippines: forced female boxing protested  by Marie Arrington  Olongapo City is a city of shanties,  shacks, hotels and nightclubs; all for the  enjoyment of the more than 20,000 United  States military personnel at Subic Bay.  Once a small fishing village of a thousand inhabitants and now home to 250,000,  the port is where all U.S. war ships, from  the Enterprise to the Kitty Hawk, to aircraft carriers and supply ships, dock for the  crew's rest and recreation (R & R).  Since these men, who call themselves and  their country "the lone ranger," work so  diligently for American interests, they are  apparently entitled to anything they desire.  Their latest form of entertainment is forced  female boxing.  The women boxers call it forced because  the hotel and club where the boxing takes  place insists the women workers box. If  they refuse they are fired. The hotel owner,  an American and ex-Naval officer, William  'Ben' Hoge, owns both the Casa Blanca del  Mar hotel-resort and the Casa BoomBoom  club. The hotel is directly off the bridge that  exits from the Subic base.  April, union organizer Dennis Joaquin was  shot and killed while he slept on the picket  line. His life had been threatened by the  hotel management several times previously.  An April issue of the Olongapo Express  reported that a Filipino and his two friends  were arrested for Joaquin's murder.  According to the Express the arrested  man stated he was promised 10,000 pesos  ($500 U.S.) for the killing, but was only paid  1500 pesos ($75 U.S.). He also said he was  hired by a local businessman.  While in Olongapo we had the opportunity to visit the picket line and speak with  the strikers and some of the women who  had been fired. The hotel has twenty-seven  women and eight male employees.  All the women have to participate in  the boxing. The desk clerks, cashiers, laundry women, accounting clerk, waitresses and  prostitutes. The hotel's management sets  up sparring practices on Saturday mornings  and all women have to participate. During  these sessions management decides which  woman will box, with whom and when.  Forced female boxing on the Casa Boom Boom's television screen.  Beginning in late 1986, the KMU (The  May First Movement) union started organizing at the Casa Blanca del Mar hotel.  Last January, after a group of workers pick-  etted the hotel, the city of Olongapo banned  the boxing. Hoge's lawyer sought a restraining order arguing that Hoge had a permit  from the Philippines Amateur Boxing Association. There was a hearing scheduled in  Olongapo City at the Regional Court, during our stay there, but it was postponed at  the request of the owner's lawyer.  Last March union workers set up another  picket line over the forced boxing and the  hotel's refusal to recognize the union. In  The women box in shorts, skimpy t-  shirts, sneakers, without head gear or  mouth protection, using six ounce boxing gloves. Watching the boxing the first  thought that comes to mind is cock fighting.  There are three ten minute rounds with  no rules. The success of the fight is determined by the amount of betting and cheering by the servicemen and also on how badly  the women are bloodied and bruised. If a  woman does not fight to management's satisfaction she pays a 250 peso fine ($12.50  U.S.), the second time she does not fight to  expectation, she is fired. The winner of the  fight may receive 120 pesos ($6 U.S.), the  loser does not get paid unless she has put up  a valiant effort, or an especially good show,  for this she receives 30 pesos ($1.50 U.S.).  Women complain of cuts, bruises, black  eyes, broken noses, swollen faces, painful  breasts, cracked ribs etc. The hotel has a  doctor standing by but the women say he  1 sexually harasses them.  During the fight we witnessed, one of the  i women got punched in the face and refused  I to continue. The crowd kept yelling for her  ? to come out of her corner. Her female coach,  i also in shorts and a halter top, kept urg-  | ing her to continue. The woman kept shak-  * ing her head and finally her 'coach' threw  a white towel into the ring. The male spectators cheered wildly. The music immediately began and out came the dancing girls.  Within five minutes it almost seemed as if  the fight hadn't taken place.  On the picket line women talked about  why they did not quit the job. One said  she boxed so her sisters could continue with  their education and won't have to end up  working as she does. Given the poverty  most Filipino women endure leaving a job  is rarely feasible. The women also talked  about the increased roughness and violence  of the service men as tricks and customers  after they had watched the fights. The demands of the striking workers, which include the hotel's sex trade workers, are:  • stop all forced female boxing;  • bring to justice the man responsible for  the murder of Dennis Joaquin;  • recognition of their union by the company;  • re-instatement of the five women who had  been terminated.  The striking workers and the workers  who are still boxing want pressure put on  the city of Olongapo, the U.S. Navy and  government, the Aquino government as well  as the police in Olongapo.  Letters of protest should be sent to:  Franklin   Drilon,   Department   of  Labour   &   Employment,   Intramuros,  Manila,  Philippines.  Chief of Police and Office of the  Mayor, Olongapo City, Zambales, Philip  pines.  President Corazon Aquino, Office of  the President, Malacanang, Manila.  Canadian Embassy, 9th Floor, Allied  Bank Centre, 6754 Ayala Ave., Makati,  P.O.Box 971, MCPO Makati, Metro  Manila, 8117.  United States Naval, Base Subic Bay  Naval Base, Phillippines.  Letters of support and donations to:  Alma M. Famanilas, #54 Mang-  gahan, Subic, Zambales, Philippines,  2215 and GABRIELA, P.O. Box 4S86,  Manila 2800, Philippines.  Sanctuary activist serving time in Texas  fAirheart  Co-operative Travel Centre  Deborah Bradley  Ellen Frank  Frances Wasserlein  James Micklewright  Judy Brooksbank  2149 Commercial Drive  Vancouver, B.C. V5N 4B3  (604)251-2282  CompuServe 71470,3502  Fort Worth, Texas:  Stacy Lynn Merkt, a thirty-one year old  Sanctuary movement worker, began serving a 179 day prison sentence on January  29, 1987 at the Fort Worth Federal Correctional Institute in Texas. She was convicted  of violating U.S. immigration laws by helping Salvadoreans obtain refuge in the U.S.  She told the court she acted in the belief  that the lives of those she had assisted would  be in danger if they were returned to their  countries. This is the third time that Stacy,  who is now pregnant, has been arrested in  connection with her work to protect Central  American refugees.  Eight other members of the Sanctuary  movement were convicted last June on  immigration-related offenses involving illegal aliens and were put on probation for  five years. Lorry Thomas, another Sanctuary worker arrested in 1985 was released  from Alderson Prison, West Virginia in December 1986.  These arrests and convictions are part  of a broad attack on the growing sanctu-  OPEN SEVEN DAYS A WEEK,  10am to 7:30pm  • KIDS play space  • FRESH produce—incl. organic  NEW convenient location  10% OFF for seniors, Wed. & Thurs.  1034 COMMERCIAL  254-5044  ary movement, which includes FBI harassment and surveillance, infiltration of church  and synagogue congregations, anti-terrorist  propaganda, and such classic FBI tactics as  trying to create divisions and mistrust by  sending phoney letters, slanderous in content and falsely signed, to Sanctuary workers. The Sanctuary movement views this  as merely an extension of the U.S. backed  war in Central America Their commitment  to aiding refugees from El Salvador and  Guatemala to come to the States and speak  out about the U.S. role in Central America  is a growing threat to the American government's goal of a pro-war consensus.  Despite the attack, the Sanctuary movement is growing steadily. There are now  380 churches and synagogues in the U.S.  that are Sanctuary congregations; twenty-  two cities and three states have also declared themselves to be sanctuaries.  In February Stacy Merkt was adopted by  Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience.  Sources: Amnesty International, The  Insurgent Vol. 2, No. S  KINESIS //////////////////////^^^^^  //////////////////////^^^^^  International  Conference  a first for  Latin American  lesbians  by Kim Irving  "It's difficult to organize lesbians in  Third World countries", stressed Mexican  lesbian activist Lourdis Perez. "Many of the  women feel guilty about concentrating on  lesbian issues when there are so many other  necessities in these countries. So here, in  Mexico City, many lesbians working in feminist groups don't directly focus on lesbian  issues. Many don't even define themselves as  lesbian but as 'being in love with women'.  So two problems arise in organizing; the necessities of Third World countries and that  many lesbians are still in the closet."  Attempting to reverse this silencing of  lesbians, P£rez has dedicated herself to  working with a recently formed lesbian  group, MULA (Mujers Urgidas de un Les-  bianismo Autentico —Women in Need of an  Authentic Lesbianism).  MULA, meaning mule, is a word often  used by Mexican men against women and  loosely translated means "she's stubborn"  of money, more than you would be carrying so you have to call your friends and ask  'Please come forward with some money.'  A recent major problem for the community, as with elsewhere in the world, is  the AIDS scare. Both Perez and Castelan  were visibly upset as they talked about the  ADDS related harassment of gays and lesbians in Mexico. They explained that in  smaller towns gays and lesbians are being attacked in the street, being fired from  jobs and in some places have had their  heads shaved. Reactionary groups are holding public demonstrations against 'homosexuals' and forcing many out of the towns.  All this is being ignored by the police.  Much of the scare has been caused by inaccurate media reports which target homosexuals. The government also contributes  to misinformation about AIDS. In a recent  public address Mexico's Minister of Health  said one could get AIDS from towels, sweat  and even tears.  Lesbian activists Lourdis Pe>ez and Alida Castela.  or "hindered". By reclaiming the word, the  group hopes to present a strong lesbian  voice, one which is "stubborn and carries a  very heavy load."  Since 1985 MULA has presented several  workshops on lesbian sexuality, identity and  a workshop for non-orgasmic women. The  groups' objective is to "face and analyze  the sexual, political, individual and collective conditions of lesbians in our society."  Kinesis interviewed Perez and her partner, Alida Castelan, another MULA member, about lesbian concerns and activities in  Mexico.  AIDS Scare New Threat  Mexican lesbians are much more oppressed  by all levels of society than are their North  American counterparts.  Police harassment is not unusual, as gays  and lesbians can be arrested under a "fault  and moral" law. Transvestites, butch lesbians and "locas" (crazy girls), what Mexicans call effeminate men, are the main targets.  "Police will often demand money," said  Perez "and if you don't pay they say they'll  call a photographer from one of the (sensational) tabloids, or they might say 'I'll call  your parents'. They will usually ask for a lot  Even though lesbians are a low risk  group, they are being categorized with gays  ."because when the media prints 'homosexual' the people read feminine and masculine" explained P6rez.  "Now, when homosexual groups print petitions supporting their position we demand  that they include a statement saying lesbians are a low risk group. Otherwise, we  won't endorse it."  MULA is quickly trying to put together  information on lesbians and AIDS, information they desperately lack. Their biggest  fear is becoming a reality, lesbians are retreating, going back to the closet, afraid to  be involved in any public or political work.  Conference a First  It's an unfortunate time for lesbians to  be pulling back as this fall, October 14-  17, Mexico City lesbians will host the  first Encuentro (encounter-conference) of  Latin American and Caribbean lesbian-  feminists. The Encuentro, originally proposed at the Eighth International Lesbian  Conference in Geneva last March (see Kinesis July/August, 1986), is meant to bring  together Latin American and Caribbean  lesbian-feminists "in order to analyze our  situation is each of our countries and to  work together to find solutions to the problems we face."  The Geneva conference also decided that  the first Encuentro would be held a week before the already scheduled Fourth Encuentro of Latin American and Caribbean Feminists (Oct. 18-25), also in Mexico City, so  women could attend both events.  "There has been tension between the two  Encuentros," said Pe>ez. "We had to explain to the Feminist Encuentro organizers  about the needs of the lesbian community  and our right to organize separately. There  has always been a lack of space within the  hetero-feminist community for lesbians."  Although the Encuentro is strictly a  Latin American and Caribbean conference,  non-Latina lesbians will be allowed to attend. "It had been suggested that white  women should not be allowed," said Perez  "but it was decided that yes, they can come,  otherwise we might lose the goals of the Encuentro. These women must find out what  it is like to be a Third World lesbian, plus  we'd like to exchange information. So we decided one hundred non-latina women could  "But, we are sorry to say," said Castelan, "that we are being very selective of  who these one hundred women are. We want  women who have written about lesbianism  and women who are sensitized to Third  World latina problems. This way we don't  have to lose time explaining who we are and  what we are doing. We also want women  who would be interested in filming or videotaping the conference—provided we get a  copy."  "We are interested in women from the  U.S. and Canada, as we import your theories. Whenever there's a political debate in  your countries, for example SM we know  eventually it'll come to Mexico. So we want  ongoing connections and information."  P£rez warned that women should not ex- •  pect conditions at the Encuentro to be like  "the first world". "The Encuentro will be  in accordance to the economic ability of our  country" said Perez. "Everyone has to do  their own cleaning, bring their own sleeping  bag, cup and plates. We have to assume collective responsibility."  Costs for the Encuentro are as follows: for non-Latinas $150-$250 (American), for Latin Americans and Caribbeans  $50 (American), and for Latinas not residing in their country $80-$120 (American).  Three hundred spaces are set aside for Latin  American and Caribbean lesbians, one hundred for Latinas residing outside.  Security precautions for the Encuentro  are receiving major attention from organizers. Only three of the organizers will know  the location of the Encuentro until the last  possible moment. Lesbians attending the  Encuentro will be asked to refrain from any  public demonstrations. Such events could  threaten the lives of lesbians from more re  pressed countries, such as Uruguay or Chile,  who take great risks in just coming to the  conference.  Funds Urgently Needed  Financing becomes a major headache for  any conference organizer, the First Encuentro being no exception. Organizing is  more difficult for Mexican lesbians in part  because they cannot publicly solicit for  funds. They are dependent on raising money  through their own community, with parties  or cultural events.  In one fundraising campaign, they mailed  over seventy lesbian telegrams to international groups and individuals, asking for  pledges. So far, not one reply has been received. This lack of international support  (unless reversed) will eliminate the opportunity for some lesbians to attend. The less  money that is raised, the fewer subsidies  there are, and the fewer Third World lesbians who will be able to attend.  Yet Encuentro organizers are optimistic.  They even have a "special offer" ... for  a minimum contribution of $20 (American)  you will receive a poster "depicting sophisticated pre-hispanic (lesbian) sexual techniques which have been passed down to us  by our foremothers and are unknown to the  first world". So even if you can't attend the  conference, you can still share in a part of it.  I asked Perez and Castelan if there was  anything they wanted to say to Canadian  lesbians and feminists. Both expressed an  interest in knowing more about Canadian  lesbians and, as well, they wanted Canadian  lesbians to know more about them.  "It's important for other lesbians to know  we have things to share and we have important things to say."  Both felt equally concerned about pohtical relations between the 'first world' and  the Third World. "Lesbians must not forget  that the first world is oppressing the Third  World and that your Third World lesbian  sisters are having a difficult time. So we ask  you to open up your field of thinking, not  just on a local basis—but also on an international one."  To donate money to Encuentro:  bank to bank transfer, Arte y Sociedad, A.C., Cuenta No. 1005016-  2, Banco International, SWC, Soc.  29 Huipulco, Calz. Tlalpan 8604, CP  14870 Mexico DF, Mexico.  For international money orders, Arte  y Sociedad, AC, Apartado Postal 22884,  1400 Mexico DF, Mexico  For the addresses of the conference  organization or lesbian groups in Mexico, contact Kinesis.  This article has been edited for  length. Kim Irving is a member of  the Kinesis Editorial Board. She has  been travelling and working in Central  America for the past ten months. A further article on feminist organizing in  Mexico will appear in a later issue.  KINESIS  '87 Jul/Aug SSSWS&s  INTERNATIONAL  Chileans give testimony in fabric  by Carmen Rodriguez  It is the same National Stadium of almost fourteen years  ago. The stadium where thousands were kept prisoner for weeks;  where women and men of all ages  vere seen for the last time before  'disappearing" in the hands of the  dictatorship's secret police.  The stadium that became a  symbol of the repression imposed by the United States-backed  Chilean military, after the coup  d'etat of September 11, 1973.  But today, April 2, 1987, Santiago's National Stadium is filled  with thousands of students, workers, office clerks, housewives, unemployed, shanty town dwellers.  After fourteen years of silence by  decree, the people of Chile have  taken advantage of the Pope's visit  and have gathered to give public  testimony of their hves in today's  Chile.  Luisa Riveros, a shanty town  dweller of "Poblacion Violeta  Parra" speaks firmly and clearly to  the attentive crowd, in spite of the  intimidating microphones and TV  "As a christian and as a shanty  town dweller I have to tell you  about some of our many sorrows  and our few joys. We are mothers and wives who only want the  well being of our families. But this,  which may sound so simple, is very  difficult for us.  Example of Chilean arpillera art work.  Sri Lanka  Booming business in babies  by Kinesis Staff Writer  Sri Lankan babies are being sold  throughout Europe, with as many  as 20,000 a year sold to West German couples. The baby market has  seen some infants sold for up to  $8,000, while the mother is paid  around $50. Agents involved in the  sales make the profits.  Argentina  marriage law  by Kinesis Staff Writer  The baby market expanded  from the ayah trade, where Sri  Lankan women work as housemaids in Arab countries. In the  past five years, over 10,000 women  have worked as ayahs throughout  the Gulf states, including Egypt,  Jordan, Syria and Lebanon.  Many ayahs return from their  jobs pregnant, because few have  any access to birth control or even  information about pregnancy, hi  Sri Lanka, where a woman's virginity is still regarded as a holy attribute, the women have no alter  native but to seek out illegal agencies which take them in while they  are pregnant. In return the agencies take the babies away as soon  as they are born and sell them to  European buyers.  The booming baby export business may soon be facing harder  times as a government sponsored  commission is studying Sri Lankan  adoption laws and is expected to  make recommendations to curb  the trade.  Spare Rib  "Due to unemployment and  very low salaries, we hve in anguish because money is never  enough and for that reason they  cut off our electricity and water.  Many times our husbands and children go into alcohol and drugs,  and in that way, our homes are destroyed.  "We are very worried about our  kids' lives. We bring them into this  world with much love but today it  has become very difficult to bring  them up in a good way. Many  of our kids are malnourished and  when they get sick, we can't find  appropriate care because we have  to get up at five in the morning to  get a number in the public hospital.  "Also, everyday it becomes  more and more difficult to send  them to school and education for  us, the poor, has become really  bad. It is even worse now, due to  the many teachers that have been  laid off.  "Our houses are extremely bad.  They are small and they become  ^ even smaller when we have to put  g* up our relatives in need and our  o kids when they get married ...  | "We go to visit the political  j- prisoners and those who have been  % tortured and all we ask for is jus-  S, tice; we ask for the return of the  |: exiles. We stand in solidarity with  3 the relatives of the "disappeared"  ^ and we want to be listened to and  B   respected ..."  ¬a   Disguised Violence  The two kinds of violence that  Chilean people have been subjected to for the last fourteen  years are well illustrated by Luisa  Riveros. On the one hand, the  overt repression that the world  knows about. On the other hand,  the disguised violence of a system  whose mandate is to ensure that  the few rich get richer at whatever  cost.  In face of this, shanty town  women have become both the  worst victims of the regime and  the motors of new kinds of struggle and organization. Confronted  with unemployment and/or low  salaries, women have had to go out  of the home and work at the most  exploitative jobs: doing domestic  work for the rich or working for the  government itself in the so-called  "minimum wage projects."  For $25 (U.S.) a month, women  "beautify" the rich sectors of the  cities, planting flowers, watering-  gardens, sweeping and washing the  Divorce and remarriage will become legal in Argentina under legislation that was adopted in early  May by the Senate.  Up to now, Argentina was one  of only seven countries in the  world that completely prohibited  divorce. The new law will allow divorce by mutual consent after a  couple has been separated for a  year.  The new divorce provisions were  passed over the overwhelming opposition of the Roman Catholic  Church, which still has considerable influence in Argentinean society.  Other countries which prohibit  any form of divorce include Ireland, Philippines and Paraguay.  NZ anti-abortionists fight with fire  by Kinesis Staff Writer  Abortion access in New Zealand  has been threatened recently by  a wave of arson attacks by anti-  abortion groups.  In April, five fires at Auckland's  Epsom Day Hospital closed the  hospital's operating theatres leaving only one Auckland hospital  available for abortion services.  The private Auckland Medical  Aid Chnic, at times the only abortion clinic in the country, has been  set fire to three times and has been  forced to move in a bid to find  more secure facilities.  The Women's National Abortion Action Campaign sees the arson as the latest in a series of attacks on legal and government services and is demanding that the  country's police investigate anti-  abortion groups. The attack on the  Epsom Hospital brought virtually  no media comment and no reaction  from government.  The continuing attacks have  worried health workers who believe they may be victims of the  next arson attempt. Nursing union  members have spoken out against  the arson as "emotional blackmail", saying they are powerless to  protect union members or women  seeking abortion services.  While arson attacks are the  most dramatic incidents New  Zealand women have to contend  with, hospital boards are also  falling victim to anti-abortionists.  Recently the Superintendent of the  Wairarapa Hospital refused to allow the hospital to hold a license to  perform abortions on the grounds  that such a license was inconsistent with his conscience.  Broadsheet   streets. After having walked two  hours to work and two hours back,  they clean their own houses (without the help of a vacuum cleaner  ... ), wash clothes by hand and  struggle with the family budget in  order to put a plate of food on the  table.  In the mid 70's, these hardships led women to look for alternative solutions to their situation. At a time when political parties, unions, associations and community organizations had been  smashed to the ground, women began to get together in order to  help each other meet the most basic needs of their families; thus,  the first soup-kitchens came into  existence. And from the soup-  kitchens grew the human rights organizations, the food co-ops, the  "pobladores" associations and the  "talleres artesanaels" (handicrafts  workshops).  Each poblaci6n (shanty-town)  has several workshops. The women  meet periodically to discuss the  specific tasks and to work out organization matters. All the work  is done collectively, from the purchasing of raw materials to the actual making of the handicrafts and  on to the marketing of the final  products.  While the government remains  hostile and does not support the  talleres in any way, church, nongovernmental and international  development agencies are helping  the groups with some financing  and marketing.  Some groups have chosen to  spin lamb and angora wool; others  crochet or knit sweaters, scarves  and dresses. Some women have  discovered creative ways of working cotton thread into curtains  and tablecloths. A few are weaving  wool into bags and belts or making clay artifacts. But the groups  that have managed to best represent the hardships and the dreams  of Chilean shanty town women  in their search for an additional  source of income are the "arpil-  leristas" (see Kinesis , February,  1987).  Vivid Commentary  Arpilleras are appliqued wall  hangings comprised of colorful recycled cloth scraps. They portray  the reality of their makers and as  such are the most vivid commentary on the socio-political situation of the Chile of today. The  arpilleristas are the many Luisa  Riveros of the Chilean barrios who  have found a collective voice to  communicate with the world.  "One day I didn't know what  theme to choose for the arpillera,  so I said to myself, I am going to do  something that is happening to us.  My children were hungry and that  is how I began to make what was  happening to us," an arpillerista  says.  Empowered by their newly  found inner strength and proud of  their ability to produce a beautiful and marketable item, Chilean  shanty town women have thus become the heart of a people that  strive for change and justice.  As Luisa Riveros told the Pope  and the people of the world: "We  want a fife of dignity for everybody, without the dictatorship."  10 KINESIS Jul/Aug '87 //////////'////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////A  /////////////////////^^^^^  by Nora Randall  I hope you read this column lying on your  back in the grass, looking up at a blue sky.  Or better yet lying on your back in the grass  looking up at the sky and watching your kite  as it dips and soars and tugs gently on the  spool of string in your hand.  Your imagination can go up with the kite  and just drift around in the sky, go with  whatever little current comes along; while  your body, back on the ground, has little important tasks to perform so it isn't left out.  It has to hold the string and decide when to  let out and when to reel in, but all this can  be accomplished in absolute comfort. Flying a kite is the cheapest way to get out of  town and it has saved me many times.  This has not always been the case. The  kites of my childhood were a bane. I can  remember trying to fly a kite for several  springs when I was around nine years old.  There I would be running like a sucker up  and down the field near the railroad tracks  trying to get my kite to fly.  After each unsuccessful attempt I had to  pick my way through a jungle of variables—  tail too long, tail too short, tail too heavy,  tail too light, wind not strong enough (wind  was never too strong), running in the wrong  direction (suck finger and hold it up in the  air—which side dries first? Does that mean  I should be running from the tracks to the  road or from the landfill to the school yard  or vice versa or diagonally?) There was also  the question of how much string to give the  kite when I ran with it and how fast I should  be running, though the answer to that was  invariably faster than you can.  After enough attempts to become totally  confused and frustrated about the mechanics of flight, I would take my kite and go  home. Once in awhile an older boy would  take pity on me and try to launch my kite,  but they didn't always succeed. Even when  they did, I was disappointed. I didn't care  that they could fly my kite, I wanted to do  it myself. Not a promising beginning for a  great friendship.  It wasn't until I was in my thirties that I  was re-introduced to kite flying and I found  it magically transformed. A man I knew for  about six months solely because we were  both totally miserable, took me to Jericho  beach and gave me a delta bat kite and a  roll of string. I put the crossbar in the kite,  held it up and let go and it went straight  up. The more string I let out the higher it  went. That was it. I was flying a kite.  The delta design doesn't need a tail and  if you're standing next to the ocean on the  edge of a continent, you don't have to run up  and down the way you do in a flat river town  2500 miles inland. All I had to do with my  bat at Jericho beach was tug on the string  if it started to fall and let out more string  if it pulled. I was thrilled. I bought my own  LIFE STORIES  SNV39^  She likes to fly kites to  the heights - it feels right  ^^^^^^^o^^^^^^^f  BEANS  iiiiiiiiiiiiiiil  w>at kite. It cost a buck. Soon I acquired several bat kites and colorful wooden spools for  my kite string. Then I took the plunge and  bought a rainbow dragon kite for fourteen  dollars. It was beautiful.  I flew my kites at Jericho and at the  point behind the planetarium. I took them  on camping trips and flew them in Oregon  and on Vancouver Island.  I discovered things and had adventures.  The security guards at the planetarium will  go up on the roof and retrieve your dollar  kite. Once a kite is caught in a tree, it is  extremely unlikely that you will free it by  yanking on the string, but you can still enjoy seeing it fly. It's just in a tree and not  the sky.  A plastic kite will still fly after it has  fallen into a pond and sunk (provided you  can get it out). If kites tear or a stick comes  loose they will plunge straight down and you  will be faced with piles of string that form  into large balls of knots.  In fact, forming knots is a favorite pastime of kite string much the same way kite  flying is my favorite pastime. As time went  on and my kites got older I seemed to be  spending more and more time untangling  knots and less time flying kites. This was not  surprising, but what shocked the pants off  me was realizing that I didn't mind. There  was something very soothing about untangling knots. It seemed like the right thing  for me to be doing.  HIHIHIJI  I could look down at this large mass of  string in my hands and kind of rub it gentry so it would loosen up a little and then  tug it apart a bit. Pretty soon a knot would  separate itself from the mass and if I played  with it loosely for awhile I could often discover just which string to pull to untie it.  Sometimes I never did see just which string  but the knot came untied anyway. So I spent  many hours sitting next to my kite in the  sun and rolling a mass of knots around in  my hands. I got pretty good at untangling  string.  This year I bought a new kite, one of  those traditional diamond shaped ones that  need a tail. I took it to the planetarium, tied  the tail on the end of the stick, held it over  my head and it went straight up and lazed  around with my thoughts for about an hour.  Then a stick came loose and it plunged into  the pond. I thought I was back in a familiar place but I reeled in the entire line and  hauled my kite up from the depths without a single knot. Something's changed, I  thought. And I went home happy.  I mention this because I was complaining  to a friend of mine that I was very busy,  sick and that my column was due and I  didn't know what to write about. She had  just come through a period of activity that  had blown her circuits. She said write about  women who take on too much, work too  hard andjhen burn out and are miserable.  SUPPORT  WOMEN  IN DU 5INE55  Down Home  RENOVATORS  J RENOVATIONS. NEW CONSTRUCTIONS. DECKS, FENCES. ETC.  J 2561 TRINITY STREET  2 VANCOUVER, B.C. V5K1E3 (604) 251-3159  :  ;; INFORMATION  ::: AUTOMATION  ANN DOYLE  GRANDVIEW REALTY LTD.  MARLENE HOLT  253-4111      RES: 255-5027  1676 Charles Street. Vancouver, B.C. V5L 2T3  n»»m»»»»»»nmmi( i «i»nn»..n».i.«.»H...i'  The Alexander  Technique  Relieves back pain, excessive  fatigue, poor posture and physical  tension. Learn to move with  flexibility and ease in daily activities,  work, performing arts, and sport.  JULIA BRANDRETH   (604)684-2541  KATHY TEMPLETON, m.Sc.,C.f.p.  Personal Sc Relationship Counselling  Financial Counselling  (604) 224-3155  2668 Crown Street Vancouver, B.C. V6R 3W1  iiwwii»»»ffl»i8iijaq ;  JANET M. LICHTY, B.A., M.Ed.  COUNSELLING PSYCHOLOGY  gvlACPHEIfSON ^MOTORS  885 E 8th Ave., Van.  876-6038  BYAPPOINTMENT  donna Les/. M.T.  THE VANCOUVER BLOCK  419-736 GRANVILLE ST.  VANCOUVER. B.C.  \  cAHcecJWacpherson.  licensed mechanic  (604) 874-6982  THERAPIST/CONSULTANT       SEXUAL   ABUSE  (604)    254-8107 Economics  XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX^  N^^x^^^^^xxxxxx^^^^^^  Community economic development  Promising a new future  by Deborah Prieur  Begin with empowerment.  Begin to see the possibilities for women  to gain greater economic control over their  lives and futures.  Economic development has traditionally  meant creating or expanding a community, region or country's economy. It usually  takes place because a corporation or individual sees development as a way to make  profits. The "benefits" to the people lie in  the creation of wealth or jobs. In this traditional economic development model, the  people whose lives will be directly affected  do not have a voice in the development decisions.  An alternative to traditional economic  development  is being discussed and  at- £  tempted in communities around the world,   c  This alternative is CED, community based  «  economic development. jS  The roots of CED are in the co-operative ^  movement and in the economic and social ^  goals of various progressive groups through- ^  out the country. 0  CED differs from conventional economic j*  development because it is an integrated approach which takes the social, economic,  cultural and environmental well-being of the  community into account. In practical terms,  this means consideration of the effects of  economic decisions on households, communities and, ultimately, our planet.  Collective Solutions  CED involves looking at the community  resources (human, financial and natural),  discovering the real needs of the community  for goods and services and trying to link the  two. It emphasizes stable employment in a  context of responsible use of resources, local control over decisions, greater community self-reliance and an appropriate use of  technology.  CED emphasizes not-for-profit enterprises. The projects need to make a profit  to survive but the profit is a means not an  end. The goal is to ensure that profits are  used in ways that benefit the community,  bringing a collective solution, not an individual one, to unemployment and community development.  How can CED benefit women? First, let's  look at the economic realities Canadian  women face. We work long hours for low  pay, we are often the last hired, first fired,  seldom unionized and given little recognition for our economic contribution. We  make up the hidden underemployed and unemployed due to our traditional work responsibilities in the home and the lack of adequate daycare. On average we earn 62 percent of what men earn and therefore when  we are unemployed our U.I. benefits are low.  In other words, we are marginalized.  Melanie Conn has developed a feminist  perspective on CED activities based on her  work with Community Economic Options, a  project of WomenSkills Development Society. Conn's perspective looks at the impact  of CED activity on women in comparison to  the level of participation women have in the  planning of conventional economic development.  A typical example would be a plan designed to attract tourism to an area seeking to expand its economic base. Looking at  tourism projects with a feminist perspective  shows hospitality jobs that pay low wages  and offer little training or hope for job advancement. A feminist alternative would be  to encourage government-sponsored small  business counselling programs for women to  learn the skills needed for self employment.  Conn describes CED as including as  many community members as possible so  that different interests contribute to decisions. CED conferences, for instance, are  Applying a feminist perspective to CED,  Conn sees more women involved as participants and as potential employees in new  projects. Secondly, the concern for keeping  wealth within the community provides more  economic stability which benefits women.  Lastly, there is the potential that economic planning and development will become more responsible as more groups with  social and economic interests are involved  in decisions.  Vancouver's recently created Airheart Co-operative Travel Centre is a good example  of local control over community economic development.  attended by members of government, business, trade unions, colleges and groups representing native people, youth, women, disabled people and the unemployed.  Wealth from Within  An important CED philosophy is that it  is more beneficial for a community to generate wealth from within than to try to attract new wealth from outside. For example, the money you spend on food or entertainment goes into the hands of companies  that are rarely locally owned. The profits  "leak out" of the community, thus the term  leakage to describe this process. Wealth is  really a result of money circulation rather  than money quantity. For instance, considerable wealth could be sitting in one person's art collection but this does nothing for  the local economy.  Often a community's savings are deposited in credit unions and banks and  are for the most part invested outside the  community. The same is often true for the  money in union pension funds and church  donations.  An exception to this is Vancouver's  CCEC Credit Union which developed from  the need for capital by several community associations and consumer co-ops. People were having trouble raising money to  start projects like daycare centers or to  make down payments on co-operatively purchased houses. Established lending institutions were reluctant to give these organizations credit because of their small size and  unconventional structures. CCEC attempts  to be an alternative to the existing financial  system and stresses the need for collective  solutions to individual problems, featuring  low-cost loans for low-income individuals.  The concern for feminists in CED activity lies with how community is defined. If it  is the existing decision-making bodies with  only token representation from women, then  women do not have a real voice in decisions.  For community control over economic decisions to be meaningful, decisions have to be  made by groups which represent the gender,  class and race differences of our communities. While community is often assumed to  be a geographic region only, it also includes  the concept of a community of interest, a  group that comes together out of shared  goals.  For example, a group of women who share  common political goals comes together to  develop a worker-controlled, profit-sharing  business with the dual purpose of creating  employment as well as lessening their dependence on government funding. As profits  are generated they will be tunneled into political work. If the project succeeds, in time  the women will no longer need outside funding.  Democratic Control  This example brings us to the other  end of the CED spectrum, where there is  greatest potential for social and economic  change. Projects here are usually small-  scale. Some are sponsored by non-profit  societies, others are autonomous, worker-  controlled co-ops like CRS or collectives,  like Press Gang.  Many Kinesis readers will recall Emma's  Jambrosia, a jam factory in the Kootenays  and an early CED project. The project grew  out of the West Kootenay Women's Association as a solution to chronic unemployment and from a desire to create a non- traditional workplace based on feminist princi  ples. The project's intention, once they began to show a profit, was to put a certain  percentage of their profits into services for  women in the community.  Such projects usually emphasize democratic control of the workplace, flexible  hours to accommodate family responsibilities, production on a human scale and responsiveness to community needs.  A local women's group currently working  with CED is the Vancouver Lesbian Centre (VLC) which has received funding to explore the feasibility of forming a women's  co-operative business. Two women were  hired to do project research and they subsequently developed the idea of a women's  building.  They surveyed women's political groups,  services and businesses to assess interest  and are putting together a financial plan  which they will discus3 with interested  women's groups. The meetings will focus on  the structures, processes and operating procedures for the building.  A women's building will take the thousands of dollars that goes to landlords and  put this money into a building that directly  benefits women. Having several women's  groups in one space would make it easier for  groups to share expertise, expenses, increase  informal networking and potentially create  a larger lobbying base for political actions.  A women's building would also make it  easier for women's groups to venture into  small scale businesses within the building. VLC is studying an idea for a small  restaurant which would provide reliable employment, reasonable wages, flexible hours,  childcare, and paid time for political work.  Business profits would benefit lesbians directly as workers and indirectly though  VLC's services and political work.  Balancing Goals  What are the obstacles for CED projects?  CED is a long-term strategy. It takes time  to research ideas, do feasibility studies and  gain access to legal, financial and business  knowledge required. Balancing social and  economic goals is a new path and it takes  time to develop the processes and skills  needed to manage these dual purposes. Because it requires a long-term strategy, it is  important that knowledge, skills and tasks  are shared so that as people leave, projects  can continue.  The greatest difficulty for any CED  project is access to capital. This is especially  true for women who often do not have a  credit rating or assets to secure a bank loan.  To assist women, WomenSkills has joined  with CCEC to establish a loan guarantee  fund to help women set up CED projects.  Called WomenFutures, the fund will help  women secure the project financing.  Projects that WomenFutures could fund  include co-operatively owned enterprises  that ensure local ownership, control and  profit-sharing amongst workers or a nonprofit society, such as a women's centre  starting a for-profit business to enlarge its  funding base.  Although still in the preliminary stages,  women's groups and interested individuals are already being approached to support WomenFutures with contributions.  The fund will be administered collectively  by a committee consisting of WomenSkills  representatives, CCEC staff and contributors. An official launching will be held on  September 10th to welcome fund contributors and introduce WomenFutures to interested groups and individuals.  TAere is a wealth of knowledge,  skills and practical information for anyone interested in CED as an alternative means of employment, as a way  to expand a group's funding base, or  as a way to get informed about economic issues. For more information  contact the following—Melanie Conn:  480-0450, Carol Nielsen or Barbara  Grantham, SPARC of B.C.: 786-8118;  Bet Cecil or Brenda Gold, VLC CED  project: 258-6088.  12   I^INESIS   Jul/Aug '87 //////Mw//////mm^^^  //////////////////^^^^^  Law  Legal victory  Together Min sickness  and in health"  The following is the story of Gail  Meredith's attempts to gain control over  the legal affairs of her lover, Judy,  who was diagnosed last year as having a degenerative brain disease. As  with Kinesis' recent coverage of the  Karen Thompson-Sharon Kowalski case  (Dec/Jan 1986/87) Meredith's struggle  raises important concerns for lesbians  involved in long term relationships.  by Barbara Findlay  "It's hard to know what the hardest part  was," said Gail Meredith. There were the  doctors who refused to recognize me as having any right as Judy's lover to be involved  with their decisions about her. There was  the shock of how Judy's family reacted, after we'd had a good relationship for ten  years. There was the loss of Judy as the  woman I knew and loved. There was never  knowing what was real, trying to put the  world together from scratch on a weekly basis. There was the feeling of utter impotence  in the face of the legal system."  That is Gail's reaction looking back over  the time she has been dealing with the illness of her lover, Judy. Judy has a degenerative brain disease that has caused her to become senile, and she is now in Riverview, a  longterm care facility for people with mental disabilities.  Gail and Judy were lovers for ten  years. Both were committed activists in the  women's and trade union movements.  Looking back, Gail realizes that the problems with Judy's health began as early as  1983. But they first became obvious in the  fall of 1985 when during a trip to England, Judy seemed to be very depressed and  unlike herself. It seemed as if there might  be problems in their relationship, but Judy  kept saying that wasn't so.  Gail wondered what she was doing  wrong, whether it was her fault as Judy became progressively more agitated and depressed. She couldn't bear to stay in social situations, demanding that Gail take  her home, or simply leaving and going for  a walk. She couldn't drive, she couldn't sit.  Nothing satisfied her.  appeared that the problem was not psychiatric but physical. The hospital discharged  Judy, and she went home to Gail, on twenty-  four hours notice. Suddenly Judy wasn't  getting any treatment at all. She had to wait  two months for an appointment for more  neurological tests, and a further "four to six  weeks" for an admission to the University of  British Columbia (UBC) Hospital.  For Gail the time was terrifying. There  was no diagnosis of what was wrong, no indication of whether Judy would get better  or worse, no sense of how quickly Judy's  condition might change. As well, it quickly  became impossible to leave Judy alone in  the house.  Gail had to make the rounds of social  service agencies to organize homemakers to  come in while she was at work. Some of the  homemakers got along well. Some, though,  were unable to deal with Judy and lasted  only a day—so Gail was left to cope. Home-  maker help was only available during the  day which meant that Gail still had all of  the responsibility for Judy in the evenings  and weekends.  At the same time Gail had to deal with  Judy's financial affairs. Judy was getting  disability benefits from work; she had to apply for CPP disability. There was a car in  Judy's name that needed to be dealt with.  And there was a settlement of an accident  claim for Judy coming through.  At that point discussions began among  Judy's family and Gail about who should  manage Judy's legal affairs—who should  be Judy's 'committee' (a committee is  a provincial Supreme Court appointed  guardian who is empowered to look after a  person's affairs if she is mentally incompetent. See Kinesis April, 1987.)  Judy's father and brother violently  opposed Gail's committeeship. Gail still  doesn't understand why that happened  since they had always had a close relationship with Judy's family. They had been out  as lovers for years, had shared birthdays and  Christmases, spent time with Judy's nieces,  and gotten along well.  At a meeting with Judy's father and  brother, they blamed Gail for Judy's illness.  If Gail and Judy had been a heterosexual couple, of course, there would  have been no legal problems. It is routine for one spouse to take over  the management of the affairs of the other in case of illness.  By February of 1986, Judy was suspended from work. She got to the point  where she never got out of bed. Gail took  her to her doctor, who treated her with antidepressants which didn't help.  Finally, in April 1986, Judy was hospitalized at Lion's Gate, in the psychiatric ward. Diagnosis: depression. Treatment: more drugs, to the point where  Judy couldn't talk well, was staggering, and  couldn't relate well to people.  The psychiatrist refused to meet with  Gail to discuss what was wrong. The nurses  told Gail—and the psychiatrist—that Judy  .wasn't behaving like a depressed person.  Finally, after five weeks, the psychiatrist  had a neurological assessment done, and it  They called into question Judy and Gail's  relationship, saying Gail had always dominated Judy. They accused Gail of withholding information about Judy's illness.  Judy was admitted to UBC. Gail was terrified: what if the family tried to prevent  her from dealing with the doctors? In fact  the staff at UBC cooperated fully with Gail,  getting her to attend family meetings whenever they were called.  If Gail and Judy had been a heterosexual  couple, of course, there would have been no  legal problems. It is routine for one spouse  to take over management of the affairs of  the other in case of illness and for doctors to  advise and consult the spouse about treatment.  Gail Meredith's lover Judy at a Vancouver demonstration.  But for lesbians and gay men none of that  can be taken for granted. Even though Gail  and Judy had shared bank accounts, owned  a house together, and had ten years of combining their incomes, it was not at all clear  that Gail would be the one appointed by  the court to be Judy's committee. Gail was  afraid that if Judy's father was made committee, he might forbid her to see Judy—  and Judy would be absolutely lost to Gail.  Gail realized she needed a lawyer. Her  first choice was a lawyer who dithered ineffectually in an expectation of losing. Gail  was getting the message that she should  "settle"—let Judy's family take over in exchange for their agreement that she could  continue to live in the house, and see Judy.  Gail changed lawyers. She told the second lawyer that she wanted exactly what a  spouse would get in the same situation.  The court process for a committeeship is  not a trial. It is done by submitting affidavits. The judge reads the affidavits ahead  of time, and then listens while the lawyers  argue why their client should win. Gail  gathered affidavits that spoke of their relationship, of Gail's character, of Gail's financial responsibility. The affidavits from  Judy's family attacked Gail, and her relationship with Judy, from every direction.  Gail sat in court and listened to the  lawyer's arguments; her life described in  paragraphs of legalese.  The judge ruled that Gail should be the  committee. Gail was profoundly relieved.  But she was disappointed that in giving his  reasons, the judge said nothing about the  fact that Gail and Judy were lesbian lovers,  so his decision will be hard to use as a precedent in other cases.  When Gail looked back to wonder why  she won, she realized her strength was in  the fact that she and Judy had not been in  the closet. As a result she was able to call  upon "pillars of respectability"—her doctor, credit union manager, therapist, and  friends—to testify to the solidness of her  partnership with Judy. The fact that Gail  was named beneficiary in Judy's will helped  By the time the court hearing was held,  Judy had been moved to Riverview. At  Riverview there was none of the cooperation from the psychiatrist that Gail had had  from doctors at UBC. The psychiatrist refused to see Gail and said that Judy's illness  was God's punishment for being a lesbian.  For a time he decreed that no one—not  Gail, not Judy's family—could visit Judy  for a month leaving her with no visitors and  no way to understand what was happening.  Gail demanded a meeting with the ward  doctor, insisting on her right to be kept informed and see Judy. She couldn't insist  that the doctor be changed, but as a result of her demands the ward doctor left the  case. Gail says one of the hardest things was  to advocate both for Judy and her own interests at the same time.  Gail says she had solid and consistent  support from her feminist friends throughout the ordeal. People went with her to  visit Judy and when Judy was home, they  brought meals and spelled Gail off in looking after Judy. Friends went with Gail  to meetings with doctors, swore affidavits,  spent time with Gail trying to piece the  world together and figure out what to do  next.  In February a tribute to Judy was held  at La Quena. One hundred women came,  to pay tribute to Judy as they remembered  her in the community. Gail said that one  of the things she has learned in the ordeal  is that feminism works—even in the hard  places. Her understanding of feminism, and  her friends, enabled her to sort out that the  situation was not her fault, that she was not  a bad person. It made it possible to stand  up to the medical system and the legal system and assert her right to have her relationship with Judy treated with respect.  Gail's relationship with Judy's family has  significantly improved. They take turns visiting Judy at Riverview. No one is able to  predict the course of Judy's disease.  She has a different doctor now, one who  is cooperative with Gail. But she is about  to be moved to a different ward—and the  process of establishing their rights will begin again for Gail.  KJNESIS       '87 JUI/AUQ 13 loeing, the case between  Fand Mary Beth Whitehead  Fof "Baby M" is closed.  New Jersey Supreme Court  rectified the lower court's decision  JTpIetely strip Whitehead of any  5 to motherhood, essentially the  Id is the Sterns. The surrogate  pthering contract was upheld as more  alid than any traditional notion of  rparentage under family law. The case  I points to the profound social, legal, and  f ethical complexities raised by the new  reproductive technologies.  Such technologies vary from prenatal  procedures such as amniocentesis and  ultrasound, to laboratory fertilization oL  human eggs and implantation of donoj  embryos into the uterus.  Feminists are asking who is gaining  from these technologies. Why do they  n exist? Who is in control of them? Are  | women really gaining "freedom of choice"?  These are not the questions most  bressing to scientists. The science  Ipmmunity worries about how to create an  "Wironment just like the womb, or how to  delect genetic characteristics from embryo  L or how to "harvest" more eggs from  a woman's ovaries. In her book, The  I MotMr Machine, Gena Corea documents  \the culling goals and motivations behind  ^technology—the desire for male  •ntrol o%er women through reproductive  %trol, aid the desire to genetically  ipulatemhe population to create  "superior" nwian beings. She and other  feminat researchers have developed a  convincWig arg%jent for extreme caution.  Artificial Insemination  Artificial insemination by donor (l  or alternative insemination as critics  of medical terminology call it, is the  relatively simple procedure of inserting  mor's semen into a woman's  i to achieve fertilization. It can  e done at home, except for screening  and testing of donor semen or blood for  health and genetic problems. Lesbians and  single women have used it to avoid the  complications of legal or social fathers.  Religious, medical and state authorities  initially greeted AID with great  concern because of its obvious potential  to threaten the patriarchal family.  They recognized early the ease  which women could can  reproductive self-deterHSKkflrathe  than as a "treatmentWor nale inf<  "Li early cases, coMrts in England]  Canada and the United States ruled  that AH) childrenMere illegitimate and  that the practiceM AID was equivalent  to adultery. As jpch, AID provided  grounds for dhaf ce and possible criminal  prosecution, "^porea) Courts were  certainly noJKs prepared to accept the  notion of a^urrogate" father as they  are now nepared to accept a "surroj  mother.  Slow, AID has gained accept an<  thougnstill with limits. In B.C. a  197jjf|w Reform Commission Repeat  tnded the same eligibility  ^e apphW for AH) recipients as are  applied » adoption proceedings. Thl  report indicated single women should  | be ruled ol, but that as in adoption,  a preferencmor heterosexual married  ~|iples woufc likely prevail.  jedical pmessionals have tended to  fe AH) asm medical "treatment",  fclaypeMle of "risks" involved.  Physicia^fkovide the procedure to  specializecr^reati_ent of semen to select  out Y chromoson* sperm (those that  produce males) fol fertilization purposes.  By 1976, a sperm Bank had opened up  in California speci—ly for storing the  sperm of Nobel PrSe winners for future  reproduction and research. The bank was  named after one of me early proponents of  eugenics (genetic "enmrieering"), Herman  J. Muller. One Germamscientist has  dedicated his career towiding a method  to detect homosexualityTM the fetus, and  possibly "correct" it honfcnally before  birth.  If it still sounds a long war off, keep in  mind the words of Randolph%eed, one of  the pioneers in the field of hunmn AID,  "The new reproductive technoldfces are all  capable of genetic manipulationmBbelieve  they will be used for that and I b<  is desirable."  Surrogacy  While most surrogacy agreements now  .only employ the simple technology of.  " e social relations surrounding them are  "v more complex than we are socially  equipped to deal with. The arrangement  is used TeWlow a male to procreate, if his  ^ wife is infer*^_or for some reason unable  j^bear a childT^he husband's sperm  lates a wom?8|_he "surrogate" (or  birthffl||hfir); she con*^_±es her own egg  and she carnK^he resultmg^^nyo to  birth. When itis%ttcnshe gives^^ghjld  over to the wife for acR^tipn, in exc  for an agreed sum of mon!  Exchanging money for a child  is illegal in most Western countries. In"  the case of surrogacy, the male "buyer"  pays the birth mother, and the male's  wife adopts the child. Technically she  has not paid for an adoption, and her  husband does not need to adopt it since he  is already the biological father.  women who fall within their guidelines—  mostly married women who have their  husband's consent. Single women,  lesbians, or anyone considered "unstable"  (having a psychiatric history) or to  be in an "unstable" relationship, are  generally seen as inappropriate candidates.  Medical justifications usually refer to  the physician's responsibility to ensure  a nurturing environment for the unborn  | child. It is up to physicians to assess the  y of applicants.  rprisingly, many women!  takenjmatters into their o  Women's health centrg^mTNorth  lerica have^g^PPcTan alternative  Rtworkj^pHng assistance to women  To undertake the procedure on  r own. In 1976, the first lesbians to  have AID babies gave birth in Vermont  and in California. Several women in  Canada have also given birth after using  AID on their own or with the help of  cooperative doctors.  Though AH) holds the greatest  potential for being an accessible,,  technology for womenj  the potential^  ofs<  __     wement andjselection. No one balks  yet at AH) reciwnts seeking certain  physical charadjeristics in their donor—  this has been Mtablished as a norm, as  AID parents Atially wanted babies to  look like the* social fathers to maintain  l secrecy. No* screening for hereditary  jdiseases orMenetic defects is considered  cceptablefco. These "defects" include  irome, even though with  I people with Down's syndrome  o old age.  fcory of "defects" lends itself  J expanding boundaries. Thei  low in the United States whi<  |iestionable reliability) the  Under famTMt law the woman who giv<  birth to a chilctV the mother. Though  Mary Beth WhitBtead is referred to  as the "surrogate's—he was actually  the biological and legU mother of the  baby she named Sara^Ls an adoptive  "social" mother, Mary wp is the more  likely candidate for the tewk "surrogate'  mother.  The legal confusion arounc  arises because two kinds of law  into play—family law and contri  Neither has been designed to addrel  this situation. Family law fails to ad<  any kind of unconventional parental  designation, while contract law normall;  deals with property and services.  When Whitehead backed out on the  'surrogate agreement, the court had to  decide which area of law would prevail.  If it were contract law, Whitehead would  lose the child. If it were family law, the  case would have to be argued as a custody  case with the "best interests of the child"  at issue.  While the courts pondered the legal  i, many pondered the social,  d feminist implications of the  case. What kind of world are we creating,  wondered, if we agree to the right of  wealthy married couples to buy babies  from poor or working class women?  Or the right of women to rent their  wombs?   ^^^^^—^     ^^B^^  Or the right of baby brokers to profit  from the desperation of childless couples  on the one hand, and disadvantag"  women on the other?  Would we want such arrangements toHS  possible if money were not involved? If so,  under what conditions?  The parallels with prostitution are  "^»t here we are also  fwith a potential new life which  "will be born into a complex web of  relationships.  In the United States, several agencies  (sixteen in 1983) now offer the "service"  of matching "surrogate" mothers with  couples unable to have their own children.  These agencies normally operate with a  team of physician and lawyer, sometup  psychologist as well, who a  deal for anywherefrojg00JJOrj to over  $20,000. NoeLJJil^he lawyer in thj|  Sterj^SjPJPMead case, is considered  her of surrogate contracts in thj  p.S. (Career building in this field is noB  :stricted to scientists.)  Although this team acts as a go-  bemyeen, its interests lie in creating a  ^Tfied customer—the childless couple.  rhe¥_rth mother's position is more  like uBt of an employee. The contracts  arrangBkfor surrogacy reflect these  difTjgJ*jBpsitions. Most contracts  ITate^iumber of stringent conditions  Rat must1»net by the birth mother,  ncluding suW^tting to close medical  f supervision, airBtoiedical procedures  ' and tests requesWLby the father/client,  ' jaj supelBkion, restrictions  in dietTrestnctiOTlS^^^tivities, and  restrictions on sexual Mivity during the  ■r I"   i  iiiiUn)..   \  There are usually provision—allowing  the father to terminate the agi  and pay only a portion of the agt  amount should pregnancy not occH  a miscarriage occur. There are provfll  that if the fetus is defective in any serS  way, the father can withdraw from the *  agreement, and that if a defective baby  is born, he can refuse it and not be  responsible for any child support costs.  In the case of Whitehead, there was even '  a provision that she should not love the  fetus she carried.  There are rarely any such protective  provisions for the birth mother involved.  The only term binding the contracting  jher is that he pay medical expenses  iupon sum on delivery of  a he '  mothers have sou  |L advice, they have usually been discouraged  from doing so by the agency engaging  \em.  'he amount Whitehead was to receive  _$10,000—not a huge amount of money  whtt averaged out over the 9 to 12  s the whole procedure could involve.  Itors of one clinic say they expect  \ to "surrogates" to go down as  Racy becomes more common. They  Expect it to go down as it becomes  UCTIVE  e Universit^njntis  more common for the egg donor to be a  different woman from the fetus "carrier".  l carriers canfin_ught from more  nically disadvantaged groups (for  Kpmen of colour^BWwould be  r fetuses forlBBtaoney.  nologjfcpw exists—embi  [yet been wi(  uple in Toi  tannolffliBMM^fetan to hire  ' in the <M| BB&Wry their  embi  Swogacy is now a business  U.Sjfwith clinics that promote th<  [think in terms of market expansion,  he desperation of childless couples is  not likely to subside in such a climate.  And the pressure on infertile women to  participate in surrogacy arrangements will  increase with their increased availability.  lube Babies  Wiu*^fc_ossibility of taking an egg from  a woman^wjkzing it in the laboratory,  and placing fln^fciito the womb of that  woman or anotherwB^to, we now have  what amounts to "test^^Byjabies—in  i vitro (in glass) fertilization!  The first baby born using this"  3 Louise Brown in 1978 in England  81, the first American birth from IVF  c place in Norfolk, Virginia, and in  19^ Canada's first was born in B.C., nine  i premature.  CaBada has at least ten fertility  resea  procedMe. The  Columb» clinic offers IVF and a  proceduAalled GIFT. Ij  the simple^  "harvesting^kggs is obviously far more  complicated »in "harvesting" sperm.  The womarMaust undergo hormone  injections for wBWeeks of her  reproductive cyc^fc—loverstimulate the  ovaries into producrlH^re than the  normal one egg.  She must undergo regulaTMMjrasound  testing to monitor egg growth.  Under a general anaesthetic,  undergoes surgery to remove eggs,  k involving three different insertions  " istruments into her abdomen. This  blled laparoscopy.  jLfter the eggs are removed, doctoi  fermize them with sperm in the lab,  alknKg them to grow for 48 hours.  Th~Wgs are then flushed int  woman^bterus by means of a clH  inserted tn^—di her cervjj—Th^rwoman  undergoes fura^MMjjnone^Rtment to  the end of that mom  The GUT procedure is ftnilar except  that it does not involve laBratory  fertilization of the egg, buHbnly mixing  egg and sperm in the lab awl immediately  placing them into the womM's fallopian  tubes during the same lapaAcopy.  Doctors use it to allow men^^i a low  sperm count to reproduce.J  attempt at pregnancy v  client must pay appu^nately $U  for lab fees and^J^Wfor fertility d  recoverable through^  Clinics and the media emphasize the  ecstasy experienced by couples successful  'i these  infertile couple Medicine performs  miracles What we hear less about is the  mere ten to twenty percent pregnancy rate  using WF. That's two out of ten women.  Of those pregnancies that do occur, close  to one third will end in miscarriage. Out  of thirty women attempting childbirth,  four will succeed.  rychiatric  Bugh not  Won^Bfeften go through more than  ^one attempwLhopes of success. For  _ry attempj^—voman subjects her  mone injections,  geneTB—nesthesiaj^fclriple ultrasound  and ot^fctests, andlTMbat constant  medical oBRWation. ThoBjkalso a risk  of multiple pMiiancy, sinciPtt^e than one  embryo is inserWLinto the woA^ uterus  each time. No stUKs have been oBj^of  the long-term effeclT  babies of these proce^  That is the story fo",  accepted to the prograi  who never make it that fl  the procedure is not coveiB  insurance, so only those w  >have access. The UBC clirl  each woman accepted for 1  she must be married, have]  illness, and be under 39-  stated, the implkfl|ifrffs she must be  ^^j^t/KttKSdslie is more thanj  ! white. Such limited accMj^irtually  amounts to a fonn^^glN^rvlBkeeding.  I procedures a  technologies. They are experiments  Women who submit to them are  experimental subjects. In some cases  they are fully informed of that fact, in  other cases not. Lesley Brown, mother  of the first test-tube baby, did not know  that IVF had never before resulted in a  successful birth. Her husband stated, "I  didn't know we were to be the first test-  tube parents. I wish we weren't." (Corea)  When Judith Carr, first test-tube mother  in North America was told of her status,  •eplied, "You're kidding." Informed  •nsent has obviously been a secondary  concern for doctors "performing" these  miracle births.  In most cases, women give up a great  deal of control over their bodies and  pregnancies to doctors: "Right up to the  time of undertaking the delivery, which  I decided to do by Caesarean section, I  can remember my last thoughts being  before we started the operation, that we'd  don«verything possible that wasj«pwn,  butjp was still going to be anu^R^wn  Lent at the birth of the IjffF' (Dr-  [trick Stenjoe, Brown's dflfer, CBC  proram).  ' Frozen nbryos  In recent jB^rs, scientists have succeeded  in freezing embryos for later use by a  couple seeking pregnancy. In Australia  this has allowed foiuupuch less invasive  process to occurjjgpfne woman going  through IVF. SJg^iust undergo only  one laparoscojjPrather than one each  .time a pregnMcy is attempted, and the  gbryo can ie transferred according to  iral cycle on subsequent tries,  x a hormonally induced cycle.  WhelHiPJfcMing is used or not, there  iPJtt^q^Kjfct^of what happens to  leftoveTfllfcMs/nSwMkuomore than  3 to 6 embryosaPj|aB]^rn ^B^fte^time  to avoid multiple preg  would undoubtedly like to use!  study and experimentation. The quest:  of how to keep an embryo alive outside the  natural womb is a nagging one for them.  in JNo  shen  ^^ronse  J^ conce  W        mirac  the real mother  please stand up 7  They say it will help provide solutions to  infertility and save premature babies.  Nevertheless, Australia and England  have passed laws that strictly limit  (though do not prohibit) the length of  dime an embryo can be kept alive outside  woman's uterus (14 days, in England),  1 be done with it and with whose  lili, erfflHfiiownership is not always  eld-. A weaTnBMmerican couple who had  ^ed frozen emUMkin Australia were  filled in a plane craslSfegtralian courts  had to decide who ownedT^«anbryos  and whether or not, if carriecr^Bterm in  another woman's womb, they woTB  legal heirs to the riches of their Amerf  genetic parents.  ^Freedom or Enslavement?  access toinem^Sasuccee  pregnancy, perhaps the new technologies  are a blessing. For the rest of us, they  have serious implications because of their  potential negative impact on the rights of  women and the direction of reproductive  control.  As practices develop which dissociate  a woman from her own fetus, as laws  develop to protect embryo research, as  hiring women as breeders gains social  acceptability, as science shortens the  time a fetus is technically dependent on  a woman's uterus—the more the fetus will  be regarded as an entity separate from the  woman who carries it. A woman's right to  make decisions about her own body will be  viewed as secondary to the rights of that  fetus. There is considerable dispute over  this already in relation to abortion. But as  the rights of a fetus increase, so the rights  of women will decrease.  The recent case of a pregnant woman in  Vancouver who refused a Caesarian section  is a case in point. Doctors sought and  obtained a court order to apprehend her  fetus before its birth. They performed the  Caesarian without her permission. Under  most other circumstances this would be  considered assault (see Kinesis , page 5).  It is ironic that the social relations  emerging from futuristic reproductive  technologies can so blatantly revert to  the regressive thinking of darker times  for women. A hundred years ago, men  owned women and children. Women were  expected to bear and raise children. With  surrogate contracts we have the modern  version of reproductive slavery.  could m  doesn't hai  child, who is  dictate in a contract  rrogate" mother must  "husband or the state  illy jMEsame? If a man  t"imperfect"  anyolfeias to? What  -lildref  will happen to i  The horror of rep^Bkctive^khnologies  is that they propose bilRkical, Mimical  and genetic solutions to «mt are^kgely  social issues. In the procesMhey r^j[orce  traditional social controls baP"  patriarchal values. It is a posrl  that women have taken some c«trol h  alternative insemination and m\  approaches to fertility problems.^^t v/i$\  the more advanced technology, wdT  control will undoubtedly have to be  the political arena.  Further reading:  The Mother Machine  Reproductive Technologies from  Artificial Insemination to Artifici  Wombs  Gena Corea, Harper & Row, 198A  Canadian Journal of Women and  Law  Women and Reproduction  Vol. 1, No. 2, 1986.  Test Tube Women  What Future for Motherhood^  Ed. by Rita Arditti, Renate Muelli  Klein, and Shelley MindenMPandoj^  Press, 1984.  Information was obtayMd for thik  article from unpublished papersg  Claudia Trudeau <md Laura Jmlosset,  UBC.  -30-  KINESIS  KJNES1S      '87 Jul/Aug 15 Education  by MaVgo Dunn  For fourteen years, VCC Langara  has presented a credit women's studies program. Unique among colleges in  British Columbia, the program has not  only survived, but also maintained its  links with the activist mainstream of  the women's movement. This fall at  Langara (49th and Main) and at VVI  (Pender and Cambie), Women's Studies 116, a course titled "Women View  Sanity, Sex and Social Change" will be  team-taught by Rosalie Hawrylko and  Margo Dunn. ■  Some jobs get easier the longer you work  at them. Not teaching women's studies.  Each term challenges instructors in an unexpected way. The attitudes of the students  now present the greatest variables. Many  students of the late eighties focus on "having it all." Some come to the course with  a knowledge of social injustice, but little  concrete information about women's place  in the picture. Some older students take  women's studies to understand upheavals in  their own lives.  Another major change concerns course  content. Fourteen years ago, the canon of  feminist studies comprised a few articles,  some issues of MS, about ten books and  the instructors' experience in the women's  liberation movement. A sample exam question just ten years old encyclopedically asks:  "Are the changes which have occurred in the  status of women in the past century substantial or superficial? Discuss in relation  to four areas." Now books and periodicals  abound; students read about women's issues  in People and The Vancouver Sun.  Political concerns abo vary. As feminists,  we've learned that the changes we want in  the world often begin with ourselves. Because of women's stories, and the dynamism  of the movement, women's studies teachers  now speak in the college classroom of incest,  Third World women's economic zones, the  reproduction of mothering, deconstruction  of language, AIDS, woman-centred birth,  etc. What started in 1973 as exploration has  become itself a tradition to be critically examined.  Maintaining women's studies in the curriculum at Langara has been a struggle.  For one year, the courses were cut completely. To promote campus presence, Rosalie Hawrylko, then co-ordinator, struck  a committee of sympathetic instructors,  counsellors, former students and community  activists. Women's studies was reinstated  the next year. Lobbying began for a diploma  program, now in place.  Fourteen years should mean women's  studies is entrenched firmly at Langara.  "We can never stop being vigilant," says  current co-ordinator Cindy Nagel. Whether  through discrimination or accident, women's studies often has been omitted from  computer course listings on registration day.  Horror stories such as a counsellor's comment to a student that "all she'll learn in  women's studies b man-hating" still filter  back to instructors.  The connection to the women's movement remains vital. When current instructor Debra Lewis goes on leave, her replacement must have the credential of experience in the women's movement as well as  the master's degree required by the college.  Connections with the community are maintained through the advisory committee and  through a public lecture series on current  bsues.  At Langara, the bottom-line in negotiations with the administration has been  the continuation of a team-teaching approach. Thb means that Rosalie Hawrylko  (social psychology), Debra Lewis (sociology/criminology), Margo Dunn (literature/history) work collectively at 5/16th  of one salary for- half the year, with  full-time instructor Cindy Nagel (psychology/feminist spirituality) as co-ordinator.  The course to be given thb fall, WS  116, "Women View Sanity, Sex and Social  Change," emphasbes interdisciplinary connections of material around themes, rather  than  presentation  of information  about  Women's Studies:  always a challenge  women derived from a single academic field.  The instructors define sanity as the integrity  of the self; sex, as an intimate integration  with another, social change, as integration  with a community of others. We examine  the old precept that "the personal is political."  Our lives are socially constructed, and  the language we use to describe them contains a separate history of meaning. When  our thoughts and experiences are disconnected, we may well "lose our minds." While  sexuality b almost as intimate as thinking  our own thoughts, what we learn about our  bodies and sexual practices is publicly defined. How does this historically inaccurate  information affect us? Above all, how can we  become free, linguistically, sexually, socially,  economically? Social change is a skill. Ironically, some of what we teach about strategy has been learned through the struggle  for women's studies itself.  "When I was first hired," says Rosalie  Hawrylko, "I was full of bright hope, having been influenced by Freire, believing that  if the structure was not radical, then the  content could never be. It was exciting to  feel like a revolutionary group in the lion's  mouth of a traditional college, teaching with  integrity, courage, the juice of life, and the  support of students who truly cared about  us and about themselves as political beings.  "When the cutbacks began, I only knew  how to be adamant when I thought I was  right. I didn't know about building links,  being prepared, long-range strategies. You  know, this b what we need an education for  ... Now I can take a stand in public ways,  for example, in union struggles, and encourage others to do so, in a style which is much  more mature ..."  Unlike most academic courses, where the  personal lives and private opinions of class  mates mean little, women's studies puts the  personal on the line. Inevitably, bsues rabed  in the classroom around the economics of  women's work, sexual abuse, psychotropic  drugs, and lesbianism meet the student's  life.  Sometimes class discussion time suffices  to integrate a person's experience with current research findings on a given topic. For  some the reverberations are profound. Relationships end, careers change, women confront harassers or poor work situations.  How do 1987 students view women's  studies courses? Rosalind Taylor took  women's studies during spring, 1987. She  "found a vocabulary to express her feelings  of rage and hurt. It's the only class that continues to come out of my mouth. I'm just as  angry as I ever was, but now I have words  to express it instead of singbg a song by  D.O.A."  Other students enjoyed specific topics  on sexuality from Mariana Valverde's Sex,  Power and Pleasure, one of the course  textbooks. The down side, issues like genital mutilation, disturbed them deeply.  More comments, culled from course evaluations:  • "It sounds vague, but aspects really  helped me understand things about myself, especially the section on sexuality."  • "During the part on organising social  change, it made me very enthusiastic  when I realised it can be done."  • "I feel there b too much emphasb on the  depressing aspects of women's issues."  • "I have found romance novels were  largely concerned with dominance. I have  stopped reading them because they give  me a fabe perception of reality."  • "Years ago I was in a mental hospital and  on drugs (prescribed by the doctor) in or  der to function in day-to-day living. If I  had been aware at that point in my life as  I am now, I do not believe I would have  suffered like I did."  For the first time since introducing the  course, the most controversial bsue was lesbianism. Actual presentation of material on  lesbians occupies only a small percentage of  class time, but some students found thb difficult. More comments:  • "When I first chose to enroll in women's  studies, lesbianism did not enter my  mind."  • "I know some women were put off by  some of the focus on lesbianism. I was  very glad for it."  • "At times there was too much emphasis  on lesbianism rather than the 'whole picture', i.e. women in general, regardless of  their personal private sexual preference."  And how do we instructors perceive the  term's work?  Rosalie Hawrylko: "Sometimes I think  the young women think we're a bit much,  that they know where it's at, and we're  wrong about women's oppression, old,  wrong. Why are we still pbsed off? This  b the most vbible change in our students:  where they were once excited with us, now  many of them hold back. Other instructors  have talked about 'denial'. The students feel  it's all been solved, there aren't any problems any longer for women as women."  Margo Dunn: "Sometimes I feel like I've  been in the war and nobody wants to hear  about it. I fail to see changes in style as fundamental change. Yes, women can get into  law school now, and women musicians form  a big part of everyone's record collection,  and we're supposed to be physically fit ...  but we still don't have real power anywhere  in Canadian society.  "As my interests move outward, internationally ... How far to go! In parts of the  world, women's studies is learning how to*  get water. A few years ago, everyone enrolled accepted square one: 'women are oppressed.' Now we have to argue that, barrage students with painful information, and  then get called negative."  Hard times, but exciting times. Two  years ago, Langara women students won a  small room to use as a centre. In the fall,  we hope to co-operate with their collective  to provide discussion time and space.  Preparing courses means reading incredible new research. As Cindy Nagel comments, "While we do spend time describing basic discrimination and stereotypes, we  are understanding the causes in deep, subtle ways, and what to do about them."  With the diploma program, women's  studies has been integrated into the college,  while sustaining an autonomous course and  department.  A diploma in Arts and Science (Women's  Studies) involves taking the two core introductory courses, 116 and 216, as well  as several other courses in various disciplines which have been approved by the four  women's studies instructors as having more  than 30 percent women's studies content.  These range through Religious Studies, Economics, Biology, Englbh, History, Political  Science, Environmental Chemistry, Philosophy, Psychology. All bear transfer credit to  the province's universities.  Years ago, a B.C. Women's Studies Association flourished, then died. Now college  instructors have begun a B.C. Community  College Women's Studies Association, with  a founding conference planned at Langara  for October 31,1987. Not a bad day to think  of saying goodbye to cutbacks, and begin fomenting plans for further growth.  For further information on Langara Women's Studies courses, and/or  Women's Studies Diploma, call Cindy  Nagel at 824-5448.  Registration for WS 116, "Women  View Sanity, Sex and Social Change,"  given Monday and Wednesday afternoons at Langara, and Tuesday evenings downtown at VVI begins the first  week of September.  16   KINESIS       Jul/Aug '87 ////////////////////^^^^^  /////////////////////^^^^  Education  by Ezzell  FIRST PEOPLES' CONFERENCE  "Whatever you have, even if it's a bit, you  have to give it to those children, they're the  ones that will walk in your footsteps and  take over what you leave them ... there's  no use in taking it six feet deep.  "You've got so much talent, you've got a  lot of gifts. You've got so much love. Give  it to your children or any child. There's no  barrier where children are concerned; they  are all our children." Gently commanding,  Frances Williams, a Maori elder, held us in  the power of her love for all children, as if  we all were her children.  The 71-year-old matriarch spoke at the  closing day ceremonies of the first World  Conference on Indigenous People's Education to an audience who murmured agreement and Maori words of "good health to  you"—kia ora koe. The gentle strength and  love of this woman was spontaneously returned by her people when they rose and  sang her a Maori song celebrating to all  their unity of spirit.  A Momentous Time  This atmosphere of warmth and solidarity  pervaded the entire week as first peoples  from all parts of the earth came together for  the first time. The first time and a great,  momentous time for themselves and, I believe, for all people. In prophecies and stories handed down from mother to daughter, father to son, it was said that a day  would come when aboriginal peoples would  be in danger of losing their ways and their  languages, and that eventually, they would  come together to become as one people.  Spoken by an elder chief of the Hopi people, this prophecy offered great hope that,  perhaps, this was the time.  Thb step in reaching across distance and  borders took the form of a week of workshops, forums and celebratory sharing of  cultures at the University of British Columbia in Vancouver from June 8-13. The second day was held at Capilano Indian Reserve where stories, traditional dance and  theatre, and a feast of salmon were shared.  Back at U.B.C, workshops and forums  were so numerous it was necessary—and  difficult—to choose from the twenty offered  in each time period. There were film and  video showings throughout the days as well  as exhibits by individual artisans, organizations and community groups.  While the majority of people attending  were of indigenous heritage, there were also  many of European descent. All were made  to feel welcome and any special needs were  provided for. There were interpreters for  those having difficulty with English. Respect for elders was demonstrated by the  special place set aside for them.  Invited with Evelyn Roth and her huge  inflatable salmon to be a storyteller among  various native storytellers, I was honoured  and challenged to be included in the day  at Capilano Reserve. The sense of hope and  celebration from Tuesday carried through in  a steady pulse to a crescendo at the end of  the conference. As I approached my choices  in workshops and forum discussions, the  Attending the conference were: (above) Patricia F. Grace, Maori author;  (left) Margaret Campbell-Buck, lecturer at the Sydney College of Advanced Education. Australia; (centre) Ma>et Sa>a, secretary-general of the Nordic Sami  Council; Samiland (referred to as Lapland) is colonized by Norway, Sweden,  Finland and the USSR; and (right) Judy Ramos, a Tlingit of Yakutat (Alaska);  Ramos is a counsellor.  Education means more  than just teachers  \ and schools  wide focus for the meaning of education to  indigenous peoples became apparent.  Respect for the  Earth,   Respect for  Each Other  The thread of emphasis that I began to  hear was voiced so well by Frances Williams  in the opening quote of this article. To "give  to those children, all of them ..." the ways,  the stories, the dance and the ritual that  all might remember, the respect for mother  earth and each other that each culture has  known. Here, education meant something  much wider than teachers and schools.  Certainly, the bsues of native schools  and culturally relevant materials for native  children in the existing schools were major  ones, and there were forums and workshops  for sharing successes and doing problem-  solving. Confronting the bsue of colonization and de-colonization as a necessary step  in regaining a sense of self and belief in one's  heritage was an bsue dbcussed by writers  at the Writers Symposium. Education as "a  philosophy of learning" was dealt with from  the perspectives of various cultures, and described in terms of furthering community  education.  Margo Kane gave an example of this  in her workshop entitled "Creating Culturally Meaningful Experience in the Role  Model Theatre." Travelling to communities  and working with young people and adults  through improvbation and masks, she helps  them give voice to their personal experience  and gain the belief that their voice has relevance.  Similarly, the effective use of the media as  a personal and community education process can promote native people's networking across the globe. Theytus Books, Ltd.,  a B.C. native publishing company, hosted  the writers symposium in which there was  much discussion of concrete ways to increase  the numbers of native writers getting published. There was a troubleshooting discus  sion around the problem of native authors  ending up in obscure bookstore categories  hke anthropology or folk tales when then-  works are fiction or poetry. In this way, in-  vbibility continues.  Knowledge of Beginnings  The necessity of reclaiming indigenous  languages as an integral part of remembering the old ways was addressed by many different speakers. Thb, then, involved the elders in the education process, to teach what  they have been taught, recapturing through  skills, stories and beliefs the unique nature  of their culture. A knowledge of the beginnings can smooth the way to contemporary  life and expression, a theme exemplified by  one New Zealand Maori writer.  Patricia Grace opened her workshop with  the Maori story of creation; one, she felt,  that was similar in many cultures.  "Before the time of remembering there  was, first of all, the nothing. From the nothing, called 'Tekori', the night was formed,  called 'Te Po', and into Te Po, Papatunaki,  earth mother was born.  "Papatunaki, filled with darkness, mated  with the sky, called Rangi. Between them,  there were many children. These children  lived in darkness. They longed for space and  they longed for light in which to move and  grow. And so the children set about to separate their parents so that Rangi, the sky  father, would dwell above and Papatunaki,  the earth mother, would dwell below.  "And because of that, light could come  onto the earth and space onto the earth.  And thb was the way human life came onto  the earth."  Grace then went on to introduce works  of contemporary Maori writers, including  some of her own work. A couple of the  vomen writers of poetry and short stories  are Jackie Sterm and Arapera Blanc. In the  1950's, there were few publbhers who would  consider their work, although each woman  did appear in collections of New Zealand  short stories.  Written by Sterm in the 1950's, The  House of the  Talking Cat was recently  published due to the efforts of the Spiral  Collective, a women's group. This same collective was responsible for providing funds  to publish Keri Hulme's The Bone People which had been rejected by three previous publishers. Later, Spiral Collective approached Grace to write a Maori children's  story.  Grace had previously written for children  and had been told by her publisher to "make  sure it's not set in New Zealand" because  there was no market. Being unable to imagine writing from any but her own Maori experience and unwilling to create yet another  children's book in which there was nothing  relevant for Maori children, she abandoned  the idea. Now, a publishing company was  offering financial backing for her to produce  this Maori children's book. Kuia and the  Spider was published just before Christmas  and sold well in and out of New Zealand. Although initially greeted with resistance by  publbhers, a Maori translation quickly sold  out.  Grace abo has written Potiki and The  Dream Sleepers, both available through  Penguin Books. Potiki means "one who  belonged in both worlds" and "youngest  born." She has abo written for film.  Challenge the Rules  Grace encouraged the writers present to  "have courage to push the boundaries" and  "challenge the rules". She observed that  many young people can read but simply  don't because they can find little that b applicable to their experience. Her belief that  indigenous peoples have much in common  b illustrated by her list of common themes:  land and environment (and their loss), people under threat, relationships with ancestors and the land, colonization, loss, pain,  joy and survival.  On this note—survival—Patricia Grace,  a Maori woman possessing a gentle strength  of belief, expressed her pride in the nuclear-  free status of her country. She noted that  "anyone can write" and that "expression of  self, honestly, has its effect ... Trees give  their best—to hold back b to die."  Her words echoed the many other voices  speaking out in all their languages for a continued network of thb new family of "one"  people. As the woman from Samiland said,  "Alone we are only a few, together we are  millions."  KINESIS       '87 Jul/Aug 17 Arts  Bulimia: both ends of the spectrum  by Maureen McEvoy  BULIMIA: A GUIDE TO RECOVERY  by Lindsey Hall and Leigh Conn 156 pages,  Gurze Books.  Most people view eating dborders as a  spectrum: at one end are those who don't  eat enough and at the other end are those  who eat too much.  Bulimia, more commonly known as the  binge-purge syndrome, represents both ends  of the spectrum meeting and tangling up together.  The woman (and the vast majority are  women) suffering from bulimia consumes  vast quantities of food in one sitting and  then purges herself of the food either by  vomiting or abusing laxatives, diuretics, enemas or exercise.  In effect, she's eating too much and starving herself at the same time.  Her body, robbed of essential nutrients  and unnaturally stressed by excessive vomiting or laxative abuse is at risk for: cardiac  arrest, kidney failure, impaired metabolism  due to electrolyte imbalance, severe dehydration, and malnutrition.  Other physical side effects include: digestive disorders, amenorrhea, anemia, infested  glands, blisters in the throat, internal bleeding, hypoglycemia, icy hands and feet, ruptured stomach or esophagus, bowl infections  and poor muscle tone in the intestines. Not  to mention rotten teeth corroded from excess stomach acid.  And then there are the emotional side-  effects such as social bolation, fear, anxiety,  loneliness and low self-esteem. Who knows  how many women have suffered in secret silence as bulimia has only just begun to be  addressed.  Lindsey Hall, herself a recovered bulimic,  provided one of the first resources by pub-  lbhing her life story in a small booklet, "Eat  Without Fear".  Bulimia: A Guide To Recovery contains the booklet plus a section defining bulimia, suggestions from other recovering bulimics, an outline for a support group and a  two week, self-help program to stop binging.  One of the strengths of the book is that  Hall and her husband, Leigh Cohn, conducted a survey of 217 recovered and recovering bulimics. Their comments, liberally sprinkled throughout the book, clearly  outline the scope of bulimia and also the  many roads to recovery.  For instance, according to their survey results, the average bulimic is a white, middle-  class, twenty-eight year old woman of normal weight who binges once or twice daily  and usually vomits. Just over half of the respondents were also anorexic.  Hall describes consuming 5,000 calories  during one of her typical binges: a quart  of ice cream, a bag of cookies, a couple of  batches of brownies, a dozen doughnuts, a  few candy bars and then a quart of whole  milk to make it easier to bring it all up  thirty minutes later.  The book is rich in suggestions from recovered and recovering bulimics. Solutions  included coping alone, receiving support  from family and friends, attending self-help  or professionally led support groups and  seeing a professional therapist. One whole  chapter b devoted to things to do instead  of binging.  The two week program to stop binging  seems to have three objectives: to provide  a series of activities to distract from the  urge to binge and purge, to develop inner  self-awareness and to strengthen communication and assertion skilb.  The idea is to take each day as it comes  and the activities suggested for each day include exercises in body awareness, journal  writing, role-playing and Gestalt here and  now awareness.  My concern b that thb program seems to  assume the woman is not caring for children  at home or working outside of the horn*1  Otherwise she would be pressed to complete  each day's activities and subject to additional anxiety and guilt.  The weakest section of the book, in my  opinion, b the "advice to loved ones". Beyond a general exhortation to support the  recovering bulimic, few specific suggestions  are given to cope with the tangled legacies  of bulimia.  Hall does not linger long on why women  become bulimic, maintaining (quite correctly) that one shouldn't wait to understand the addictive behaviour before beginning to change it. She briefly mentions research that suggests bulimia and serious depression are linked. She cites a complex mixture of childhood factors and cultural pressures as the most commonly given reasons.  She relates childhood factors to the decline of the extended family and the baby  boom, resulting in fewer adults to help with  parenting and more children to compete  for their love. The fact that epidemic numbers of women are totally preoccupied with  food, eating and weight loss is not surprising given that our culture b obsessed with  thinness.  However, at some point in the recovery  process the woman will need to develop her  own answers to the questions of why she  became bulimic, especially when she realizes that fears and obsessions about food  are only symptoms. Authors such as Kim  Chernin, Susie Orback and Geneen Roth  may provide more detailed, feminist analysis of etiological factors.  The fact that epidemic  numbers of women are  totally pre-occupied with  food, eating and weight  loss is not surprising given  that our culture is  obsessed with thinness.  In the heart of the movement  by Eunice Brooks  SANCTUARY  by Judith McDaniel  Firebrand Books, New York, 1987,  171 pages, $7.95  Do you want to take a journey into the  soul of a superb observer of human nature?  Do you wonder what it might be like to oppose a government in power on a matter of  foreign affairs? Come with author and ac-  tivbt Judith McDaniel into the intimacy of  her journals, finely crafted poems and essays. This might be the best read in the  decade.  McDaniel has chosen to live a life "not  cramped by the fear of death" and for her  that means walking, actually walking into  danger. Her first essay on leaving home  flows neatly into the second on walking, and  hence into sanctuary.  She says: 'I cannot write a book about  safe places without experiencing the unsafe."  In a few pages we are transported from  the little girl who wants to wear stylish  shoes to the woman in Nike joggers walking in front of gun carrying contras in  Nicaragua, in the mud and roots of the jungle. Her classic understatement: "My body  was not entirely under control," shows both  understanding and irony.  Sanctuary is about many journeys. For  example, the trek from innocent brat to political activist, from tomboy to lesbian, from  an alcoholic to one in control of her body,  from home to a war zone and back, to a  place that will never seem quite like home  again. There are more. I won't list them all.  She telb us: "The Sanctuary Movement has no precbe date of origin and  no founders." The movement b in aid of  Central Americans who want to live in  the United States and Canada. American  churches have become safe houses for those  in transit, as have private homes. McDaniel  first heard of the Sanctuary Movement in  1984, and subsequent contact with refugees  convinced her that witnessing was necessary, because so much of what is presented  to Americans by their government is disinformation. She was present in Arizona when  Sanctuary members were charged and tried  by the American government.  The opponent in all the mental battles  we fight with McDaniel is the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service. As one  example, she tells us of the hearing that denied Margaret Randall the right to live in  the country where she was born, where her  mother lives and where her husband lives.  That case is now under appeal.  One gets the feeling of being in the heart  of the movement, as though McDaniel has  pulled us from our arm chairs and into the  fray. One 'cannot remain remote from her  images. They linger in the closed eyes like  neon signs.  "On September 2 the judge who heard  the case ... confirmed that it b a deportable crime to criticize the U.S. government in print, even if history proves the criticism to be well founded." McDaniel tells us  of the Randall hearing.  McDaniel has written three other books  and edited an anthology. By trade she b  both writer and teacher. I recommend this  book to anyone who is a seeker of well  matched words, for it b spare with not a  word out of place.  I recommend it to those who seek truth,  for the journeys described are given in images that only one who has hved them could  render. I recommend the book to those who  may never venture anywhere more dangerous than the corner store, for Judith Mc-  ,Daniel can take you there too, and you will  find more than cigarettes and candybars.  I will leave the last words to her:  And sometimes this helps  the   words  to  come  again,   describing  each thing as it is,  seeing each detail with her heart  18   1^1 NESIS     Jul/Aug '87 ia^Ji,IIJ'mjJHimiimii  ■sixty perceilt of A.TM J?" ^"P- Close to I  fe^hpl ^}    th|gjgjs a,       *>  pr Diversity b an important part of the Fes- |  [rival and thb year's women artists reflect I  I this goal. Women are coming from as far as I  I England, Germany and New Zealand to join I  I the many North American women artists. I  I New Zealand will be represented this year I  I for the first time. The Topp Twins on their I  I first North American tour are bringing their I  I cabaret-style music, political theatre and I  I comedy to the Festival. "—'^"^  felt  I Representmg women in country musicl  are several artists of varying age and style.  Fifteen-year-old Alison Krauss b a talented  vocalist and fiddler from Illinois. Hazel  Dickens, from West Virginia writes and'  sings songs both traditional and contemporary. Joining them and others is Patsy Montana from Los Angeles, a treasure in country!  music and an inspiration to many women ~  | the field. ^^^^^^^^^^m  I ^p&oVt^ybwc0rti7 TM^S«i  Stand-up social commentator Sheila Go-ff  I stick from Toronto  b making her    rstl  Festival appearance this year. Celebra ingjS  iwomen's experience with her b Kate C in-K  ton from Los Angeles. Kate calb hers  f al  [fumerist—feminbt and humorbt combi ed.B  Singing about being black women in Noval  Scotia are Four The Moment. Performin  at ■  j their first Festival these women are sur  tog  draw big crowds. Influenced by Sweet H ney S  j in the Rock, this a capella group is challeng- a  ing preconceptions of the Nova Scotia b ack H  community and black women's experience.!  | Their music is both traditional and con em-j^a|i  Returning to Vancouver are Lillian Allenl  | and The Revolutionary Tea Party Band.1  'Lillian  is   a   dub   poet   from   Toronto's!  I Caribbean community and a 1986 J*»no|  award winner.  Locally, three very different women from!  British Columbia will all be returning to thei  Festival. Ferron will be back to the stage!  after a year-long break from performing. |  Connie Kaldor returns for her fifth festival. I  Shari Ulrich b back from a stint in Los An-I  geles for her first Festiy^aj^earan^smceJ  IwW? FifSnVal rePrese*ts strong women!  Mel iT^ traditi°nal ro,es TM^ J  difference There are many I have not men-1  XVte "tists add *> ^ dive" ;|  of the Festival and to Vancouver's conthlF  L?1^yrantJofJhis^^ '  K  Texas!  ■ Cathy Jones transports Wedding »n  J Texas and Other Stories to the Van-  I couver East Cultural Centre, August 13-30,  [Tuesday through Sunday, 8:30 p.m.  Rd adventuress,^  ^over, who is about!  Tald adventuress  Ler best friend and ex-love^w.  Itomarrya'sleazebag'vnTexas  .wiich b acufS> ^verent^^omtis^' , eF The journey to the wedding is the most!  **  tie  fi   3nd feroci0llVlS,0,1"~~a viS    linventive and demanding part of the play.l  M Presents a   ?' Par*  of 7^d fnmy   °nM Critics across the country are applauding its!  ■ apea'onCl, oroa ot six h *%» J or, BcomPlexity ^d risk-taking. The drawback!  Ixand 0r'ginalSSric and vj actefs- Th Bto attemPtinS tne less than assured path is  I M°Uscaria   I      e audienr      ra^e, ch.Vf, 'jBthe risk of drawinS criticism. And some crit-  ■ cW_   ' bespectacJPr)   * 5e^s A^aSM"* haVe P°inted to a lack °f cohesion m tne I  *" " a^^work, fragmentation in the structure and I  lthe overuse of special effects. However, the I  | overall critical response has been ecstatic.   |  |Dagmar Krause sings political Brecht |  J "You're M,P .,ere"xi8>  h"i: J?w^l  I Vave Gladney, hostess of the talk show,  iFudgeos and Feminism, b a Joan Rivers hy-  Ibrid with a Newfoundland lilt and the sure  I response of a grounded pragmatbt. A sur-  I vivor, she says of her husband: "He believes  I sex is like doing the dbhes—if you do it  I badly enough you won't get asked again."  cept »8 ^for the i***"?,^ W  •*** arrne Canaan£££"***  l*Cyter satirical eye ls acute aa  Catby^o^^Xco-d^upe,  ffi •, i?s^f rtiSS®^-^  tT 1^ "% FrC€ Hug8' Md offera 5> ten lb ilert Crew ot the Toront ^  the future with, no not a goddess tarot deck I * l£Li that, "^^L it can also be  but French fries-«all you need is a -31%°ffi^^«t£^4 outrage^  fries, no gravy." M^-   riv inventive, ***y »  traces 0{ th<  ^berbu-lB   [cath^ones: Wedding in Texas,  Burford 'Love' Murphy closes the first  Iict. Pencil thin moustache, greased back  hair: Jones cross-dressed as a shallow worn-  anizing lounge lizard.  I    The second part of the show witnesses I  Lindianna Jones, outport lesbian and rib-|  former, it J*lJj^(__   thl^SrWedding in Texas has toured at the Quin-1  zaine International Theatre Festival in Que-I  bee and the World Stage TheatreFestivaJ  I^INESIS       "87 Jul/Aug 19 ^^^s^^^^^^^^^^  ARTS  by Melanie Conn  While thb month's books are very different from each other (something you can  count on in thb column!), they share a particularly distinctive sense of environment.  In a way, that's one of the main features of  tee fiction (SF): creating a sense of time  and place that draws readers into some very  unusual situations and keeps us involved  and entertained.  Some SF authors concentrate on geography and physical characteristics while others focus more on the social or emotional  atmosphere. Pm most impressed when an  author approaches her story's environment  from several perspectives, but I am always  interested in a convincing description, even  from a single vantage point.  /N^O>Y\££  THE BEST OF  LEIGH BRACKETT  edited by Edmond Hamilton  Nelson Doubleday  Hardcover, 363 pages  Leigh Brackett has been writing SF for  almost fifty years. Some of these stories  were first published in 1944; the most recent has a 1956 copyright date. What fascinates me about Brackett b the attention  she gives to physical detail in her extraterrestrial stories. The planets she writes  about are Venus, Mars and Mercury and  she describes them in loving, lyrical detail:  dawn on Venus, for example ...  It came slowly, sifting down like a  rain of jewels through the miles of pearl-  gray cloud. Cool and slow at first, then  warming and spreading, turning the  misty air to drops of rosy fire, opaline,  glowing, low to the water, so that the  little ship seemed to be drifting through  the heart of a fire-opal as vast as the  universe.  Her Mercury, on the other hand, b a  hellish place, with extremes of savage heat  and bitter cold where life survives precariously in the Twilight Belt between the  poles. Mars b yet another contrast, home  of a dying, ancient civilization where cities  once flourished without suffering or crime or  places of punishment. Its inhabitants have  developed the faculty of reason, they explain, as opposed to Earth, where "man has  only learned to talk."  The stories are not sophisticated, and the  science b out of date, but for sheer creativity and vivid description, Brackett's writing  b a special kind of treat.  WOKLl*  ■ WIZARD OF THE PIGEONS'  by Megan Lindholm  Ace Fantasy Books, 1986, 214 pages  $3.75  The flavour of this book b part fairy tale  and part real life but for me, the strongest  taste is the location, described whimsically  in the first paragraph:  On the far western shore of a northern continent there was once a harbour  city called Seattle ... and the folk who  lived there were wont to call it "The  Emerald City" for the greenness of its  foliage.  The wizard of the title b a mysterious,  rather mixed-up young man, and the book  concerns hb survival in the city, on both the  psychological and physical level.  As a Vietnam veteran who is struggling  to come to terms with that experience, and  as a penniless street-person, Wizard roams  Seattle, taking in its sights and sounds. He  travels by bus and foot and fantasy, often  guided by Cassie, a down-to-earth fairy godmother who knows how important a hot  bath b after a day out scavenging in a  rainy, west-coast winter afternoon. Cassie  also knows why downtown Seattle sidewalks  are hollow and who built Waterfall Gardens,  an oasis of shade trees and flowing water in  the middle of the city.  Wizard's interior explorations are marked  by confusion and occasional insights, mirrored by the ever-present (and familiar)  Seattle weather. A sentimental favorite,  mainly because of the setting.  ■ THE JUDAS ROSE:  NATIVE TONGUE II  by Suzette Haden Elgin  Daw Books, 1987, 363 pages  $4.50  Everyone who loved Native Tongue will  be as excited as I was to hear that there's  a sequel. In her first book, the author described a future society where women are  subjugated by men. The focus was on one  group of women who are secretly organizing  and building a base for change through the  creation of a women's language.  The atmosphere throughout the first  book b brooding and oppressive except  when the women are together: their resilience and humour and support of one another radiate warmth and light.  The sequel provides the same contrast between the world of men and the real world  of the women, but much more of the action in The Judas Rose takes place outside the women's community. In fact, it took  me some time to adjust to the rhythm of  The Judas Rose; instead of one, more or  less chronological story, there are a number of story threads, several concerning men  and their negotiations with the alien traders  who dominate Earth economics.  Instead of picking up where the first  book left off, Elgin has broadened the frame  through which we observe this future world.  The most important thread of her story continues to be the strengthening of Laadan  (the women's language), and the women  still sparkle, especially in their witty and  ironic observations of men. But, we also  learn more about the forces interacting with  Earth, and the emotional impact of the  women's project becomes harder to sustain  in the face of such major players.  The pace of the book reflects the author's  understanding of the process of change. Her  wonderful character, Nazareth, a young girl  in the first book, and now a woman over  ninety, says  The unit of time that must be taken  into account here is not decades but centuries, and tens of centuries ... Nothing about me was large enough to stretch  itself to such a scale. And so, because  there was quite literally nothing else to  do, I set Time aside ... I began to do  whatever I humanly could.  Her message is an important one: women  have ways of creating real change, because  we understand how change occurs and we  have the courage and resolve to undertake  the process. Something to think about these  days as our impatience grows.  gait, a regularity to her breathing. As  she trudged, she inhaled the rich energy  that was the fern's exhalation and gave  back to the plant with each of her own  out-breathing her tiredness; that tiredness was the stuff of the fern's life. She  could actually see the plant soaking up  her fatigue, quenching its thirst.  Eventually, we learn about other, more  specialized skills: the power of the mind  to move objects, and the ability to fly  ("windride"). Somehow, because not all the  women have these skilb, and because there  are some comical scenes of women trying to  learn, none of it seems out of the ordinary,  in the context of the book.  In thb series of loosely connected stories,  Gearhart explores many aspects of these future women's lives, particularly their use of  memory to bind them together. Most of the  memories are of past outrages committed  against them by the men who still dwell in  the City.  The men continue to present great danger to the "Gentles" amongst them, as well  as to women within and without the City's  ■ THE WANDERGROUND  by Sally Miller Gearhart  The Women's Press, 1985  212 pages  $7.95  I think Fve saved the best one for last.  The Wanderground opens with a young  woman on watch listening telepathically  to the sounds around her. Amongst other  things, thb book presents the most concrete, and at the same time, the most natural descriptions of telepathy I have ever  read. The women of the Wanderground use  their skill for conversation, for comfort, for  surveillance, for ritual. Quite quickly, the  reader becomes used to the many delicate  forms of their mind-to-mind communications.  The women's mental interaction is reflected in their ability to communicate with  the natural world. In one passage, a woman  visualises a fern to help her through a long  and difficult trek:  Ciana established a rhythm to her  walls. The scenes of oppression are grim and  disturbing, partly because they are so familiar: women hunted down for wearing pants,  for attending a political meeting, for talking  back to a man in public.  For all the pain in the book, though, what  has stayed with me is the beauty and the,  hope so richly described.  20     I^INESIS     Jul/Aug '87 Arts  ^^%sssms%<*^m^^  Eva Kupczynski  FIBRE ARTIST  by Jill Pollack  Tapestry has a long hbtory as both  functional objects and religious illuminants.  Their value as artworks has been confined,  until very recently, to museums, where they  are considered artifacts; or to specialized  galleries or exhibitions, where more often  than not they have been segregated from  the rest of the collection.  Quilts, perhaps because they are more  decorative, have fared better than other  forms of fibre art, with what has been called,  "The Quilt Revival" occurring in the seventies, and due primarily to the efforts of feminists to reclaim "women's work".  Yet generally fine art fibre art has not entered into the larger critical discourse, and  continues to exist outside the realm of most  serious discussions.  Fibre art has not yet been allowed to  throw off the cloak of obscurity. A few exceptions creep through, notably when made  by an artist who has gained a solid reputation in other areas.  For example, Sonia Delaunay's retrospective at the Albright Knox Gallery (Buffalo,  New York) in 1980 included a large selection  of her fabrics, costumes and design work.  Not only as a result of the post-war revival  of design taking place in France and Germany in the twenties, nor her associations  through her husband Robert, but because  of her ability to convert modernist ideology  into fabric, was her work received so well.  It cannot be overlooked, however, that  the milieu in France in 1925 was conducive  to accepting fabric art. A fusion between industry and art was taking place, and Delaunay's fibre work was in the vanguard. She  upheld that "the true beauty of an object  b not an effect of taste but b intimately  tied to its function." Yet despite the quality of her work and its innovativeness, the  economic situation in France in the 1930's  caused her to re-assess her priorities and return to painting. In the 1970's she went back  to work with fabric, but again, the trend  had re-emerged.  It b profound that even an artist of Sonia Delaunay's stature saw the inevitable  outcome of continuing to work in fibre. She  chose to abandon it as, for various economic, ideological and aesthetic reasons, the  art world was promoting and completely involved with painting, and only painting.  The after-effects of a war and the feminist  movement were mitigating factors which enabled Delaunay to work with fabric and be  seen as creating art. Yet few others have  achieved her level of recognition.  Thb b not because no one else has  been as technically or aesthetically proficient as she was. In Canada, artists such as  Cathie Falk and Joyce Wieland have ventured successfully into fibre art, but only  fleetingly and never within the strict confines of tapestry. Their forays bore a close  enough relationship to "conventional" fine  art that they were able to cross the rigid  barriers and still be assessed within current critical terms. That Delaunay, Falk and  Wieland are strong, important artbts b undeniable. But their positions make it possible to explore, with success and deserved  recognition, the fibre arts.  Art criticism in the 1980's continues to be  focussed on painting and to a lesser extent,  photography and film. The significance of  thb cannot be overlooked. An artist like Eva  Kupczynski, despite the quality of her work,  finds herself involved in a medium which remains on the edge of the Canadian art community.  After a flurry of activity in the seventies, where major fibre exhibitions and large  commissions were more common, the tide  abated. It left a few artbts with solid reputations, but most were simply confused.  What had happened? For a while there had  been the beginnings of a critical discourse  and re-evaluation. And although the impact  had left trace elements, by the early 1980's,  fibre artists were once again swallowed up  and largely ignored.  Yet the 'underground' of fibre art production continues. Especially in Vancouver,  there are many artbts who refuse to change  mediums, despite the fact that they are  working in a relative vacuum. These artbts,  primarily women, are involved in a number  of individual attempts to push the boundaries of fibre art. Not because they are haphazardly concerned with moving away from  traditions, but due to their own creative  sensibilities, are they doing thb.  Perhaps in some way affected by the  surge of interest in the seventies, artbts such  as Karen Chapnick, Eva Kupczynski and  Joanna Stanbzkis remain deeply committed and are important fibre artists, because  they choose to be.  The exhibition, Cityscapes, depicts an  irony that is unmistakable. Eva Kupczynski has produced a series of tapestries based  on the downtown core of Vancouver, as  seen from her window. Including a grid-like  structure into the tapestries allows the imagery to appear from the same perspective  as she encountered it—at a distance. Given  the context of fibre art in Vancouver, her  work speaks not just of itself (which it does  very eloquently) but of the state of thb art  form in the city.  Eva has captured and distilled Vancouver  within the confines of the centre of business, backdropped by the mountains and  foregrounded by B.C. Place; showing in  the middle the arena of power. Abstracted,  the downtown core becomes symmetrical,  anonymous and unreal. It is a panoramic  vbta which can be seen, but not entered.  These works offer a vicarious portrait  of the urban landscape, at once uninhabitable and tinged with irony. Yet it also  appears non-threatening and soft. Eva has  taken into account the properties of her chosen medium, and used them to enhance her  analysis. In evidence is the combination of  a strong technique, a developed awareness  of composition and a provocative use of imagery.  Eva Kupczynski's tapestries derive some  of their power from their ability to be read  on many levels. The continuum of art history is marked by a movement from rendering external situations, to revealing unconscious states, to a mingling of the two.  Her fibre works exhibit an awareness  of thb legacy, and enter into the discourse via their connections to pictorial  traditions and the current re-assessment  of the urbanscape-as-landscape. Canadian  Eva Kupczynski  art, with its overt relationship to (and  against) the power of the natural environment, b more and more concerned with  what has been termed, "The Urban Wilderness". This new body of Kupczynski's can  be seen as an offshoot of that trend.  Eva has taken care to refer to her previous, abstract work at the same time as she  b venturing into the representational. In the  past, she created tapestries which alluded  to her surroundings, capturing their mood  rather than their physical presence. She b  now weaving definable scenarios, imbuing  them with sensations which acknowledge  the impact of industrialization but which  also yearn for a return to awareness of place.  She equates the gentle slope of the mountains with the curved roof of B.C. Place. She  renders each piece in tiers, exposing a slice  of the archaeology of the urban setting, with  the natural landscape on top, moving downward to the architecture of the city. And she  separates herself from her imaginary by not  including any animate human presence and  by dissecting the images with woven "flaps".  These flaps serve as both window frames  and as reminders that it is a distant view  we are seeing.  We are not surrounded by the imagery,  rather we observe it through her sensibility  and from afar. Thb perceptual technique is  enhanced by the fibre itself. Clearly we are  faced with a tapestry and clearly it alludes  to, but is not, the true city. Instead, the  tapestries refer to the actualities of the urban setting by capturing its essence.  Another tactic which the artist employs  to blur the existing definitions of fibre art  b her almost-painterly manner of weaving. Seemingly a contradiction in terms,  Eva Kupczynski nevertheless designs her  tapestries under the loose umbrella of traditions of pointillism and impressionbm.  Although due in part to the grid system imposed by the medium of tapestry,  the work premises a similar ideological base:  the intention to achieve a vividness or effectiveness more by evoking subjective and  sensory impressions than by recreating an  objective reality. This further situates her  work within the context of art hbtory, and  Detail of Cityscape tapestry  elucidates many weavers' desire to extend  the potential and status of the medium, still  within the confines of tapestry but allowing  for continual exploration.  At the same time, there b a marked  awareness of modern art-making practices  and theories, transposed and transformed as  suited to tapestry.  Obviously, on some level the dialogue  does include fibre artists, but it b within the  private realm, and still confined to one-way  communication. Artbts involved in fibre are  interested in and concerned with current  aesthetic ideologies, and indeed see themselves as constituents of the larger art community. But, as Sonia Delaunay acknowledge fifty years ago, they find the nexus of  fibre and other fine arts to be sadly lacking.  Eva Kupczynski has devbed her own  methods of production and her own venues  for public exposure and feedback. While thb  adds to her load, it at least ensures that  for her, anyway, the cycle of communication  has an outlet. She has no choice, for Eva  Kupczynski is a (fibre) artist.  UPRISING  DREADS  BAKERY  Introduces  Ice Cream  & frozen  desserts  non-dairy available too  1697 Venables Street  Vancouver 254-5635  A part of CRS Work  KINESIS <^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^  ARTS  Women are making the joint jump  by Carolyn Bell  I come to you relatively fresh from a gig  (a gig b a job for musicians; I don't think  they have to pay you as much for a gig as a  job) at the Holiday Inn on West Broadway.  I had the privilege of accompanying  Colleen Savage, local blues and jazz singer  on the hotel's untuned baby Yamaha grand  piano. We transcended the upper register,  and made a lot of friends and music while  we were there.  Colleen likes to sing my originals, and  since I have learned to play in other than  the People's Key of 'C, we have a wonderful working relationship. If I can get just a  little Barbara Walters, she b also a quick  wit and a wonderful human being.  Over the course of the gig, Colleen took  a week off and, as we realbed it would  be terribly lonesome for me all alone at I  the Holiday Inn, we invited some other  singers to come down during the time  Colleen was away. One guest was local  singer-composer-musician Rae Armour who  agreed to come and dabble in some jazz and  old tunes (Ain't Mbbehavin', Summertime,  Sentimental Journey, to name a few).  On the evening in question, as she was  setting up her recording device, a psychopathic bar fly oozed over to the table where  we had our equipment and sat down with  hb trusty beer.  "We're about to record here," says Rae.  "I won't say a word," says the psychopath. (The guy's eyes were glowing, and  it wasn't from love of humankind. It looked  as though he had borrowed his smile from  Jack Nichobon in The Shining.  Well, we began. Our audience had been  hanging around chomping at the nachos and  the bit at the same time.  The psychopath was true to his word. He  did not speak, he merely began clapping hb  hands in the middle of Rae's poignant rendition of Summertime. She and I exchange  looks. I nod.  "Back in five minutes ..." says Rae to  our audience.  "Play some Floyd Kramer Fm paying  your salary" the guy orders, indicating his  beer.  The staff swooped down and gently extricated him from the hotel prembes as Millie, the bartender, told him quietly, "You  will never get a drink again in this bar for  as long as you live." Rae and I resumed.  Community of Jazz Lovers  It b an unfortunate fact that most musicians make their rent money playing in bars,  where the music seems to be secondary to  the 'interesting elements' that society offers  us.  But don't despair. Two alternatives, for  those who do not want to have more stress  going out to hearhve music than thev  have had all week at work, are CFRO Vancouver Co-operative Radio, 102.7 FM and  The Classical Joint on Carrall Street in Gas-  town.  Co-op Radio has many regularly scheduled jazz and blues programs: Jazzblu, A-  Trane, Women of Note and The Joint is  Jumpin', broadcast live from the Classical  Joint every Sunday night.  When I first arrived in Vancouver fifteen  years ago, a friend took me to the Joint.,  I was young and green and ate the casual,  candlelit ambience with a spoon. Then the  music started and I was a hooked fish.  At that time, women musicians were  scarce in Vancouver—other than vocal musicians, the ones who are too often overlooked and unfortunately, still referred to as  chick singers, jazz bitches and canaries.  Many local women vocalbts have worked  hard to acquire the theory and arranging  skills need to write their own charts, enabling them to perform songs as they want  them sung.  Many of these women perform at the  Classical Joint, one of the few clubs in town  that is there because of the music and the  community, not tourism and booze sales.  To mention a few, Kate Hammett-  Vaughn, Bonnie Ferguson, Shannon Gunn  and Colleen Savage are regulars at the Joint  and deliver jazz tunes to an always appreciative audience.  The Joint, in fact, b more than a club.  It's a community of jazz lovers and everyone, it seems, is welcome. One time, on  Tuesday Jam Night, some friends and I wandered in. A woman with a stroller came in,  dropped the stroller off at the table in front  of us, and made for the other side to get a  better look at the band.  From the back, we couldn't tell if there  was a child there or if she was using it to  portage goods of some kind. The woman  came back towards us, took a look at the  stroller and left to get herself some tea. Still  no movement from the stroller.  "Maybe it's a saxophone," I said.  "Nah, it's too well behaved for a saxophone," replied my friend.  It was a child, grinning quietly and listening to be-bop music.  On the monthly listing of who's playing, the Joint promo abo states: "The place  to listen to Vancouver's finest musicians,  mostly jazz groups, occasionally folk or  blues and classical music. A place to relax, >  meet people, play chess and where single  women can feel comfortable."  Bass and Piano, Voice and Sax  We've briefly touched on some of our local vocalbts. Here are some local women  players you can watch for; they are all entertaining and inspiring. Patti Nichobon (Pat  Hervey) vocalizes and plays bass with Oliver  Gannon. Barbara Fisher, singer, songwriter,  piano player. Barbara is off to Europe for  awhile but look for her in a month or two  around town. Kendra Sprinkling and Meg  Walker have a group called, A La Carte,  with Barbara. Rae Armour will be taking  Barbara's place while she b away. They perform at Hogan's Alley at Puccinni's the first  two weekends in July. Monique Nadine is a  talented saxophonbt who can be heard with  Allen Matheson's Big Band.  Kirsten Nash, vocalbt and sax player, b  presently on tour with Long John Baldry.  duced two successful benefits at the Classical Joint, where many of the aforementioned  players performed as well as Alan Mathe-  son, Bob Murphy, Craig Scott and many  others. Noovo features many women jazz  musicians as a matter of course.  Colleen and other locals will be showcased at the Vancouver's du Maurier Jazz  Festival in July. Grab a program or stay  tuned to Co-op Radio for more information.  You Can Be Yourself  I recently completed an impromptu sur-  Twyla Brooks.bass; Sandy Scofield, vocals. Carolyn Bell, piano.  Judy Abrams, pianbt. Judy writes her own  tunes and plays in a Salsa band, as well as  at the Classical Joint from time to time.  Glenna Powrie and Renne Rosness are two  keyboard players who have received Canada  Council grants to study in New York. Catch  them at the Classical Joint.  Twyla Brooks, bassbt. Twyla has played  with Gavin Walker, Kate Hammett-Vaughn,  Carolyn Bell and the country swing band,  the Hen Pab, which opened for Key Change  at the Savoy and the Railway Club in June.  (Just an aside—a great night of music at  the Savoy. Key Change is fronted by Heidi  Archibald and Jane LaRue whose cover version of Grace Jones' "Everybody Hold Still"  stopped the show. Both Heidi and Jane deserve induction into the local blues women  hall of fame.)  Kathy Kidd, pianbt, teacher, composer.  Kathy teaches at V.C.C. If anyone out there  b thinking of going to school to learn about  jazz, go there. Kathy is a very caring, patient teacher with much respect for her students.  A final note of wonderful jazz and blues  women to add to your list of local people to  see: June Katz (working on her second album), Lovie Elie, Tess Mariasine, Amanda  Hughes, Jennifer Scott, Lovena Fox, and  Sybil Thraser.  It's worth mentioning that there b considerable crossover to jazz from musicians  who focus largely on other musical styles.  It has been my delight to have played jazz  and blues backup for three of Vancouver's  rock/new wave singers: Vanessa Richards  (Bolera Lava), Madeleine Morrb (Family  Plot) and Sandy Scofield at Graceland a  couple of months ago. All three women love  to sing jazz and do a great job of it, although  it's not their regular bag.  Colleen Savage has been playing regularly  around Vancouver for years. Recently she  and I, along with some other players and interested parties, came together to form the  Noovo Jazz Etc. Society. The Society pro-  vey on the topic "So what's the big attraction in jazz." While making a living is secondary, if relevant at all, here are some random comments by randomly questioned mu-  "Jazz was instrumental in bringing white  and black players together when such a  thing was unheard of and dangerous. It's  the great communicator. It transcends race  and sex."  "There are so seldom areas in life where  you can be yourself. Jazz demands that you  be yourself."  Now, singing the blues comes into it. In  order to be a good player (we're including  singers here, right?), it takes years of study  and active performing work. Money b always tight. There are no dental plans for  musicians. There is no worker's compensation if you injure a vocal cord trying to be  heard over the din of Saturday night life, or  if your saxophone gets run over by a cab.  But we keep on, keeping the music alive,  creating new music, new venues where the  emphasis b on the performance and not the  bar tab.  Your peers and family are always trying to find you part time jobs because with  studying, food, and drycleaning bills, you  are usually so broke you can't pay attention.  But jazz hves and more and more women  are breaking traditions and becoming—as  Mary-Lou Williams, jazz piano great was  called by a band member—'girl-cats', mean-  ' ing that anything the men can play, women  can play.  In Toronto in the early seventies, a young  Kathy Kidd went backstage after hearing  Mary-Lou play. After graciously listening  to Kathy's superlatives, Ms. Williams said,  "Oh, that was nothing but a l'il ole boogie  woogie."  Carolyn Bell is another local jazz legend. A pianist, songwriter and singer,  Carolyn often performs at the Classical Joint, but can be seen at other local venues.  22   KINESIS     Jul/Aug  87 Arts  //////////////////////////^^^^  Press Gang live at the  American Booksellers Association  by Delia McCreary  The taxi was late. It was rush hour in  Toronto. I got to the airport with only fifteen minutes until my flight. When I smiled  at the customs officer he didn't smile back.  "Where are you going?"  "Washington, D.C."  "What for?"  "I work for a small publishing company  in Vancouver, Canada and we're exhibiting  at a convention being held there this year.  The American Booksellers Association convention (ABA)."  "How long you staying?"  "Six days altogether."  "What's in the box?"  "Catalogues, a listing of the books we've  publbhed."  "I want to see."  (You're kidding)  Fortunately, I had a couple of copies of  the catalogue in my hand luggage that he  accepted as evidence. The officer then proceeded to not skim but read the Press Gang  catalogue from cover to cover. As he made  hb way through titles on lesbianism, feminism, women and institutionalized oppression, etc., I watched the time of my flight go  on by and wondered what thb man was going to do. There was no drama. In due time  and matter-of-factly he said, "One of those  feminist publbhers, huh?"  "Yes"  "Go ahead then."  I had missed my flight.  Arriving at my hotel in Washington  hours late, with my box of catalogues, my  backpack of "good" clothes, I was irritable  and exhausted—until it dawned on me that  I was here. "Do you realize you're really  here ... you're sharing a room with the  women from Cleb Press ... you just met  the women who run Seal Press in the lobby  ... tomorrow you're going to meet ..."  Despite my excitement, I had a looming  feeling that I was out of my league. What  was Press Gang, a small Canadian pub-  Ibher, doing at the ABA?  The ABA was everything I had been told  to expect—overwhelming, exciting, a different world from the Canadian equivalent (the  Canadian Booksellers Association convention) which is much more low key. Every  American and Canadian publisher who can  afford (or nearly afford) to attend the ABA  does so. It is a place to promote your books  and to make sales. The dbplays range from  outrageously lavbh to modestly grand. Virtually every new book being or about to be  published in the United States and Canada  b loudly proclaimed at the convention.  Everyone who owns a bookstore who can  afford (or nearly afford) to attend the ABA  does so. Booksellers roam the aisles with  ordering Ibts in their hands, taking information, sometimes asking which of your titles might sell well in a "general" bookstore  in Peaprairie, Illinois— "We want to stock a  good women's section."  As a small feminist publbher on the west  coast of Canada it b easy to feel insignificant at times in relation to the larger feminist publishing industry. It was quite an experience to have so many people over the  four days of the convention come up to Press  Gang's booth and say "Pm so glad you came  to the ABA," "I love your book," "What  are you doing that's new?" "Such and such  b one of our best selling books," etc.  I had to quickly adjust my (Press Gang's)  self-image. Contrary to being outside a  larger feminist publbhing community we  are evidently a distinct part of it.  The confirmation of this was worth the  trip to Washington in and of itself. The  North American market for feminist and  lesbian material b growing and becoming  more demanding, and the feminbt publishing industry and community is growing with  it. The evident concern among the smaller  feminist publbhers is not whether there are  enough people who want to read the work  they're doing but more how to survive as a  small publbhing business.  Nancy Bereano, of Firebrand Books,  called a meeting of women-owned, women-  run feminbt publishers that was held during the ABA. The intention is that thb was  the first of what will become annual meetings of such publbhing houses. At the meeting the discussion kept coming back to the  concern that we must be careful not to be  drawn into seeing one another as competitors. In spite of the business-minded climate  we are presently faced with, we must work  to remain allies, work to clarify who and  what are the threats to us.  A growing threat is from the larger publishers who now see that there is money to  be made from a substantial feminist market. Now that writers have been established through the smaller feminbt publbhers, larger houses with more money behind  them can offer very appealing advances to  authors more or less on spec. Thb b virtually an impossibility for a business with a  tight cash flow, especially a feminbt business with the goal of encouraging and publishing women writers who have not been  previously published. One always publishes  with much hope but not enough certainty of  the financial returns to let you throw a hefty  advance to your next deserving writer-with-  manuscript-in-hand.  Feminbt publishers of varying sizes were  represented at the meeting, but all are still  in the small publisher category. It b in relation to the stature of the mainstream industry that we are defined. We all agreed  that we experience or have experienced similar headaches about how to manage to pay  ourselves a living wage, how to work efficiently and not abandon goals of working  collectively, how to find appropriate material to publish, how to best promote to our  markets, what avenues to pursue when aiming to grow, and more. It was suggested that  becoming more aware of ourselves as a community and sharing information will be crucial in order to protect and strengthen our  integrity and our publbhing potential.  At the meeting I recall Barbara Smith of  Kitchen Table: Women of Color Press, sitting to the side of the room. It is hard to  say but clear to see that feminbt publbhing is more accurately white feminist publishing. The reason, racism, is no more acceptable than the sexbt reasons that explain  why mainstream publishing represents the  interests of a male-dominated world.  The bsue of racism within feminbt publishing was not mentioned at our meeting. Several times I looked over to Barbara  Smith, wondering about her lack of voice.  I wondered about the other white women  in the room who didn't raise the bsue of  racbm. Why b it so scary to talk about? I  suspect because there b guilt and blame and  power at stake—and so much to be done to  rectify the state of affairs.  I was sorry to come away from the ABA  with no sense of the racbm in publbhing dialogue as alive and lively. I was dbcouraged  to hear Barbara Smith imply, in conversation, that she is fed up with white feminist  publishers.  The most encouraging conversation I had  about racism on my trip was after the ABA  when I met with Rona Moreau from the  Women's Press in Toronto. Racbm seems to  be hot on their plate these days, and their  intention b to learn more about it. They  feel lucky to have Sbter Vbion (a relatively  new feminbt women of colour press) working in Toronto. We talked about the work  that white women must do and the responsibility they must take for learning about  and acting on racism, for seeing where we  are and where we want to go as feminbts  working to publish the voices of all women.  The International Feminist Bookfare is  being held in Montreal in 1988 and I hope  to be part of the Canadian feminist publishing community gaining a greater understanding of itself, part of dialogues unfolding and amplifying.  As Canadian publishers, there are ways  in which we are distinct from our American  counterparts, and for some (perhaps overestimated) reason I feel that we are not as  out of our league as I previously thought.  A mixed message I got from the American booksellers b that while they're enthusiastic about the "good work" we do (they  wbh we'd do more), they can only sell it as  long as the bsues are not particularly Canadian or from a Canadian perspective. The  affect of thb arrogance goes home with me  at the end of my work day these days.  I think about Press Gang's membership  in the North American feminbt publishing  community, and I feel good, with reservations. I think about the inspiring and hardworking women I met. I think about Canadian feminist publishing issues and feel motivated to both learn and unlearn much.  For a listing of feminist publishers in  Canada and the Untied States see Words  to the Wise by Andrea Fleck Clardy. A  second updated edition will be available  this fall.  fmuc Banners  MDE   TO ORD£r\  OJiu su*-recLSor>oi>te rates* bartf  carsiietel- £(«zabetri 73f-f3?5  rSKXWoMAH'S  l3l<!Ct*AM£RciAL &R. &54&05&  ie> stXrVTiNcr-rb sell ",  Clothes foo. large WDMtri  ALSD  LCTT6  of «UAUft?UL  ttfewetufcY Arte i&  iNCKgASUfcr TWE frKEETlHCr  CMU>  3ELeCTt<»U.f£yOND  c^l  f!  $>"  '§2  feminist thee:  somen's writing    ^  ending abuse  f arid books for women  '        2766 west 4th ave.  Vancouver, b.c.  Canada V6kirl  (604)733-3511  Marsha J. Arbour    I  Signpainting  Screenprinting  Graphics 6? Design     \  734-9395  PIGEON  pr0gram y°ur  dearies and  saveaeundle.  683-1610  683-2696  1501-925 West Georgia Street, Vancouver, B.C. V6C 1R5  • • THEATRE • *  For the best in Foreign Films  and Independent Quality Films  Non-Sexist, Coffee Bar, Crying Room for parents  with small children  16th and ARBUTUS STREET  Phone 738-6311  $2.50 on TUesday, $4 students with  valid student cards.   VANCOUVER WOMEN'S   BOOKSTORE  Hours: Monday-Saturday  ll:00-5:30pm  684-0523  Ask about our new book club.  ibie Street     Vancouver, B.C. V6B 2N4  KINESIS 87 Jul/Aug Letters  Support  needed  Kinesis  Lucy Berrios and Ivonne Melendez, the  two women of the Puerto Rican 15, were finally released on hail shortly before the winter holidays. The women had been incarcerated in pre-trial detention for more than  fourteen months by Reagan's 1984 Bail Reform Act, through which their motions for  bail were denied repeatedly, until the defendants were successful in overturning the  constitutional nature of one of its provisions.  Arrested in connection with the August 30th FBI assault on the Independence Movement of Puerto Rico, they are  charged with violating the RICO Statutes  (Racketeering Influenced and Corrupt Organizations) purportedly designed to halt  the mafia, but used most notably to date  against the New York 8 Plus, a group  of Afro-American Anti-Imperialists. The  women are clearly independentists, but the  U.S. government persists in branding them  and their co-defendants as terrorists.  The federal government has militarized  the courtroom since the beginning of the  hearings with excessive security measures,  the most recent additions being concrete  blocks surrounding the entrance of the  Federal Court Building, one would think  are more appropriate to U.S. embassies in  Beirut than in Hartford, CT.  Lucy and Ivonne, along with those of  the prisoners who have been released, have  found themselves suddenly living in Hartford with requirements to appear in court  daily, with a court ordered curfew of ten  p.m. and with permits required for travel to  other cities. Both women have children (five  in total) and must arrange for child care as  the judge has ruled that the children are not  allowed in the courtroom.  Having just spent over a year in prison,  the women are under the stress of preparing for their defense which involves listening  to hundreds of hours of FBI wiretap tapes,  checking their transcriptions and their subsequent translation into English. Their children have undergone a great deal of trauma,  and need special attention. Lucy's husband  Juan is still incarcerated along with Filib-  erto Ojeda, and she is also involved in supporting him while he is inside.  Their expenses are tremendous, not even  referring to the cost of attorneys and transcriptions, etc. Uprooted from their country, tossed into prison, and now struggling with survival and the U.S. system  of justice, these women need our support.  Please send any amount of money that you  can, with cheques made out to NHACAR  (New Haven Action Committee Against Repression), P.O. Box 2072, New Haven, CT  06521. Please annotate Lucy and Ivonne  and it will be put into a specific fund for  their use.  Thank you,  Theresa I. Carr  Hartford, CT  P.S. Letters to the defendants are also  welcome.  Praise for  Vancouver  Kinesis  Open letter to the women of the Vancouver women's community:  I have recently moved to Victoria after  being part of the women's community in  Vancouver for over thirteen years. On a  recent weekend visit back in Vancouver I  found myself reminiscing with a dear friend;  it was a time of recounting, of taking stock  of the past years.  In that recounting I began to realize how  very blessed I have been over the years to  have known so many wonderful, interesting,  provocative and loving women, from intimate friends to neighbours to political allies to acquaintances; women with courage  and determination, humour and heart.  I feel grateful for these women in my life  and intend this letter as a letter of appreciation and deep thanks to this entire community of women for being part of my life  and including me in theirs.  There have been many times when we  have had criticisms to make about each  other as individuals, collective members, allies and opponents. We can be so very hard  on each other sometimes. Our differences  contribute to our growth as much as our  love and support for each other does.  ARIEL BOOKS  open  Monday to Saturday  10-6  Sunday  1-5  artel books for women  2766 w.4thave. van., b.c 733-}5U  Sometimes we belabour the point when  we have criticisms to make, forgetting to  take equal time to celebrate each other,  as individuals and as community. We are  such fascinating, earnest, delightful people,  each in our own way—let's not take this for  granted.  Victoria is new to me. The women I have  met here thus far are also good women. And  it will take time for me to feel as comfortable  and supported and accepted as I have been  in Vancouver. Right now I miss and appreciate my old community in Vancouver.  I want to thank the Vancouver women's  community for everything I have learned  from them; for the struggles and the joys  and the love.  Remember to appreciate each other.  Love  Deb Thiessen  God  stands by  WfM  Kinesis  Open letter to RE.A.L. Women:  I was a born-again twenty years ago.  I was a fundamentalist church-attending  Christian for as many years as my "Christian" husband would allow me to be. I was  married for fifteen years, mainly because I  believed that I had no other options. He  did not want children, so I chose not to  have any. Fortunately, I could choose. I performed my wifely duty every other night  for as long as we were together, whether I  wanted to or not. I landed in a psychiatric  ward after all those years of his tender loving care. He subsequently divorced me for  mental cruelty. I turned to women for love.  I am now a slightly psychotic lesbian on  welfare. Your god and your philosophy condemn me. My God, who has never left me,  does not condemn me.  When the legs fold in from under you and  that man and his church that you lean on finally desert you, will your god still be with  you?  Irene Neufeld  Learn  newspaper  skills-  call 873-5925  i  Arms production, South Africa,  toxic waste—don't finance what  you don't support*  CCEC Credit Union  Mon. and Wed. 11 am to 5 pm.  Friday 1 to 7 pm.  33 East Broadway  876-2123  Your money can be used to help build the  kind of society you want to live in.  btSflfJT^fcgSv  24    I^INESIS      JUI/AUO '87 /////////////////m^^  ////////////////////^^^^^  Bulletin Board  Read this  All listings must be received no later than .3  the 18th of the month preceding publica- *  tion. Listings are limited to 75 words and -a  should include a contact name and tele- -2  phone number for any clarification that may ■§_  be required. Listings should be typed or  neatly handwritten, double-spaced on 8 h  by 11 paper. Listings will not be accepted  over the telephone. Groups, organizations  and individuals eligible for free space in the  Bulletin Board must be, or have, non-profit  objectives. Other free notices will be items  of general public interest and will appear at  the discretion of Kinesis.  Classified are $4 for the first 75 words or  portion thereof, $1 for each additional 25  words or portion thereof. Deadline for classifieds is the 18th of the month preceding  publication. Kinesis will not accept classifieds over the telephone. All classifieds must  be prepaid.  For Bulletin Board submissions send  copy to Kinesis Att'n Bulletin Board, 400  A West 5th, Vancouver, B.C. V5Y 1J8. For  more information call 873-5925.  EVENTS  A SURVIVAL GATHERING  Plans are now underway for the 3rd annual North American anarchist gathering  in Toronto July 1-4, 1988. Input welcome. Sept. 13 planning mtg. in T.O.  More info P.O. Box 435 Stn. P. Toronto  M5S 2S9  COFFEE HOUSES  Vancouver Lesbian Connection hosts  Coffee Houses the 1st and 3rd Friday  of every month, 876 Commercial Drive.  7:30-11 pm. It's a good chance to see  some of the community's finest entertainers.  W.K.W.A. WOMEN'S FESTIVAL  Workshops—feminist theory, singing,  spirituality, country music, theatre. Open  stage Sun. Images Ad Hoc, Women  on Cue, Si dance on Sat. nite. Child  care available Sat. Boys 10 and under  welcome. Camping available. No pets.  Potluck dinner Sat. Valican Whole. Aug.  15 & 16. $30. weekend, $5. less for  W.K.W.A. members, unemployed & pre-  registered. Children under 8 free, half  price 8-16 yrs. Send for brochure West  Kootenay Women's Assoc. 307 Vernon.  Nelson. B.C. V1L 4E3. 352-9916.  LESBIAN SHOW  Thursdays 8:30-9:30 pm. CFRO 102.7  FM. Co-op Radio. July 2. Lezzie Lit.—  books old Si new; July 9, Anne Cameron;  July 16 Folk Fest: A Dyke's Preview; July  23, news; July 30, opera. Yes. you heard  right; Aug 6, What can we do about the  right?; Aug. 13, Lesbian filmmaker, Barbara Hammer; Aug. 20, TBA; Aug. 27.  monthly news.  BOOKSTORE'S BIRTHDAY  Join Vancouver Women's Bookstore, 315  Cambie St. for 14th birthday celebration.  14 % discount off everything! July 25  11-5:30 pm. Refreshments.  INT'L LESBIAN WEEK  Help organize International Lesbian  Week— first week in October. Last yr.  during I.L.W. there were several activities. Make this year's larger, lustier, more  visible, more fun. First planning mtg.  July 14, 7:30 pm. VLC. 876 Commercial  Drive.  PROUD. STRONG, UNITED  10th Annual Gay Si Lesbian Pride Festival. Vancouver Aug. 1-9. Aug. 1 Van.  Vancouver's Women's  Bookstore celebrates its  fourteenth birthday this  July, making it one of  the oldest women's  bookstores in the country. The bookstore, in  it's various locations,  provided meeting space  and facilities for much  of Vancouver's early  feminist organizing.  Special events and a  sale are planned for this  year's birthday bash.  See Bulletin Board for  more information.  EVENT SIE VENT SIRESOURCES  Men's Choir with Seattle Women's Ensemble, Hotel Vancouver. Pride Festival dance following; Aug. 2 Moonlight  boat cruise; Aug. 2-3 Rainbow Park  mini festival. West End; Aug. 3 Parade  from Ceperly Park in Stanley Park at  noon, along Park Dr Si Beach Ave; Aug.  8 PWA Coalition fundraising dance at  Commodore Ballroom; Aug. 9 Pride Festival Spiritual Celebration. Other events  include art exhibits at Pitt Int'l Gallery,  workshops at Van. Gay Si Lesbian Community Centre, films, women's fastball  tournament, AA public info mtg, and  more. Tix available at VTC/CBO and Little Sisters. More info VLC 254-8458 or  VGLCC 688-1044.  FABRIC ART WORKS  By Sima Elizabeth Shefrin on display at  La Quena coffee house, 1111 Commercial  Drive. To July 12.  CANADIAN WOMEN WRITERS  Free readings are part of West Word  III. annual summer school/retreat for  women writers. Instructors: Betsy War-  land Si Myrna Kostash, Aug. 12. Nicole  Brossard Si Margaret Hollingsworth,  Aug. 16. Jeanette Armstrong, Aug. 13.  Sharon Thesen Aug. 18. All readings  7:30 pm. Van. School of Theology. 6050  Chancellor Blvd. UBC. Cross-Genre panel  discussion open to public Aug. 15, 1:30  pm. More info Sandra Benson, Women Si  Words 872-8014.  A FRINGE BENEFIT  Theatre Space-Simon Webb Si Pat Armstrong dust off the best of '86 Fringe Festival, with a sneak preview of '87's offerings. Door prizes, musical guests, past Si  future highlights. July 11. 8:30 pm. Tix  $10.  VLC DANCE  Capri Hall. 3925 Fraser. Wheelchair accessible. Childcare offsite. Sliding scale  $4-$6. July 24. doors open 8 pm. More  info 254-8458.  WEDDING IN TEXAS  AND OTHER STORIES  One woman's irreverent insights Si attempts to make sense of an insane world.  Cathy Jones' vignettes give rise to hilarity Si outrage. Aug. 13-30 8:30 pm.  Tix Tues.-Thurs. $8, Fri.-Sun. $10. Vancouver East Cultural Centre, 1895 Venables. Reservations Si info 254-9578.  TAKE BACK THE NIGHT  Protest male violence against women.  Take Back the Night demonstration,  Sept. 18. organized by Rape Relief Si  Women's Shelter 872-8212.  AUGUST DANCE  Fundraiser benefit dance for VLC coffee house. Basin Street, 1138 Granville.  Aug. 20. doors open 8 pm. Childcare  offsite. Wheelchair accessible. More info  254-8458.  FEMINIST ENCUENTRO  4th Encuento of Latin American and  Caribbean Feminists, Oct. 18-25, Morelos, Mexico. Buses leave Mexico City  Oct. 19 to Hacienda Vista Mermoza.  Plenaries focus on where L.A. Si Caribbean feminists are now, the role of feminism Si institutional patriarchy. Workshops, cultural Si social events. Over  1200 women expected. For Canadians,  cost for hotel Si food is $120 U.S. More  info. Cuatro Creciente, Lie. Verdad 11-8,  Centro, C.P. 06060. Mexico Df. Mexico.  LESBIAN CENTRE  The Vancouver Lesbian Centre is open  Mon.-Fri. 11-4 pm. Library, housing info,  referral service, women's art exhibits, social event info, pool table and more. 876  Commercial Dr. Drop in.  LEGAL ADVICE CLINIC  Ruth Lea Taylor offers free legal advice  clinic last Sat. of the month. 9 am-12  noon. Open to any woman needing legal  advice. 876 Commercial Drive.  TYPEWRITER AVAILABLE  Any woman requiring the use of a  typewriter is invited to Vancouver Lesbian Connection Centre Tuesdays and  Thursdays 11-4 pm. The centre at 876  Commercial Drive also boasts access to a  high quality photocopier! (10 cents each)  WOMEN'S STUDIES 16  Women View: Sex, Sanity and Social  Change, an introductory interdisciplinary,  team-taught, university transfer course.  VVI, 250 W. Pender. Sept. 8-Dec. 15.  6:30-9:30 pm. Also offered at Langara.  more info Cindy Nagel 324-5448, local  448.  MAIZE  A magazine of rural lesbian experience Si  strategies in economic survival and community building. Sub $10/4 issues. Word  Weavers. Box 8742, Mpls, MN. 55408.  HiMIWMflkJ  BASKETBALL  Attention all women interested in establishing a regular time for drop-in basketball or in forming a bb team for 87/88  season. Plans are to call a mtg, in Aug..  to determine interest. If you played last  yr. Si want to play again or if you want  to get involved for the 1st time call 254-  9963.  CALL FOR PROPOSALS  For: No More Secrets: A (National) Conference on Child Abuse, May 24-27,1988.  Together we will share feminist theories,  current practices and experiences that  impact our work. More info Community  Resources and Initiatives, 303A Melita  Ave. Toronto M6G 3X1. (416) 536-6340.  KJNESIS      '87 JUI/AUO 25 Bulletin Board  SUBMISSIONSIG ROUP S1G ROUPS 1G ROUPS  CALL FOR SUBMISSIONS  For anthology by and about daughters  of alcoholics. Writings may cover: recollections, present day issues, such as  struggles with personal addictions, relationships and healing. Poetry, interviews,  short stories, diary excerpts, etc. Send  material to Natalie Zlodre. 303A Melita  Ave. Toronto M6G 3X1.  EROS IN THE FLESH  Call for proposals for an art show of  sexual and erotic images of women by  women. Photos, films, video, sketches,  collage, slides, sculpture, prose, poems,  soundscapes. installation ... Due July  15. Finished works Aug. 1. Exhibition  Aug. 15. More info M(em) 294-2002,  Carolyn 251-6446.  BWSS GROUP LEADERS  Battered Women Support Services will  be holding a fall training of Support  Group leaders Sept. 25-Dec. 6. 2 weekend workshops and 8 evening sessions.  Call 734-1574 for application forms. Application deadline Aug. 13.  ABORTION CLINICS IN B.C.  On Jan. 25/87 the B.C. Coalition of  Abortion Clinics was established. There  are several working committees in need  of your active support: fundraising, outreach/education, media, and clinic. Be an  active member for a woman's right to  choose. More info P.O. Box 66171. Stn.  F Vancouver V5N 5L4. 873-5455.  VLC PAMPHLETS  Hot off the press! NEW Vancouver Lesbian Connection pamphlets, a welcome  addition to any organization's brochure  rack! If you, or your organization would  ramaEHEIBES  codco's Cathy Jones  August 13-30,  Tuesday thru Sunday, 8:30 pm  Direct from the Edinburgh Festival  DRAMADILLO in  OJ-yMty  'Dramadillo evoke the  mythical world of monsters,  sirens, lotus eaters,  witches and the surge of the  Aegean.' Vancouver Sun  September 2-6, 8 pm  /'ñ†y   THE VANCOUVER EAST'  1895 Venables at Victoria  RESERVATIONS 254-9578  like some, drop in to 876 Commercial  Drive or call 254-8458 and we'll send  some to you.  VIOLENCE  IN LESBIAN RELATIONSHIPS  A group focusing on discussion, support  and peer counselling, meets every second  Tuesday at Vancouver Lesbian Connection Centre. 876 Commercial Drive. This  is a VLC sponsored program. $2 drop-in  fee. More info 254-8458.  YOUNG LESBIANS  A Young Lesbian Support and Social  Group is being held the 2nd and 4th  Friday of every month, Vancouver Lesbian Connection Centre. 876 Commercial  Drive, 7:30-11 pm. There is a $2 drop-in  fee to cover costs. More info 254-8458.  WOMEN'S NICARAGUA TOUR  Women interested in applying or wanting more info on the 1988 tour write:  Women's Sector of B.C. Nic. 1672 E.  10th Ave., Vancouver, V5N 1X5 or call  Fran 291-9317.  LESBIANS IN RECOVERY  A group of women in recovery is in the  process of forming a lesbian study group  on addiction. We plan to use the anthology. Out from Under: Sober Dykes  and Our Friends, as a guide to discussion (avail, at Vancouver Women's Bookstore). More info 254-8458.  LESBIAN NETWORK  Meets every second Monday of mo. at  Vancouver Lesbian Connection Centre,  876 Commercial Drive. 7:30 pm. More  info 254-8458.  WEST COAST LEAF ASSOC.  New office for West Coast Legal Education and Action Fund: 1036- 470  Granville. Van. V6C 1V5. 684-8772.  Tues. 9-12 pm Si Wed. 9-5 pm. Seeking test court cases on women's rights  with view to developing law in interests  of women. Speakers, workshop leaders  on women's equality rights available at  no charge.  VOLUNTEER TRAINING  Battered Women's Support Services will  be training women in early fall to work  in BWSS office doing crisis line counselling and 1-1 peer counselling. Interested please call 734-1574 for more info  and application form.  REMEMBER LIL  The Lesbian Information Line provides  answers to calls on Wed. and Sun. from  7-9 pm and 24 hour recorded messages Si  current info 7 days a week. LIL offers peer  counselling, info Si referral and sponsors  workshops, monthly meetings, pot luck  dinners and annual softball tournament.  LIL needs more volunteer members to  maintain vital services. Please leave message at 986-8324. Info line 875- 6963.  VIOLENCE IN LESBIAN RELATION  SHIPS  Discussion, support Si peer counselling.  Tuesdays 7:30- 10 pm. $2 drop-in fee.  More info VLC 254-8458.  LESBIAN MOMS AND TOTS  If you want to meet other women with  children and need support, VLC encourages you to drop-in Wednesdays 9-11  am. 876 Commercial Drive.  DOWNTOWN EASTSIDE  Downtown Eastside Women's Centre,  217 Main. 681-8480. Mon.-Fri. 1-9 pm  Resources, support, drop-in. coffee, telephone, clothing and more. Ongoing support groups: Alcohol and drug, women on  welfare, prostitutes.  Carolyn Bell  NEED   INFORMATION?  WANT  TO  TALK?  (604) 875-6963  Weds. & Sun. 7-9p.m.  400A West 5th Ave.  Vancouver, B.C. Canada V5Y 1J8  Lesbian information Line  26    I^INESIS      Jul/Aug '87 ///////////////////^^^^^  /////////////////////^^^^^  Bulletin Board  M   I    S   C . ^CLASSIFIED  SCHOLARSHIPS FOR WOMEN  CN offering 68 $600 scholarships for  1987 fall semester to encourage women  in non-traditional fields. Contact CN Employee Relations for brochure. Application deadline July 31.  LESBIAN FOOD BANK  VLC, 876 Commercial Drive, in conjunction with the Gay Si Lesbian Food Bank  has a depot for lesbians Tuesdays 1-3  CONSIDER ACTING UP  Acting Up writes and performs skits and  mini plays which reflect anti-capitalist,  feminist, anti-imperialist, lesbian-positive  view. Acting Up wants to change its all-  white perspective and are seeking women  of colour interested in doing political theatre. More info Nora 435-5772 or Judy  876-8466.  SUPPORT LESBIAN GATHERING  The First Gathering of Latin American  Si Caribbean lesbian feminists is calling upon women's groups Si independent  women for financial support. Third World  resources are limited so please send $1 or  more to L.A.L.. c/o G.L.L.U., 1213 Highland Ave.. Hollywood. CA. 90038, USA.  Donations over $20 will receive a fabulous poster unknown to the first world.  SEX DISCRIMINATION RESEARCH  Anyone having trouble recently with filing a sexual discrimination complaint to  the Human Rights Council of B.C. please  contact Kinesis 873-5925 or Linda Riz-  zato 738- 8874.  A.C.O.A. DOCUMENTARY  REACH Community Health Centre is producing video documentary addressing issues facing adult children of alcoholics.  People interested in participating as interviewees write: Harris Taylor c/o The  Health Education Project. REACH. 1145  Commercial Dr. Vancouver V5L 3X3.  More info Harris 251-9994.  CLASS FED  BED & BREAKFAST FOR WOMEN  On Quadra Island. Country quiet, superb scenery, comfort Si privacy. Dig for  clams at Rebecca Spit, climb Chinese  Mountain, watch eagles or spend time at  nearby Cortes Island or Strathcona Park.  Large room with view, private bath, good  breakfasts. $35 double, $28 single. 10%  discount for 3 or more nights. Call Susan  or Carolyn 285-3632 or write Box 119,  Quathiaski Cove. B.C. VOP 1NO  SATURNA ISLAND RETREAT  Enjoy the unspoiled quiet of island life  in 12 room historic farmhouse nestled in  28 acres with private beach. Reasonable  rates. Groups, families and individuals.  Breezy Bay Bed and Breakfast, Saturna  Island, B.C. VON 2YO (604) 539-2937.  SUNNY EAST SIDE  Attractive, sunny. East side house. Large  private yard. Clean, white basement  suite, sharing upstairs kitchen. $250 plus  util. Also main floor bedroom available.  $250 plus util. Or if someone wants the  bsmt. plus share the house, it's $425.  plus util. Piano available. Quiet space.  I'm 36. Women only please. 876- 0671.  NORTH VAN  Woman or woman and child wanted to  share large communal house in N. Van.,  with 3 women and 2 children. Large  fenced yard, vegetable garden, close to  shopping centre, library, schools, easy  access to Vancouver. More info Lynn or  Eileen 980-7033.  CORRESPONDENCE WANTED  25 year old Australian working on the  feminist publication, Womanspeak wants  to correspond with women interested  in social issues concerning women and  women's writing. Lee Cottam. 1 Childers  Court, North Adelaide, S. Australia,  5006. Australia.  FOR RENT  2 rooms, shared, large, pleasant house  in Grandview/Woodlands area. Available  July 1 Si Aug. 1. Share with 1 child,  1 woman Si 1 man. Nice yard, fireplace,  w/d. Close to rapid transit, schools.  Commercial Drive shopping. Child welcome. $320. mo. plus util. per bedroom.  Debbie or Allan 872-3570 eves.  HAPPY 30TH BIRTHDAY  To my tough Cookie, alias Mushy Muffin.  Thanks for holding one door open while  helping me to close another. My admiration Si appreciation are yours. Love you,  M.  LONELY ROCK VOCALIST  Looking for women musicians to work  with. Long range plan to perform in Vancouver area. Call Elaine 255-4767 or leave  message on machine 254-2693.  COMMUNAL SPACE  Available  now in  Community Alternatives Co-op for 1 or 2 persons. Share with  2 women. 1 small child and 1 teenager  (part time). Attractive living space, edible landscaping, library, woodworking  shop, mtg. room, etc. Open to short term  renters or those wishing to pursue membership. $290 rent includes util. More info  Maret or Patricia 731-3005 or 732-5153.  WOMEN'S COUNSELLING  I am counselling full time with women  at my downtown office. Specializations  include depression, sexuality, sexual and  emotional abuse, adult women survivors  of childhood sexual abuse, identity issues, self-awareness, relationship issues,  decision making, and career exploration.  I work using verbal and expressive therapies, gestalt and guided imagery. Sliding fee scale. Janet Lichty. M.Ed., Counselling Psychology. Please call 874-6982.  UNADVERTISED VACANCIES  At Sitka Housing Co-op for women, when  suites become available, there often isn't  time to meet advertising deadlines. If you  would like to be considered for future vacancies in an apartment or townhouse,  or if you would like to meet women who  are interested in sharing a suite in the  co-op send SASE to Sitka Housing Cooperative, P.O. Box 65684, Stn. F, 2160  Commercial Dr. Van. V5N 5K7.  GRAND OPENING  This is it! Official opening of Sitka Housing Co-operative. Sept. 26 1-4 pm. We  are happy to invite our community to be  on hand when CMHC presents plaque.  See our co-op, meet our members, view  common room with an eye to using it for  your next mtg. All welcome. Free food Si  refreshments. 1550 Woodland Dr. Rain  or shine. Children most welcome.  Morion Lydbrooke  CLASS IFIEDICLASSIFIED  BOOKS BY MAIL  Feminist and lesbian books by mail  (in English and French). Free new  book bulletin published 3 times/year.  L'Androgyne Bookstore, 3636 St. Laurent. Montreal H2X2V4.  WICCAN SUMMER INTENSIVE  An opportunity to study feminist ritual,  magic and political change with Starhawk  and Reclaiming Collective. Aug. 9-15.  Residential program in Lower Mainland  at secluded, beautiful campsite. Open  to women and men, with women only  and men only space planned. Sliding  scale $250-350 includes food, lodging  and training. For brochure/application,  send SASE to P. Hogan. 1932 W. 2nd  Ave, Vancouver V6J 1J2. 732-5153.  COMMUNAL SPACE  Available now in Community Alternatives Co-op for 1 or 2 single adults.  Share with 2 women. 1 small child and  1 teenager (part time). Attractive living  space, edible landscaping, library, woodworking shop, mtg. room, etc. Open to  short term renters or those wishing to  pursue membership. $290 rent includes  util. More info Maret or Patricia 731-3005  or 732-5153.  ENERGY CIRCLES  Visualization led by Joan O'Brien. Unload, transform, revitalize women's  groups meeting weekly. Sliding scale.  254-2627. 1-1 sessions also available.  &«**  ^V*  pO^  cP  -o^  KINESIS We subscribe to Kinesis,  and we're glad we do.  How about you?  Published 10 times a y  by Vancouver Status of Women  400A West 5th Ave., Vancouver, BC V5Y 1J8  VSW Membership-$25.50 (or what you can afford)-includes Kinesis subscription  □ Kinesis subscription only - $17.50       □ Sustainers - $75  ;    Institutions - $45 D New  Here's my cheque □ Renewal  I    Bill rae □ Gift subscription for a friend Now is the time  to become part of  CELEBRATION W  Gay Games III and Cultural Festival  Vancouver, Canada August, 1990  Please join us as we prepare for Celebration '90, the name we are giving Gay Games III and  Cultural Festival. It's an exciting social experience as women and men work together in equal  partnership, free of societal roles. The parity Board of Directors is committed to positive action  on women's issues such as equal access, sliding  scale and child care.  The excitement is growing  Ever since Tom Waddell announced that  Vancouver, Canada would be the site of the  1990 Gay Games, we have been overwhelmed  with the interest and offers of help which  have literally come from all over the world.  Two things you can do today  We really welcome your support - in fact  there are two things you could do today for  Gay Games III:  * Sign up as an official 1990 Celebrant! For  $10 a year you add your name to the official  mailing list and receive regular newsletters  and information updates.  * Tell someone about your women's sports  experiences! Whether it's one person or your  whole community, please make sure you help  to carry the message about the great  experiences gay athletic events offer. Please  duplicate this notice and share it.  Get your community invoived now  Athletic and community lesbian groups all  over North America have offered their  support through distributing information and  through community based fund raisers in  support of the Games themselves.  The Games' beginnings  The Gay Games were first held in San  Francisco in 1982; they drew over 1300  athletes from 179 cities for competitions in  14 sports. The second Games, again in San  Francisco, saw 3482 women and men from  259 cities participate in 17 sports. Already,  letters requesting information suggest that  we might experience a huge growth by  1990.  Cultural festival plans  Vancouver plans a cultural festival to run  parallel to the athletic events. Visual arts,  dance, theatre, writing and many forms of  music will all be part of the 10 day festival  planned for August, 1990. There could be an  many cultural participants as athletes as a  professional and amateur program develops.  A special philosophy  The Games are open to everyone who supports  their philosophy of inclusiveness rather than  exclusiveness. "Participation and doing  one's personal best are more important  than winning," says founder Waddell. "Our  friendly competitions have worked  well to remove age, sex,and racial  stereotypes."  Here's my 1987 membership of $10 for Celebration '90 - Gay Games III and Cultural Festival  Name:   _City_  Please make cheques payable to Metropolitan Vancouver Athletics and Arts Association  1170 Bute Street, Vancouver Canada V6E 1Z6  Supplement to Kinesis July-August, 1987