 # MAY 1996      B.C. Minister of WomWs^^lWW^^^Vl^ KINESIS  #301-1720 Grant Street  Vancouver, BC V5L 2Y6  Tel: (604)255-5499  Fax:(604)255-5511  Kinesis welcomes volunteers to work  on all aspects of the paper. Our next  Writers' Meeting is Mon May 6 for the  Jun issue and Mon Jun 3 for the Jul/  Aug issue, at 7 pm at Kinesis. All  women welcome even if you don't  have experience.  Kinesis is published ten times a year  by the Vancouver Status of  Women.Its objectives are to be a non-  sectarian feminist voice for women  and to work actively for social change,  specifically combatting sexism,  racism.classism, homophobia,  ableism, and imperialism. Views  ^expressed in Kinesis are those of the  writer and do not necessarily reflect  VSW policy. All unsigned material is  the responsibility of the Kinesis  Editorial Board.  EDITORIAL BOARD  ratima Jaffer, Lissa Gelier, wendy lee  kenward, Agnes Huang, Robyn Hall,  Laiwan, Alex Hennig  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE  Dorcas, Dorothy Elias,  Persimmon Blackbridge, Lisa  Valencia-Svensson, Annthea  Whittaker, Centime Zeleke, Sandra,  Agnes Huang, Laiwan, Alex Hennig  Imada, Linda Gorrie, Chrystal Fowler  Distribution: Carolina Rosales  Production Co-ordinator: Laiwan  Typesetter: Sur Mehat  FRONT COVER  Women on Wheels: Rolling feminist  library. E.Centime Zeleke, Gretchen  Zimmerman and Annthea Whittaker.  Photo by Laiwan  [Thanks to Spartacus Books].  PRESS DATE  April 29, 1996  SUBSCRIPTIONS  Individual: $20 per year (+$1.40 GST)  or what you can afford  Institutions/Groups:  $45 per year (+$3.15 GST)  VSW Membership (includes 1 year  Kinesis subscription):  $30 per year (+$1.40 GST)  SUBMISSIONS  t  Inside  KINESIS  ^^News About NX/Somen That's   Not In TT-»e  Dallies  News  Inquiry at the Kingston Prison for Women 3  by Marni Norwich  BC women prepare for the provincial election 4  by Agnes Huang  Queer women protest homophobic attack 5  by Lisa Mesbur  Single mothers' win pre-natal costs 5  by Robyn Hall  Women respond to murders in Vernon 6  by Prem Gill  Features  Interview with BC's Minister of Women's Equality Sue Hammell.... 9  as told to Agnes Huang  Feminism and the culture of human rights 11  by Sunila Abeysekera, Fatima Jaffer and Lata Rukh  Unwaged work and the Census 15  by Ellen Woodsworth  Centrespread  National Women's March Against Poverty 12  by Annthea Whittaker  Women on Wheels: Rolling feminist library 13  by Jennifer Weih  Commentary  Violence against women is about power..  by Yasmin Jiwani  P4W inquiry 3  bue nammeii..  Arts  Plural Desires: writings by bisexual women   by Dionne Falconer as told to Centime Zeleke  Regulars  As Kinesis Goes to Press 2  Inside Kinesis 2  Movement Matters 16  by Joanne Namsoo, wendy lee kenward and Lisa Valencia-Svensson  Paging Women 18  compiled by Kay Ann  Bulletin Board 21  compiled by Andrea Imada  Passionate about women's issues?  Want to see those issues in these pages?  Come to the next Writers' Meeting  Mon May 6 for the Jun issue  at #301-1720 Grant Street, Vancouver.  Telephone: (604) 255-5499  Plural Desires As Kinesis goes to press, federal Minister of Justice Allan Rock is preparing  to release his government's legislation  for including sexual orientation in the  Canadian Human Rights Act as a prohibited ground of discrimination. The  long-awaited bill is being welcomed by  lesbians and gay men, but still they point  out it's a water-downed version of the  previous promise by the Liberal government.  In order to better ensure the bill  would be passed without much opposition, Rock decided to keep the legislation "simple" (and less controversial) by  not including provisions concerning  same-sex spousal benefits, adoptions by  lesbians and gay men, and so on. The  Liberals appear to want to avoid the  "backlash" from homophobic family-  values proponents, like the Reform party,  and within their own party who are  loathe to agree to any "special treatment"  of "special interest groups" like lesbians and gays. Well, at least they acknowledge we're special. We're swell too, and  we deserve our rights.  Further on the issue of lesbian and  gay rights...For the first time ever,  StatsCan will allow lesbians and gays to  count their relationships into the national  census. However, lesbian and gay rights  activists say they are disappointed that  Stats Can still has not fully acknowledged lesbians and gay men in Canada  by adding a question directly related to  sexual orientation. The lobby for inclusion will continue.  Also new in this year's version of the  Census, some of women's unwaged  work will finally be recognized [see feature page 15.] Unfortunately, the accounting only relates to particular household  activities and does not cover the whole  gamut of women's unpaid work and its  real contribution to the Canadian  economy.  The National Women's March  Against Poverty is set to take off from  Vancouver May 14th. Kinesis hopes to be  able to bring our readers reports from  women participating in the March along  the way to Ottawa. The March will wind  up in Ottawa during the NationalAction  Committee on the Status of Women's  (NAC) annual general meeting. At this  year's AGM, NAC member groups will  be choosing a new president. After three  years in that position, Sunera Thobani  has announced she is stepping down and  will be returning to Vancouver [see page  16.] Kinesis congratulates Thobani on all  her accomplishments as NAC president,  and look forward to interviewing  Thobani when next Kinesis goes to press.  While women across Canada are  preparing for the National Women's  March, women in BC are gearing up for  a provincial election. (We know we said  that last month...but this time, we're  quite sure the writ is going to be dropped  soon.)  Women in BC are keenly aware that  there is the potential election of a government that'll bring in even more regressive policies, as happened in Ontario. They are busy strategizing to ensure that the government elected will  have the leadership and politics to challenge the federal government's deficit-  cutting agenda, and will forward policies that are supportive of, rather than  destructive to, women, poor people, immigrants, refugees, and so on.  One of the key issues for women in  the upcoming provincial election is the  continuation of a stand alone Ministry  of Women's Equality. Women already  know that the Liberal and Reform parties have no interest in such a ministry.  And even if the NDP gets re-elected,  there'll be no guarantees, and that's according to the minister herself, Sue  Hammell.  Another critical issue for BC women  is the maintenance of women's centres,  rape crisis centres and transition houses  as independent and autonomous  women-run feminist organizations. A lot  of talk about amalgamation has been  happening within CSSEA (the Community Social Service Employers Association,) and women's organizations are  gravely concerned about the fallout if  amalgamation is imposed on them [see  page 10.]  Recently, Sue Hammell was asked if  her ministry supports independence and  autonomy for women's organizations,  but she remained non-committal, saying  the government has not proposed amalgamation, and that it is a battle between  women's organizations and CSSEA.  However, in late April at a forum on  violence against women, Hammell told  women in attendance that there would  be no amalgamation for women's centres. However, as one violence against  women activist pointed out, this still  leaves rape crisis centres and transition  houses vulnerable to being engulfed by  other service agencies.  It's now almost one month after the  CHST came into effect. And still, there  are no national standards to replace  those lost with the dumping of CAP. So  what's going on...It looks like the First  Ministers are planning to meet sometime  in June to discuss the whole issue of national standards.  At a recent consultation meeting in  Vancouver with Status of Women  Canada, a number of women tried to  convey the necessity of providing a  mechanism so we can participate in the  First Ministers' discussion of national  standards. Unfortunately, Status of  Women Minister Hedy Fry was not there  to respond to the demand. The strategy  now: women across the country should  contact their premiers and their local  MPs and press them to ensure that  Thanks!  New/renewed members  Ursula Kernig*Kate Braid*Ruth Taylor* Maureen McEvoy *Joana Dunaway • Elaine  Young* Barbara Bell*Jillyan Gift'Jill Stainsby• Patricia Charter  Monthly  Barbara Curran*Bea McKenzie'Jane McCartney*Eha Ono*Barbara  Lebrasseur*Karin Litzcke*Gail Mountain*Neil Power*Gale Stewart*Barbara  Karmazyn* Elaine Everett*Jody Gordon  Donations  Michele Pujol'Leslie Muir'Shona Moore*Carolyn Jerome*Jane Rule'Elisabeth  Geller*Myrtle Mowatt* A. Jean Elder*B. Gene Errington* E. Margaret Fulton* Lorraine  Cameron*Mary Elizabeth Williams*R. S. Mallory*Andrea Lebowitz'Kathryn  McCannell • Betty Carter • Margaret Jackson 'Jennifer Johnstone • Noga Gayle • Katharine  Young'Marilyn DeRooy* Miriam Gropper*Gale Stewart'Davidson Muir* Kathleen  MacRae* A. Hewitt* J. Bradford*M. Malcolmson*Glinda Sutherland* Susan Boyd*Arlene  McLaren • Joan Robillard • Noma Horner • Lillian Zimmerman • Shelagh Day • BC Federation of Labour* Joanne Namsoo  women will have a seat at the First Ministers' table.  Another major issue related to national standards, is the dismantling of  public pension and old-age security systems in Canada. [The issues surrounding  public pension will be discussed in the next  issue o/Kinesis.J  The Liberal government has sent out  its travelling road show to gauge public  opinion on its proposals to "reform," also  know as destroy, a publicly funded pension plan. The tentative date for the Vancouver public consultation hearings had  been set for May 28th. Now it looks as  though the hearings will be postponed—  the BC government has yet to invite the  review panel to BC and likely will not  do so until after the provincial election.  This gives activists in BC some time to  prepare for the hearings, and those active in the movement to protect public  pensions say it is imperative that all  women ask to have their voices heard at  the review panel.  To help get ready for the hearings  and the defense of public pensions, a  coalition of groups is sponsoring a one-  day public pension forum in mid-June.  To find out more about the forum and  the campaign to protect public pensions  in Canada, contact the Trade Union Research Bureau in Vancouver, (604) 255-  7346.  That's all for this month as Kinesis  goes to press. Have a good read.  JK  TL  We're just about the enter the fifth  month of the year and the sun still isn't  shining most days in Vancouver. But here  inside Kinesis, the rain hasn't managed to  dampen our enthusiasm or water down  our fabulous view of the luminous and  cool snow capped mountains.  This month, Kinesis got off to press  almost a week later than originally  planned. A number of things were happening to slow down the process of producing Kinesis, but now that we've got all  the bugs out, we hope to be back on  schedule next month. Meanwhile, big  apologies to readers and advertisers who  were inconvenienced by the change in  press day.  Just when we thought we had everything secured...five days before we went  to press, someone came into Kinesis and  "removed" a few items from our offices.  No one in the office at the time seemed to  have noticed we had an intruder.  We didn't lose anything too critical,  but they are still important to Kinesis  nonetheless—a tape deck (we had just  acquired to replace one stolen the last time  we were burglarized,) our only tape recorder for recording interviews and  speeches, a pair of brand-new running  shoes, and some CDs.  In the middle of the night, we came  to the panicked realization that a taped  interview with NAC president Sunera  Thobani we needed for this issue had also  been stolen. It was a very disheartening  experience. When will it all get easier?  Luckily, the interview had recently  been aired on Vancouver's Coop Radio,  so a copy of the interview existed on a  logger tape. Thanks to Lisa Valencia-  Svensson for going down to Coop and  retrieving the interview.  There's good news too this month.  The Annual Kinesis Benefit and Raffle is  on track and will shake up the town sometime this summer. Anyone interested in  joining the committee to organize the  event is invited to call wendy-lee at 255-  5499. It's really a great way to get some  experience at organizing a community  benefit or just to get involved with a women's organization.  We'd like to say a warm welcome to  someone special this month: Audrey  Johnson who starts work May 1st as Vancouver Status of Women's fundraiser/  administrator—a huge undertaking that  includes looking after the finances and  some administration of Kinesis. Audrey  moved to Vancouver from Calgary last  summer and comes to VSW with years of  experience in administrative and  fundraising work and in working with  not-for-profit organizations. Kinesis is  even more excited because Audrey also  has done lots of writing and editing in her  past and present lives. Welcome to Kinesis and VSW, Audrey. Have fun and good  luck!  Welcome also this month to our new  writers this issue: Lisa Mesbur, Sunila  Abeysekera, Lala Rukh, Annthea  Whittaker, Jennifer Weih and Ann Kay.  Special thanks to Lisa Valencia-  Svensson, Sandra McPherson, Fatima  Jaffer, Dorcas, Dorothy Elias and Persimmon Blackbridge for their energy, keen  eye and sharp wit in editing and proofreading the copy.  If you'd like to join in the fun of pre-  production, production and post-production work at Canada's coolest feminist  newspaper, call Agnes Huang at 255-5499.  Until June, have a good Spring! News  Prison for Women inquiry:  Corrections Canada  reprimanded  by Marni Norwich  A Commission of Inquiry has condemned the actions of the Correctional  Service of Canada (CSC) in a 1994 incident  where male guards strip-searched women  prisoners.  In a 300 page report released in early  April, the head of the inquiry, Justice Louise  Arbour of the Ontario Court of Appeal,  criticized Corrections Canada for a "disturbing lack of commitment to the ideals  of justice," and concluded that "there is  nothing to suggest that the Service is either  willing or able to reform without judicial  guidance and control".  Immediately following the release of  Arbour's report, the head of CSC, John  Edwards, resigned.  The inquiry into events at Prison for  Women (P4W) in Kingston, Ontario was  jparked by the April 26, 1994 strip search  of eight women by six male members of  the CSC's Institutional Emergency Response Team (IERT)  During the incident, the six men in riot  gear burst into the segregation cells of each  woman, ordered her to lie face down and  held her down while a female officer  ripped off the woman's clothing. In at least  one case, the male guards helped rip off a  woman's clothing.  The women were marched naked out  of their cells, given only paper gowns.  Later, they were returned to their cells  where they were locked in body belts and  leg irons and left lying on the cement floor.  The women were also subjected to body  cavity searches.  In the days following, as recorded in  Arbour's report, the women went without  mattresses, phone calls, reading and writing materials, and other necessities. Women  were denied visits by peer support teams  and private professional counselling.  On May 6, they were transferred  against their will to the Regional Treatment  centre, a men's facility, and not returned to  the P4W until July 18, under court orders.  All eight women spent between seven to  nine months in segregation.  The assaults on the women were  videotaped by the IERT to be used as a  training tool and to safeguard the team  should they later be accused of impropriety. A copy of the tape was later aired on  CBC-TV's Fifth Estate program.  In late February 1995, nearly one year  after the incident, the Solicitor General,  Herb Gray, called for a Commission of Inquiry.  The mandate of the Commission was  to make independent findings regarding  the incidents and to recommend improved  policies for the CSC. Justice Arbour conducted formal public hearings, examined  witnesses under oath and solicited the input of experts and interested parties. Arbour also heard from a number of groups,  including the Canadian Association of  Elizabeth Fry Societies (E. Fry) a federation  of groups which work with women in conflict with the law, the Native Sisterhood,  which provides support for First Nations  women in prison and the Women's Legal  Education and Action Fund.  In her report and recommendations,  Judge Arbour critiqued Corrections for ordering a strip search of women by men  when, under the circumstances, such an  action contravened Corrections policy. She  called the treatment of the women "cruel,  inhumane, and degrading." She also criticized Corrections for, among other things,  their failure to deal appropriately with  grievances made by the women who were  the subjects of the strip search. "In many  instances, one was left with the impression  that an inmate's version of events was  treated as inherently unreliable, and that to  grant a grievance was seen as admitting  defeat on the part of the Correctional Service," Judge Arbour wrote.  Among her numerous recommendations were that:  • the position of Deputy Commissioner  for Women be created within the Correctional Service of Canada.  • at least one of the federal institutions  be staffed with no men working in the living units, or that agreements be made with  provincial prisons where units are staffed  exclusively by women for the placement of  federally sentenced women. (As a result of  the 1990 Task Force report "Creating  Choices," P4W will be closed later this year  and replaced by five new regional correctional facilities for women, including a  Healing Lodge for First Nations women.)  • a woman independent of CSC be appointed to monitor and report annually to  the Deputy Commissioner for Women on  the implementation of a cross-gender staffing policy, recommended by Arbour. A  cross-gender staffing policy would include  provisions to ensure prisoners' privacy is  respected.  •male IERT's not be used in a women's prison.  •access to the Healing Lodge, which  opened last August, should be open to all  federally sentenced Aboriginal women regardless of their classification. (Currently,  there is some concern that only women classified as minimum or medium security are  being sent to the Lodge. The Healing Lodge  is staffed mostly by Aboriginal people and  programs reflect the needs expressed by  federally sentenced Aboriginal women.)  •the practice of long-term confinement  in segregation be terminated and that inmates not spend more than 60 non-consecutive days a year in segregation.  • a system be installed to assign priority to all complaints, with special priority  given to complaints that relate to ongoing  serious matters.  •the Citizens' Advisory Committee  (CAC) should continue in its role to promote community involvement in the operation of Corrections, and that CSC refrain  from taking any action against the Committee's position.  "'■tffSH  H9 V'  -ijvifSH  ^H* sflfl   ■■ *;.  ill mm  ^9rH  SIM I:H  Hfl B"1  III 11  H'fl B •'  *j3jt*J9B"a     ^■S^^H  ■SI ^K"l  M^li^MSi  itoatfifi^&^S  Graphic from Prison News Service,  May/June 1994.  After reviewing the summary of recommendations in Arbour's report,  Strength in Sisterhood (SIS), a society  formed to provide a support network for  women in prisons, issued an official response. Overall, SIS says it concurs with  most of the recommendations. However,  the group says they have a number of criticisms of the report, including that:  •the recommendations do not apply to  the more than 50 percent of federally sentenced women incarcerated under provincial and territorial jurisdictions. (Federally  sentenced women in three provinces, including BC, can serve their time in provincial facilities under an exchange of services  agreement between the provinces and federal government.)  •it misapplies the concept of equal  employment by recommending that male  guards be hired to work in women's prisons, when already there are more opportunities for men to work in the prison system  than women—there are 60 prisons for men  in Canada. (In her report, Judge Arbour  forwards the argument that equality of  opportunity is one reason men should be  allowed to work in women's prisons.)  •it assumes women in prison can demand redress for wrongs without facing  repercussions.  •the recommendation that women  guards be trained under the IERT-model of  dealing with a crisis with a violent response  is "a perversion of equal opportunity." SIS  says the better response is using peer-support teams, and that they should be mandated before approval of IERT intervention.  • "It is a regression of justice to provide  a detailed recommendation with respect to  the use of force without providing an  equally detailed recommendation to reformulate the security conditions under  which women are and will be held." SIS  says most women in prison are non-violent  and it is the prison system itself which influences their aggressive behaviour.  •the suggestion that CSC will educate  employees regarding prisoners' rights denies the history of CSC's violation of pris  oners rights, specifically the events that led  to the Arbour inquiry.  •the suggestion that an outside  agency—the Citizen's Advisory Committee—can resolve prisoner grievances ignores the reality that those members must  be approved by the warden and that CACs  have been ineffective in reducing harm  against prisoners.  • that the rule of law will be carried out  in Canada's prisons segregation area, as  Judge Arbour beleives it will. SIS says it  wholeheartedly rejects the model of security management aspired to by CSC, and  that "the euphemistic term, enhanced unit,  belies the reality of the structure and intent  of these units whose design mimics the security details of men's segregation ranges  in maximum security prisons." SIS says  these structures, which are designed by  men for men, "pose great dangers for  women in prison."  The Arbour report is now in the hands  of Solicitor-General Herb Gray, who says it  will take six weeks before he decides which  recommendations to implement.  One of Judge Arbour's recommendations was that the women strip searched  should be compensated by CSC for the infringement on their legal rights. Gray has  offered an apology to the women, but no  financial compensation or a change to their  sentences to account for the excessive time  spent in segregation. The eight have all  launched civil suits against the prison system.  Maureen Gabriel of the BC E. Fry Society says the next step "will be to ensure  the recommendations are implemented and  the report won't be swept under the carpet." Canadian E. Fry Society spokesperson Kim Pate adds that there is no legal  obligation to ensure that the recommendations are adopted. "It's completely discretionary on the Minister's part. He can  choose to implement all or none," says Pate.  Activist, researcher, writer and former  prisoner Gayle Horii says public concern  is vital for keeping the issues raised in the  report on the table. Horii represented SIS  before the Arbour Commission. "The walls  keep the people out and the power is totally on one side. This is the nature of the  beast," she says of the prison system. "If  we could open a dialogue on an ongoing  basis...that would be a very positive outcome."  Phyllis Iverson of Joint Effort, a prisoner support group, agrees that opening the  issues up to the public may be one of the  most positive effects of the Commission.  "The report focuses on this incident and the  general handling of women prisoners but  there's a long way to go," she says. "They  say prisoners have the same rights as people in society—that you just lose your freedom—but once inside the system, you lose  a lot more than that."  The public airing of the incidents at  P4W outraged viewers, many of whom  Continued on page 6  MAY 1996 News  Election in British Columbia, 1996:  Women set the agenda  by Agnes Huang   Although the writ has yet to be  dropped signalling the start of a provincial  election, women in BC are already gearing  up for a fight to protect the principles of  women's equality and the progressive advances we've achieved over the last few  years.  Most women in BC have expressed the  need to be vigilant in protecting gains  made, and fighting back hard against the  growing right-wing agenda that is targeting women and marginalized groups.  There is a real fear among feminists in the  province that voters could choose a government with a right-wing agenda—in the  style of Ontario conservative premier, Mike  Harris—which will continue the trend of  using "deficit reduction" as an excuse to  destroy what remains of the social safety  net in this country.  "I think what we'll see if the Reform  party gets in is an immediate attack on  some important issues-such as policies  around affirmative action, as well as unprecedented cuts to welfare, the minimum  wage, and so on," says Fatima Jaffer of the  South Asian Women's Action Network.  The Reform party, one of two far right  parties in the upcoming election, is challenging progressive legislation brought in  by the current BC government, such as affirmative action, and changes to the BC  Human Rights Act with respect to adoption by lesbians and gay men, as well as  general protection for lesbians and gay  men.  Feminist activists preparing for the  upcoming election say the underlying question that must be asked about each of the  political parties concerns the "leadership"  they'll take in stopping the attacks on women's equality.  "We need a provincial government that  will take a strong stand against the federal  government's cuts to social programs—in  particular cuts to pensions and medicare—  and we need a provincial government that  will take a leadership role in pressing for  the restoration of national standards for  welfare." says Ellen Woodsworth, an organizer in Vancouver's downtown core and a  member of the Greater Vancouver Coalition  of Seniors.  Theresa Netsena of the Aboriginal  Women's Action Network and the Vancouver Status of Women says it is critical that  women elect a provincial government that  does not espouse regressive conservative  views on the rights of Aboriginal peoples.  "We are emphatically opposed to the  backlash against Aboriginal people, particularly implied in the language: 'one law,  one people.' First Nations people were  never included in the first place, so there  isn't, nor has there ever been, a level playing field," says Netsena.  Cenen Bagon, the BC regional representative for the National Action Committee on the Status of Women (NAC) further  warns against electing political parties who  bash poor people. "There is a widening of  the gap between rich and poor, and it is  poor people who are always held to blame  for economic downturns, even when the  cuts to public spending and social programs affect poor people the most."  Social programs  "One of the key roles of the provincial  government will be to challenge the cutbacks to welfare and to call for the entrenchment of national standards to protect the  rights of people to an income," says  Netsena.  Lee Lakeman of Rape Relief rape crisis centre and transition house says that  "most women leaving abusive situations  have to have welfare," says Lakeman. "We  want assurances that the provincial government will support welfare at a liveable rate,  and will fight the federal government to  ensure national standards for welfare, pensions, childcare and healthcare accessible  to women across the country." These issues  Lakeman says are all critical to the fight  against violence against women.  Violence against women  Netsena says, "it's critical to make the  safety of women a priority, and one of the  first steps is to ensure the police believe  women when they say they are in danger."  Lakeman agrees that getting the police  under control is one of the most important  issues. "Often the police do not respond  quickly to 911 calls," says Lakeman. She  says it is crucial to have a mechanism for  independent review of the police because  the overwhelming complaint of women  who are assaulted or being abused is that  the police do not respond quickly enough.  Another critical area is the availability  of legal aid, in particular civil legal aid, to  help women fight their abusive husbands,  or custody battles. Lakeman says that legal aid funding is being swallowed up in  block funding [transfer payments,] and  with money no longer designated specifically to legal aid, women will have even  less guarantees they will be able to get legal aid support.  At a roundtable on violence called by  Minister of Women's Equality Sue  Hammell, women from transitions houses,  rape crisis centres, women's groups, immigrant service organizations and Aboriginal  organizations drew a harsh picture of the  ever-increasing backlash against women in  the home, workplace and in organizing  against male violence. For example, more  women are being challenged in custody  and access cases by their partners, who are  being backed by organized groups of men  who have lost their own children in the  courts due to their abusive histories.  Another key issue raised was the need  to protect women's personal records from  lawyers of the accused male partner. Citing a recent case in Kamloops, where the  Kamloops Rape Crisis Centre workers have  been charged with contempt of court for  destroying a client's confidential records  rather than allowing the defence to use  them against her. Lakeman says, "It is the  role of government to stand up to the police, courts and defence attorneys to protect women's rights in these cases."  Perhaps the most unanimous concern  raised at the roundtable was the need to  resist the amalgamation of rape crisis centres, transition houses and women's centres with other service delivery agencies,  almost all of whom do not have a feminist  agenda. "Amalgamation threatens the in  dependence and autonomy of women's organizations," says Lakeman.  Hammell assured women at the  roundtable that the government was not  calling for amalgamation of women's centres. Lakeman notes, however, that  Hammell did not specifically exempt rape  crisis centres or transition houses from that  possibility.  Employment and Training  Employment and training are critical  issues for women in BC, especially given  the cuts to the public sector where many  women are employed and the slashing of  training and employment programs both  at the federal and provincial levels.  Shauna Butterwick, a member of the  Women's Employment and Training Coalition, says it is more and more difficult to  access any job training programs because  the number of programs are declining and  the eligibility criteria are being narrowed.  As an example, Butterwick points to the requirements to qualify for unemployment  insurance, which she says has made it even  more difficult for women to access federal  job training programs—most of which require a person to be on UI.  Butterwick says lack of adequate job  training programs is an important issue,  but lack of jobs is an even bigger issue.  "People are suffering phenomenally from  unemployment, and not just as a result of  lack of training," says Butterwick.  She cautions that it is necessary to  make the distinction between real job training/creation programs that lead to real jobs,  and workfare programs. Programs that coerce women to participate in order to receive welfare are not intended to benefit  women; they are intended to justify throwing women off welfare.  "Women in BC have a right to expect  our government to work towards creating  jobs and not creating poverty," says NAC's  Bagon. She adds that NAC supports  sectoral bargaining legislation that would  give women workers—particularly the  growing number of women working as  home garment workers, domestic workers  and in retail and food service work—the  right to negotiate contracts with their employers.  Butterwick says that what is needed is  a government that will take leadership and  introduce policies penalizing larger corporate interests for cutting jobs through moving their factories to countries with  "cheaper" labour, or bringing in technology to replace human workers. "Governments should hold corporations responsible for job creation."  Childcare  Mab Olomon, a board member of the  Coalition of Childcare Advocates in BC,  says over the past four years the current  government, has done a lot in addressing  the issue of childcare by devoting concentrated attention to childcare.  However, she adds that childcare advocates in BC are disappointed the provincial government didn't take their commitment a step further and introduce legislation to enshrine public funding support for  childcare services. Without legislation,  Olomon says she fears the carefully  planned infrastructure the NDP government brought in to support childcare may  disappear.  Olomon says legislation would "legitimize the rationale and protocol for the  funding of childcare services, which is critical for maintaining stable, viable and quality childcare."  At a broader level, Olomon says the  next provincial government must to take a  leadership role in developing a framework  for a national childcare plan with the federal government.  Ministry of Women's Equality  One of the critical issues for women in  BC is the continued existence of a standalone Ministry of Women's Equality. There  has been no commitment to a women's  equality ministry in the next government  from any of the leading political parties in  BC—the Reform, Liberal and NDP. Women's equality minister Hammell cautioned  women at the roundtable on violence to  fight to ensure that a re-elected NDP government reconfirms its support for a standalone ministry.  "Without a ministry dedicated to women's issues, women's organizations would  be forced to compete with other organizations for limited program dollars," says  Emilie Coulter of the Fort Nelson Women's  Resource Centre and the BC and Yukon Association of Women's Centres.  AWAN's Netsena is calling for the ministry to take leadership in ensuring that  "funding go directly to Aboriginal women's groups and to services provided by  Aboriginal women's groups rather than to  family violence programs in general. This  will ensure the money trickles down to the  women who most need it."  <textsub> Voting for social change  Women who have begun the work of  comparing pre-election-call promises by  the three leading political parties say the  NDP usually come out looking the most  favourable on questions of women's equality, lesbians and gay rights, and labour.  But Ellen Woodsworth, who works in  an area hardest hit by the NDP's most recent welfare policies—the BC Benefits Program—cautions that, "While it is important  the NDP get re-elected, they deserve our  support only if they agree to stop bringing  in policies on the backs of poor people, seniors, students, single mothers, and refugees.  The current government is violating the  basic principles of the NDP."  Cenen Bagon says NAC's strategy for  this provincial election will be to produce  information pamphlets to help women understand the issues and to encourage  women to actually vote—and to vote for a  government that will take leadership  against the rise of conservatism.  Tor more information about NAC-BC's  election strategy, call Cenen Bagon at (604)  876-4119. Tor more information about provincial childcare issues, contact Tirst Call (the BC  Child and Youth Advocacy Movement) for a  copy of An Overview of Child and Youth  Issues in BC, a guidebook intended to promote  discussion during the 1996 provincial election.  Tirst Call, 4480 Oak St, Vancouver, BC, V6H  3V4. Tel: (604) 875-3629;fax: (604) 875-3569;  toll free: 1-800-307-1212.  MAY 1996 News  Homophobic attack in Vancouver:  Queer women take action  by Lisa Mesbur  illft  On April 16, over 25 women gathered  outside the British Columbia Provincial  Courthouse on Main Street in Vancouver  to protest a queer-bashing that took place  outside a lesbian nightclub nine months  earlier.  On the day Steven Paul Myskew finally  stood trial for the violent attack on one  woman outside the Lotus and the assault  with a weapon of several other women, an  ad hoc group of queer women organized a  direct action and candelight vigil outside  the courthouse.  Organizers says the action was held to  show support not only to the women attacked by Myskew, but also to all queer  women who have been, and are, targetted  by violence against them as lesbians.  In the early morning hours of August  12, 1995, a woman was thrown to the  ground by a male unknown to her outside  the Lotus. Tara Poirier, who witnessed the  assault, says she saw the woman "go flying onto the road."  A group of women followed the man  as he tried to run away. As they got nearer  to him, Poirier says the man produced a 20  centimetre bolt knotted onto a length of  rope and began violently swinging at them,  screaming, "get away from me, fucking  dykes, bitches." Says Poirier, "It was pretty  clear it was a lesbian thing, a homophobic  thing."  Two women were hit with the weapon  before the police arrived, more than half an  hour after the man first attacked the  women.  During Myskew's trial hearing, six  witnesses testified that he targetted the  women because they were lesbians. His  defense counsel argued that his actions  were in self-defense, and suggested that  Myskew had every right to defend himself  against the "antagonizing mob" of women.  This case is not an isolated incident of  the homophobic attacks on lesbians say the  action's organizers. According to a pamphlet they distributed at the protest action,  approximately 26.7 percent of queer  women polled in Vancouver have been attacked because of their sexual orientation.  As part of the action, several women  donned t-shirts bearing the names of  women who have been queer-bashed, statistics about the prevalance of homophobia-related hate crimes, and messages such  as "One queer bashing is too many" and  "Queer women so empowered are  dangerous. "As well, a vigil was held to coincide with the recess of the court hearing.  Women lit candles and stood together in a  moment of silence, remembering the many  women who have been victims of homophobia hate crimes.  The mood of the women participating  in the action was solemn, but also hopeful.  "We wanted to show this guy that what  he'd done had not been ignored, whatever  the trial's outcome may be. We wanted to  support the women who were witnesses  'ñ†  Over 25 women gathered to protest a queer-bashing that took place outside  a lesbian nightclub nine months earlier. Photo by Kristina Zalite.  and complainants at the trial, and publicize the fact that queer-bashing happens,  especially to queer women," said Rachel  Rosen, one of the action's organizers. "So  many cases don't even make it this far...it's  so important to publicize that, to make a  space for queer women to come together."  Elsa Pang, another of the action organizers, read from a pamphlet distributed to  all the women in attendance. "Queer  women are really powerful, and we can and  do kick ass," she said amid cheers, "...we  are loud and tough, except when we are  silenced and injured...but we are always  strong."  A second hearing date for Myskew's  trial has been set for mid-May, and despite  several charges against him, Myskew remains free.  Lisa Mesbur is a writer living in Vancouver.  She is a first-time contributor to Kinesis.  Single mothers and child support:  Pre-natal costs recovered  by Robyn Hall  A recent ruling by the BC Supreme  Court gives single mothers deserted by  their partners during pregnancy the ability to recover costs associated with  pregancy and childbirth.  The case, Assayag v. Stevens, is the first  in BC in which a previously unused section of the Family Relations Act was applied to recover pre-natal costs. Those costs  include hospital visit fees, maternity clothing, lost wages, baby furniture, strollers,  and the like.  Corinne Assayag had been in a relationship with Grant Stevens for three years.  After trying for some time to have children,  they were finally successful. However their  relationship ended before the child was  born.  Assayag brought an application to  court to have her estranged partner pay  child maintenance, spousal maintenance,  pre-natal care costs and costs associated  with the birth of her child under section  61(3)(e) of the Family Relations Act.  In its decision, the BC Supreme Court  ordered Stevens to pay Assayag not only  monthly child maintenance and monthly  spousal maintenance, but also a lump sum,  non-taxable award for pre-natal costs. The  decision establishes an important precedent  for other BC women.  One of the key elements of the decision says Tracey Jackson, Corinne  Assayag's lawyer, is that the pre-natal costs  are recoverable as "child maintenance" as  opposed to "spousal maintenance." That  means the remedy is open to women who  have a child with a man who is not their  spouse under provincial family legislation.  (The definition of a common-law relationship in BC is co-habition for a two year  period).  Potentially, even a woman who has a  brief encounter with a man which results  in the birth of a child may be able to recover the costs associated with the birth,  including pre-natal care and lost wages.  Jackson believes this case is important  because it strengthens women's legal rights  as guaranteed by Section 15 of the Charter  of Rights and Freedoms, and puts more  responsibility for bearing the costs associated with childbirth on men.  "Women have been assuming a grossly  disporportionate share of the hidden and  direct costs associated with childbirth, prenatal care and early infant care. These costs  must be shared between the man and the  woman," says Jackson.  The decision is binding on the judges  of the Provincial Court, the court which is  where many women without financial resources find themselves.  This case is significant because women  are choosing to have children with their  partners outside of marriage far more now  than in the past, says Jackson. Many couples are also planning to have children after shorter periods of time together.  She adds that women who do not fall  under the laws that apply to married  women or women in legal common-law  relationships, were previously unsuccessful in claiming pre-natal costs if the relationship ended.  Jackson says it is necessary to make  public the Supreme Court's decision in  Corinne Assayag's case because most  women are not being advised they can  claim pre-natal and incidental costs when  they go to court for child maintenance, as  many family lawyers and family court  counsellors are not aware of this section of  the Act; and because in order to successfully obtain this award, women would need  to keep records and receipts of expenses  from conception onward.  If you would like a copy of the court decision in this case, contact the office of Tracey  Jackson, 439 Helmcken St, Vancouver, BC,  V6B 2E6; tel: (604) 681-9200; fax: (604) 681-  8339.  Robyn Hall is a regular contributor to Kinesis  and works at West Coast Women's Legal Education and Action Tund.  Write for Kinesis & see year  issues & concerns in these  Interested?  Phone us at 255-5499  MAY 1996 News   Violence against women:  Women respond to Vernon murders  by Prem Gill  On April 5,1996, Mark Chahal walked  into the Gakhal family home and murdered  his estranged wife, her four sisters, mother,  father, younger brother and brother-in-law.  This vicious act of violence has angered and  saddened all Canadians and brings to the  forefront yet again the issue of violence  against women.  Within days, South Asian feminists  mobilized in response to this brutal crime.  They came together as the Coalition of  South Asian Women Against Violence (the  Coalition.) The Coalition included the India Mahila Association (IMA,) Indo-Cana-  dian Women's Organization, Punjabi Women's Association, South Asian Women's  Centre, individual South Asian feminists  and those working in various mainstream  women's organizations.  The last time the Coalition had come  together was in 1993 to challenge an American doctor's targetting of the South Asian  community with sex selection services [see  Kinesis Oct 1993. ]  The Coalition quickly planned a series  of actions and a list of demands to highlight the reality that violence affects all  women regardless of race, class and culture.  The Coalition wanted to ensure that the  media coverage did not continue to frame  the murders as a cultural issue. Raminder  Dosanjh, a member of the IMA says that  "finding something such as culture, ethnicity or traditions to blame [for the killings]  is at best an escape and at worst a deception."  To stress the reality that violence  against women is not culture bound, the  Coalition held a press conference on April  12 to confront the media and present their  list of demands. Apart from Coalition  spokespeople, there were representatives  from the National Action Committee on the  Status of Women, Vancouver Rape Relief  and Women's Shelter, Women Against Violence Against Women (WAVAW,) Battered  Women's Support Services, Vancouver Status of Women and the Philippine Women  Centre.  At the press conference, Jyoti Sanghera,  a professor in the Department of Women's  Studies at the University of Victoria and a  member of the Coalition, presented the  Coalition's demands to the media. "The  Coalition demands a full independent inquiry into why the RCMP did not adhere  to the Attorney General's policy regarding  violence in intimate relationships and that  the inquiry be conducted by an external and  independent agency," Sanghera said on  behalf of the Coalition.  Sanghera added "that all efforts must  be made to increase awareness and prevention of violence against women and children." The Coalition members stressed that  the issue is not about arranged marriages.  It is about power and control over women.  Kamala Raj of WAVAW also called on  the Attorney General's office to "immediately implement the recommendations of  the Oppal Commission, particularly with  regard to enabling independent and external monitoring of all aspects of the criminal justice system." The Oppal Commission  on Policing in British Columbia released its  reports, based on input from a broad  number of community groups in September 1992. Most of the 317 recommendations  have yet to be implemented.  Two days after the press conference,  the Coalition held a Candle-light Vigil in  memory of the Gakhal and Saran families  at the Vancouver Art Gallery. Over 400 people attended, most from the South Asian  community.  The Coalition has continued to meet  regularly. In meetings since the vigil, a repeated concern has been: "Where were all  the mainstream feminists and  community?"Members of the Coalition  agree that "the response and support from  the feminist community was slow." Says  Sadhana Datta, "When Marc Lepine murdered 14 women in Montreal [in 1989,]  feminist groups all over the country mobilized. Where are they now?"  The Coalition says their biggest frustration has been trying to emphasize to the  media that the murders are not a South  Asian issue, it is an issue about violence  and violence is about power [see page 17].  "With little support from women's groups,  will it continue to be framed as a South  Asian issue despite all of our efforts?" asks  Sandra Mann, another member of the Coalition.  On April 16, the Attorney General responded in part to one of the demands of  the Coalition by appointing a Coroner's inquest into the Gakhal massacre. While inquests tend to have a narrow focus on the  immediate issues concerning a specific  case, they are open processes that can call  public witnesses to testify before a jury.  "An inquest is the very least the Attorney General can call. Clearly, an investigation of the RCMP by the RCMP is definitely not enough, nor is it credible," says  Fatima Jaffer, a Coalition spokesperson.  Members of the Coalition agree that a  transparent process of selection is needed  when it comes to the appointment of jury  members, which in the Ghakal inquest will  consist of six jurors. "We need to know the  criteria by which members of the jury are  selected and how they represent the public," says IMA member Herminder  Sanghera.  The Coalition advocates that the composition of the jury reflect both the cultural  diversity of BC as well as the expertise of  front-line women's organizations who deal  with violence on a daily basis. "Violence  against women affects us all, so it is essen  rial that the inquest is able to access a wide  range of voices," says Zara Suleman.  The Coalition also believes that tht  terms of reference set up by the Gakhal in  quest should be broader in that they should  take into consideration "the different fac  ets of the criminal justice system in so far  as how they impact on women who expe  rience violence in intimate relationships,'  says Yasmin Jiwani of FREDA, the Femi  nist Research Education Development and  Action Centre.  The Coalition says the coroner's inquest is just the first step, and is planning  to take further action on their demands. A  series of public forums with various women's organizations from both mainstream  and South Asian communities are in the  works.  "All feminist and women's organizations need to react to these horrendous  crimes," says Jyoti Sanghera. "We need to  name this crime. Violence against women  is a violation of basic human rights."  The Coalition welcomes support from all  women and women's organizations. Please call  Tina Bains at the South Asian Women's Centre, (604) 325-6637, if you are interested in  working with the Coalition to change policy  and increase awareness about violence against  women and children.  Prem Gill sits on the board of the South Asian  Women's Centre and is a member of the Coalition.  Prison for women inquiry  con tin uedfrom page 3  were unfamiliar with the degrading conditions endured by women behind bars.  Says Horii, "Women who had never had a  prison experience saw that tape and recognized it as sexual violence."  Many of the criticisms of the specific  recommendations are founded on the argument that prisons are not the solution for  women and that changing the law won't  change a flawed system.  Horii says that while she applauds the  strong language Judge Arbour used in the  report to condemn the brutal acts of the  IERT, the report is still predicated on a belief that the law will protect people—a belief that she does not uphold.  Simon Fraser University criminology  professor Karlene Faith says there are  strengths in the report if seen from the perspective of simply trying to reform the existing prison system. But "one cannot simply assume one can make a law to right an  injustice." Faith is author of the book, Unruly Women: Politics of Confinement and Resistance (Press Gang, 1993) and was an advisor to the Commission.  Faith says she sees prisons as "a junction of social problems," a place where one  can see the effects of many societal problems—problems like violence against  women, poverty, illiteracy, lack of child  care, unemployment, and selective prosecution based on class and racial bias.  These problems need to be dealt with  at their roots rather than attaching blame  later on down the line, she says. "Women  who go to prison need healing. They don't  need to be punished. They are already victims of all kinds of social injustices."  The crimes most women are sentenced  for are non-violent and economically-related, adds Joint Effort's Iverson. "Most  women don't belong in prison and there's  no reason for them to be there," she says.  Marilyn Mura, Aboriginal prisoner liaison worker (under contract to the Indian  Homemaker Society) at the Burnaby Correctional Centre for Women (BCCW) says  that the biggest issues for First Nations  women at BCCW can be traced back to their  home communities. She says there is a lack  of programs for women on reserve and that  no matter what programs are provided for  them in prison, there is no follow-up upon  release.  With only 320 women in the federal  system, CSC could be paying more individual attention to each case says E. Fry's  Kim Pate. She adds that programming at  the P4W may look good on paper but the  reality is quite bleak. Programs at P4W include traditional cleaning and kitchen  work, work in a beauty parlor and some  educational upgrading with no trades  training.  With the exception of recommendations made about the Healing Lodge, says  Pate, the 1990 Task Force report does not  focus on programming.  Gabriel expresses concern that even  though P4W will close, some of the same  problems will continue at the regional centres. Pate points to the situation at the regional prison in Edmonton, which opened  in November, where there have already  been three attempted suicides. There is also  a refusal on the part of some women to  participate in out-of-prison programming  because of routine mandatory strip  searches they must undergo. (A national  inquiry has been ordered to look into some  of the problems at the Edmonton prison.)  Karlene Faith believes it is necessary  to look at the issue of prisons in a broader  societal context. "We need to re-think our  vision about the use of prisons in the first  place. We need to decarcerate our institutions. We need to decrease the number of  people we send to prisons and increase our  efforts around crime prevention by addressing social problems," she says.  To demand that the recommendations  in the Arbour Report be implemented along  with consideration for all responses to the  Report from humanitarian groups, fax letters to: the Honourable Herb Gray, Solicitor General of Canada, fax: (613) 952-2240;  or the Honourable Allan Rock, Minister of  Justice, fax: (613) 990-7258; or Shaughnessy  Cohen, Chair of the Standing Committee  on Justice and Legal Affairs, fax: (613) 947-  3448. Or write to them c/o the House of  Commons, Ottawa, Ontario, K1A OA6. No  postage is necessary.  To contact Strength in Sisterhood or to  send them copies of your correspondence,  write— P.O. Box 184, 3456 Dunbar St, Vancouver, B.C. V6S 2C2; or by fax: (604) 224-  2609.  Marni Norwich is a freelance magazine writer  living in Vancouver. What's News  by Lissa Geller  Midwives in BC  After years of lobbying by women  wanting more birth choices, the provincial  government in BC has finally agreed to recognize midwives and their services and to  cover them under Medicare. BC Health  Minister Andrew Petter announced inApril  that midwives will be registered and legalized in the province in order to provide  parents with a greater range of choices  when having children.  The move, however, has come under  fire from some midwives as an attempt to  "professionalize" the practice of midwifery  which, they say, will result in the removal  of birth choice from women and their  caregivers.  The provincial government and the BC  College of Midwives expects to have approximately 50 people registered over the  next year, all of whom will have been  trained outside the province in Europe,  Asia, Africa or Australia. Worldwide, mid-  wives assist at more than 80 percent of all  births, whereas estimates in Canada place  midwife-assisted births at less than 1 percent.  The World Health Organization reports that the five countries with the highest proportion of midwife births, in Scandinavia, also have the healthiest babies with  the lowest infant mortality rate.  This recent move by the BC government is similar to legislation passed in Ontario in 1993 which legalized and licensed  midwives in that province. Since legalization there, demand for midwife services has  increased dramatically as more women,  now able to access these services, choose  delivery by a midwife over more conventional birthing experiences.  Regulating  the baby trade  More than two years after the Royal  Commission on New Reproductive Technologies issued its report, the federal government is introducing legislation which  will regulate, among other things, surrogate  mothering and the buying and selling of  human eggs and embryos. Although few  details are available yet on the contents of  the bill, the government has confirmed the  inclusion of fines and suggested the possibility of setting up a new regulatory agency.  The legislation, which is expected to  be tabled at the end of June, will be based  on a voluntary moratorium on nine practices which was put into place last July [see  Kinesis, Sept 1995.] These practices include  the creation of commercial agreements for  surrogate mothering, [sex selection for nonmedical purposes,] and the buying and selling of eggs and sperm. Also forbidden is  the retrieval of eggs from cadavers and fetuses, for donation, fertilization and research. The voluntary moratorium was  criticized by various groups and governing bodies as being unenforceable.  Dr. Patricia Baird, who chaired the  NRT Royal Commission, welcomed the legislation as a way to get "our house in order" and protect Canadians from dangerous reproductive technologies. The Commission had stressed that voluntary compliance would be inadequate and there was  a need for criminal laws to ensure compliance. Baird added that she hoped the legislation would have been broader than the  scope of the moratorium.  The legislation will also likely extend  beyond the specific mandate of the NRT  Royal Commission, in part because of the  ever-changing technologies associated with  NRTs. "Different issues are under consideration that aren't necessarily in the moratorium," noted Health Canada policy analyst Monique Charron. "There are practices  that can emerge that one can't even foresee," she noted, so the legislation will need  to be flexible.  The reaction from women was mixed.  Women's groups welcomed the provision  in the legislation that would prohibit the  use of ultrasound or amniocentesis technology to determine the sex of fetuses, which  they say, given sexism in society, would  likely result in the aborting of female fetuses. Some women did express concern  that not paying men to donate their sperm  to sperm banks could result in a lack of  availability of sperm. This was raised at the  Commission's hearing as a concern for lesbians in particular, many of whom rely on  donated sperm for artificial insemination.  Conviction of anti-  choice protester upheld  BC pro-choice groups are heralding a  victory for women's reproductive choice  following a positive decision by the BC  Court of Appeal. Last month, the court  upheld the criminal contempt conviction  of Gordon Watson, a well-known anti-  choice protester in the Vancouver area.  The court rejected Watson's argument  that he was only engaged in "forceful  preaching" and that his conviction violated  his constitutional right to freedom of religion, expression and association.  in dismissing Watson's appeal, Justice  Jo-Ann Prowse said, "The trial judge  [rightly] found that Mr. Watson's actions  went far beyond communicating his religious views to actively and publicly interfering in the rights of others."  During the trial, Watson was shown on  video tape shouting at a man who was accompanying a woman into the  Everywoman's Health Centre, a free standing abortion clinic. Prowse agreed with the  trial judge that Watson's size, behaviour  and body language made him a threat to  the man.  Watson now faces up to 21 days in jail  and a $5,000 fine. The trial judge had also  sentenced Watson to an 18 month probation and ordered him to stay away from the  Everywoman's Clinic, which has been the  focus of his harassing tactics in the past.  The outcome of this appeal sends an  important message particularly at a time  of escalating violence and terrorism experienced by providers of abortion services  both in Canada and the US. Data from a  recent report tracking global crime trends  show that anti-choice terrorism is rising in  the US. Out of a record 44 reported acts of  terrorism last year, 21, or nearly half, were  directed against abortion clinics or their  staff.  Bubble zone appeal  A coalition of five women's groups in  BC have successfully gained intervenor status in the appeal of the acquittal of the first  anti-choice protester charged under the  province's access to abortion services legislation, also known as the bubble zone law.  Women's rights to abortions were set  back in February when a BC Supreme Court  judge struck down sections of the Access to  Abortion Services Act as unconstitutional,  saying they violated the Charter of Rights  and Freedoms by going too far in limiting  peaceful protest near abortion clinics and  by limiting freedom of expression within  the access zones. (SeeKinesis, March 1996].  The bubble zone law requires anti-choice  demonstrators to stay out of an access zone  area around abortion clinics and other facilities, including the homes of abortion  services providers.  The Coalition filed to intervene to ensure there would be direct input from organizations representing the interests of a  broad spectrum of women on whose behalf the legislation was created. The Coalition consists of the BC Coalition of Abortion Clinics (BCCAC), the Elizabeth  Bagshaw Society, the Everywoman's Health  Centre Society, the BC Women's Hospital  and Health Centre and the Women's Legal  Education and Action Fund (LEAF).  At the appeal, scheduled to be heard  May 13-14th, the Coalition will argue that  the legislation is constitutionally justified  . in that it promotes women's right to access  medical services.  "It is our groups which understand so  well the need to uphold women's right to  access abortion health care services and to  be able to do so without fear of harassment  or violence," says Jennifer Whiteside of  BCCAC. Adds Whiteside, "We believe this  five member Coalition can provide a perspective that is crucial in understanding the  intent of the legislation, in illustrating the  extensive difficulties expressed by women  accessing, and doctors and staff providing  abortion services."  "Abortion is a lawful medical procedure. By taking steps to ensure safe and  effective access to such services, the Access  to Abortion Services Act promotes the  equality values guaranteed in the Charter  of Rights and Freedoms in the particular  context of reproductive rights," says LEAF  spokesperson Jennifer Conkie.  Female circumcision  legislation defeated  A bill that would have criminalized  female genital mutilation (FGM) in Canada,  unless the procedure was performed by a  surgeon, died a quiet death when the  House of Commons session ended before  Christmas.  Sunera Thobani, president of the National Action Committee on the Status of  Women (NAC) says the bill was full of loopholes and should have been scrapped. The  bill would not have applied to women over  18 and was severely watered down.  "Female genital mutilation is no more  acceptable when it is performed by a surgeon," says Thobani. "NAC clearly opposes this practice, and believes in working with the women from affected communities to bring it to an end."  As well, the FGM Prevention Task  Force in Ontario, which includes representation of women from communities in  which the procedure is practiced, also criticized the bill for the same reasons.  Female circumcision is practised in  some parts of Africa, South America and  Asia, where it is believed to improve a girl's  chances to get married. It is estimated that  there are approximately 100 million girls  and women in the world who have been  subjected to female circumcision.  Some forms of the practice, denounced  as a human right's violation and child  abuse and widely condemned as dangerous and even life-threatening, can result in  infection, hemorrhage, infertility, increased  risk of HIV due to tearing, and high-risk  childbirth among other complications.  (Information from Herizons, Winter  1996.)  Canada to criminalize  child sex tourism  Recent amendments to the Canadian  Criminal Code will see the country join the  ranks of other European nations and the  United States in prosecuting men who buy  sex from children in foreign countries. The  amendments are an effort to stem the tide  of the child-sex-tourism business which  draws tens of thousands of men to Thailand, Cambodia, India, the Philippines, and  other countries each year.  Many of the brothel districts in these  countries were initially established to service US soldiers stationed on US military  bases or serving in the Vietnam War. The  problem of child prostitution in Asia is aggravated by rapid economic development  and the rise of capitalism, both of which  have increased the demand and market for  children, as well as by a fear of AIDS which  results in a preference for younger children  who are considered more likely to be disease-free.  Local authorities in Asia continue to  find it difficult to control child prostitution  because the customers are now almost all  wealthy foreign tourists who return home  before they can be prosecuted.  The proposed legislation would allow  prosecution of Canadian citizens and permanent residents upon return to Canada,  and the imposition of jail sentences by Canadian courts. The amendments would be  similar to current legislation which enables  the prosecution of suspected war criminals  and terrorists accused of committing  offenses in another country.  "We are convinced that one of the  strongest signals we can send internationally about Canada's intolerance of such  practices is to make our own citizens and  permanent residents accountable for their  behavior when they travel abroad," said  Foreign Affairs Minister Lloyd Axworthy.  Axworthy also called for ratification by UN  member countries of an international protocol requiring all governments to prosecute those who sexually exploit children.  It is estimated that there are more than  one million girls and boys in Asia under  the age of 17 who are being forced to work  in the sex trade.  More What's News next page  ■ ■_ THE KEEPERTM  U^fH^-Ns. (MENSTRUAL CUP)  ' V^H ' 3-mon'h money-back guarantee  v ..TM Tf ;i sold for over 40 years  N .'of life expectancy of 10 years  ^•"•"•^a no chlorine used in its productio  1 -800-680-9739 100% natural rubber  Distributed in Canada l>> Eco Logique lire  Fax (61 J) 820-1626 / lnterncl:cdJ59@lreeiiel.car!  (Lowest Canadian Mall Order Price)  ■  WOMEN  IN PRINT  BOOKS & OTHER MEDIA  Discountsfor  book clubs  3566 West 4th Avenue  ♦  Vancouver BC  Special orders  Voice   604 732-4128  welcome  Fax      604 732-4129  10-6 Daily ♦  12-5 Sunday What's News  New community bank in  Vancouver  A new type of financial institution designed to meet the needs of low income  residents in Vancouver's Downtown  Eastside opened its doors in April.  Located at the corner of Main and  Hastings, the Four Corners Community  Savings has been heralded as a special institution that caters to the needs of people  living in poverty. It is more flexible than the  regular banks and credit unions in terms  of allowing people who can't otherwise  afford bank accounts to make deposits, and  by lending smaller amounts of money.  Four Corners expects to attract over  $20 million in deposits in its first year, in  part because the provincial government is  providing higher deposit guarantees than  those provided by other financial institutions. The government has also invested $5  million in start-up capital to the venture.  It will be five more years before Four  Corners will break even on their financial  operations. However, the benefits to people in the community, many of whom rely  on private companies like Money Mart  which extract large percentages of cheques  as processing fees for cheque cashing, will  be immediate.  Little Sister's wins  injunction and cash  Chalk up round two to Little Sister's  Bookstore in Vancouver in their ongoing  legal battle against Canada Customs. For  several years now, the lesbian and gay  bookstore has been trying to stop the discriminatory seizure and review of shipments of books and magazines to the bookstore by Canada Customs.  In late March, BC Supreme Court Justice Kenneth Smith issued a temporary injunction to restrain Canada Customs from  specifically looking for and detaining material imported by Little Sister's. Little Sister's had requested an injunction because  despite the initial decision against Canada  Customs in January, shipments destined for  Little Sister's continued to be checked and  seized.  In round one of Little Sister's most recent court battle with Canada Customs,  Smith ruled in favour of Little Sister's and  co-complainant, the BC Civil Liberties Association (BCCLA,) agreeing that Canada  Customs was discriminating against the  bookseller by arbitrarily censoring material  entering the country, thereby violating sec  tions of the Charter of Rights and  Freedoms.  Smith, however, did not accept the  complainants' position that the section of  the Customs Act concerning seizure should  be struck down as unconstitutional [see  Kinesis, March, 1996.] Little Sister's says  they plan to appeal Smith's ruling on the  constitutionality of the Custom's seizure  policies.  Since the January decision, Canada  Customs has instituted new procedures  which, it claims, provide improved guidelines to officers in determining the artistic  or literary value of books and other materials. Justice Smith has now given Customs  until October 31 of this year to convince the  court that the new procedures won't discriminate against Little Sister's. If Customs  fails to comply, the bookstore can apply for  an extention of the injunction.  In granting the injunction, Smith said:  "I appreciate that this (injunction) is an intrusion into the executive sphere, but it is  justified here because of the failure of the  federal crown to come to grips with this  problem."  In a separate judgment, Little Sister's  was also awarded $168,740~an amount  considerably more than usually granted-  to cover legal costs. Justice Smith explained  that the award was made because it was in  the public interest to have the case determined, the financial cost to Little Sister's  was particularly high, and Canada Customs had contravened the previous decision of the courts.  Janine Fuller, manager of Little Sister's,  was very pleased with the latest decisions,  and says that "whenever there's an economic consequence for a government arising from administration of legislation it's a  real victory for everyone involved." Fuller  says the award will go towards paying off  the $70,000 debt in legal fees incurred by  the bookstore to date and towards their  appeal case.  Class action suit for  breast implants  Women in BC with breast implants  have won the right to go ahead with a class-  action suit against the manufacturers of  breast implant devices.  In late March, BC Supreme Court Justice Kenneth MacKenzie approved the  province's first class-action suit which will  allow Helen Harrington of Delta to file a  civil suit against the makers of silicone  breast implants on behalf of approximately  1,000 women, mostly from BC. MacKenzie  certified the class-action for the 1,000  women but added that more women may  join the suit now that it has been publicized.  For years, thousands of women internationally have charged that silicone breast  implants have caused a wide array of  health problems for them, including arthritis, aching joints, skin rashes, multiple sclerosis, and immune-system breakdowns/see  Kinesis Dec/Jan 1996.]  Silicone implants were first introduced  in the 1960s when the United States and  Canadian governments did not require  medical device manufacturers to prove the  safety of their products in advance. These  implants have since been targeted by moratoriums in both Canada and the US.  Arguing that all women with health  problems associated with breast implants  are suffering from silicone toxicity,  Harrington's lawyer convinced the judge  to clear the way for the landmark case.  MacKenzie agreed that the women have a  common complaint against the companies  that developed, distributed and sold the  implants. The corporate defendants named  in the suit include the Dow Corning group,  McGhan Medical Corporation, 3M Company and Bristol-Myers Squibb Company.  Union Carbide, originally named in the  suit, was dropped as a defendant by Justice MacKenzie due to the fact that they had  only supplied raw materials for the implants. Women who had saline breast implants were also dropped from the suit  since saline implants are still being used.  The case, which could take years to  settle, will now be fought on the grounds  of whether the implants are prone to rupture and the leaked silicone gel a serious  health risk to the women who have the  implants.  Meanwhile, two federal judges in the  US took the rare step earlier this spring of  allowing the creation of an expert panel of  scientists to review the issues involved in  silicone breast implant litigation in that  country.  Hong Kong women win  anti-discrimination  legislation  Women's groups in Hong Kong successfully campaigned for the enactment of  the Sex Discrimination Ordinance (SDO)  last July. The Ordinance has been heralded  as a great step forward for women's rights  in the territory. The SDO outlaws discrimination specifically on the grounds of sex but  stops short of meeting the groups' expectations in related areas.  m  u  J 1  •» Coming  Out  * Grief and  Loss  * Relationship  Issues  * Childhood  Trauma  '*• Family  Issues  Sliding  Scale Fees  Inquiries  Welcome  Emma  Tigerheart  M.S.W.  COUNSELLING  THERAPY  CONSULTATION  Call  327-4437  Vancouver, bc  H-£  hZZJ  Women's groups say one of the shortcoming of the SDO is that the ordinance  does not outlaw discrimination on the basis of age, sexual orientation or family responsibilities. They say the Hong Kong  government has stalled legislative advancements in these areas by initiating a public  consultation process. The government has  also lobbied against Legislator Anna Wu's  Equal Opportunity Bill which defined discrimination on a broader scope.  Women's and human rights groups  have also condemned a questionnaire issued by the government as part of the public consultation which claims to gauge public opinion of homosexuality. The wording  of the questionnaire, the groups argue, only  serves to reinforce stereotypes and misconceptions about homosexuality and does  nothing to promote understanding or a  meaningful dialogue in the wider community on the topic of discrimination against  lesbians, gays and bisexuals.  The consultation period, which was  expected to end this past March, allows the  government to deflect attention away from  the need for the legislation. Lesbian and gay  groups, along with women's organizations  and human rights activists, are continuing  to mobilize to force the government to pass  an anti-discrimination bill and commir  public funds for support services and education.  (Information from Women's News Digest, February 1996, Hong Kong)  iSatijaia Jl  cJrffo-Ja£L BootLzping <&wfaes  & SJf£mpfo^  • Monthly Financial Statements  • Government Remittances  • Payroll. A/P. A/R. Budgets  I Will Transform Your Paperwork!  (604) 737-1824 email:barb.l@deepcove.co  COVER THE  NEWS FOR  KINESIS  255-5499  Bed & Breakfast  A Beautiful Place  Centre yourself  in the comfort and tranquility  of B.C.'s Super Natural  Gulf Islands.  Healthy Breakfasts  Hot Tub & Sauna  5 acres of forested  foot paths with ponds  ocean and mountain views  A Memorable Escape  (604) 537-9344  1207 Beddis Road,  Salt Spring Island, B.C. V8K 2C8 Feature  Interview with BC's Minister of Women's Equality:  Focusing on equality  Feature by Sue Hammell  as told to Agnes Huang   Sue Hammell is the New Democratic  Party MLAfrom Surrey-Green Timbers.  She became the Minister of Women's  Equality this Tebruary, replacing Penny  Priddy who has been the minister since the  creation of MWE in 1991. Prior to her appointment with MWE, Hammell was the Minister of Housing.  Kinesis had the opportunity to speak with  Sue Hammell in April in her home riding on a  number of issues concerning women's equality in BC.  Agnes Huang: A lot of women in feminist organizations aren't familiar with who  you are. Could you talk a little bit about  your background?  Sue Hammell: First off, I am an elementary school teacher and I see myself as a  teacher. I say that because it colours to a  certain extent my outlook of the world and  how I approach politics.  I joined the [New Democratic] party in  1972, so although I'm a newcomer to the  public stage, I have been very active in the  backrooms of politics—for almost 20 years.  Before I became a public person, part  of my passion in the backrooms was to  make sure that women were part of the electoral process. I worked on the civic, provincial and federal levels trying to get  women from Surrey elected.  I think in the long run we have been  successful in some very real ways. I did a  test the other day and looked at the men  and women throughout the whole political spectrum, [and it's] about half and half  [men and women] from Surrey. There are  not a lot of women from our political perspective, but there are women who are at  the table in various political arenas.  Huang: Can you talk about your  knowledge and experience working on  equality rights issues for women, and your  relationship with women's organizations?  As well, do you identify as a feminist?  Hammell: I am very clearly a feminist.  If you believe strongly in equality of  women in every walk of life, then I think  you are a feminist.  When you ask me about women's issues, the first place women have to be is at  the table where political decisions are being made. If you do not have women at the  political tables, you will not get the same  consciousness of women's equality. You  cannot ask men to do the job for you, you  have to be there doing it on behalf of yourself. So from a very broad perspective, I  have approached the equity issue from getting women elected.  I'm certainly aware of the issues. Because I'm a feminist, I know exactly where  we're coming from, where we have to go  and the number of barriers we have to remove to get there.  When it comes to the economic side,  women's work has to be valued. One of the  examples actually playing itself out [right  now] concerns the wage scale of child care  workers. [It's important] to pay people  more for doing the work that is very valuable to the community. [This may mean] the  community subsidizes or participates in the  pay rate of an individual or class of people, and this would be enough to keep the  Sue Hammell. Photo by Agnes Huang.  pressure moving that low waged worker  up-  Valuing women's work is a very heavy  component of the economic side of things  because in the end we will not be men, we  will be women, and therefore our contributions have to be valued.  Huang: One of its promises when the  NDP was elected was pay equity and employment equity. It's been four years and  there hasn't been a lot of movement in those  areas...  Hammell: There has been in the public  sector that is influenced by government.  The government itself is putting over a $100  million into the pay equity component of  their workers. We have also brought in a  structure that can organize [unionize] the  unorganized, where a lot of women are. So  there has not been "no action," but there  certainly can be more.  Huang: Further on the issue of economic status, one of the critical issues is that  of access to jobs: jobs and job training. A  lot of the training programs that have been  set up are more targeted towards men, and  particularly men in industries that men are  predominant, such as the forestry industry.  For example, one program is focused on  training forestry workers—mostly men—  in computer skills.  Can you talk about what strategies  MWE will undertake to ensure women  have access to job training programs, and  to programs that will lead to real full-time  jobs, and not to programs that don't go  anywhere.  Hammell: It's a very big problem first  to make sure that whatever training is done  ends up somewhere, and this is where we  get into the issue of valuing women's work,  and valuing work that isn't traditionally  women's.  You talked about forestry and linked  that with computer training. Women are  very good at computers because a lot of  them have the basic skills in computers. So  we have to move women into some of the  non-traditional roles [like working in forestry] and we have to be very aggressive  about encouraging women. We are con-  Basically, the three  prongs are: economic  equity, violence against  women and child care.  stantly looking at expanding the spaces for  women in nontraditional roles.  When it comes to training in the broadest spectrum, we have pushed the envelope for training. In the end, if you're asking me if there are jobs at the end of the  training, there are no guarantees. But certainly, we're doing our best to ensure what  is trained for is there.  Huang: There's also a concern with the  number of the job training programs that  have specific criteria—for example, you  have to be on social assistance or on unemployment insurance, or have a history of  abuse or drug and alcohol dependency.  This leaves a huge gap of training programs  for women who are not in those situations,  but who have been put in a place of needing re-training in other areas—women who  are affected by the downsizing of the public sector, the lack of job creation by the private sector, and the technological changes  which are resulting in massive job loss.  What training programs has MWE  pressed for to benefit women who are adversely affected by the restructuring of the  Canadian economy?  Hammell: Again, it goes back to what  we were talking about before, being at the  table. The tables are where the decisions are  being made concerning training programs,  and what the government is doing in terms  of ensuring access to women and that they  are not ghettoized in low-entry jobs. It's the  ministry's responsibility to be there when  it comes to that. And we are.  Huang: You talk about one of the priority areas is valuing women's work. What  do you see are the other priority areas for  the ministry for women's equality?  Hammell: Basically, the three prongs  are: economic equity, violence against  women and child care. And then there's  support stuff, such as making sure the  healthcare programs are reflective of women's needs. It's more of looking at other areas.  I think child care is important, but  we've got a system going that will continue.  It just needs monitoring. The childcare plate  is up and running, it needs constant tweaking, but it is going.  I think violence against women is critical. I don't know how women if they're facing abuse can function in any effective way  at all.  I equate it to some extent to, as a  teacher, going into my classroom and finding some child is hungry. If they're totally  preoccupied with the fact that they're hungry, they won't learn anything.  Women are abused and it's a terrible  situation for them, and we have to be very  pro-active around violence against women.  I feel that very strongly.  Huang: Given what happened last  week in Vernon... [see page 6 and 15.]  Hammell: ...I think that's an excellent  example. The [violence against women in  relationships] policy says the RCMP are  supposed to charge [the abuser,] and not  expect the victim—the person who is traumatized, threatened and abused—to then  take the additional act of charging the person who's the abuser. It's the RCMP's responsibility to do that.  From an initial glance at the situation,  it looks like the policy was not adhered to,  so I'm really curious about a review of why.  I've spoken to the Attorney General [Ujjal  Dosanjh] and was very pleased when the  consequence of a number of discussions  ended up with a review. [The RCMP ordered an internal review into the actions of  the Vernon police.]  We have a policy that's based on research, on an assessment of what is good  for women under those circumstances, and  it is up to the RCMP—police forces—to follow the policy.  Huang: A lot of equality issues for  women are related to the justice and legal  systems, such as the stalking legislation and  proposed changes to criminal injury compensation which would remove the category of pain and suffering from compensation—a move which would adversely affect women. Are you in continual contact  with the Attorney General on these and  other issues?  Hammell: My ministry and the AG's  ministry are in a series of meetings about  stalking, and that was going on prior to the  incident [in Vernon, BC]  I think there have only been two people who have spent any time in prison as a  consequence of stalking, and there were  many more who were charged. We have to  look at whether the behaviour [stalking]  and the consequence of the behaviour is  fitting, and I think there's a question about  it.  I also know around the issue of pain  and suffering, our ministries are looking at  that, working together on that issue.  Huang: One of the roles of the MWE is  to do gender analysis of other government  policies. Are you committed to looking at  how the changes to social assistance in BC  are affecting women? [The cuts and changes,  under the name "BC Benefits," were brought  in last November.]  For example, many women are talking  about how the three month residency requirement is adversely affecting a lot of  women, especially battered women coming from other provinces and refugee  women. Other areas of concern are the  work for welfare requirement [workfare,]  and whether or not the cuts and policy  changes are affecting child apprehension—  are more women living on welfare giving  up their kids because they can't afford to  take care of them anymore?  Hammell: Not that I know of. I'll do a  check, but not that I know of.  Going back to the general, we are constantly monitoring the affects of BC Benefits, and we are providing input to the  Ministry of Social Services on many issues,  in particular on the flat rate versus the 25  percent exemption, and the whole issue  around daycare for when women are in  training programs or in post secondary institutions.  Continued on next page. Feature  Interview with BC's Minister of Women's Equality  Continued from previous page  The Minister of Social Services [Joy  McPhail] is committed to a six-month review and we're part of that process. We're  looking at all the issues.  Huang: I wanted to ask you about  funding priorities for MWE. Is there a commitment from the NDP government to ensuring that there's funding for ministry for  women's equality?  Hammell: Yes. We've maintained our  [budget] position, but we've also seen an  increase. Between last year and this year,  MWE's budget has gone up because we're  now absorbing daycare. We also got $13  million from BC benefits. [The proposed  budget for the ministry is approximately $212  million for 1996-97.]  Huang: Is the ministry committed to  ensuring there's ongoing core funding for  women's organizations?  Hammell: Absolutely.  Huang: What about funding for new  centres? Will core funding for women's organizations be expanded to include new  centres.  Hammell: I'm going to defer this one; I  don't know. I think we really have to see  the budget. We are always pushing the envelope—trying to squeeze a little bit more  out. If you get a bit more, you try to push  it, broaden the commitment.  We are committed to what we've got.  In some ways the contest [election] we will  face shortly is about keeping what we've  got. If we look at Ontario, it wasn't about  keeping what we've got. The consequence  was dramatic in terms of loss.  Huang: So you haven't actually discussed the possibilities of growth within  core funding for women's centres?  Hammell: My suspicion would be, it's  tight. The ministry is not going to be cut  back because we have commitments that  tend to push the [funding] envelope, especially around child care. Plus we have received the extra money from BC Benefits.  The women's centre issue is probably  "hold your own," just get into a holding  pattern until we get past some of this  offloading [from the federal government.]  I think anyone who's  politically astute would  remain vigilant. I  couldn't guarantee you  of my own volition to  save the Ministry of  Women's Equality.  We've been offloaded $400 and some odd  million this year, and $800 million next year  [with the introduction of the Canada Health  and Social Transer (CHST).]  If [the NDP government] came in with  a $2.25 million deficit that took four years  to get rid of it and now we're getting another $800,000, that's like getting a third of  it all over again. It's a tremendous amount  of money.  Huang: We talked about core funding,  can you also talk about project funding? I  know that there was no money to meet  grant applications applied for last December, so no grants were given out. Has project  funding within MWE been restored?  Hammell: Yes, there is project funding.  And we are making a shift in the project  funding, directing it towards violence  against women.  Huang: The concern with that narrowing of criteria is that a lot of worthwhile  and important projects won't be able to get  funding. For example, I know that when  Vancouver Status of Women applied in 1994  for funding to update and reprint the Single Mother's Resource Guide (SMRG,) they  were turned down because the project did  not fit into the funding priority, which, I  believe, at the time was child care. [VSW  did appeal the decision and did secure  some project funding from the Ministry of  Women's Equality]  Again, something like the SMRG  wouldn't meet this year's project funding  criteria because it's not specific to violence.  The concern then is that the broader issues  that affect women's equality, such as economic equality issues, could not receive  funding.  Hammell: The problem is dissipating  your energy. You may have to, at some  times, focus, to just try to get some consciousness and energy going within [a particular area.] It's a bit like child care: it's  now had significant focus, it's up, and it  just needs some kind of monitoring.  To get the violence issue so that it has  some energy of its own, we have to pour  some energy and resources and our own  personal focus onto that issue. Now  whether some of the other broad based  things could not be caught somewhere else,  I'm not sure. But I tell you, my energy will  go around the violence issue; it's just something I feel very strongly about.  I know all projects are very valuable,  but there's limited resources. You're always  into those kind of hard choices, whether  you're doing it between two violence  projects, or between a project and two other  projects.  Huang: A lot of women's centres, rape  crisis centres and transition houses, are  very concerned about what is happening  around the Community Social Services  Employers Association (CSSEA,) around  the whole issue of restructuring delivery of  social services in BC. [CSSEA was formed  out of the Korbin Commission which dealt with  the structure of the public sector in BC in 1993.  CSSEA covers all agencies that have contracts  with the provincial government to deliver social services.]  One of the discussions at the CSSEA  table is the amalgamation of agencies in  order to achieve administrative efficiency.  This is of great concern to women's centres, rape crisis centres and transition  houses. The main issue for women's organizations is that we do not consider ourselves  service deliverers in the same way as other  agencies; we are social change agencies and  one way we press for social change is  through the delivery of services. We do not  want amalgamation. For us, it is about pro  tecting the independence and the au  tonomy and the work we do.  What is the ministry's position in terms  of either getting women's organizations  removed from this process of restructuring  or pressing home the point that we are different from other agencies?  Hammell: There is no decision within  government that there will be amalgamation of services at women's centres, or even  of the administration [component of centres.] This is not a decision of government.  You are the membership of CSSEA,  you have to give input, you have to make  your case. There's nothing coming from us  saying there has to be amalgamation. It's  not our decision. It's a discussion that's  going on at your table, [see update in As Kinesis goes to press]  Huang: There are rumours that the  Ministry of Women's Equality will not remain a stand alone ministry.  Hammell: People were worried about  that prior to the change [in leadership of  the NDP, when Glen Clark became premier,  and later when Clark reshuffled the cabinet.] I think anyone who's politically astute  would remain vigilant. I couldn't guarantee you of my own volition to save the ministry.  If, in fact, the ministry is serving a  need, we'd better tell people that that's happening. I can voice it, but if I don't have a  lot of people saying so behind me and making the arguments, [I won't be as strongly  heard.]  I think it's an incredibly important  ministry. To have a focus on women and  women's issues is very important. But I  can't save the ministry, the community has  to save the ministry.  Huang: Do you feel that others in the  NDP caucus and Glen Clark believe the  Ministry of Women's Equality is important  as well?  Hammell: I wouldn't dare speak on  other people's behalf, but I certainly know  many people do.  ml  :>  I I   OUR COMMUNITIES!  OUR PUBLIC SERVICES!  A message from the Public Service Alliance of Canada   •   (604) 430-5631  Ma Y 1996 Feature  Conversation between three women in Huairou:  A world culture of  human rights  by Sunila Abeysekera, Lala Rukh  and Fatima Jaffer   Sunila Abeysekera is a long-time feminist,  and media and human rights activist based in  Sri Lanka. She currently works with INPORM,  an Information Monitor service in Colombo,  Sri Lanka. She was interviewed by Patima  Jaffer, a South-Asian feminist based in Vancouver. Lala Rukh, who is with the Simorgh  Women's Resource and Publication Centre in  Lahore, Pakistan, sat in on the interview.  This conversation on feminism and the  culture of human rights took place at the Nongovernmental (NGO) Women's Forum in  Huairou, China last September, which was  concurrent with the Fourth World Conference  on Women (FWCW) in Beijing.  Fatima Jaffer: The culture of rights is  quite noticeable at the FWCW and NGO  Forum. Many demonstrations, whether by  women from southern or northern countries, are using the language of human  rights. We're quite familiar with the slogans: "Lesbian rights are human rights;"  and "Women's rights are human rights."  Yet there's been no place to talk about that  culture of rights in Beijing, about what that  means to us as feminists.  Sunila Abeysekera: It's bizarre that  there's no Human Rights tent in Huairou.  [Tents at the NGO Forum were venues for  women to organize around particular themes/  issues, such as peace or indigenous struggles,  or by region, such as Africa, Asia and the Pacific, et cetera.] It's interesting that, in a situation where almost everybody has been  talking about rights, there wasn't space created for such a tent.  It has to do with the Chinese government's paranoia about human rights, but  also with the fragmentation we are seeing  at Beijing in the "women's movement."  There is no stronger progressive social force  in the world today than the women's movement, but we are not together. We're changing things in bits and pieces, and while  some of the changes have been profound—  for example, getting domestic violence  criminalized—it's piecemeal.  Meanwhile, everyone is talking about  rights—migrant rights, workers' rights,  refugee rights, lesbian rights, whatever.  Again, there doesn't seem to be an  overarching framework of women's rights  across the board yet.  Jaffer: I would have hoped that the  overarching framework at this conference  would be feminism.  Lala Rukh: Unfortunately "feminism"  seems to have abdicated that role.  Jaffer: Do you agree with the strategy  of fighting behind slogans such as, "Women's rights are human rights?"  Rukh: When this slogan initially started  being used, I was opposed to it because I  knew it would mean feminism would go  by the wayside. Now that's what's happened—everybody is talking about rights  and there's no feminist vision or politics.  Abeysekera: I partly agree. I believe  human rights is perhaps the only frame-  M AY 1996  Sunila Abeysekera and Lala Rukh. Photos by Fatima Jaffer.  work in which you can truly address the  problems of multicultural societies and  multiethnic societies. It can provide us with  a bottom line on what rights are owed to  every person, regardless of race, ethnic origin, religion, and so on.  I think the framework of rights we see  in all the workshops at this forum is more  positive than negative, because at the grassroots level, it is strengthening for women  to know there are rights one can claim absolutely from a government and from an  international court. A lot of women don't  know they're entitled to these rights.  Secondly, the slogan 'Women's rights  are human rights is not what's keeping  feminism from being widely discussed at  this conference. The process of fragmentation of the women's movement could be  seen 10 years ago at the Third World Conference on Women in Nairobi. There, some  women were working on economics, others on health, others on violence. After  Nairobi, women went ahead and "specialized" in each of those fields, which was  necessary and important.  But in the process, a lot of feminists  also became academics and began to write,  research and study. Many feminists went  into institutions—state and non-state. It's  been interesting for me to see women I  knew from the Nairobi conference who are  now working in UNIFEM [the United Nations Development fund for Women], at the  United Nations Development Program, the  World Bank, the World Health Organization, the International Labour Organization.  The women's studies units which have  proliferated in universities all over the  world, are run by women who were part  of the women's movement in the 70s. And  it is because there was a line of thought,  and conscious decisions made: that women  needed to go into research and study, that  we needed to influence policy-making by  putting gender-sensitive women in policy-  There has yet to be a  strong new generation  of activists to replace  the women who opted  out...People are more  geared towards looking  after themselves first  and others afterwards.  Lala Rukh  making positions. But getting in there  means you can no longer be an activist.  On the other hand, there has yet to be  a strong new generation of activists to replace the women who opted out. The first  generation of feminists came out of the 60s  with a lot of radical politics. We're now in  a historical phase where there's a swing  towards conservatism and a lot of economic  difficulties, neo-liberal economic policies,  religious fundamentalism, and other right-  wing politics. People are more geared towards looking after themselves first and  others afterwards.  And in all our countries, we've been  raising fewer feminist activists and more  of what we call "career activists" who are  into "women and development," and who  are getting paid to do what they do. We  never got paid—we did what we did out  of political conviction alone.  Jaffer: The struggle for human rights  appears to me to be taking away from the  radicalism of the different movements. We  now find ourselves in dialogue with the  very people who may be able to give us  rights that are ours but have been taken  away, but this dialogue is at a cost.  Abeysekera: I agree. When I look at the  process at the FWCW in Beijing, I see ac  tivists engaged and concerned about the  government conference and the Platform  for Action [the official document of the  World Conference.] They have spent  months and months quibbling over one  bracketfParfs of the official document not yet  agreed upon were in brackets]. In Nairobi,  nobody gave a shit about the precious government conference.  This process of NGOs becoming more  involved in the shaping of government began after Nairobi. Before that, the role of  NGOs was quite clear—you were non-government, you had your own agenda; you  fought for your own space and you did  very different things from government.  Increasingly over the last 10 years,  we've seen NGOs grow much larger. In a  lot of countries, some NGOs are major institutions. Some are huge multi-nationals  that have a lot of resources and sometimes  get funding that government don't have  access to.  Some NGOs do things governments  are supposed to, such as build roads and  dig wells. Many have taken over provision  of much of the social infrastructure and  social services. Some are becoming quasi-  government, if you like, in at least some  countries such as in Bangladesh, Sri Lanka,  and even in Pakistan. These bodies, especially in rural areas and in the provinces,  sometimes have more power and provide  more services than the government.  I think it has to do with the shrinking  role of the state as much as with NGOs  becoming more institutionalized and more  into negotiating with governments. If s part  of this whole process of globalization. It's  quite interesting that in left-wing political  towns, NGOs are being cast as the bodies  that can strengthen this thing called "civil  society." I question what that means in  terms of global situations where economies  of countries are no longer bound by national borders and governments are completely incapable of acting autonomously  and are completely dependent on the World  Bank or the International Monetary Fund  (IMF).  Jaffer: One of the dangerous things  we've seen at this conference is the  cooptation of the language of human rights  by fundamentalists and right-wing groups.  Abeysekera: The issue of rights is becoming so significant, those on the Right  are taking the language and misusing it.  Yesterday, at a workshop at the NGO Forum, women were justifying sexist Islamic  inheritance laws, saying men get double the  share women get because men have to look  after women. These groups also say it's the  woman's right to stay at home and not have  to work, that it is her right to be supported  by her family.  Jaffer: The Christian Right in the West  similarily coopts the language of progressive movements.  Abeysekera: It's extremely dangerous  when everybody starts talking about rights  Continued on page 14. National Women's March Against Poverty:  For bread  by Annthea Whittaker  Across the country, from Newfoundland to Vancouver Island, women are  gearing up for the National Women's  March Against Poverty. The slogan is  simple: "For Bread and Roses! For Jobs  and Justice!" But the demands and goals  are far reaching and fierce.  It's on to Ottawa! From May 14 to  June 15, thousands of women will be  travelling from west to east, from east to  west, ultimately converging on the nation's capital. Co-sponsored by the National Action Committee on the Status  of Women (NAC) and Canadian Labour  Congress (CLC,) the Women's March  will be launched in Vancouver on Tuesday, May 14, during the CLC's annual  convention.  The take-off rally will start at  11:45am in front of the Vancouver Art  Gallery (Georgia St. side,) and the March  Caravan will leave from the old bus depot site shortly thereafter.  Five days later on May 19 women  on the east coast will be taking off simultaneously from St. John, New Brunswick  and St. John's, Newfoundland. The  launch in New Brunswick will begin at  the end of the Atlantic Poor People's  Conference, organized by the National  Anti-Poverty Organization.  In St. John's, the March Caravan will  take off after a rally at Bannerman Park.  The women on the March will cross the  Island to PortAux Basques, then take the  ferry to Nova Scotia to join up with the  other caravans.  The March will culminate ihn Ottawa on June 15, coinciding with NAC's  annual general meeting. A two-day Tent  City, near Parliament Hill, will be set up  with lots of events, actions and displays  taking place from the Tent City.  NAC president Sunera Thobani says  the March is being organized to demonstrate against the rise of the conservative  agenda in Canada. "We are marching because women's dream of equality can  never be realized in a society polarized  between the 'haves' and 'have-nots,'  where the poorer regions of the country  roses!  sidies  />"'ñ†  are marginalized, racism grows and the  most vulnerable members of our communities are abandoned," says Thobani.  She says that the March is a way to  mobilize the women's movement on the  ground across the country and to send a  clear message to the federal government.  "Women realize that there's a need to do  something positive, to channel all of that  frustration and anger and insecurity into  an action which actually gives women  across this country some hope," says  Thobani.  Thobani adds that a mass mobilization of the women will be a clear indicator to the Liberal government that they  are contending with a strong and widespread opposition. The Women's March,  with thousands of women stampeding  to Ottawa, will send a loud and clear  statement that women will not accept the  dismantling of the social system and the  increase in the number of women and  children living in poverty.  The March is also about creating a  vital and active political force between  union women and grassroots feminists,  according to Barb Byers, president of the  Saskatchewan Federation of Labour.  Byers sees the March as an opportunity  for "the labour movement and women's  movement to re-connect and form new  and stronger coalitions."  Apart from mobilizing women, the  purpose of the March is to present a series of demands calling on the federal  government to end its policies that are  leading to the economic erosion taking  place in Canada. The demands were  written by the CLC and NAC to address  the current crisis created by the federal  government's deficit hysteria. [See box for  a short-list of the demands.J  The Aboriginal Women's Action  Network (AWAN,) based in Vancouver,  says it supports the March against Poverty and sees the demands as addressing many of their own concerns as Aboriginal women. AWAN sees the March  as an education and alliance building  process between themselves and feminists from other communities.  AWAN further demands that Aboriginal people get a greater say in the  processes of the child welfare system.  "Because our children still constitute the  majority of those in the care of the  Superintendant of Family and Child  Services, we demand a greater say in this  entire process, including preventative  and support services for parents, and  especially, greater accountability in how  DIA [Department of Indian Affairs] dollars are being spent on our behalf," says  the group.  One concern being raised about the  March is the tight timeframe given for  women to organize activities around the  March. NAC's Thobani says the main  reason for holding the March on such  short notice has to do with the timing of  the next federal election. Initially she  says, the National Women's March was  planned to take place in mid-1997, which  would have allowed for a year and a half  of pre-March organizing. But because of  rumblings that a federal election might  be called as early as this fall, the organizers believed it was important to have  a national mobilization before an election.  Thobani says the organizers are  quite aware of the risks involved in attempting such a task in such a short time  frame. "Once you launch something like  this, it has to be effective. You really put  your movement on the line by trying to  organize something like this."  Other criticisms of the March concern its accessibility to most women, and  in particular women living in poverty  and single mothers. Some women have  also expressed concerns such as the lack  of on-site childcare. While childcare sub  sidies are available, on-site childcare is  preferable for many single moms.  Tara Poirier, an activist and single  mom living in Vancouver, says for  women who are living in poverty the  timing of the March runs over the dates  when people receive social assistance  cheques, so this excludes women who  would have difficulty paying their rent  should they be on the March the whole  way. She asks,"How are the organizers  getting poor women and women who  are not involved in organizing to go? This  March should work for women living in  poverty or else there shouldn't be a  March."  Despite the real barriers to participation for a lot of women, many activities in communities across Canada are  being planned, due in large part to the  wide spread support from the labour  movement and community women's organizations. "Already the response from  women across the country has been phenomenal," says CLC Executive Vice-  President Nancy Riche. "Women want to  take action."  Karen Budgell, vice president of the  Labrador Federation of Labour and a  March organizer in Newfoundland, says  the idea of the March has been effective  in inspiring women to get involved and  to take action. "Women are starting to  realize that the gains we made are susceptible to being lost. Even women who  are not in organizations are seeing the  links between the economy and their  situation. The March is an opportunity  for women to see we are all working for  the same cause," says Budgell.  Across the country, women are coming up with inspired and exciting ways  to demonstrate, energize and march in  order to ensure their communities hear  about the events and understand the  demands that are being made of the federal government. Some of the actions  include: picnics in the park, events for  kids, rallies, concerts, barbeques, quilt  For jobs  & justice!  making, and a rolling feminist library [see  sidebar.]  Another aspect of the March is a  popular education campaign. Many  women are organizing one day conferences, forums and workshops in their  communities to discuss the demands of  the March along with actions to ensure  the demands are met by the federal government.  Women in Saskatchewan say they  wanted to do more than a rally and demonstration and came up with some alternative actions to consider. They discussed a symbolic glueing of hair back  on their legs and the building of a huge  bonfire where they would do a real bra  burning. [The women say the historical bra-  burners of the 1970s had not in actual fact  burnt their lingerie.] The idea has been  mostly quelched, but there is still a discussion of perhaps burning stiletto heels  and make up. Watch for the burning inferno when the caravan hits Saskatchewan.  In Winnipeg, the main event will be  a forum to demand a repeal of the $975  Women on Wheels:  immigration landing fee. Sunera  Thobani will be speaking at the plenary  of the forum, being organized by the  Council for Refugees and the Conference  for Canadians.  In Newfoundland, after leaving St.  John's, the March caravan will be making various stops at the major centres  across the province, including in  Claronville, Grand Falls and Gander. In  those places, there will be rallies and  luncheons with speakers. Because of the  geographic isolation of many of the  women in Newfoundland, women are  also planning to make a quilt so that the  words and messages of women who are  not able to go on the March will be heard.  The quilt will be taken to Ottawa and  proudly displayed.  In Quebec, there will be a 24-hour  vigil surrounding the legislature. They  will also celebrate the first year anniversary of the Bread and Roses March [a  successful provincial women's march held  last June which inspired the organizing of a  national women's march.]  As well as hosting the kick-off to the  March, women activists in Vancouver are  planning to hold workshops about  women living in poverty and First Nations women, as well as forums to address the list of demands.  Sunera Thobani says NAC and CLC  are preparing postcards listing the demands, and are calling on women across  Canada to send them to their Members  of Parliament, pressing them to support  the demands. As a follow-up to the  March, Thobani adds that national and  community women's organizations will  be monitoring the federal government's  implementation of the demands of the  National Women's March Against Poverty.  To find out what is happening in your  community around the March, contact your  local women's organization or the women's  rights committee of a CLC-affiliated union.  Or contact the National March coordinator,  Monica Mulvahill, at NAC, (416) 932-3780.  In BC, contact the regional March organizer,  Michelle Dodds, at the Public Service Alliance of Canada, (604) 430-5631.  Rolling across Canada  by Jennifer Weih  When three Vancouver lesbians decided that feminism had to hit the road,  they never thought the vice president of the  largest union in the world would help make  it happen.  "Diana Kilmury is going to lend us a  truck," screamed Annthea Whittaker. And  with these words Women On Wheels  (WOW) was really and truly becoming a  rolling feminist library.  Starting on May 14th, E. Centime  Zeleke, Annthea Whittaker and Gretchen  Zimmerman will be putting pedal to the  metal for the feminist revolution.  The three conceived of the idea of a  rolling feminist library and their plan  started to gel when they decided to link  their WOW with the National Women's  March Against Poverty. What a better way  to go on a road trip than with thousands of  other women, as they make the trek from  Vancouver to Ottawa.  Over the last two months, the three  WOW women have been publicizing  WOW and collecting donations of books  and other materials and money to get the  feminist library rolling. They are trying to  collect lots of new and used feminist books,  pamphlets, magazines, newspapers, tapes  and CDs.  The issue of how to transport the materials across Canada was a serious concern  for the WOW women. But then great news  came when Kilmury, the vice-president of  the Teamsters' Union, agreed to fix up and  lend WOW her very own truck to distribute print materials across the country. Now  they had wheels for their books.  The WOW truck will be stocked with  all types of feminist materials to be distributed along the cross country journey. The  goal, says Zeleke, is to reclaim, reuse, and  redistribute feminist resources along the  way.  She adds that WOW decided to go on  the road because feminist literature is difficult to obtain for rural and low-income  women.At stops along the March, WOW  plans to park the truck, open its doors, and  give away or trade materials. WOW will  also be accepting donations to take to next  stops along the way.  WOW's members say they purposely  identify as feminists because they see feminism being unjustly vilified in the 90s backlash. Their feminism is broad-based and  acknowledges the linkages between various forms of oppression. To match their  feminist politics, WOW is collecting materials that address a wide range of concerns,  including, but not restricted to, racism, anti-  poverty, AIDS, safer-sex, lesbian and gay,  and birth control issues.  Then another exciting thing happened.  At a recent WOW meeting in a neighbourhood cafe, the three women met up with  longtime feminist activist Ellen  Woodsworth. They told Woodsworth  about their rolling feminist library and were  surprised and delighted to discover that  Woodsworth, herself, had been involved in  a similar project.  ids of the  National Women's  March:  Jobs  We are ca!  women.  We are ca  ing for real ji  ling for the federal  minimum wage to be raised  immediately to $7.85 an hour.  We are calling for i  Aboriginal women tc  employment and training  Bread  We are calling for a Can;  Security Act.  We are calling for the promi:  national child care prograi  We are calling for guaranteed,  portable and secure support programs  for people with disabilities.  We are calling for the strengthening  of the public pension system and the  maintenance of women's independent  access to old age benefits.  We are calling for the enforcement  of the Canada Health Act.  We are calling for post- secondai  education to be accessible to womei  through grants, not loans.  We are calling for the surplus in the  UI fund to be used to restore benefit  levels.  We are calling for the creat  14,000 units of social housing a year.  Justice  We are calling for $50 million fc  community-based feminist serv:  against male violence.  We are calling for an end to the  sexist, racist and anti-poor $975 head  tax.  We are calling for the inclusion of  "sexual orientation" as prohibited  grounds for discrimination in the  Canadian Human Rights Act.  We are calling for the elimination  of women's poverty to be a foreign  policy objective.  Woodsworth was among a number of  women who took to the road in 1973 with  Cora: the Women's Liberation Bookmobile.  Cora was a school bus refurbished into a  roadworthy women's centre.  The namesake of the Bookmobile, Cora  Hind, was an Agriculture Minister and  "farmer dyke" in the 1880's. The goal of the  Bookmobile was to provide access to women's liberation resources and encourage  community among women in rural Ontario. Cora stayed on the road for three seasons, until 1976.  And now 20 years later, Whittaker,  Zimmerman and Zeleke will be taking  feminism on tour across the country.  Look for them in your town soon!  WOW is still collecting material and establishing contacts for the trip. They would also  appreciate financial donations to help cover the  costs for their cross country trek. If you have  any questions give them a call: Annthea  Whittaker (604) 873-3665; Gretchen  Zimmerman (604) 251-7284; and E.Centime  Zeleke (604) 253-3710. Or fax them at: (604)  873-6379; or write to them at: 1655 E. 21st  Ave, Vancouver, BC, V5N 2N4.  WOW is having a fundraising event on  May 6th. Check Bulletin Board for details. Feature  Conversation between three women in Huairou  Continued from page 11  because you no longer know which rights  are right.  Jaffer: Is the question then "Which  rights are right?"  Abeysekera: The real question here, especially in Beijing with the Platform for  Action is the huge debate on the universality of rights. Resistance to universality is  coming from some southern countries, the  Islamic countries, and from Christian sectors like the Vatican. These sectors have  come up with the idea that a universal concept of human rights is Western. They argue that cultural specificities need to take  precedence over any universalized framework. It's a problem because, for example  in Sri Lanka, that argument is being used  to justify the existence of differential personal laws on marriage, inheritance, et cetera, that govern women.  We've seen a strange political formation in the right-wing during the process  of preparing for the FWCW—all the reactionary governments have shown up very  well-aligned on one side, saying, "We have  deep problems with acknowledging universality. We're culture-bound countries  with 2-5,000 years of tradition that we have  to respect..." and so on. One of the issues  that has constantly come up in the Platform for Action is the inability of governments to transcend this discussion on universality.  In the end, you get the white northern  countries supporting universality and the  southern countries against it. That becomes  a dicy division—like with the issue of China  at this conference where the Americans  China-bash and southern countries China-  bash too. But there's a difference. We're  critical of China but when the Americans  go with their absolute bashing, you have  to ask "Wait a minute, what's the agenda?"  Jaffer: And then we find we're standing up for China instead of being able to  critique it. You've mentioned north-south  divisions a number of times, yet we have  not heard much open discussion about the  differences here. It was a big issue in Nairobi 10 years ago. Do you think it is still a  big issue at this NGO Forum?  Abeysekera: I think it's even more pronounced now. Then again, I think the south  is also fragmented. In the 70s, we had the  non-aligned movement, a very strong, positive, post-nationalist, post-post-colonial  movement. With the collapse of the Soviet  Union and other factors, that has fallen  apart. It was a movement which had a political and ideological force behind it. The  G-77[mostly southern countries] does not  have a political or ideological binding—its  only binding force is economic circumstances and the need to jointly negotiate  with the IMF and the World Bank.  Jaffer: What about the United Nations?  Abeysekera: In reality, no one actually  gives a shit about the United Nations as the  recent developments in the former Yugoslavia have shown us. The UN is basically  an ineffective and ineffectual international  instrument.  Jaffer: The UN still manages to get the  world's governments in the same room together. What's the point?  Abeysekera: I think people are beginning to question what the point is. At each  of the world conferences, such as this one,  the polarization between Islamic countries  and G-7 [top seven industrialized] countries is actually becoming deeper and  deeper, as it is between the G-7 and G-77,  and between southern against white western/northern, and so on.  Jaffer: Could you tell us what you, as a  southern woman, wanted to achieve at the  NGO Forum?  We need to  acknowledge  differences—but the  issue of surrendering  privilege is only wishful  thinking. Sunila Abeysekera  Abeysekera: Partly, I came because I  wanted to network with South Asian  women, and with Latin American women  who I rarely see. I also came to get a sense  of what is possible. Much of my work is of  an international nature. In the last two,  three years, there's been much confusion,  misunderstanding and squabbling, even  within the campaign for women's human  rights. We've been trying to see whether it's  possible to transcend some of those divisions beyond Beijing.  At every preparatory conference for  Beijing, there were major divisions on the  basis of language class and region. These  are all political differences manifesting  themselves within the women's movement.  There are big divisions. On the one hand,  there are the white northern-based human  rights NGO women who work with Amnesty International or international human  rights organizations from New York, Ottawa or Toronto, who know how to work  the system and who have all the contacts.  On the other, there are the women from  Africa, Asia and Latin America who do a  lot of work underground, who feed information to these groups and deal with the  difficult dynamics of northern NGO between partners and friends while still feeling disadvantaged and marginalized in the  process of negotiation at the UN level.  We began talking about these resentments in March [at the prepratory conference in New York] but need to continue.  We were hoping Beijing would provide the  space for that conversation. We have been  trying to initiate a discussion with different women working on the human rights  campaign but nobody talks about the divisions. You fight and it's all very unpleasant. Then you just want to forget about it.  You don't want to talk about why.  We haven't been able to have that conversation here because everybody is so involved and has been running around, trying to get things done. But on September  10th, we have a whole day's meeting set  aside for the global campaign for women's  human rights, where we hope to speak to  some of the problems.  I recently read a piece about surrendering privilege. It has its points—mainly that  we need to acknowledge differences—but  the issue of surrendering privilege is only  wishful thinking.  It was awkward for us to raise the  question of privilege with our friends in  New York who are white, because they're  women who have worked with anti-racist  and feminist movements for many years.  They're not denying they're privileged. But  the idea of surrendering privilege is bullshit  because you can't surrender it. It's better  to talk about the ways in which we can collectively use our different privileges . But  in order to do that, one needs to have a very  honest conversation.  In the 1970s, we had a slogan that said,  "The personal is political." Now is a moment when we need to go back to that slogan and say women really need to look at  what their politics are and what their personal predilections are. We need to talk  about how we can do that—honestly.  PARAGRAPH  THECANAD  IAN  F I C T J_0 _N_R_ E_ V ^E_W  $500  FIRST PRIZE  DEADLINE JUNE 30. 1996  $14 entry fee includes a  one-year subscription to  PARAGRAPH  for detailed RULES send SASE to:  PARAGRAPH CONTEST  137 Birmingham Street  Stratford, Ontario   N5A 2T1  Advertise in Kinesis  and support Canada's  sole remaining,  national, feminist  monthly  Telephone: 255-5499  It's worth it!  Corrections  In the conversation with Chrystos  [page 16] in our April 1996 issue, we  provided two spellings for Michelle  Sylliboy's last name. The one listed  here is the correct spelling. Apologies  for the error.  And in our March 1996 issue, we  forgot to mention a few things: The  photo of the February 14th march in  Vancouver's Downtown Eastside on  page 4 should have been credited to  Fatima Jaffer. And we forgot to say that  Joanne Namsoo had written the Movement Matters pieces on page 16.  Kinesis would also like to apologize  to the Simon Fraser University Women's Centre. Some of the text on their  IWD ad disappeared in the grey screen,  leaving the ad unrecognizable. Feature  1996 Canadian Census:  Counting women in?  by Ellen Woodsworth  For the first time ever, the Canadian  Census will "count" women's unpaid housework and family care. Statistics Canada  (StatsCan) has added a section to the 1996  Census called "Household Activities," intended to measure unwaged work.  The week before May 14—Census  Day—20 percent of Canada's 11.2 million  households will receive the long form version of the census. In it, they will be asked to  fill out three questions related to unpaid  work in the household.  For decades, women and women's organizations all over the world have been  fighting for the inclusion of their unwaged  work in their country's census.  The acknowledgement (somewhat) of  women's unpaid work in North America is  the result of a long campaign which began  in 1970. In that year, the Association for the  Advancement of Women demanded that the  US Congress include women as "producers  and labourers." The issue was taken up in  Canada when the International Campaign  for Wages for Housework was founded in  Montreal in 1975.  A decade later, Canada signed the UN  document [which came out of the 3rd World  Conference on Women in Nairobi, Kenya in  1975] which states, "the renumerated contributions of women to all aspects and sectors of development should be recognized  and appropriate efforts be made to economic  statistics and in the gross national product."  This gave women more leverage in pressing  StatsCan to amend the national census.  In 1991, Carol Lees, a Saskatchewan  housewife, took up the fight against  StatsCan. StatsCan had threatened Lees with  jail after she refused to mark on her census  form that she "didn't work." Instead of complying with StatsCan, Lees launched a new  campaign called "Work is Work is Work"  with women's organizations from Quebec,  Ontario, Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta  and BC.  The campaign to include women's  unwaged work in the national census  achieved a victory recently when StatsCan  announced during the 4th World Conference  on Women in Beijing, China that it would  finally include questions related to unpaid  work.  The question is: Did Canadian women  really win what we have fought for? And will  these questions enable us to move on in the  campaign and use the information to win  pensions, wages and other benefits that come  with recognition of work as work?  Although the change to the census is a  great step, the answer to the questions seems  to unfortunately be "No." This is mainly  oecause the questions are not placed in the  section of the census which counts "real" or  paid work, "Labour Force Activities." This  section provides information for the calculation of Canada's Gross National Product  (GNP,) which measures "productivity" of a  nation.  As well, the questions in the "Household Activities" section do not accurately  count our unwaged work because the definition of that work does not go far enough:  it does not include the amount of time we  spend doing volunteer work, or caring for  ill people or people with disabilities, or providing full care for seniors.  Still, the ongoing campaigns have successfully exposed the extent of women's  work—globally, it is estimated women do  two-thirds of all the world's work. As well,  the campaigns have further exposed the  grave disparity between women's and men's  economic status—women receive only 10  percent of the world's wages and own only  one percent of the world's property.  Propping up this blatant exploitation of  women's labour is the present system of international accounting—the United Nations  System of National Accounts (UNSNA)—the  system used to measure "productive economic activity," and to which all nations  must agree if they are to be members of the  United Nations.  The UNSNA system of accounting recognizes military costs and environmental  disasters as contributing to the GNP, but it  does not include unpaid housework or the  benefit of having a pristine beach or ocean.  Why? Because neither "costs" anything to  maintain. The GNP of a country can increase,  even though the poverty of women also increases.  This continued exploitation of women's  unwaged work is a key factor in the federal  government's ongoing plan to slash social  program spending. As the cuts dismantle the  nation's social security net, women—both at  home and in women's organizations—are  being forced to pick up the slack, increasing  enormously their workload as unpaid or  low-waged service providers and caregivers.  The current economic system works to  ensure corporations get wealthier. If women's unwaged work continues to not be valued as having economic worth, then we will  continue to be forced to do it for free.  Women need a clear gender analysis to  show how spending cuts by the federal (and  by extension, the provincial) government are  affecting women's work, both paid and unpaid. What women need is an economic system that works for women—a system that  pays us for the work we do, and provides us  with a secure social system.  An alternative system of economics is  being developed called the Genuine Progress  Indicator, which would include the economic  benefits and costs of all activities in measuring the GNP Under this system, raising chil  dren would be considered a benefit and an  environmental disaster a cost, and their impact would be included in the national accounting system.  The immediate goals of the campaign  to "count women in" is to encourage women  to fill in all three questions, with some additions to question 30(c) to include the full  amount of time spent on senior care.  Mothers are Women (MAW) and the  Canadian Alliance of Home Managers  (CAHM) have prepared a pamphlet to help  women fill in the census to best account for  unpaid work in the household [see box.]  MAW is also asking women to attach  their "Census 2001 Count Volunteer Work!"  sticker to their census before sending it to  StatsCan. They have developed an excellent  census resource kit which includes brochures, the questions, stickers, a time sheet  to calculate your weekly work hours and  other useful articles about unwaged work  from different women's groups.  BC Voice of Women wants to take it a  step further, and is asking women who work  in the home to also answer questions 31  through 46—the Labour Force Activities section—as if they were self-employed.  In the long run, the questions on  unwaged work need to be placed in the "Labour Force Activities" section. Questions  concerning the care of ill people and people  with disabilities, full senior care, and volunteer work must be included in the GNP and  in all statistical gathering at provincial and  municipal levels of government.  It is important that all references to work  always include both paid and unpaid  work—62.5 percent of the working time of  Canadian women is unpaid and 3.4 million  Canadians, 96 percent of whom are women,  define their main activity as home management.  Women's paid work cannot increase in  value until our unpaid work is valued. And  women's increasing poverty will only be  stopped when there is a political and economic system that reflects who we are in our  full work day.  For more information on the campaigns to  have women's unwaged work counted into the  census, contact one of the following groups:  Mothers are Women (MAW), PO Box  4104 Stn E, Ottawa, ON, K1S 5B1; tel: (613)  722-7851.  BC Voice of Women, c/o Barbara Little,  Brenton-Page Rd, RR 1, Ladysmith, BC, V0R  2E0; tel: (604) 245-3405.  Census Info: Vancouver, c/o 1426 Napier  St, Vancouver, BC, V5L 2M5; tel: (604) 253-  3395 leave message, 9am-5pm.  Canadian Alliance for Home Managers,  2422 Hanover Ave, Saskatoon, SK, S7J 1E8;  tel: (603) 343-9379.  Other valuable resources include the books:  Global Kitchen by Selma James (London, England, 1995) and If Women Counted by  Marilyn Waring (New York, 1988); and the  film: Who's Counting: Sex, Lies, and Global  Economics (National Film Board, Canada,  1995.)  Ellen Woodsworth is active with the "Work is  Work" campaign and the Greater Vancouver  Senior's Coalition.  Tips for  answering the  census questions  Most Canadians will receive a short  census form which does not include questions on unpaid work. But if you do happen to receive the long torm, then...  Mother are Women (MAW) and the  Canadian Alliance tor Home Managers  (CAHM) have prepared a pamphet with  suggestions to help women who receive  the long torm version ot the census ensure that their unwaged work is more accurately accounted tor in the 1996 Census.  Under the Household Activities Section, you will be asked three questions.  MAW and CAHM suggest the following examples as activities that should be included when counting the hours of work  done on household activities.  Household Activities:  Question 30:  Last week, how many hours did you  spend doing the following activities?  a) Doing unpaid housework, yard  work or home maintenance?  Some examples include: preparing  meals, doing laundry, household planning, shopping and cutting grass.  b) Looking after one or more of your  own children, or the children of others,  without pay.  Some examples include: bathing or  dren to sports activities or helping them  with homework, and talking with teens  c) Providing unpaid care or assistance to one or more seniors.  Some examples include: providing  personal care to a senior family member,  ping, banking or with taking medication.  MAW points out mat the highest response  category for hours of unpaid work listed  for this question is "10 hours or more."  If your hours are much more than 10,  write in the correct number.  In counting women's unpaid work,  MAW and CAHM say women should include the total number of unpaid hours  spent doing activities for members of your  household; other family members outside  the household; and friends or neighbours.  As well, overlapping activities should be  reported under separate categories. For  example, if you spent one hour preparing a meal while looking after your children, report one hour of housework in  (30a) and one hour of child care in (30b.)  You can add this too!  The 1996 census will not count volunteer community work or care for an ill  or disabled adult. MAW and CAHM say  women should let StatsCan know just how  much time we spend on these activities.  They suggest writing in those additional  hours at the end of the question on unpaid household work.  The groups say it is critical that all  of women's work—waged and unwaged  is accounted for in the national census.  Measuring unpaid work values the contributions of unpaid workers; recognizes  the work of women; and provides policy  makers with accurate information on the  working lives of Canadians.  MAY 1996 Movement Matters  listings information  Movement Matters is designed to  be a network of news, updates and  information of special interest to the  women's movement.  Submissions to Movement Matters  should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double spaced and may be edited  for length. Deadline is the 18th of the  month preceding publication.  Sunera Thobani to  step down  Sunera Thobani of the NationalAction  Committee on the Status of Women (NAC)  has announced her plans to resign as president of the national women's organization.  Thobani was nominated to NAC by the  Vancouver Status of Women in 1993. She  was the first woman of colour ever to lead  the organization, and as such has had a  great impact on the feminist movement in  Canada.  When Thobani was first elected president, she successfully fought back against  the racist and sexist backlash, most notably from Conservative member of parliament John McDougall who questioned her  immigration status.  Under Thobani's leadership, NAC experienced several positive changes: its  membership expanded from 550 to 677  women's groups, its deficit was paid off,  and NAC strengthened its position as a  feminist organization playing a key role in  fighting for women's equality during a time  of profound right-wing economic and social restructuring of Canada.  "Most significantly, however, my presidency has represented a significant breakthrough in the barriers faced by women of  colour to our participation in Canadian  society," says Ms. Thobani.  Cenen Bagon, from the Vancouver  Committee for Domestic Workers' and  Caregiver's Rights and the BC NAC regional representative adds that Thobani's  leadership will be missed at the national  level, stating that "...we were able to show  that leaders in the community of women  of colour can actually lead a national women's organization."  Thobani will be returning to Vancouver and is currently negotiating an academic position which has not been announced yet. We look forward to having  Sunera back on the West Coast.  A new NAC president will be elected  at the organiation's Annual General Meeting in mid-June in Ottawa.  Everywoman's mural  project  The MayWorks Festival of Working  People and the Arts and the Everywoman's  Health Centre, BC's first free-standing abortion clinic, will unveil a mural on the outside walls of the clinic as part of the 1996  MayWorks Festival. The mural will beautify the building in a gesture of solidarity  with the women using and working at the  clinic. Board member Kim Zander describes Everywoman's Health Centre as "a  health service that treats women with respect in a dignified environment. This mural will reinforce the pride with which  women fought for and won the right to  choose."  Mural artist, Cheryl Hamilton, has  been working as an illustrator/painter for  six years in Vancouver and San Francisco.  She says, "Giving the building a sense of  pride and identity can only strengthen the  16  struggle for women's right to choose what  happens with our bodies."  The mural will be unveiled during the  ninth MayWorks Festival of Working People and the Arts, which runs from April 28  to May 4. Centred around May lst-Inter-  national Workers' Day—Mayworks celebrates the creativity and strength of working people with our own images of ourselves and our work.  Donating to the project is a tangible  and lasting way to support the women of  Everywoman's. Donations towards the  mural can be made at any VanCity Credit  Union branch to Vancouver MayWorks Society, Everywoman's Mural Project, Account #2-44877-9; or cheques can be mailed  to Box 21566-1855 Commercial Dr, Vancouver, BC, V5N 4A0. All funds donated will  go directly to the mural project.  For more information on the project or  the 1996 MayWorks Festival call the  MayWorks hotline at (604) 874-2906 or e-  mail: mayworks@wimsey.com.  Vancouver Women's  Bookstore to close  After a long and difficult deliberation  process, the collective at the Vancouver  Women's Bookstore has decided to close the  storefront at the end of June. The main reason for the decision is the financial struggle involved with keeping the bookstore  open. Many of the books carried are now  widely available at other stores, including  some chain stores, and it has become harder  and harder to maintain the previous feminist 'niche' in the book market.  The Vancouver Women's Bookstore  was founded in 1973, and was the first feminist bookstore in Canada. An arson attack  in 1980 forced it to close, but tremendous  community support enabled the bookstore  to reopen three months later at a new location. In 1984, they had outgrown their space  on Hastings Street and moved to the  present location on Cambie Street.  In 1992, after 19 years of of being run  by a volunteer collective, the structure was  changed to a paid worker's co-operative.  Many women worked for minimal pay and  still contributed countless unpaid hours.  This dedication is what the store was built  on~what all feminist stores are built on.  The Collective is discussing the possibility of a transformation into a mail-order  store to avoid a complete closure of operations. A storefront closing sale will be held  throughout the entire month of May, with  20-70 percent off everything. Bookstore  hours are Tuesday to Saturday 10:00am to  6:00pm.  Questions, comments, queries and  suggestions may be sent to the Vancouver  Women's Bookstore at 315 Cambie St, Vancouver, BC, V6B 2N4; or call (604) 684-0523.  OXFAM  campaign for  food security  Oxfam-Canada has launched a three-  month national campaign to raise funds for  community programs to alleviate hunger  and promote self-sufficiency in Nicaragua,  Namibia, Cuba and Ethiopia.  The goal of the Seeds for Life campaign  is to raise $100,000, and from now until June  9th, Oxfam-Canada will be selling sunflower seeds at $3 a packet in Northern  Reflection stores across the country. All proceeds will go directly to programs which  promote self-sufficiency in food, including  the development of soil and water conservation systems in Ethiopia, and the training of Cuban women in the cultivation of  soy beans for use as nutritional supplements for school children because of milk  shortages.  According to Miriam Palacios, BC Program Coordinator with OXFAM-Canada,  support of these food programs is an important contribution to the efforts of  women in many countries who are struggling for recognition of their work in the  area of agriculture. She explained that even  though women in the "Third World" countries produce half of the world's food, their  work is generally seen as an extension of  their housework, and as such is usually  unpaid.  For further information on the campaign or on Oxfam's food security programs, contact Miriam Palacios or Joy  Schellenberg at (604) 736-7678, or Patricia  Coty at (416) 535-6767.  Hong Kong women  take action against  poverty  AConference on Poverty, organized by  the Hong Kong Council of Social Service  and held in February of this year in Hong  Kong, examined poverty issues facing various groups in Hong Kong, including the  elderly, immigrants, and women. The Association for the Advancement of Feminism  (AAF), a Hong Kong women's organization, helped to prepare the position paper  on Women and Poverty for the conference.  The position paper pointed out that the  feminization of poverty is a serious problem in Hong Kong. For example, there are  more elderly women than men and more  female than male single parents who rely  on social assistance, the employment rate  is significantly lower for women, and women's average earnings are much lower than  those of men.  The paper noted that the particular  situations facing poor women are often ignored entirely in discussions and policies  addressing poverty issues. The traditional  definition of poverty as economic deprivation and unemployment overlooks equally  significant indicators such as equality, social participation, and personal development. Adhering to the concept of family as  a basic unit and overlooking power relations within the family also hinders a full  understanding of the realities for women  living in poverty.  The AAF concludes that the poverty of  women is linked to their position within  the family, their position within the labour  market, and a social welfare system that  reinforces their traditional caring role. The  eradication of poverty for women in Hong  Kong, according to their research, would  require changes to be directed to these  structures and, at the ideological level, the  redefinition of poverty within a gender  perspective.  At the policy level, the AAF suggests  three important types of strategies to improve women's economic position: cash  support for women caregivers in the home,  social services which improve women's  opportunities for employment and development, and a strategy that will provide  comprehensive protection of women's  rights and eliminate discrimination.  (Information from Women's News  Dz'gesf,[February 1996,]Hong Kong).  Woman in Turkey  sentenced for  self-defense  Feminists in Turkey are calling on  women internationally to contact the Turkish Supreme Court in response to a recent  court decision that put nineteen year old  Zeynep Uludag in prison for defending  herself, her mother, her sister and a friend  against a group of men who attacked them.  The women were having dinner at a  restaurant when they were harassed by a  man passing their table. The man approached the table, rubbed his genitals  against Mrs. Uludag, and made lewd remarks. Mrs. Uludag then grabbed a glass  from the table and threw it at the man. Later,  while walking to their car, the four women  were confronted by a group of men who  knocked them down, kicked them, dragged  them by their hair, and banged their heads  against stone walls. Zeynep escaped, ran  back to the restaurant and got a knife. She  returned and threatened the men with the  knife, and the women fled.  One of the men was later found dead.  Although witnesses attested that Zeynep  didn't stab anyone, the court found her  guilty and sentenced her to twenty-four  years in prison. Her sentence was reduced  to six-and-two-thirds years due to provocation. Only one of the men involved in the  attack admitted his role and was sentenced  to eight months in prison. The women have  been harassed and one of the women was  demoted in her job for 'being involved' in  this incident.  Feminists in Turkey are urging women  to contact the Turkish Supreme Court  which is scheduled to hear an appeal, and  condemn this injustice against Zeynep. Letters should be sent to: Yarglay 1, Ceza  Baskanligl, Ataturk Bulveri, Bakanliklar No  1, Anakara, Turkey, or faxed to: 011-90-312-  425-9814. A defense fund for Zeynep has  also been set up by a monthly feminist  magazine in Istanbul, Pazartesi. Send contributions to: Pazartesi, Sehit muhtar Cad.  60/5, Tallmhane/Taksim, Istanbul, Turkey.  (Information from Off our Backs, April  1996.)  Rape Relief organizes  annual walkathon  Canada's oldest rape crisis centre, Vancouver Rape Relief and Women's Shelter,  is organizing its 18th Annual Walkathon.  More than 400 participants are expected to  join the event, which will raise much of the  money needed to pay for the centre.  Rape Relief runs a transitional house  for battered women in the Lower Mainland,  a sexual assault crisis line, and an organizing centre for women. In 1995, the centre  received 1,500 crisis calls and sheltered over  100 families.  The 10 kilometre wheelchair-accessible  and bicycle-friendly route goes around the  seawall at Stanley Park. All are welcome  to join the walkathon, which will be followed by a free picnic lunch, displays and  entertainment. Childcare is available for the  whole day at a site within the park.  For pre-registration and pledge sheets,  call (604) 879-6752. For more information  about the Walkathon call Rape Relief at  (604) 872-8212.  Advertise in Kinesis  and support news that's not  in the dailies—255-5499  and reach women! Commentary  Murders in Vernon, British Columbia:  Violence is about power  by Yasmin Jiwani  On April 5, at 10:30 am, a man walked  into his estranged wife's home in Vernon,  BC, and shot her dead. He also killed eight  members of the family who had stood by  her when she left her husband, and  wounded her grandmother and a six-year-  old niece. Later that day, he shot himself in  a motel room.  The murders were carefully planned  and executed. Mark Chahal killed an entire family on a day when he knew they  would be home—the day before his ex-  wife's sister, Balwinder Gakhal, was to be  married.  Weeks after the event, the SouthAsian  community and larger society are still reeling from the shock of these killings. The  tragic murders of the Gakhal family brings  to the forefront, once again, the issue of violence against women.  Questions arise about how an event of  this kind could have occured: how was it  possible that a man with well-known violent intentions was allowed to get anywhere close to the family who subsequently  became victims of his wrath? Other questions that are surfacing deal with the adequacy of the criminal justice system in  protecting women against male violence.  Still others question whether culture had  anything to do with the killing of this South  Asian Canadian family.  The media immediately labelled the  event as the "second largest massacre in Canadian history," the first being the murders  of 14 women at the Ecole Polytechnique in  Montreal in 1989. This characterization  typically ignores the history of genocide of  First Nations peoples in Canada. It also ignores the countless deaths and assaults of  thousands of women between, before and  since these mass murders.  Recent research reveals that 120  women in Canada are killed every year. On  average, two women are murdered per  week by their male partners. A Vancouver  police study found that there were 130 cases  of violence against women in intimate relationships reported in just one month in  1994. More than 450,000 women are  "slapped, punched, choked, beaten, sexually assaulted, or threatened with a gun or  knife," by their partners. And since 1992,  more than 118 women have died as a result of male violence in Vancouver's  Downtown Eastside.  The statistics reveal the staggering nature of violence against women. They also  reveal that violence transcends class, race,  ethnicity or religion. Violence is an endemic  problem; in fact, it is an epidemic in Canadian society. The common factor is male  control over women. When men feel they  can no longer control women, violence  erupts. Approximately 50 percent of violence occurs after a woman has left or attempts to leave an abusive relationship.  Violence also occurs when men feel women  are taking over. The Montreal murders  were one such instance, where Marc Lepine  killed "feminists" who he believed were  taking over—moving into a previously de- .  fined male territory—the engineering fac-  ulty.  Media coverage of the Ghakal murders  refrained from mentioning these realities  and parallels. Only letters to the editor and  Yasmin Jiwani speaking at a press  conference organized by the  Coalition of South Asian Women  Against Violence. Photo by Fatima  Jaffer.  the articles appearing in the opinion/editorial pages brought the issue of power to  the surface. Instead, much emphasis was  placed on arranged marriages and other  SouthAsian cultural traditions, which were  seen as contributing to violence.  The focus on culture deflects attention  away from the real issues at hand, which  again are power, control and the outcome  of challenging male authority. Rajwar  Gakhal challenged that authority when she  left her husband and filed for divorce. Yet,  rather than focussing on her bravery or the  support of her family and friends, media  coverage and the RCMP blamed the victim by suggesting that she was remiss in  not laying charges.  The focus on culture  deflects attention away  from the real issues at  hand, which again are  power, control and the  outcome of challenging  male authority.  The media ignored the fact that women  have a well-known fear of retaliation if they  tell, let alone lay charges. Because of this  fear, many cases either do not proceed to  court or the charges are stayed [dismissed.]  It was precisely because of this fear that the  Attorney General's office in 1993 issued a  mandatory charging policy. Under that  policy, police are required to investigate a  case where there is suspicion of violence in  an intimate relationship. They are not supposed to ask the woman if she wants  charges laid. They are not to be concerned  about any lack of evidence. They simply  must report the case to Crown Counsel who  then pursues it in court. It is the Crown  which decides whether or not to lay  charges.  In most cases, women's decisions not  to report the abuse and violence they experience stems from economic and social con-  We need to examine the  broad social factors  that contribute to the  epidemic of violence.  cerns. It has been extensively documented  in what is now known as the "feminization  of poverty" thesis, that women are poorer  when they become divorced or separated.  There are actually few resources for women  who leave abusive relationships.  Across Canada, there are 400 shelters  for abused women and 200 crisis centres.  Increasingly, many shelters are facing funding cuts even while most have waiting lists.  The shelters only provide transitory help  and support. So what happens after women  leave the shelters? There are few programs  available for them.  Women are also afraid to leave abusive  relationships. They are afraid for their lives  and the lives of their children, and they are  fearful that the children will be taken from  their custody. So where do women go?  The Gakhal family supported Rajwar.  Like some Canadian families who support  their daughters, sisters or mothers, the family attempted to protect Rajwar from her  ex-husband-. In fact, eight months after the  wedding, they went from Vernon to  Burnaby where Rajwar was residing to take  her away from an abusive environment.  These actions speak to the strength of  the extended family, regardless of its cultural background.  Not surprisingly, media accounts of the  murders have failed to mention this fact,  even though the family was targetted by  the killer as a result of their support for  Rajwar. Instead, the focus has been on how  arranged marriages are fossilized relics of  the past, unable to withstand the pressures  of contemporary western society.  The focus on arranged marriages is a  red herring. The media's theories on arranged marriage fail to account for the endemic nature of violence in relationships  which have supposedly been based on individual choice. If the mainstream media  had really wanted to focus on factors contributing to women's vulnerability to violence, the focus should have been on aspects concerning women's status in society. Why, for instance, do women have less  power than men? Why do we earn less than  men? Why are women more likely to be  targets for sexual harassment, campus rape,  stranger-inflicted violence, and violence in  the home? Why are women's voices less  likely to be heard and their realities silenced—in the media, in the political arena,  and everywhere else where decisions are  made and power wielded? In general, why  are women considered to be less able than  men?  Historically, women had to fight for the  vote, we had to fight to be recognized as  persons, and we had to fight to enter the  workforce in capacities other than domestic workers. None of this has anything to  do with arranged marriages. It has everything to do with power and dominance.  The constant emphasis on culture  highlighs the non-acceptance of those who  are in any way different from the mainstream. Rajwar Gakhal's father, Karnail,  had immigrated to Canada 20 years ago.  Rajwar was barely six when she arrived  here, and her sister Balwinder was one year  old. The rest of the siblings were born in  Canada. They were raised on Canadian soil  and they died on Canadian soil. That makes  them Canadians, for all intents and purposes. Their deaths should be a matter of  concern to all Canadians.  In the immediate aftermath of the murders, a group of us came together to form  the Coalition of South Asian Women  Against Violence [see page 6.] As feminists  and women, we were saddened and angered by the murders. We were even more  dismayed at the way in which countless  newscasts and press coverage used the issue of culture as a smokescreen. Exotic institutions, foreign to Canada, were somehow rendered responsible for massacre.  The message was loud and clear: the latest  in a long line of domestic murders had  nothing really to do with Canada, but everything to do with the difference of a minority culture.  We need to examine the broad social  factors that contribute to the epidemic of  violence. Tragedies like the Gakhal murders  are not aberrations. The bitter reality is that  a woman is assaulted every 17 minutes in  Canada. The Gakhal family tragedy can be  likened to the sound of a scream against  the continuous anguish and muffled cries  of women who are daily the targets of male  violence.  One tragedy, no matter which family  it affects, has implications for all of us. We  all hear the message loud and clear—that  if we challenge patriarchal authority, we  will likely suffer the backlash. Fear of this  backlash often compels us to remain silent.  As a group, women have little institutional  power or access to resources. Our only  power is that which we use to mobilize and  effect change. To do this, we turn to allies  and families who can support us in our  quest.  Rajwar Gakhal tried to protect herself  by turning to her family and police. She  made the RCMP aware of her situation.  With a mandatory charging policy in place,  it is difficult to understand why the RCMP  did not pursue an investigation and further,  why they issued gun permits to a man who  had already expressed his violent intentions. Did racist and sexist stereotypes have  anything to do with this? Could it be that  they just did not believe Rajwar, or Sharon  Velisek, a Vernon woman who was shot and  left for dead by her ex-boyfriend and who  had even lodged an official complaint?  It is incumbent upon the state to protect women. We constitute half of its  citizenry. We have fought for recognition  as persons, and to have our human right  acknowledged. Do we now have to battle  with state institutions to have those rights  protected? Is there no end to our struggle?  Yasmin Jiwani is the Executive Coordinator of  FREDA, the Feminist Research Development  and Action Centre. She has a PhD in communications from Simon Fraser University.  MAY 1996 Arts  A number of new books written by women come into our offices each week, so Kinesis  thought we'd share with you, our readers, a sampling of some of the recently published fiction  and non-fiction titles. If you are interested in reviewing any of these books listed below for  Kinesis, or know of any other exciting titles you would like to review or that Kinesis should  review, please give us a call (604) 255-5499 or drop us a line.  compiled by Kay Ann   Parastoo Stories and Poems, by Mehri Yalfani. Parastoo is Yalfani's  first English-language novel. Yalfani captivatingly recreates the emotional,  physical, spiritual and herstorical experiences, recognizable by immigrant  women, women of colour and those who work with them. Parastoo is an empowering collection. (Women's Press, Toronto, 1995.)  Eggplant Wife, by J. JillRobinson "Eggplant Wife" is thetitleofthenovella, included  with threeshortstories, in this Robinson's third collection of fiction. Likeher previous books,  Eggplant Wife explores the issues of human intimacy and behaviour. (Arsenal Pulp  Press, Vancouver, 1995.)  Dobiyd,byAnn(Ihameyinsix/^,.AHHGwm^  1944,shehved in Poland andspent threeandahalfofherfirstfiveyears in hiding. In 1949,  sheandherjamUy sought political asylum inMontreal. What happened in between makes  Dobryda compelling autobiography. (Douglas and Mclntyre, Vancouver, 19%.)  Feminist VisioraofGenderSimilaribes and Differences, by MeridefhM Kimball.  In Feminist Visions, Kimball historically, academically, and practically defines two often  contradictory feminist theoretical camps. Shepresents the camps to explain how by "practicing double visions"  fttninistscmeffedcdtundchmgeandcreakanewjemm  York, 1995.)  Against the Current Canadian Women Talk About Fifty Years of Life on  the Job, by Judith Finlayson. In this book, Finlayson has compiled stories from  women from across Canada working in diverse professions and fields. Against the  Current provides personal accounts of the fifty-year voyage of ninety-three women  through theworld ofpaidwork Theyarestories ofstruggle and success. (Doubleday,  Canada Ltd., Toronto, 1995.)  Resisting Discrimination: Women from Asia, Africa and the Caribbean  and the Women's Movement in Canada, edited by Vijay Agnew. This groundbreaking bookexplores issues of race, class and gender realities cfwomen of colour, and  how women of colour are excluded from mainstream feminist theory and practice in  Canada. Agnew teaches at York University. (University of Toronto Press, Toronto,  19%.)  Along the Journey River, by Carole laFavor. Along the Journey Rivenwiffen by  laFavor,aTwo-SpiritOjibwa living in Minneapolis, is the first Native American  lesbian mystery. The main character, Renee LaRoche, is caught up in the investigation  of a murder of a tribal chairman and the theft of ceremonial objects from the Minnesota  Red Earth Reservation while struggling to maintain a new relationship with the visit-  ingwhite,women'sstudiesprofessorfrom the nearby college. (Firebrand Books, Ithaca, New York, 19%.)  I Am Woman: A Native Perspective on Sociology and Feminism, by Lee Maracle. In this newly revised edition, Maracle links  her First Nations traditions and her vision cf emancipation from colonialism and sexism. Maracle examines trie fundamental differences  between Aboriginal and Euro-American world views, advocating a  return of Native culture and laws. Maracle speaks to all who are  committed to social change. (Press Gang Vancouver, 19%.)  Honour, by Ann Decter. Honour is the sequel to Decter's first  novel, Paper, Scissors, Rock. This novel explores the relationships  that Jane Camtnen, her long distance lover Maria, and their mutual  friend Shula have with women: their mothers, themselves, and each  other. Honour is the compelling story of their divergent and intersecting lifepaths, as they probe mother/daughter relationships, legacies of the past, and a case of mistaken identity. (Press Gang Vancouver, 19%.)  Too Queer: Essays from a Radical Life, by Victoria A.  Brownworth. In this collection cf autobiographical essays, lesbian,feminist, writer, Catholic, leftist,andpolitical  activist, Victoria Brownworth challenges readers with her examinations of race, class,  gender, MDS,thereligiousngUardgbbalwar,toriameafmoftheissu^  away from. InToo(^eer,Brownzoorthprobeshercwnpolihodro^  about what it means to be livinga radical life in an increasingly neo-conservative society.  Brownworth is a nationally syndicated columnist andaward-winning journalist. (Firebrand Books, Ithaca, New York,19%.)  Goodbye Mother Hello Woman: Reweaving the Daughter Mother Relationship, by Marilyn Irwin Boyton and Mary Dell. Boy ton and Dell are both family  therapistslivingandpractisinginToronto. Theybelievethat,"Allwomenaredaughters"  and that some of us daughters may not have learned to become independent and relate to  our mothers as adults. This gentle, well thought out guide offers support and resources for  further help. (New Harbinger Publications, Oakland, California, 1995.)  They Shouldn't Make You Promise That, by Lois Simmie. First published in 1987,  LoisSimmie'spopularnovdisbackinprint.ThenwincharaderEleamr  threebeautifulchMrm,andarmiascmehard  she should be happy, Eleanor's psychiatrist thinks she needs to put romance back into her  marriage. Eleanor decides that she needs to take control of her life and do it her way!  (Greystone Books, Vancouver, 19%.)  Aurora,bySharonThesen. Aurora, isacollectimofpoemsintwosectionsandis  Thesen'sfirstbookofpoetryineightyears. The first section, "andwhen she weeps,  weeps every little flower" has thirty-four poems ranging in subject matter from Billu  Holiday tothecityofPrinceGeorge. The second section, "Gala Roses" is composed  of thirteen brief parts and promises to be a delight and a surprise to Thesenfans.  (CoachHouse Press, Toronto, 1995.)  Listening to the Thunder Advocates Talk about the Battered Women's  Movement Written by twenty-twograssroot activistsfrom across Canada,Us-  ter^tofaeThunderismencornpassingand  womm'smovemmtinCanadaJncludedinthebookareessaysbyandaboutFirst  Nations women, Muslim women, women of colour, and women with disabilities. As  well, there are essays dealing with white racism, patriarchy, rural lift, heterosexual  and lesbian relationships. Each chapter provides hope, strategies and resources.  (Women's Research Centre, Vancouver, 1995.)  Crosswinds, by Byma Beaday.Barclayhascrmtedacastofmaturewomen in her  If    ktestmlledimqfstories.Crosswincteisabmtwommw  and for worse, to life's challenges brought on by age, health, circumstance and  experience. As they approach times cf change in their lives, the women in Barclay's  stories use memories of their own,and thoseqftheir mothers, to come to understand  s, the process of aging and their relationships with others. (Coteau Books, Regina, 1995.)  Ocean Kayaking for Women  Join us for this introductory  all-women's course.  No previous paddling  experience necessary.  1st class: May 26 & 28  2nd class: June 16 & 18  FCOMARINP  J—<    V" A VA V     *—'  I OCF.AN IVrM/vlV CliNTPK  Ecomarine Coastal Kayaking School  Telephone: (604) 689-7520  barbara findlay  B.A. M.A. LIB.  is delighted to announce  that she is now practicing law  with the law firm of  Smith and Hughes  321-1525 Robson Street  Vancouver  Tel: (604) 683-4176  Smith and Hughes offer a full range of legal  services to the lesbian, gay and bisexual  communities of Vancouver. Initial consultations  are without charge.  Closing Out Sale  entire month of May  20-70% off everything  new store hours:  tuesday to Saturday 10am to 6pm  /^PFBOOKSTOR£^|^.  Vancouver Women's Bookstore  315 Cambie Street.  Vancouuer. BC V6B 2N4  Tel: (604) 684-0523 Arts  Plural Desires; writing bisexual women's realties:  This is who I am  A^GDfe...  by Dionne Falconer  as told to Centime Zeleke   Dionne Falconer is a member of the  Bisexual Anthology Collective that edited  Plural Desires, an anthology of writings  by bisexual women published by Sister Vision Press (1995). The Collective also includes: Leela Acharya, Nancy Chater,  Sharon Lewis, Leanna McLennan and  Susan Nosov. Falconer is a Black bisexual  feminist working in the Black community  around AIDS prevention and support.  Centime Zeleke had the opportunity  to interview Falconer while she was in  Vancouver. The interview was originally  aired on Obaa, a show produced by, for  and about women of colour on Co-op Radio, CFRO 102.7 in Vancouver.  Centime Zeleke: Could you talk  about the context out of which Plural  Desires came? What were some of the  needs you were hoping to address by  torming a collective and publishing a  oook on bisexuality?  Dionne Falconer: The book project  started about three years ago. Nancy  Chater spoke to me and another  woman, Susan Nosov, about doing an  anthology of writings by bisexual  women. We decided to pull together  bisexual women in Toronto that we  knew for the project, so we started  having monthly potlucks.  One of the things that we talked  about up front was that the editorial  collective would be at least half  women of colour. Later when we approached Sister Vision Press, a Black  women and women of colour publishing house, they said that at least half  of the contributors had to be women  of colour. Since this was in line with  what the collective was thinking, everything just fit together.  I think that when we started as a  group we were hoping to make some  connections. At the time, bisexuality  wasn't talked about as much as it is  now and there weren't as many  women who identified as bisexual as  there are now. The collective was  about developing the supportive as  well as political aspects of community.  In doing the project one of the  things we had hoped for was to start  getting more theory around bisexuality. Bisexuality is not just about  Teeping with men and sleeping with  vomen—there is more; there's a consciousness and a politic to it.  I want to say that our editorial  rollective is not necessarily representative of all people who are bisexual. I think one of the important  elements about us as a group is that  Cartoon from Plural Desires: an anthology of writings by bisexual women  published by Sister Vision Press  we all identify as feminists, doing  different kinds of political work.  Zeleke: In Plural Desires, there is a  piece written by the editorial collective in which you say you found it  necessary when developing a bisexual  politic to develop an anti-capitalist  politic. Why do you feel this is necessary?  Falconer: I feel it's necessary because bisexuality or any sexual identity or sexual orientation doesn't exist in a vacuum or in isolation. Our  sexuality is linked to other parts of  our lives. I locate bisexual struggle  within lesbian and gay struggle for  liberation—and not just liberation for  sexual freedom, so I can fuck who I  wanna fuck.  I am interested in a whole kind  of identity as opposed to individual  sexual practices and preferences. I  locate bisexuality within anti-capitalist struggle because even before bisexual identity, there were the struggles around class and gender and  race. I see these struggles as interwoven and interlinked. It's important to  acknowledge that interconnect-  edness.  Zeleke: Do you find the term "bisexual" comes from a particular North  American context, and that it might  not be useful in other cultural contexts  or might be alienating to people in  different contexts.  Falconer: That's probably true for  some folks, but I think it's not just  about bisexuality. I think for some it's  about taking on any kind of label or  naming or about having to identity  what their sexual orientation is.  But even with that, in North  America and other places around the  world, if you don't name yourself,  somebody will label you. So even if  we don't necessarily want to have  anything cast upon us, it will happen.  So how do you deal with that? I guess  part of dealing with is to say, "this is  who I am," as opposed to allowing  someone else to tell me who I am.  The term bisexual is also problematic because to say bisexual connotes  "two," as if there's some kind of even  split around our desire and our identity, like 50 percent of the time I'm  attracted to men and 50 percent I'm  attracted to women. And that's not  true.  I don't think desire is shaped like  that. Bisexuality also connotes that  there are these two polar opposites  with lesbian on one side and then  heterosexual over on the other side,  and then in the middle you have bisexuals. This assumes a certain kind  of linearness to our sexual identity  and our orientation. So although I do  use the term bisexual, it's mostly for  lack of a better term.  Zeleke: One of the things I found  frustrating about the anthology was  that there were two kinds of theorizing going on.  On the one hand, there were  some women talking about liberation  in terms of, "I want to fuck whomever I want to fuck," without addressing a broader context of how  these rules become formulated. This  politic is very narrow.  Then there were other women  who were talking not so much about  their specific desires, but who were  trying to reconstruct the kinds of systemic rules that we're given within a  society. For example, in the South  Asian women's piece—"Purifying"  the (Identi)Ghee: South Asian Feminists Gup-shup" by Leela Acharya,  Amina, Amita, Farzana Doctor and  Nupur Gogia—they talk about their  inability to come out as sexual beings  altogether, whether it's as bisexual or  heterosexual.  Falconer: That's definitely a good  criticism of this book, and I think it's  a valid criticism of anthologies in general. Although they serve the purpose  of being able to give diverse representation to many people, anthologies also struggle at finding a common ground, a particular kind of common ground.  I think the struggle for our editorial collective and this anthology was  that for us, as bisexual feminists, we  wanted a certain kind of theorizing  and talking about political organizing.  Many of the submissions we received were the first type you mentioned—women personally trying to  come out, trying to figure themselves  out, which I think is important. I went  through that and I think everyone  goes through that stage, but in terms  of political consciousness it's limited  for some.  Zeleke: Because the collective was  half women of colour and half white  women, did you find that there was  a conflict in terms of agendas or ideologies?  Falconer: No, not from within the  collective. We were pretty clear that  that's how Plural Desires had to be.  Part of the struggle, however, was  trying to get a lot of women of colour to write for the book. We definitely got a lot more submissions from  white women, but because we made  a choice that the book was going to  look a certain kind of way, it meant  we were not going to publish a lot of  those white women.  It also meant that we had to go  out to women of colour whom we  knew identified as bisexual and ask  them to write something for the book.  For various reasons women of colour  were hesitant to submit pieces to Plural Desires. For some, this would have  been their first public disclosure, and Arts  Writing bisexual women's realities:  Continued from previo  to put your name in a book about bisexual women means it's forever engraved.  Zeleke: The original idea for Plural Desires came three years ago. The  struggles around bisexuality were  different then. Now that the book has  come out, how do you feel about the  context in which it exists today, as  opposed to a few years ago.  Falconer: I think that for myself  I've moved personally. The kind of  need that the book came out of...I'm  not at that place anymore. I'm very  fortunate to be in a supportive community and to be able to have discussions and dialogue [about sexuality  and politics.]  At the launch of Plural Desires, it  was clear that a lot of women think  the book is important. I think it is  important as well because there are a  lot of women who are struggling with  their sexual orientation.  I think that also comes out of increased political consciousness. As  your consciousness is raised, you start  to think more about who you are,  Woman Circle #2 by Tracy Charette  Fehr, from Plural Desires.  where you fit in the world, and how  you fit in the world.  I think that for a lot of women,  the anthology will be wonderful because it will help affirm some of what  they've been thinking about. For others it'll feel like, "I've been at this  place already and I'm beyond this  place." Different folks will get different feelings and things out of it.  Another things too about the  book is that to some women it will  say you can go through various experiences before coming to a place  where you identify as bisexual. For  some women, it might be that they,  at one point in their lives, identified  as lesbian or as heterosexual. Women  come from all over the place.  Zeleke: Within the book there is a  lot of talk about not being accepted  by the lesbian and gay community—  the term "les/bi divide" was used.  I'm wondering if you feel that within  the various lesbian or bisexual communities, there are certain people  who get to set the agenda which  might exclude other people's agendas?  Falconer: Yeah, I think that happens generally in all groups regardless of whether it's lesbian or bisexual.  For me, the struggle around bisexuality is not a struggle against lesbians. I'm not of the mindset that somehow bisexuals are oppressed by lesbians. Bisexuality is in the lesbian and  gay struggle. Yes, we will have issues  and we will have disagreements and  differences, but that's not who the  enemy is. I don't want to be a crab in  a basket fighting with the other crabs  to get out. That's how I feel about it.  Zeleke: Do you have anything else  you want to add.  Falconer: If I'm doing an interview  about Plural Desires, I should be plugging the book, telling women to go  out and buy the book. Read it and  think of it as a catalyst for discussion.  It's not going to be the be-all-and-  end-all of bisexual women's realities  because it's not and it can never be.  I think one of our hopes in doing  Plural Desires was that it would raise  people's consciousness around the  whole issue of bisexuality, and it  would also be a catalyst for discussion and dialogue. I think that's always needed because it's through  those discussions that there can be a  political movement.  E. Centime Zeleke is a lesbian activist who  likes girls of any orientation.   NOTICE   ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING  of the  VANCOUVER  LESBIAN CONNECTION  SOCIETY  Date:   May 30, 1996  Time: Doors open at 7 pm  Meeting starts at 7:30  Place: Croatian Cultural Centre  3250 Commercial Dr  Wheelchair accessible  Partial child care subsidy available  If sign language interpretation is  required, please leave a message at  254-8458 by May 16  To lesbians/queer/bisexuai women  T The Vancouver Lesbian Connection has several new Board Members.  The Board has the legal responsibility and decision making power for  the organization until a new board is elected We have committed  ourselves to:  T creating as large a membership as possible of lesbian/queer and  bisexual women who are in agreement with the principles and aims >f  the VLC  ▼ creating a fair and open process for the membership to elect the next  Board of Directors.  T keeping VLC functioning and the centre open until a new Board is  elected on May 30.  T we ask for your patience as there have been rapid changes and there  is a lot to do.  With thanks: Wendy Wenting. Joanne Beatty,  Maureen Mills. Bet Cecill, Suzanne Dineiie  ▼ VLC membership forms will be available at VLC by May 3  T Meeting agenda and nomination fonns/process will also be available  May 3  T A background and information package is being created  T Anyone wishing to help the Board with registration and distribution,  has ideas they would like to share or wishes more information, please  leave your name/" at 254 8458 and some one will net back to \ou Bulletin Board  read this  Bulletin Board listings have a  maximum of 50 words. Groups,  organizations and individuals eligible  for free space in the Bulletin Board  must be, or have, non-profit  objectives.  Other free notices will be items of  general public interest and will appear  at the discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $8 (+$0.56 GST) for  the first 50 words or portion thereof,  $4 (+$0.28 GST) for each additional 25  words or portion thereof and must be  prepaid.  Deadline for all submissions is  the 18th of the month preceding  publication. Note: Kinesis is  published ten times a year. Jul/Aug  and Dec/Jan are double issues.  All submissions should include a  contact name and telephone number  for any clarification that may be  required.  Listings will not be accepted over the  telephone.  Kinesis encourages readers to  research the goods and services  advertised in Bulletin Board. Kinesis  cannot guarantee the accuracy of the  information provided or the safety and  effectiveness of the services and  products listed.  Send submissions to Bulletin Board,  Kinesis, #301-1720 Grant Street,  Vancouver, BC, V5L 2Y6, or fax: (604)  255-5511. For more information call  (604) 255-5499.  Pen on fire?  Camera in the closet?  Let them out!  Write or take photographs  for Kinesis  255-5499  Cover the arts that you love  on these pages  Engage with  feminist politics-  Read oil our backs  Publishing for 25 years, off  our backs specializes in  coverage of feminist  conferences, interviews with  grassroots women, news,  analysis of international  issues, reproductive  rights, violence  .against women - all  's issues.  INVOLVEMENT INVOLVEMENT  EVENTS  Get a TRIAL SUB today -  3 issues for US $9  Annual sub airmail US $30  (Canada & Mexico $22)  Yes, send to:  rName_  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis? We want to get involved with  you too. Help plan our next issue. All  women interested in what goes into  Kinesis—whether it's news, features or  arts—are invited to our next Story Meetings: Mon, May 6 and Mon, Jun 3 at 7 pm  at our office, 301-1720 Grant St, Van. If you  can't make the meeting, but still want to  find out about writing for Kinesis, give  Agnes a call at (604) 255-5499. No  experience is necessary. Childcare subsidies available.  CALLING ALL VOLUNTEERS  Are you interested in finding out how  Kinesis is put together? Well...just drop by  during our next production dates and help  us design and lay out Canada's national  feminist newspaper. Production for the  June 1996 issue is from May 21-28. No  experience is necessary. Training and  support will be provided. If this notice  intrigues you, call us at 255-5499.  Childcare subsidies available.  ABORIGINAL WOMEN'S NETWORK  The Aboriginal Women's Action Network  (AWAN) holds regular monthly meetings at  VSW, 301-1720 Grant St. We work towards  equality and justice for Aboriginal women.  Workshops and projects will be developed  for Aboriginal women in the Eastside. All  Aboriginal women are invited to participate.  If you have any questions, please call Terri  at (604) 255-5511.  VSW PROGRAMMING COMMITTEE        WATCH MY INDICATOR  All women are invited to join Vancouver  Status of Women's programming committee and become involved in planning  community activities—such as the Women's Film Series and Single Moms' Day in  the Park. It's fun. It's important. It's cool.  Interested? Call Terri at 255-5511.   ASSERTIVENESS TRAINING  Vancouver Status of Women is offering a  six-week "Assertiveness Training" course  every Thurs starting May 9 from 7:00-  9:30pm at VSW, 301-1720 Grant St.  Childcare subsidies will be available. VSW  is wheelchair accessible. To register or for  more info call Terri at 255-5511 by May 6.  ABORIGINAL WOMEN'S DROP-IN  The Aboriginal Women's Action Network  (AWAN) will be holding a drop-in for  Aboriginal women every Tues from 12-  2:30pm at the Vancouver Status of Women,  301-1720 Grant St. Activities such as  healing circles, traditional storytelling and  workshops will be featured. Come and find  out what AWAN is all about. For more info,  call Terri at 255-5511.  VSW WANTS YOU!  Want to get more involved but not sure  where to begin? Join us—become a  volunteer at Vancouver Status of Women.  VSW volunteers plan events, lead groups,  raise funds, answer the phone lines,  organize the library, help connect women  with the community resources they need,  and get involved in other exciting jobs! The  next volunteer orientation will be on Wed,  May 22, 7pm at VSW, 301-1720 Grant St.  For more info, call 255-5511. Childcare  subsidies available.  A<tt*Bt*¥**.  Canada's best Latin American Women's magazine  covers a broad spectrum of issues and interests,  with interviews, literature, testimonies, essays,  humour, reviews and visual art.  Aquelarre is published four times a year in English and Spanish  Available at bookstores or  by subscription. Great deal!  Yearly sub. only $15 Cdn.  Women's programming on  Co-op Radio 102.7 FM  Where women have a voice  Monday, 8:00 - 9:00pm:  WomenVisions  For women about women by women. Health, politics, law, spirituality, arts  sexuality and alternative ideologies.  Tuesday, 7:00 - 8:00pm:  OBAA  By women of colour for women of colour. Local community groups and events,  interviews and music not heard in the mainstream.  Thursday, 8:00 - 9:00pm:  The Lesbian Show  Friday, 8:00-10:00pm: Rubymusic  12 years on the air, Rubymusic features the best in music by women-old, new,  lost and found.  For a free listener's guide call 684-8494 Monday to Thursday, 10am - 6pm  Watch my Indicator \s a fundraiser for  Women On Wheels (WOW): rolling feminist  library. WOW will be joining the National  Women's March Against Poverty, distributing feminist literature for free on their trip  across Canada (starting in Vancouver.) The  benefit will feature readings by Lizard  Jones, Elaine Miller, Laiwan, Persimmon  Blackbridge and Nadine Chambers. The  event will take place on Mon, May 6, 7pm  at Harry's off Commercial, 1716 Charles  St, Van. Call 251-7284 for childcare.  LESBIANS IN YIDDISH FILMS  New York filmmaker and historian Eve  Sicular will be in Vancouver to present A  Yingl Mit a Yingl Hot Epes a Tarn: Lesbian  and Gay Subtext in Yiddish Film Thurs May  16 at 8pm at the Video In, 1965 Main St.  Sicular will show clips from selected films  and period home movies to explore queer  subtext in Yiddish cinema from the 1920s  to the 1940s. Admission is $5 members, $6  non-members. For more info, call Ken at  (604) 872-8337.   WOMEN ANDTHE ECONOMY  Oxfam-Canada presents as part of its  discussion series Making the Economy  Work for Women: "Community Economic  Planning: Through the Eyes of Women."  That video The Hands that Feed the World:  Women's Role in Food Production will be  screened on May 7 at 7:30pm, at Mount  Pleasant Neighbourhood House, 800 E  Broadway in Vancouver. A discussion will  follow, hosted by Rebecca Kneen of Farm  Folk City Folk and Linda Moreau of End  Legislated Poverty. Admission is $7/$5. For  more info, call Oxfam Canada at (604) 736-  7678.   LESBIAN SEPARATIST GATHERING  A lesbian separatist gathering will be held  in the San Francisco area in June. To find  out more, write to SEP2, PO Box 1130,  Sebastopol, CA 9547-1180. For local info  on dyke separatism as a political strategy  write: Rootsisters, PO Box 21588, 1850  Commercial Dr, Vancouver BC, V5N 4A0.  DYKE ART RETREAT  The seventh annual Dyke Art Retreat  Encampment (DARE) will be held Jun 30-  Jul 7 at Rootworks, wooded women's land  near Sunny Valley in Southern Oregon.  Cabins, tenting space and meals are  provided. Cost is $160-185. Registration is  limited. For info and registration brochure,  send SASE to DARE, 2000 King Mountain  Trail, Sunny Valley, OR, 97497.   WORKSHOPS FOR WOMEN  The Douglas College Women's Centre is  holding free workshops open to all women.  The first workshop, Introduction to Self  Esteem will be held on Thurs May 16 from  2-4 pm. Thinking Of Upgrading?—a  workshop exploring options for women on  income assistance thinking of returning to  school, will be held on Tues May 21 from  12pm-2 pm.The final workshop, Abusive  Relationships will be held on Wed Jun 5  from 2-4 pm. At this workshop, a woman  from Battered Women's Support Services  will answer questions about abusive  relationships and helping a friend in an  abusive relationship. No registration  required. Just show up at Women's Centre,  Room 2720, New Westminster Campus,  Douglas College. For more info call (604)  527-5148.   SUMMER GATHERING  FOR OLD LESBIANS  Old Lesbians Organizing for Change  (OLOC) invites lesbians 60+ to join them at  the Summer '96 Old Lesbian Gathering at  the University of Minnesota from Thurs  Aug 15 to Sun Aug 18. Cost is $175 and  includes registration, 3 nights lodging and  KINESIS Bulletin Board  EVENTS  1  EVENTS  1  EVENTS  1  GROUPS  food. Wheelchair accessible, and ASL  interpreters available. For more info,  contact OLOC, PO Box 980422, Houston,  TX 77098 USA.   MICHIGAN WOMYN'S  MUSIC FESTIVAL  The 21st annual music festival, the oldest  and largest of outdoor women's music  festivals in the US, takes place Aug 13-18.  This year's festival features 42 concerts,  300 workshops, a women's film festival and  a women's crafts bazaar. It is held on 650  acres of secluded country land where  women live communally for the week in a  woman-created village. Ticket prices are on  a sliding scale from $40 to $250 US. For  more info, contact WWTMC, PO Box 22,  Walhalla, Ml 49458 USA. Or call (616) 757-  4766.   SANDY SHREVE  Vancouver author Sandy Shreve will be  reading from her two poetry collections:  The Speed of the Wheel Is Up to the Potter  and Bewildered Rituals, on Tues Jun 4 at  7:30 pm at Women In Print, 3566 W. 4th  Ave, Van. For more info, call (604) 732-  4128.   MELINDA MOLLINEAUX  Opening reception for Melinda Mollineaux's  new exhibit [T(here)l a photographic-  based investigation of ideas of race,  gender and Caribbean cultural identity, will  be held at the Pitt Gallery , 317 W. Hastings St., Vancouver, Wed May 1 at 8 pm.  This exhibit will run until May 25. Gallery  hours are 12pm-5pm Wed to Sat.  Mollineaux will give an artist's talk on Sat  May 18, 3 pm. Free admission. For info, call  (604) 681-6740.   BREAST CANCER QUILT  The Life Quilt For Breast Cancer Project  will be holding a quilting bee at the Pitt  Gallery, 317 W. Hastings St., Van, on Sat,  Jun 1 from 12pm-5 pm. The Project seeks  to help women, their families, friends and  caregivers who are struggling with all  stages of breast cancer. Quilting experts  and complete novices are invited to  contribute stories and stitches. Free  admission. For info, call (604) 687-6740.  DYKE WORDS  Dyke Words presents their May series  starting with Honour, a new novel by  Toronto author Ann Decter, and readings  by Persimmon Blackbridge and Susan  Stewart of Kiss & Tell on Thurs May 2. On  Thurs May 9, Vancouver-based writers  Janet Bianic, Lizard Jones of Kiss & Tell,  and Lynnette D'anna will read from their  works. Both readings are at The Lotus  Club, 455 Abbott St., Van. Doors at 8pm,  show at 9 pm. Admission is $1-4 sliding  scale. For more info, call (604) 685-7777.  DYKEWORDS COMEDY NIGHT  Dykewords also presents Comedy Night  with Sandra Fellner, Sharon Novack, Briar  Taine, Laverne and others on Thurs May  23 at 9 pm at The Lotus Club, 455 Abbott  St, Van. Admission is $1-4 sliding scale.  For more info, call 685-7777.  SKY RANCH SUMMER  Sky Ranch Summer is a series of events to  connect rural and urban women in a rural  environment. They are entirely volunteer  run and take place on open women's land  near Ootsa Lake, BC. Work exchanges  from May 15-Oct 15 offer free room and  board in exchange for help with gardening  and building. There are also several Art in  The Bush weekend events planned: Music  in the Meadows, featuring music and voice  with Martina Zechendorf, takes place May  31-Jun 2; Words in the Woods, featuring  poetry and prose with Judith Quinlan, takes  place Jun 29-Jul 1. A Graphic art workshop will be held in August. A Wild  Women's Weekend, featuring camping,  circles, sweats and workshops, also takes  place Aug 2-5. All events are free; there  may be a $20 charge for materials. Other  expenses are absorbed by The Open Door,  a newsletter for rural lesbians and feminists. For more info, contact Sky Ranch, C4  Site20 RR 2, Burns Lake, BC V0K 1E0. Or  call (604) 694-3738.   CORINNA DAHLIN  Anecdotes/Antidotes, an exhibition by  Vancouver-based artist Corinna Dahlin  focusing on women's experiences with the  medical establishment, opens at the Pitt  Gallery, 317 W. Hastings St., Vancouver on  Wed May 29 at 8 pm and runs to Jun 22.  Gallery hours are 12pm-5pm Wed to Sat.  An artist talk will be held on Sat Jun 15 at  3 pm. Admission is free. For more info, call  (604) 681-6740.   LORNA BROWN  W, an installation work by Vancouver artist  Lorna Brown, will be exhibited at Artspeak  Gallery, 233 Carrall St, Van until May 25. W  is a 'mirror' work to Brown's 1990 exhibit M  and is based on the history and recent  controversy about the Woodward's building  in downtown eastside Vancouver. W  features a internet component. Gallery  hours are Tues-Sat, noon-5pm. For more  info call (604) 688-0051.   ECE CONFERENCE  The Early Childhood Educators of BC's  annual conference Together: Early Childhood, a Journey of Discovery is being held  at the University of British Columbia in  Vancouver from May 9-11. Conference  enquiries can be directed to: Events by  Design at (604) 669-7175.   SISTERS/STRANGERS  A performance of the community play  Sisters/Strangers will take place Sat May  11, 6:30pm at Vancouver Community  College, King Edward Campus Auditorium,  1155 E. Broadway. Sisters/Strangers brings  together professional actors and community players to explore and celebrate their  immigrant experience through movement,  music, storytelling and playback. The play  is produced by Puente Theatre Company  and is directed by Lina de Guevara. Tickets  are $8, or $5 seniors/students. For more  info call the Community Outreach Program  at MOSAIC at (606) 254-9626.   WOMEN'S CABARET  Mayworks and Sound and Furies presents  a Women's Cabaret as part of Mayworks  9th annual Working People's Cultural  Festival on Fri May 3 at 8pm at the WISE  Hall, 1882 Adanac. Performers include  musician Sandy Scofield, poet/musician  Amanda Stark, storyteller Jackie  Crossland, classical Chinese instrumentalist Qiu Xia He with Silk Road and more!  Tickets are $10 unemployed, $14 employed and are available at Little Sister's,  Women In Print and Urban Empire.   ARGENTINETANGO WORKSHOP  Instructors Mireille Painchaud from Montreal and Lilliana Kleiner from Buenos Aires  will be holding a tango workshop on Sun  May 5 from 2-6pm. For info and to register,  call 253-7189.   ALTERNATIVE BOOKSHOP  Librairie Alternative Bookshop in Montreal  has released a 1996 catalogue of alternative information on forms from chapbooks  to periodicals and videos. Prices range  from $1-15. For more info, write Librairie  Alternative, 2035 St.Laurent, 2e etage,  Montreal, QP, Canada, H2X-2T3 or call  (514) 844-3207.  VANCOUVER WOMEN'S CHORUS  A Vancouver Women's Chorus presents  Voices from the Journal, featuring Louise  Rose, musicmaker, on Sat, May 25 at 8pm  at the Michael J Fox Theatre, Burnaby  South High School, 5455 Rumble St,  Burnaby. Tickets are $15, $18, and $20 and  can be bought at Little Sisters. For more  info call 924-1653.   RAPE RELIEFWALKATHON  The 18th annual Vancouver Rape Relief  and Women's Shelter Walkathon and  Picnic will be held on Sun May 26. Women  and men are encouraged to walk, cycle or  wheel around the Seawall at Stanley Park  to help raise money for Rape Relief. A big  free picnic, displays and entertainment will  be provided at the end of the Walk. To pre-  register and to order pledge sheets call  (604) 879-6752. For more info call Rape  Relief at (604) 872-8212^    KAREN X.TULCHINSKY  Vancouver Author Karen X. Tulchinsky will  read from her recently released collection  of short stories, In Her Nature, Tues May  28 at 7:30 pm at Women in Print, 3566 W.  4th Ave. Van. Tulchinsky's stories are warm,  humourous tales of desire and sex, of life  and love as a Jewish dyke. Admission is  free. For more info call (604) 732-4128.  KATHY ROSS  Seattle-based lesbian feminist artist, Kathy  Ross, will be exhibiting Apple Pie, her  installationthat challenges traditional views  of family values, at the Richmond Art  Centre,  100-7700 Minoru Rd, Richmond,  BC. Apple Pie opens May 22 and runs until  Jun 16. The opening event is on Thurs May  23 at 6pm. For more info call (604) 231-  6440.  GROUPS  LESBIAN GATHERING  The Lesbian Gathering in Process discussion group presents a speaking engagement with Sandra Bensen and Tracy Potter  Mon Jun 10. They will talk about their  experience with the medical and legal  systems when they were denied artificial  insemination by a Lower Mainland doctor.  For info contact the Port Coquitlam Area  Women's Centre at (604) 941-6311.  LEARNING RESOURCES SOCIETY  Learning Resources Society (LRS) invites  women to participate in regular monthly  meetings held on the third Wed of each  month at 7pm at the Women's Centre,  Room 2730 at Douglas College in New  Westminster. LRS is a non-profit organization concerned with issues affecting  women's ability to make informed choices  about their education and work. For more  info, call (604) 527-5447.   GRASSROOTS WOMEN'S GROUP  The Grassroots Women's Discussion  Group in Vancouver has been meeting to  make connections between theory and  practice and to organize for change. The  next meeting is Wed May 29 at 7pm at the  Philippine Women Centre, 1011 E. 59th  Ave, Van. Women interested in joining the  discussion group, please call the Centre at  (604) 322-9852.   QUEER JEWISH WOMEN  Calling Nice Jewish Girls for food, socializing, politics, 'zine-making, and fun with  other queer Jewish women. For more info,  call (604) 254-6807.  MATUREWOMEN'S  SUPPORT GROUP  This is a group for women in transition who  are entering/re-entering the workforce or  college. In particular, the groups are  designed for women who are attending or  planning to attend Douglas College. The  support groups will be held free at Douglas  College Women's Centre every Thurs from  2-2:30 pm in Room 2720, New Westminster campus. Call (604) 527-5148 to  register or for information.  SUBMISSIONS  YOUNG WOMEN AND INTIMACY  Submissions are being sought from women  aged 20-35 of diverse backgrounds and  sexual orientations for a new anthology,  Look Me in the Eye: Young Women Talk  About Intimacy. Submissions can include  essays, short fiction, journal entries, poetry  and black & white artwork. Topics could  include: surviving a break up, getting out of  abusive relationships, race, gender and  sexual orientation and their impact on  intimacy, children and intimacy, etc.  Submissions should be no longer than  3,500 words. For more info, call Susan  Dumett at (206) 860-5075 or write PO Box  20566, Seattle, WA, 98102. Deadline is  Jun 1.   ALBERTA WRITER'S CONFERENCE  describing Albertas, a conference on  contemporary Alberta writing and the  politics of location, is calling for submissions related to the political, cultural and  social landscape. Topics could include: the  "place" of Alberta writers, lesbian/gay/  bisexual/queer writers, First Nations and  "colour" in the great white north, cultural  censorship, right-wing ideology, teaching  and learning in the school curriculum etc.  One-page proposals should be submitted  to describing Albertas, Janice Williamson,  Department of English, University of  Alberta, Edmonton, AB, T6G 2E5; or fax  (403) 492-8142. Deadline is Jun 15.  DOCUMENTARY ON FEMINISM  A Vancouver-based filmmaker is seeking  women 18-35 to participate in informal  talks—in person or by phone—for a  documentary on twenty and thirty-something feminists on issues of concern to their  generation of women. To participate or for  more info, call Celine at (604) 254-6495 or  write to her at Box #57012 E. Hastings PO,  2458 E. Hastings St, Vancouver, BC, V5K  5G6, or e-mail celine@brc.ubc.ca.  WOMEN OF AFRICAN DESCENT  Sister Vision Press is seeking pieces for an  anthology of works by women of African  descent speaking about violence in our  lives. How does race/class/gender/immigration influence violence against Black  women? Send submissions to Speaking  About Violence, Sister Vision Press, PO  Box 217, Stn E, Toronto, ON, M6E 4E2.  Deadline is Sep 1.  WOMAN/SISTER/  FRIEND/GIRLFRIEND  A call for submissions from heterosexual  women who have friendships with lesbians  and lesbians who have friendships with  heterosexual women. Send testimonies,  essays, photos, recipes, interviews, poems  and stories to Sister Vision Press, PO Box  217, Stn E, Toronto, ON, M6H 4E2. Deadline is Sep 1.  22 Bulletin Board  SUBMISSIONS  HOT AND BOTHERED  Arsenal Pulp Press is accepting short short  fiction for an anthology of lesbian erotic  stories. For full guidelines send SASE to:  Hot and Bothered, 1036 Odium Drive,  Vancouver, BC, V5L 3L6; or e-mail  kxt@descon.mlnet.com. Deadline is Aug  31.   PITT GALLERY  The curatorial committee wants to hear  from visual, media, performance artists  and curators for the 1997 programming  year. Send 10-20 numbered slides, VHS  tapes, statement of intent, CV, and a SASE  to the curatorial committee at the Pitt  Gallery, 317 W. Hastings St. Vancouver, BC  V6B 1H6. Deadline is Jun 30.  THIN LINES OF COMMUNICATION  Women who have had anorexia and/or  bulimia are invited to submit poetry, short  fiction, personal non-fiction, and black and  white visual art to the anthology Thin Lines  of Communication, forthcoming from  gynergy books. Send up to 20 pages, a  brief biography, and a SASE to: Thin Lines,  PO Box 1164, Saskatoon, SK S7K 3N2.  Deadline is Nov 1.  BRIDGING NORTH AND SOUTH  Canadian Woman Studies is seeking  submissions for an exploration of feminist  practice and theory through the lens of  women's growing global connections and  organization. The issue aims to go beyond  mere description. Send essays, research  reports, manifestos, true stories, brief  anecdotes, poetry, cartoons, drawings and  other artwork to: Canadian Woman Studies, 212 Founders, York University, 4700  Keele St. North York, ON M3J 1P3. Call  (416) 736-5356. Fax (416) 736-5765. E-  mail cwscf@yorku.ca Deadline is Oct 30.  CLASSIFIEDS  FAMILY PRACTITIONERS  Joan Robillard, MD and Suzanne Roberts,  MD have a family practice (obstetrics  included) for all kinds of families and  people. We are located at 203-1750 E. 10th  Ave. Vancouver. Tel: 872-1454 or fax 872-  3510.   AFFORDABLE PROFESSIONAL  REFLEXOLOGY  Certified, experienced, reflexologist  available. Experience and enjoy this natural  healing art for better health. Releases  tension and stress and toxins built up in  your body. Feel deeply relaxed, nurtured  and a wonderful sense of well-being.  Appointments are available 7 days a week.  Call 291-2019. One full hour session for  $30.   COUNSELLING FOR WOMEN  A feminist approach to sexual abuse,  depression, grief and loss, sexual orientation issues and personal growth. Sliding fee  scale. Free initial appointment. Call Susan  Dales, R.RC. at 255-9173.   COUNSELLING SERVICES  FOR WOMEN  Offering group, individual and couple  counselling with a feminist philosophy,  Hakomi techniques, art and gestalt therapy.  Sliding fee scale. Please contact Miljenka  Zadravec, M.Ed, Sydney Foran, MSW, Fran  Friesen, M.Ed, or Elli Tamasin, M.Ed at  304-1720 Grant St, Van, or call 253-0143.  WOMEN'S SELF-DEFENSE  Women Educating in Self-defense Training  (WEST) teaching Wenlido. In Basic  classes, you learn how to make the most of  mental, physical and verbal skills to get  away from assault situations. Continuing  training builds on basic techniques to  CLASSIFIEDS  improve physical and mental strength. By  women, for women. For info, call 876-  6390.   KARATE FOR WOMEN  Shito-ryu karate taught by female black  belts. Learn a martial art for self-defense,  fitness, self confidence! At the YWCA, 535  Hornby St, Van. Mon, Tues, Thurs, 7:15-  9pm. $45/month. Beginner groups start Jul  4, Aug 1, Sept 5, Oct 2. Call 872-7846.  ROOMMATE WANTED  Quiet lesbian wanted to share character  farmhouse on seven acres in Maple Ridge,  BC. Sunken bath, woodstove, orchard,  barns, and view of Mount Baker. Must love  horses, dogs, and cats. Rent is $375 + one  third utilities. Call (604) 462-0606.   CITYVIEW CO-OP  Cityview Co-op has one, two and three  bedroom suites for $565, $696, $795 per  month and refundable share purchase.  Carpets, blinds, appliances, parking and  laundry room. Children and small pets  welcome. Please send a business size  SASE to Membership Committee, Cityview  Housing Co-op, 108-1885 E. Pender St,  Vancouver, BC, V5L 1W6.   NEW GODDESS GUEST HOUSE  New Goddess Guest House on the Lake is  for relaxation, recreation, reasonable rates  and fun! Meet other women. Lakefront  house with private door. Focus weekends  will be held. Organized events, ie: sweat  lodge, sailing, kayaking trips. Rest and  recreration and yoga. Starting at $30/night;  events extra. Bodywork and hypnotherapy  provided to enhance your relaxation by  certified practitioners. Salt Spring Island.  Info and reservation 537-0088. Limited  space.  GUEST HOUSE FOR WOMEN  The back hills is a retreat on 10 private  hillside acres. Enjoy delicious breakfasts  and cozy wood fires. We are only a half  hour from Victoria, minutes from ocean  beaches and a short hike to a spectacular  view of the Juan de Fuca Strait...and the  Olympic Mountains start at our back door.  Very reasonable rates. Write 4470 Leefield  Road, Victoria, BC V5B 5T7 or call Marlene  or Margaret at (604) 478-9648.   JOURNEYTO IRELAND  Mid-September, join a Women's Sacred  Journey to Ireland to visit the seven major  ritual centers of ancient Ireland with group  facilitated ritual, voice work, storytelling,  drumming and movement. For more info,  call Sounds & Furies at 253-7189. Maxi-  mum 25 women.   SAPPHOWITCH CAMP  Register now the 5th Annual Sappho  Lesbian Witchcamp Jun 23-28 with Ruth  Rhiannon Barrett, Dianic priestess,  educator and musician from California, Jay  Goldspinner, crone, witch storyteller from  Massachussets and more. For info and  brochure, call Pat Hogan at 253-7189.  Relationship Therapy  DANA L. JANSSEN  R.M.T., M.Ed, psych.. R.C.C.  Counselling - Therapy  Integrative Body Work  Massage Therapy  Oak & W. 8th Ave. Vancouver, B.C.  Tel: (604) 731-2867  SINGLE MOMS' DAY INTHE PARK  Come and join us for Single Moms' Day in the Park, Vancouver Status of  Women's annual celebration for Mother's Day, Sunday May 12 from 1:00-  5:00pm at Grandview Park (at the corner of William and Commercial St.)  There'll be fun, food, frolic..and it's free! Fun and entertainment for everyone: clowns, face painting, trampoline (we hope), crafts and games. For  more information, call VSW at 255-5511 Monday to Thursday 1:00-5:00pm.  Photos by Agnes Huang.  CLASSIFIEDS  CLADDAGH HOUSE B&B  Treat yourself to a great Victoria Get-Away.  Wake up to music in your ears, the aroma  of fine food and hearty conversation with  your Irish hosts. Imagine walking by the  ocean, cozying up by the fire, reflexology,  massage and sound sleeps. Take a stroll  through Oak Bay Village for that back in  time experience. Memorable, convenient  accommodation at affordable rates.  Contact Maggie at Claddagh House B&B,  1761 Lee Ave. Victoria, tel: (604) 370-2816  or fax: (604) 592-0228.   COUNSELLOR  Eve Abrams, MA Counselling Psychology,  Individual and couples counselling.  Women's issues, loss and grief, healing  from dysfunctional families, coming out. I  use an eclectic approach, including art and  writing therapy, Gestalt techniques, role  play, etc., but do straightforward "talk  therapy" where clients prefer it. Sliding  scale, $45-60. Phone 222-0276.   WOMENS SACRED DRUM CIRCLE  Join us for a Women's Sacred Drum Circle  with drummer Carol Weaver on May 21 at  7:30 pm at Helen's Court Co-op Common  Room, 2137 W. 1st St. (at Arbutus), Van.  Bring drum and pillow. Drop in for $8. Ongoing. Every third tuesday. For more info  call (604) 879-4648 or (604) 929-0776.  CLASSIFIEDS  WORKERWANTED  Richmond Transition House Worker  wanted. 28 hours/week, $21,044 annum.  Experience providing support and crisis  counselling to abused women/children.  Feminist perspective and knowledge of  issues of violence against women essential. Experience, knowledge and understanding of working within Asian commu-  nity an asset. Fax Sali 270-4915 May 6th.  CHILDREN'SWORKER  Richmond Transition House looking for  Children's Worker. 35 hours/week, 26,305/  annum. Experience designing/implimenting  children support program, advocacy and  skills working with children (predominantly  3-7) who have experienced/witnessed  violence/abuse. Knowledge and understanding of issues of violence against  women and effects on children essential.  Fax Sali 270-4915 May 6th.  5ter  OCEANSIDE ACCOMMODATION  SALT SPRING ISLAND  (604) 537 2727  DR. PAULETTE ROSCOE  NA TUROPA THIC PHYSICIAN  HOMEOPATHY  COUNSELLING  DETOXIFICATION  HYCROFT MEDICAL CENTER  108-3195 GRANVILLE ST.  VANCOUVER, B.C. V6H 3K2  731-4183 ■HjeJie. La me. and  heJie La my.  co.LLch,  I£a u/AeJie I nap.  and £Le ab.oM±.  Butt w.hen L £e.e£  £Lke Heading.  good,  Z Heach IjQJl the  oji£y. thing.  L AhojjUd.  I£a 24 pag.eA  and o^ten moJie.  ojj. new.A, >ievxew.Ai  gjOM. knoMJ, ItA no. hoJie..  Sx>. cojne. ojv OAteJi, piun.dc  y,OM.tiAe££ dojv.n.  Read the b^At fi.ap.eJi. Ln toM/.n.  A allL jjOJi me^, a Aui, fan. ijjojjl.  U/Aat o£he.n ftag, uUU do.?  One year  □$20 + $1.40 GST □ Bill me  Two years □ New  D$36 + $2.52 GST D Renewal  Institutions/Groups □ Gift  □$45 + $3.15 GST □ Donation  □ Cheque enclosed   For individuals who can't afford the full amount <3  for Kinesis subscription, send what you can.  Free to prisoners.  Orders outside Canada add $8.  Vancouver Status of Women Membership  (includes Kinesis subscription)  □$30+$1.40 GST  Address   Country   Telephone _  Postal code"  Fax   Published ten times a year by the Vancouver Status of Women  #301 -1720 Grant Street Vancouver, BC V5L 2Y6