 Special Collections Serial  VMS/DC  MARCH '82  2 Kinesis is looking for  new workers. All that's  necessary is a willingness  to take the plunge.  7 Vancouver International Women's Day Committee has two days of  festivities planned. Let's  celebrate!  9 Have revolutionary  changes in Nicaragua improved conditions for  women? Heather Conn  sends an on-location  report  12 Our centre feature  discusses feminism and  the food industry. Jill  Pollack interviews women  who work in food co-ops.  15 Judith Atkinson  deals with heroic women  and labyrinths in her work  — here is a portrait of an  amazing artist  16 "Stevie" Smith, the  subject of an extraordinary film, was an independent, creative poet.  Cy-Thea Sand in her  review explores the myth  of woman as artist, virgin  and woman-unto-herself  18 Julie Wheelwright  reviews DES Daughters,  the story of the first  woman to win damages  from the manufacturers of  this cancer-causing drug  20 B.C. Tel is pushing  its luck by asking for yet  another rate increase, says  VSW in its brief to the  CRTC  COVER: "Women Organizing" is the theme of this year's  International Women's Day activities. Artwork by Nola  Johnston.  SUBSCRIBE TO K/MEJIS  Published 10 times a year  by Vancouver Status of Women  400A West 5th Ave., Vancouver, B.C. V5Y 1J8  □ VSW membership - includes Kinesis subscription -  $20 (or what you can afford)  □ Kinesis subscription only - $13  □ Institutions - $40  □ Sustainers - $75  Name_  Address_  Phone   news about women that's not in the dailies  imERnflTiondL  womEirs  MY  MARCH 8,1982  .Amount Enclosed_  Please remember that VSW operates on inadequate  funding — we need member support!  i 2   Kinesis   March 1982  KINESIS  Womanpower wanted: can you help?  by Janet Beebe  Kinesis has grown with Vancouver Status of  Women over the years. Today it is a respected and widely-read paper, offering feminist news and analysis to women in B.C.  and across Canada.  The paper is produced largely by volunteers  who, as you might expect, put in long, hard  hours to get the paper out every month.  Recently, we (the working group) have decided to re-structure ourselves to try and  do the work more efficiently.  By doing this, we hope to spread the workload more evenly among available volunteers,  make sure that every task gets the attention  it needs, make the workings of the paper  more accessible to every worker, and better  incorporate new workers, particularly those  who want to make only a minimal commitment.  We intend to be organized enough that planning ahead can be a regular, rather than a  hapha zard, event.  Committees formed for efficiency  Beginning with our current core group of  eight, we have each taken responsibility  for coordinating a committee. The coordinator in each area will be responsible for  getting that part of the work done, as well  as orienting and training volunteers who  want to work on the committee.  KINESIS  KINESIS is published ten times a  year by Vancouver Status of Women.  Its objectives are to enhance  understanding about the changing  position of women in society and  work actively towards achieving  social change.  VIEWS EXPRESSED IN KINESIS are  those of the writer and do not  necessarily reflect VSW policy. All  unsigned material is the responsibility of the Kinesis editorial group.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status of Women, 400A West  5th Avenue, Vancouver, B.C. V5Y 1J8.  MEMBERSHIP in Vancouver Status  of Women is $20/year (or what you  can afford). This includes a subscription to Kinesis. Individual subscriptions to Kinesis are $13/year.  SUBMISSIONS are welcome. We  reserve the right to edit, and submission does not guarantee publication.  Include a SASE if you want your work  returned.  WORKERS ON THIS ISSUE: Janet Beebe,  Janet Berry, Jan DeGrass, Cole Dudley,  Dorothy Elias, Pat Feindel, Penny Goldsmith,  Nicky Hood, Judy Hopkins, Hilarie McMur-  ray, Ces Rosales, Jeanne Taylor, Michele  Wollstonecroft.  DEADLINE FOR NEXT ISSUE: March 15 for  March 31 publication. Late copy printed as  space permits.  Vancouver Status of Women offices  are located at 400A W. 5th Avenue,  Vancouver V5Y 1J7. Office hours are  Monday to Thursday, 9-5:30 (some  evenings by appointment).  Our phone number is 873-1427.  What we want is not a hard-line structure,  but rather guidelines which will help us  work more efficiently, consistently and  democratically. With ten years behind us,  we obviously have an established system of  rules and policy, which it is not our  intent to revise at this time.  Each committee we have established is different in its requirements and the type of  work involved, and will meet only as often  as necessary to do the work. However, to  maintain overall coherency, we will continue to have our monthly potluck meeting,  to which all Kinesis workers will be encouraged to come, to share committee reports, plan ahead, and socialize.  Right now, we are looking for new volunteers for the paper. We understand not  everyone can offer a lot of time (though  dedicated types are always welcome), but  we ask that those interested consider beforehand the amount of time you regularly  have available, the type of work you would  like to do, and the skills you may have to  offer. (You don't have to know how to do  the work - we can provide training.)  Most important to us are a regular commitment (however small it may be), a willing-  ness to learn new skills, and an ability  to put up with a couple of perfectionist  types who like to hang out there!  Here's a breakdown of tasks . . .  Following are descriptions of committees  and the work involved in each, for women  who may be considering coming to work with  us:  Production: This seems to be the current  favourite among new volunteers. Production  involves layout, proofreading, typing and  laying down corrections, sizing and marking  up illustrations, and various related  chores.  This committee works steadily the last ten  days of the month, right up to the time  Kinesis goes to press. We have a production  sign-up sheet where workers sign up for  shifts. Two hours is the absolute minimum  time you should set aside for production  work. Three to six hours at a time is optimum.  Advertising and Promotion: This area has  been neglected in the past due to lack of  time and energy. Consequently, there is a  substantial amount of catch-up work to do.  We have some plans laid out, and need one  or more workers who would enjoy doing this  kind of work for Kinesis. We are in the  process of soliciting advertising, and are  looking at ways to use back issues to reach  out to potential readers. Some of this work  can be done at home.  Fundraising: This is another "never-any-  time-for" task which really is crucial to  the long-term viability of the paper. We  need to make Kinesis a financially secure  operation.  We could use at least two workers on this  committee. Right now, we have a T-shirt  project and a film benefit in the works.  This committee will have back-up from the  Financial Planning Committee, which is  concerned with the more mundane task of  budgetting.  Again, much of this could be done from home  though by its nature, it will involve some  intense spells of work.  Education:  In order to share among ourselves the skills we possess, and build up  our collective knowledge store, we want to  hold regular educational workshops for  Kinesis volunteers. We have done this spor  adically in the past, but now want to make  it more a priority. Our first workshop,  scheduled for March 14, 7:30pm at the Kinesis office, will be about editing.  This committee has also taken on the task  of putting our policy in written, agreed-  upon form - again, so that decision-making  is more clearly a matter of group will.  This is not a particularly heavy-duty committee, but work will involve putting the  knowledge shared in workshops in written  form for future reference. We could use  two workers on this committee.  Graphics:  This has been the most active  committee to date. Right now, it meets once  a week. Its tasks are to re-organize and  maintain our graphics and photo files,  solicit new material from local artists and  photographers, search out illustrations' for  each issue, keep a file of design ideas,  and do cover design. If you are interested  in graphics or design, this could be the  committee for you.  Community groups should note that we will  soon have available a file of graphics we  have already used in Kinesis, but which we  would like to make available to other  groups on a lending-library basis for your  graphic needs.  Distribution:  This work is being done by  a committee of one at present, and that  seems to be adequate. We could use one  worker to do the out-of-town consignment  mailing when the paper comes back from  press, and the in-office work of keeping  tabs on publication exchanges and expanding our out-of-town outlets.  Admittedly, this type of work is not glory-  laden, but it is crucial to maintaining a  high-profile circulation.  Coming up once again is the end of VSW's  grant, and time for renewal of funding.   We  let you know it's that time again,  because  only vocal public support, for Vancouver  Status of Women keeps us in the running  year after year.  We would appreciate your support in the  form of a support letter, phone call or  telegram to our funding agencies,   the  Attorney-General's office in Victoria and  City Hall in Vancouver.  Our fiscal year  ends March 31.  We encourage support from groups as well  as individuals.  Let these funders know  how our services are important to you, and  how imperative it is to women in B.C.  that  a service like ours continues to exist.  Features: This is a very important commit-  tee which right now, until it is developed,  is a bit of a catch-all committee. Its work  involves planning and facilitating supplements and other features, assigning stories  which require more than usual lead time to  write, and tracking down reviewers for  books and films.  We need workers for this committee who have  a good knowledge of the community, and  consider themselves idea-people, with good  communication skills. Some of the work can  be done from home."  Editorial:  The editorial committee is not  yet a functioning one, probably because it  is the most time-consuming job of the paper  Right now, the work is being handled by  those who are in the office when the work  needs to be done.  The tasks of the editorial committee are to  record events which need to be covered and  make sure they are assigned, go through  news clippings and exchange publications  Continued on page 3 March 1982    Kinesis   3  KINESIS  WOMANPOWER continued from page 2  for news briefs and story ideas, edit all  copy, write short news items, prepare the  "dummy" for the paper, liaise with writers,  write headlines and other such copy, and  collect all copy for typesetting and mark  it up.  It's expected this committee would meet two  to three times a week through the last  three weeks of the month. And though it requires a fair number of hours from several  women, the tasks are clearcut.  It will be possible to join this committee  for a specified length of time, if the  and bring back news and views from other  local publishers.  BCPPA is an association of publishers whose  aim is to help members with promotion,  distribution and professional development,  and to represent our united interest where  possible.  Photographers, news writers ... we need  you  The fourth Is an area we haven't dealt with  very well to date. That is our on-going  need for reporters, women who will cover  events and either provide comprehensive  in working on Kinesis but haven't yet  stepped forward (or even those who have  given it a whirl in the past) will be encouraged to do so by this recap of our new  structure.  None of the work at Kinesis is thankless  work, though often it does seem tough. We  are a supportive, friendly group with a  common interest - making Kinesis the best  publication we can make it with the resources at hand.  We have scheduled an afternoon social for  women who think they would like to join  the Kinesis staff, but want to have a look  around and ask questions first. It will be  Kinesis has changed over the past 11 years, growing from a  mimeographed newsletter to a full-fledged tabloid newspaper.  thought of sacrificing all that free time  forever makes you nervous. A willingness to  take the plunge is all that's needed -  training is necessary, but we can provide  it.  Indexing, mailout are simple jobs  There are four other tasks which are not  included in any committee. One is the simple chore of indexing each issue as it is  published, on a prepared form. We need one  volunteer to do that consistently. If this  one sounds too good to be true, you're  right - at the moment, we have a backlog  of ten years' worth of issues to index!  The second is the recurring task of mail-  out. This happens the evening the paper  comes back from the press, shortly before  the end of each month. It involves 3 hours  work from about 10 people, and it would be  nice not to have to line up a crew from  scratch each time.  If you're interested in a straightforward  monthly commitment, consider this task -  it's worth a free copy, hot off the press,  and a good chance to socialize. (I might  add that this is the hardest task to face  for workers who put in time earlier in the  month, coming as it does on the heels of  two weeks of heavy-duty production work.)  The third is attendance at the monthly  meetings of the B.C. chapter of the Canadian Periodical Publishers Association,  which we recently joined. We need someone  who will represent us at these meetings  notes or a news story relating the event.  Ideally, we would like to have a list of  reporters on call who would be willing to  take the lead from us and cover one or two  events a month. In some cases, it would be  useful to have a photographer attend as  well. Photographers, newswriters, are you  there ?  We hope that women who have been interested  held Sunday, April <4 at 2pm at the Kinesis  office, 4-00A West 5th Avenue, Vancouver.  We will make every attempt to work you  into the group in a way that suits you,  should you decide you like what you see.  And no, it is not necessary to attend this  social if you already know you want to  make a commitment to Kinesis. Just give us  a call.  Financial support appreciated too  Sustainers provide much-needed support  Vancouver Status of Women would like to  see Kinesis  continue to grow, and we  need your help to make that happen. This  is a plea for donations from you, our  readers.  Kinesis made its first appeal for sus-  tainer support in April 1979. At that  time, we wrote:  "Only new subscribers, steady sustainers  and better distribution can'get Kinesis  through 1979 and into the 1980s...Government cutbacks and economic recession  have meant that for many B.C. feminists,  Kinesis is their only access to a public  voice within the media..."  That appeal helped - response to our sus-  tainer plea netted over $2,000, much  needed security for the paper at that  time.  Since then, the economic situation has  worsened. At the same time that your real  income has taken a dip, printing and postage costs for Kinesis  have risen sharply.  We need those readers who can, to make a  personal commitment to keeping Kinesis  alive.  Sustainer subscriptions cost $75 per year  (instalments welcome), and entitle the  donor to a subscription plus any number  of complimentary copies for friends who  are not already subscribers. You also  receive our personal thanks, for it would  be hard to survive without you.  If you've been a sustainer before, and  circumstances still permit, consider renewing that commitment.  Help Kinesis  survive. Become a sustainer  today. Kinesis    March 1982  ACROSS B.C.  Feminists escalate legal action against UBC engineers  by Jan DeGrass  A recent article in the Ubyssey -  the  U.B.C. student newspaper — indicates that  once more, campus police have failed to  act upon student complaints directed at the  "lady Godiva" ride.  For those who have  missed this annual tribute to the subnormal  capacity of engineers, the exhibit is hosted each year during Engineers Week.  A young woman, usually a prostitute, mounted on a horse rides naked across campus,  to the apparent delight of engineers and  to the disgust of many others.  This year two formal complaints were lodged  previous to the ride—one from the Student  Council and another from the Women's Committee of the Law Students Association.  Police refuse to act on complaints  Through some unexplained mixup police claim  not to have received the letter of complaint from the Student Council although  they clearly knew of its intention. Police  stated that they have not received complaints directed at the ride previous to  this.  Kate Andrew of the Womens' Committee of the  Law Students Association says that she and  other women have phoned to protest this  event and have always received a negative  response from the police or have been told  that the ride "was all a joke". During  this year's demonstration Andrew phoned the  RCMP campus police, indicating that the  demonstration was taking place-and asking  them to come over and break up the proceedings.  They did not do so.  "I want to know why the RCMP won't uphold  the law in this circumstance", said Andrew.  After having her name quoted in the Ubyssey  article concerning the ride Kate Andrew  has received hate notes from anonymous  sources and feels that "it's pretty indicative of the deep-seated paranoia" that  surrounds the issue.  Attention has also focused on another offensive offshoot of Engineers Week, the  "Red Rag",-a disgusting, four-page newspaper known to be put out by engineers.  The "rag" offends women, the handicapped,  the Chinese, Lady Diana and child murderers  with equal glee.  Larded with obscenities and crude cartoons  it does not even aspire to the standard of  drugstore pornography. A sample of the  humour follows: "Always fuck on her side  of the bed so she gets to sleep on the wet  spot. If she complains buy her a rubber  nightgown."  There were worse examples but why ruin a  good copy of Kinesis?  A front-page arti  cle asks: "Where's the Women's Committee?"  And goes on to state that "all those raving  lunatic feminist slobs have disappeared."  Ombuds inquiry will be next step  Fortunately they have not disappeared. A  group of concerned students and other individuals are investigating this year's  activities and are calling for action on  a two-year-old complaint filed with the  Human Rights Commission that has never  been properly resolved.  The complaint, which addressed both the  ride and the "Red Rag", was investigated  and promises were heard from the engineers. This year an inquiry will be launched with the ombudservice to resolve the  initial complaint and to determine why  the promises were made in bad faith.  Other avenues of action are also being explored by concerned students and organizations like Vancouver Status of Women.  The "Red Rag" has been in trouble before,  for anti-semitism. Pressure was brought to  bear and the publication ceased to print  anti-Jewish jokes, preferring instead to  focus on women, gay men and more timely  and tasteless topics like Clifford Robert  Olson.  Q  Socreds cancel Rape Centres  funding  The B.C. Coalition of Rape Centres has had  its funding cut by the provincial government.  The government gave the centres - located  in Vancouver, Victoria, Nanaimo and Terrace - 30 days notice on January that the  $151,000 they share would be cut as of  February 28.  The issue over which negotiations broke  down was that of confidentiality of clients'  files. The government had wanted the rape  centres to provide detailed statistical  information on rape victims in a manner  which was unacceptable to the Coalition.  Their clients (rape victims) have clearly  indicated they want complete confidentiality of the information in their files.  Women in small towns are especially vulnerable in the case of misuse or careless  handling of information contained in their  files.  The•Coalition has received strong community  support for its stand on the issue of confidentiality.  Following announcement of the funding cut,  the government apparently encouraged individual centres to drop out of the Coalition.  and negotiate separately for re-funding on  the government's terms. This is clearly a  divisive tactic which should be condemned.  Also divisive is the fact that the government has announced it wants funding applications from other community groups willing  to provide the services the Coalition now  provides. This indicates the government  hopes and expects the Coalition will drop  out of sight once it no longer receives  government funding.  But the Coalition says it will not disappear. The centres plan to fight for the  lost funding. For the present, it is looking at ways to raise money from other  sources to pay rent and telephone bills.  The withdrawal of funding from the Coali  tion is a reprehensible move on the part of  the government. Rape centres - along with  Transition Houses - are dedicated grassroots services developed by feminists for  women.  We encourage all groups and individuals to  demand immediate re-instatement of the  Coalition's funding.  Government cuts back on  low-income housing  The provincial government, in its infinite  wisdom, has decided to eliminate subsidies  for 850 low-income housing units.  The suites will revert to the open market  in a phase-out program expected to last  two years. Current tenants will not be affected, according to Housing Minister Jim  Chabot, but subsidies will be eliminated  as tenants move out.  Consider the facts. The current waiting  list for subsidized housing has 10,000  names on it. There are 22,817 single parents on welfare in B.C., most of them women. Add to that figure an ever-increasing  number of disabled and senior citizens  (also mostly women) on fixed incomes, and  the 8,000 existing subsidized units don't  begin to house the people who need them.  Take the case of welfare recipients. A single parent on welfare receives $540/month.  Of this, $300 is allocated by the Ministry  of Human Resources for rent. If the rent  is below $300, the Ministry keeps the difference .  In subsidized housing, rent is 25% of income. A single parent would therefore pay  25% of $540, or $135, in rent. So where a  single parent on welfare has subsidized  housing, the Ministry withholds $165 of  the $300 allocated for rent.  Those low-income housing tenants on welfare whose subsidy is eliminated will need  the entire $300/month just to stand a minimal chance of finding housing on the open  "market. And with average rent for a two-  bedroom apartment in Vancouver standing at  $500/month and a vacancy rate of .1%,  they  could have a long wait before finding anything suitable.  It is unclear what the government hopes to  accomplish by the removal of subsidized  housing for 850 low-income families. Each  new restraint measure by the government is  more ludicrous than the last.  Surely it is time to develop an economic  program that makes sense, instead of one  based on harassment of the poor.  Welfare activists descend on  Cabinet retreat  On January 28, members of the Welfare  Rights Coalition, the First United Church  and the Downtown Eastside Residents Association knocked on the doors of a posh resort in Nanoose Bay, north of Nanaimo,  to speak to members of the Cabinet who  were there on a 3-day retreat.  The protesters were there to give them  petitions with the names of 6,000 people  who oppose the recent welfare cutbacks.  The Ministers, predictably, denied them a  hearing. But Bill Bennett, rounding the  corner from a lunch-time walk, was not so  lucky. Surrounded, he had no choice but to  hear them out.  Linda Irwin of the First United Church  pointed out to Bennett that welfare recipients in B.C. live well below the poverty  line. Marilyn Hogan of the Welfare Rights  Coalition added, "If the government needs  to reduce spending, we suggest you stop  building mega-projects and cut back your  salaries instead of our food budgets."  The government could provide a guaranteed  annual income if it chose to make social  welfare a priority, say welfare rights  activists.  Welfare recipients are continuing to fight  the cutbacks in an attempt to force the  government to rescind them. The Welfare  Rights Coalition will be holding neighbourhood meetings across Vancouver in the  coming months to organize welfare recipients around this goal. ACROSS CANADA  March 1982   Kinesis   5  Access to abortion still limited  Abortions have resumed at Surrey Memorial  Hospital, following six months of deadlock  between the hospital's anti-abortion dominated board and its doctors.  Last June, the Surrey hospital board moved  to end abortions; in response, doctors  refused to participate in hospital committees. A public administrator was appointed  to mediate an agreement, which came last  month in the form of guidelines regulating  the availability of abortions.  The guidelines comply with the Criminal  Code of Canada, which says that abortions  are allowed only when a properly constituted  hospital abortion committee verifies that a  woman's health is threatened by the pregnancy. The guidelines will ensure that  access to abortion is restricted, according  to the associate administrator of the hospital.  Meanwhile, in Moose Jaw, a small group  called the Hospital Concerns Committee has  forced Moose Jaw Union Hospital to stop  performing therapeutic abortions.  The group, in a move that could affect many  small hospitals in the province, successfully pushed through a motion at a hospital  board meeting last November stating that  the hospital was contravening the Criminal  Code by performing abortions.  Apparently, there is some confusion at both  the local and federal level, about whether  Moose Jaw Hospital, because it does not  have a maternity ward, is breaking the law  by performing abortions. The only other  hospital in Moose Jaw, a Catholic one, does  have a maternity ward, but does no abortions.  Right now, the hospital is waiting for  clarification and approval from either the  Attorney-General or the Minister of Health.  But the Attorney-General's office says that  as long as there is no legal action, the  issue remains a local one, to be settled by  the hospital board, (info from Vancouver  Sun,   Toronto Globe & Mail)  Since the Civil Defence Information Centre  is not selling wares or services, they  felt somewhat unjustly singled out. However, their hearts don't glow sufficiently  to take the flag to court, so they obliged  by defacing the offensive symbol on their  information leaflets. (B.C.   Blackout)  Deported East Indian women  faces uncertain future  A 25-year-old Punjabi woman was forced to  return to India January 22, after a yearlong struggle to reverse a deportation  order.  Bhajno Kaur Toor originally applied to  emigrate to Canada along with the rest of  her family as a sponsored dependent. Her  brother, a Canadian citizen, sponsored  the application.  Unfortunately processing of her application was delayed until after her 21st  Maple leaf a trademark, says  government  Government departments aren't the only  Canadians to stand on guard under the 11-  point maple leaf. But only when someone  used the Canadian flag recently for unauthorized (i.e. non-commercial and nongovernmental ) purposes did the government  let on that the thing is a trademark.  The controversy unfurled when three local  artists set up a Civil Defence Information  Centre to demonstrate the futility of  trying to survive a nuclear war.  They built a bomb shelter as cozy as Mom  and Dad's summer cottage. They drew huge  wall posters parodying the civil defence  manual's 11 steps to survival. And they  used the Canadian flag to publicize their  direct attack on the government's commitment to planning for war. It seemed appropriate enough, since they are citizene  concerned with survival.  The flag symbol had an immediate impact.  Not only have members of the general public come in response to its guise of authority, but several media outlets reacted  by phoning the federal Emergency Planning  office.  Officials there were furious.  Left with no other way to retaliate, they  went for the absurd.  They called out the  Justice Department to dust off the section  of the Trademarks Act referring to the  flag, and the artists received a letter  threatening legal action.  birthday, when she was no longer considered a 'dependent'. Permission was eventually granted to her family to come to  Canada as landed immigrants.  Bhajno arrived in Canada on a visitor's  visa in April 1979 and never left. In  early 1981, she was told she would have to  leave Canada and apply from outside the  country to gain landed immigrant status.  This may prove difficult to secure, now  that she has been deported.  Bhajno faces an uncertain future in India.  She has no relatives who are capable of  caring for and supporting an unmarried  woman. Her family is understandably bitter  about her deportation.  Bhajno's cause was supported by the International Committee Against Racism during  her fight to stay in Canada, (info from  the Vancouver Sun)  Discrimination requires proof  of inability  A recent Canadian Human Rights Commission  ruling requires Canadian employers to provide both medical and statistical evidence  proving a person can't do a particular job  if they want to discriminate on the basis  of that person's sex, physical disability  or age (among other grounds ).  The ruling establishes what employers must  prove before they can discriminate on any  grounds covered by provincial or federal  human rights codes.  Under the new ruling, private contracts can  no longer invalidate a provision of the  Human Rights Code. For instance, employees  cannot be forced through their work contract to retire before the age of 65 unless  the employer can prove that older employees  cannot do the job. The ruling could also  help women in our battle for equal pay by  excluding spurious grounds for discrimination. (Toronto Globe & Mail)  Pregnant VDT worker wins  transfer  The belief that radiation from video display terminals can harm an unborn child  gave a pregnant government employee  grounds to refuse to work on the machines  and not take a cut in pay, an Ontario  public service arbitration board has ruled  In a unanimous unprecedented decision, the  board ruled Helen Barss, a 26-year old  education ministry clerk, should not have  lost pay when she was assigned last year  to a lower-paying job in which she did not  have to use a VDT "for reasons of health."  Last April, Barss asked for the transfer  to be effective during her pregnancy after  she read of possible health hazards to the  unborn attributed to VDTs and after consulting her doctor.  The ministry complied but argued VDTs pose  no health hazards and Barss was being  transferred for personal, not health  reasons.  The collective agreement between the  50,000 members of the Ontario Public Service Employees Union and the provincial  government provides that if a person is  put in a lower-paid job for health reasons,  she must be paid for the next six months ai  if she were performing the higher-paying  job. (Vancouver Sun)  House of Commons committee  ponders family violence  The House of Commons Committee on Health,  Welfare and Social Services recently held  hearings on family violence, with particular focus on wife battering.  On January 28, the Canadian Advisory Council on the Status of Women presented its  brief. The brief was prepared by Debra  Lewis of Vancouver, who attended the presentation with Lucie Pepin, Council president.  It focused on the need to cut through the  'buck-passing' between different levels of  government, and emphasized that there are  specific steps the federal government can  take.  These include setting up a special startup fund for transition houses, provision  for funding of ancillary services not currently included in provincial per diem  rates, integration of maintenance and support payment collection into the income  tax system, and changes in RCMP policy in  areas where they provide local policing  services.  On February 17, Jan Barnsley presented the  Women's Research Centre brief. This presentation was based on the Centre's recently  completed "A Study of Protection for  Battered Women" (available from the Centre  at $8 for individuals and women's groups,  $10 for institutions).  The report outlines a number of areas  where protection for battered women is  virtually non-existent, and makes proposals for change in these areas.  The Committee's report is expected toward  the end of March. 6    Kinesis    March 1982  INTERNATIONAL  American film will glorify Yorkshire Ripper  Women of Leeds, England, are outraged over  recent announcements in the Yorkshire Post  that an as yet unnamed American film company is making a sexploitation feature on  the Yorkshire Ripper.  Women Against Violence Against Women  (WAVAW) of Leeds reports that location  shots have already been filmed in towns in  Northern England, and that Robert de Niro  has been asked to star in the leading  Ripper role.  WAVAW of Leeds charges the film's producers with media rape, and insists that  the film not be made. Feminists fear that  further media glorification of Sutcliffe  (the Ripper) will only spawn imitations of  his attacks, and WAVAW is building mass  opposition to halt the film's production  and distribution.  Reporters sexist, classist in their  coverage  Sutcliffe, who rape-murdered thirteen  women and sexually assaulted seven, has  been compared by British journalists to  folk hero Jack-the-Ripper.  Currently on  trial for the murders, Sutcliffe evaded the  police for five years, cau&ing women to  Leeds to live in constant fear for their  lives.  During those five years, British media and  police maintained a sexist and classist  stance in their reporting of the murders.  The authorities consistently distinguished  between the Ripper's "pure" and "impure"  victims, implying that prostitutes were  low-class trash whose lives were less valuable than "honourable" women. As many of  the Ripper's victims were prostitutes, the  murders were often blamed on the women who  work the "red light districts" of Leeds.  Sutcliffe's wife blamed for murders  After his arrest, Sutcliffe pleaded not  guilty by reason of insanity, citing that  his wife, Sonia, had driven him mad. The  media sensationalized their relationship  with headlines like "Ripper was henpecked"  and "Mania of the Ripper's wife" blaming  her for his woman-hatred and vicious murders.  Women in Leeds responded to misogynist  tactics with rage, and are organizing  throughout England to counter the further  perpetuation of media myths.  The English Collective of Prostitutes (ECP)  of London has been demonstrating outside  the Old Bailey against media and legal  abuse they have received throughout the  course of the Ripper case.  Their protest  slogans, including "70% of prostitutes  are mothers," and "23 kids are left mother  less," demand respect for the prostitute  victims and their families.  WAVAW of Leeds charges that media sensationalism of Sutcliffe only "... thinly  disguises a woman-hating culture in which  men are encouraged to see themselves as  attackers or protectors of women, and  women are portrayed as victims, deserving  or innocent, prostitute or virgin, depending on their relationship to men."  WAVAW of Leeds is seeking further information on the proposed film of Sutcliffe.  They would like to identify the American  company producing the film, and they request that feminists organize protests  around this film similar to the feminist  anti-media violence movement's angry reaction to Dressed to Kill.    For more information, contact WAVAW, c/o Corner  Books, Woodhouse Lane, Leeds 2, England.Q  (Women Against Violence Against Women in  Pornography & Media NEWSPAGE,   October   '81)  Winnie Mandela ban extended  The banishment of Winnie Mandela, South  African black nationalist and founder of  the now-banned Black Parents Association,  was extended in December for another five  years.  Mandela was originally banished from the  Johannesburg area, her family and friends,  five years ago to the small town of Brand-  fort, 200 miles away. The banishment order restricts her to her house at night  and over weekends.  Also extended was the banning order first  imposed 20 years ago, prohibiting her from  meeting with more than one person at a  time or from being quoted in South Africa.  Now 47, Mandela has been "free" only 11  months since 1962.  Despite her extensive restrictions, Mandela is an active organizer in the black  community where she is "located". She has  started gardening projects which have improved the community's diet tremendously.  Mandela, a qualified medical social worker,  has also started a first-aid and babycare  advice service.  Mandela has stirred things up. She has ignored segregation signs in town. She has  kept whites waiting while she used "their"  public telephones. She has marched into  little shops and tried on clothes in the  only change room they have.  Letters of support to the women of South  Africa can be sent to Barbara Masakela,  African National Congress,  801 2nd Ave.,  New York,  NY 10017 or contact Amnesty International at 705 G St.  SE,  Wash.   DC,  20003.     (off our backs,  Feb./82)    0.  feminists are often the product of over-  protective domineering and even sadistic  mothers. As a result, the doctors say,  they grew up hating men but admiring masculine qualities.  But there's hope. The journal says several doctors have successfully "treated"  feminists, teaching them to love men, and  presumably, to go back to the kitchen.  (RNR/CUP)    0.  'cured", can  Feminists can be '  they!  Good news for all members of the feminist  movement — the International Association  of Social Psychiatry says you can be  "cured".  The association's journal says extreme  Life, but no soul, say "pro-  lifers' '  If you would join the "pro-lifers", you  had better be prepared to accept a rigidly  circumscribed definition of "life".  According to several outspoken opponents  of "test tube babies", the "right to. life"  definitely does not extend to them —  since they were not conceived in the womb,  they have no soul. That was the essence  of objections lodged against the in vitro  fertilization program at Eastern Virginia  Medical School (which recently reported  its first birth).  Typical among the objections were those  voiced by Australia's leading in-vitro  fertilization opponent — who also calls  herself a Right-to-Lifer — when she  called in vitro doctors "a lot of mad monsters — they really should be locked up."  (National NOW Times,  Jan/Feb.   r82)    Q  California unemployment code  used against women  A recent court decision may give retroactive benefits to thousands of Califor-  nian women who, when they quit work for  family reasons, were denied unemployment  insurance only because they didn't earn  as much as their husbands.  On November 27, 1981 the California  Supreme Court unanimously approved a class  action determination for the 1972 suit  that successfully challenged the discriminatory eligibility requirement.  The state Unemployment Code used to allow  benefits for those who quit work because  of "marital or domestic duties" only  if  that person was the "sole or major support of his or her family."  This provision was discriminatory against  women, since it is more often women who  have to leave work for family reasons,  and since women rarely earn more than  their husbands.  In an eight year period,  as many as 70,000 people, nearly all  women, may have been disqualified under  this section.  In 1972, one of these women, Betty Ann  Boren, decided to sue. California Rural  Legal Assistance (CRLA) brought suit for  her, arguing that the eligibility requirement was a denial of equal protection for  women.  They won the suit in 1976, and Betty Ann  Boren was awarded retroactive benefits.  The state legislature repealed the code  section soon afterwards.  Until last month, it was unclear whether  the 1976 decision would apply to the thousands of other women who had been disqualified under the discriminatory code  section.  Now the State Supreme Court has ruled that  the decision does have a class-wide application and the case goes back to the trial  court to decide exactly when to begin the  retroactive claims period and how to determine which women are eligible for  payments. (Union WAGE)     Q March 1982   Kinesis   7  ORGANIZING  Equal pay rally will serve notice to government, employers  by Karen Dean  "Of late years employers have made the  startling discovery that women of birth  and education may be adapted for other  uses than those of household ornament  and domestic set; that they may be converted, in fact, to sober, industrious  and very useful drudges, who will work  carefully, quickly and thankfully for  half the salary that would be required  for a man of equal qualification. "  —George Paton*, 189-4  On Sunday, March 7, 7:30 p.m., at Temple-  ton High School, The Equal Pay Rally  Organizing Committee will commemorate  International Women's Day with a meeting  on the issue of equal pay for work of  equal value.  For although George Paton made her observation almost 100 years ago, the situation  of women in the workforce has not changed  substantially.  In 1981 women made up 40.5% of the work  force, with 63% of these women involved  in the clerical, service and sales sectors  of the economy.  The wages of working  women comprised 56% of their male counterparts in 1981.  Women, however, are no longer "thankful".  Women are fighting back. Equal pay for  work of equal value has become a prime  issue at the bargaining table.  The recent  strikes and negotiations of the Canadian  Union of Public Employees, the Public  Service Alliance of Canada, the Vancouver  Municipal and Regional Employees Union and  the Hospital Employees Union, to name a  ,few, have fought and sometimes made gains  on the issue of equal pay.  Nor has this fight been limited to the key,  but not all-encompassing, issue of equal  pay.  The recent increased maternity provisions won by the Canadian Union of Postal Workers is indicative of a growing  recognition that equality for women in the  workplace is a many-faceted battle.  1982, however, marks a year in which sustaining the momentum will be difficult.  Women and their families are faced with  massive layoffs in the forest industry,  increasing interest rates forcing rents  and mortgage payments out of reach, and  simply the increasing economic pressure of  the recession.  Llutterings by Trudeau and Bennett proposing "wage guidelines" for the public  sector, and the prospect of some form of  wage controls, are contributing to the  pressure. The United Auto Workers in the  U.S. have already made concessions, and  Jack Munro of the I.W.A. has agreed to  "discuss" with the forest industry  proposals for putting off negotiated wage  increases.  These facts are indicative of a climate  in which winning increases to meet inflation will be a challenge in and of itself.  Women's, and the entire labour movement's  ability to meet the further challenge of  fighting for equal pay for work of equal  value will be strained.  These conditions prompted the calling of  an equal pay rally on March 7th. A  successful rally will serve as notice  that equal pay for work of equal value  is still on the agenda for working women.  *George Paton was the pen name of a woman.  Appeal from Zimbabwe  The Zimbabwe Freedom from Hunger Campaign  is an organization dedicated to the improvement of conditions for people living in  extreme poverty in the rural areas of Zimbabwe, through the promotion of health, nutrition and self-help projects.  ZFFHC is registered with the appropriate  ministry of the Zimbabwe government as a  welfare organization, and has been in existence since 1967. We have a national committee of 16 members which consists of  senior members of government departments  and commerce.  The committee meets once every two months  and the executive director and staff carry  out the instructions of the National Committee. Our books of accounts are audited  annually by a firm of international auditors  and copies of the audited report are available if desired.  We are presently engaged in sponsoring nutrition villages or training centres for  illiterate women with malnourished children.  Once trained, the women go to farms and  villages as nutrition educators, in order  to teach the wives of labourers the basics  of nutrition, health and first aid.  In order to facilitate our work, we urgently  need educational toys, clothing, and/or  donations of money to help begin such projects. The clothes would be sold at nominal  cost to assist a community to build schools,  clinics, creches, and simple thatched round  houses.  At the same time, people would be taught  sanitation measures to ensure an adequate  water supply and an end to waterborn diseases such as bilharzia, typhoid, dysentery  and malaria.  All contributions, money, clothing or toys  should be sent to ZFFHC, P.O. Box 1880,  Ranche House College, Rotten Row, Salisbury,  Zimbabwe, and will be considered a valuable  contribution to helping us rebuild Zimbabwe  for Zimbabweans.  This year's theme for  International Women's Day  is "Women Organizing".  NfimmOML  womEirs  MY  Saturday, March 6:  The MARCH leaves from Victory Square  (Hastings & Cambie) at 11am, and winds  through the downtown area to arrive at  the Old Courthouse at noon, where the  RALLY will be held.  Marchers are requested to listen to  the marshalls while the march is in  progress.  Muggs Sigurgeirson of SORWUC and Drina  McCormick of the IWD Committee will MC  the rally. The Euphonious Feminist  Non-Performing Quintet will provide  the music.  Five speakers are scheduled:  1) Pat Davitt, VMREU member and part  of the Equal Pay for Work of Equal  Value Committee  2) Kathy Cuellar, from El Salvador,  speaking on the role of women in that  country  3) a spokeswoman from the Domestic  Workers  4-) Silva Tenenbein, from the Lesbian  Action Committee of the B.C. Federation  of Women  5) and a member of Concerned Aboriginal Women  A WOMEN'S DANCE will be held that evening. The Moral Lepers and Mystery Guest  will be performing. The dance will be  at West End Community Centre, starting  at 8pm. Admission is $4.  MARCH 8,1982  Sunday, March 7:  March 7 is devoted to an INFORMATION  DAY at Britannia School Cafeteria (1661  Napier St. ), from 11am-5pm.  There will be information tables and  displays, all-day video and film,  theatre and wen-do displays, and  workshops.  Workshops will include: Domestic Workers; Equal Pay for Work of Equal Value;  Lesbian Rights; Welfare Rights; Aboriginal Women; Health, Safety and Technological Change; Women Against Imperialism on El Salvador; and Violence Against  Women.  Dance tickets must be purchased in advance, and can be obtained at Ariel  Books, Women's Bookstore, Octopus East  & West, Vancouver Status of Women, and  Press Gang.  Childcare will be provided at the dance  and on Information Day.  All events are sponsored by the Vancouver International Women's Day Committee. Kinesis   March 1982  INTERNATIONAL  Salvadorean women fight double oppression  by Debra Lewis  Despite inadequate media coverage, most  of us are becoming aware of the situation  in El Salvador.  The continuing murder of Salvadoreans  (over 20,000 in 1981), the massive military aid by the U.S. to the ruling junta,  and the sham of the upcoming elections  in March are all indications of the  crisis facing the Salvadorean people.  The junta currently governing El Salvador  represents the interests of a tiny elite.  Two percent of the population controls  60% of the land; 8%  of the population  receives 50% of the national income. The  per capita calorie intake is the lowest  in Latin America, and in San Salvador  over 200,000 people live in paper and  cardboard huts.  What do we know about the specific situation of Salvadorean women?  While most of the population lives in  poverty, women face even more severe  economic problems. Women in the countryside are employed only two to three  months of the year (primarily during the  coffee harvest), and their wages are a  third less than those of the men.  Many women migrate to the cities, where  a substantial number end up in domestic  service for families of the upper classes.  These women become' virtual.slaves,  earning only, about $30-$60 per month.  Women in factories are equally exploited,  and many are now unemployed due to the  closing of factories during the government of the junta.  In times of such severe "economic hardship and unemployment, women often carry  the major part of the load.  It is women  who are ultimately responsible for the  survival of their families.  areas by fleeing to the cities or across  the Honduran border, are women and  children.  Many women, as well as men, are taken  prisoner and subjected to torture.  For  women, torture almost always includes  gang rape and other forms of sexual abuse.  the liberation struggle, and to provide  women with an organization which will  fight for the specific rights of women.  The biggest threat to the movement for the  liberation of women and of all people in  El Salvador, is the increasing threat of  direct U.S. intervention. As Canadian  As was the case in Nicaragua (documented  in Margaret Randall's excellent book  Sarjdino's Daughters),  Salvadorean women  are integrally involved in the struggle  against repression in their country.  Most Salvadorean refugees, both inside and outside the country, are  women and children. While most of the families have been affected  in one way or another by the repression, only the wealthy can  afford to keep their families together.  Some women turn to illegal street vending  as a way to bring some income into the  family (the government claims that the  women are an eyesore and discourage  tourism). However, the marketplaces  have no room for stalls for these women.  Instead, they are hunted down by the  police, often beaten and jailed, and  their merchandise is confiscated.  Other problems also specifically affect  women. Fifty percent of Salvadoreans  are illiterate, but it is the condition  of twice as many women as men. Seventy-  five percent of Salvadorean children  suffer diseases related to malnutrition.  Birth control education is controlled by  the Salvadorean Population Association.  Here, programs developed by North Americans reflect the goal of lowering the  birth rate in an attempt to stop social  unrest, rather than the interests of  Salvadorean women.  Finally, Salvadorean women suffer particular forms of direct violence and repression from the junta. Most refugees  who try to escape the bombing of rural  Women play a crucial role in both the FDR  (Democratic Revolutionary Front) and the  FMLN (Farabundo Marti National Liberation  Front — an umbrella group of political/  military forces and the people's armed  forces).  In addition, International Women's Day in  1980 saw the formation of AMES (Association de Mujeres de El Salvador/Salvadorean Women's Association). This group has  two goals: to provide an organization  through which women can participate in  women, we have a responsibility to pressure our own government to clearly  differentiate itself from U.S. foreign  policy in Latin America.  Here is what you can do:  1. Write letters to Prime Minister Trudeau, External Affairs Minister Mark  McGuigan, and your MP, demanding an end  to Canadian endorsement of U.S. policy  on El Salvador, and subsequent endorsement of the Franco-Mexican resolution  recognizing the FDR/FMLN as the representatives of the Salvadorean people.  2. Support the Medical Aid to El Salvador  campaign (details available from Oxfam,  2524 Cypress Street, Van., 736-1717)  3. Support the AMES tour (see accompanying announcement).  Note:    Much of the information in this  article was taken from  Women in El  Salvador, a collection of articles published by the Women's International  Resource Exchange.     Q  A group of Vancouver women are organizing  a speaking tour featuring an AMES representative. We need, however, to raise  money to cover travel and publicity expenses — enough, hopefully to have her  speak across Canada.  We estimate that if we can raise at  least $1500 locally over the next two  months, we will be able to schedule the  tour for the end of April.  We already have commitments from women  in Alberta to organize that section of  the tour. Fundraising there began the  weekend of February 13-14 with a collection taken at a provincial women's  conference.  The tour will not only bring us information about the general situation in El  Salvador,' but also the particular involvement of women in that country. Please  make a donation.  Donations can be sent to D. Lewis, AMES  tour, c/o Vancouver Status of Women,  400A W. 5th Ave., Vancouver, B.C. INTERNATIONAL  March 1982    Kinesis   9  More and more Nicaraguan women are organizing  by Heather Conn  This is the first of a series of three  articles on Nicaraguan women.  Clenched fists thrust in the air, ten  strident women with full smiles march  outside a factory. Strong, captivating  figures, their image in the black and  white photo is alive and real.  These women are active workers in a revolution. Marching off the page of an education workbook, they symbolize the hopeful spirit of women in production in  Nicaragua.  Throughout this Central American nation,  • posters advise:  "Advance women with your  participation." There is an eagerness and  optimism that women will help boost national production. Ex-prostitutes are  attending rehabilitation centres to learn  employable skills.  Old women in markets  are controlling sales of basic products  to ensure that nationally set prices are  kept. Domestic workers are slowly gaining  collective security.  Today, more and more women are organizing  in the workplaces of Nicaragua. With the  help of the national women's group AMNLAE,  work committees of two to five women have  formed in rural communities, markets,  large plantations, hospitals, factories,  study centres and private institutions.  These committees seek to unite women from  textile industry to tobacco fields, and  promote their participation in all levels  of employment.  Revolution opened the way for women  For some, this '"incite to action" campaign  is working.  "When I first arrived (in Nicaragua), I  saw that not so many people in my workplace were involved in revolutionary  things," says Andrea Fernandez, a Mexican  journalist who joined the revolution in  1979 and now works for a Managua radio  station. "But each day there were more  and more.  "There are still two or three women who  are not organized, or two or three big  groups that are not organized, but they  don't have a force. Now there are a lot  fewer people who do not go into things."  The revolutionary government of the FSLN  (National Sandinista Liberation Front) is  promoting technical training, and encourages women to enter job areas previously  limited to men. (Under the former dictatorship of Anastasio Somoza, women could  study but not enter fields such as electrical engineering, construction or technical research).  Now, half the workers in an office of the  finance ministry's computer division are  women.  In November 1981, the first woman  pilot in Nicaragua received her diploma.  Women are visible as construction workers,  traffic police, bus and taxi drivers and  gas station attendants.  In the past,  a female face was never seen in any of  these areas.  "I believe that the revolution has opened  the possibility for women to free themselves," says 17-year old Gutierrez Sanchez, one of the first female gas station  attendants in Managua. She says her  greatest hope is to have a career and become a professional.  Her friend Istmeny Corea Lopez adds: "I  believe that a woman can work in any trade,  with the exception of some very heavy work.  It is part of the. liberation of women."  Under Somoza's regime, many women had to  resort to prostitution to survive economically. Some operated from local markets,  charging customers 10 cents for a "trick".  Today, these women can attend centres to  gain education and skilled training.  In the western coastal town of Corinto, a  rehabilitation centre houses 15 ex-prostitutes and their children, and serves 50  daily visitors. Located on a beach, the  centre enables women to collect seashells  and transform them into ornate flower  arrangements and decorations. These items  are then sold at fairs and stores for  profit. Typing and sewing skills are also  taught, while some women train in the  centre's day care facilities to become  pre-school teachers.  Although these are traditional female work  areas, they enable women to support themselves financially without the sexual  oppression of prostitution. The centres  give participants a sense of dignity and  pride in their work.  (Currently there  are three rehabilitation centres funded  by AMNLAE, church groups and the ministry  of social welfare.  One more is soon to  open in Managua ).  In 1981, the Year of Defence and Production, women's participation in national  production was considered essential. The  area of domestic work was one that particularly needed promotion and recognition,  since many women in Nicaragua remain invisible producers.  workers in six major cities and gained the  following for their members:  • a 10-hour schedule (the fight still  continues for an 8-hour day);  • payment of double-time for holidays  and extra hours;  • a minimum weekly wage of 400 cordo-  bas (about $20) and continued attempts  to get 600 (about $30); and  • the right to six months' salary for  wrongful dismissal.  The union has also made efforts to get  social security benefits for domestic workers and this is soon to be put into  effect.  Yet despite such efforts to gain collective strength, Nicaraguan women's economic  advances in real terms are poor.  In general with high inflation, their wages are  low and not at par with men's. Those who  work for major corporations such as Coca  Cola do not receive union wages.  Those  who are unionized often feel frustrated  and alienated in their male-dominated  locals.  (The workers' right to strike has  in fact been removed, because in the words  of one government official: "The people  who were going to strike were counterrevolutionary and trying to break down the  economy.")  Both men and women workers have become  victims of Nicaragua's crumbling economy.  The foreign debt is expected to climb to  $3.5 billion in 1982. Even with the government's repeated willingness to raise  A wall poster adorns the front of AMNLAE's offices in Managua.  It has been difficult to reach these workers because their employers refuse cooperation. As Esperanza Galeano, a  domestic union member, explains:  "It is difficult to organize comrades because their bosses deny (they.are there).  For example, many comrades did not become  alphabeticized (learn to read and write)  because when the literary census was made,  the women employers said that the domestics were their daughters or nieces, that  they had no workers."  But the central domestic workers' union in  Managua, Angelita Morales Aviles, is  trying to combat the exploitation of women  employed in the home.  They have organized  wages, there is nowhere near enough money  to adequately improve^ workers' financial  status.  The country is dependent on  export sales, which comprise half the  annual payments for importation of oil.  "We have an economy of survival," says  AMNLAE executive member Magda Enriquez.  "We are surviving. We cannot even dream  of great projects in our economy until we  are able to raise our production, to really  go into the line of development."  Meanwhile, many women continue to eke out  an unstable existence as sidewalk vendors  or part-time seamstresses, while their  male counterparts find better paying,  qualified work.  In Managua, employment   Continued on page 10 10   Kinesis   March 1982  INTERNATIONAL  NICARAGUAN WOMEN continued from page 9  opportunities are hardly equal — AMNLAE  cites that 52% of women aged 20-24 are  working, compared to 8%  of the men.  Even in government, where there is a  strong female representation, participation  is not evenly balanced between the sexes.  As Luis Caldera, a member of the FSLN's  department of international affairs,  explains:  "There's a certain less participation of  women, but that's due to their previous  cultural disadvantages. Cultural background in the past makes limitations for  women. But the revolution has opened itself up to everyone. It's not determined  by sex."  Although the three members of the ruling  junta are male, women currently hold leading positions in the FSLN:  • military "commandante" and director  of the ministry of interior;  • military "commandante" and vice-  chairperson of the Council of State  (a legislative, representative body  composed of about 60 people);  • "commandante" and secretary of the  FSLN;  • vice-minister of the exterior;  • minister of health; and  • vice-minister of culture.  As part of the government reconstruction,  Nicaraguan women played a crucial role in  the health programs and the post-war literacy campaign; 60% of the teachers and  57% of the students were women, according  the AMNLAE. In total, 210,000 women  learned to read and write.  "The literacy crusade was a strong statement of independence and self-determination of all people," says American Becki  Cohn, who was a teacher during the campaign.  "It raised the level of political  consciousness and taught people the important attitude that no one can irick them or  exploit them."  However, increased awareness and politici-  zation have not changed the labour status  of women on all economic levels in Nicaragua. As in North America, women are still  'found predominantly in the poorly paid,  low-status positions — employees in the  food and clothing industry, planters and  harvesters of tobacco, cotton and coffee,  and 80% of volunteer forces. Some newly  educated workers are still unable to fully  understand written instructions in manuals  or produce containers; hence their power  as a worker is- limited.  information on work-site hygiene, health  conditions and nutrition. A section of  occupational health for women in the ministry of labour already exists.  AMLAE has requested that all girls age 14  and over who pick cotton or coffee be included on a payroll.  (Currently, many  assist their parents in the fields without payment.) Similarly, the group has  asked that women agricultural workers be  paid directly, rather than have their  wages paid to a spouse or offspring.  For health reasons, demands have been made  that the pesticide DECP be prohibited from  use in banana plantations and that the use  of herbicide DDT ALDRIN and 24-5 T be restricted; the latter is suspected of harming human reproductive organs.  Women's reproductive role has gained recognition in labour rights. Pregnancy  benefits have been granted with 4-0-day  paid maternity leave both before and after the birth of a child. Day care and  pre-school centres have become a new and  valuable addition. They are built on a  neighbourhood and community level with  government-provided funds.  Services are  free and readily accessible and usually  located near markets or other work areas  where women are found.  Day care and pre-school centres are a new and valuable service for  women . . . They are free and readily accessible, usually located  near markets or other work areas where women are found.  With the help of the government, AMNLAE is  trying to improve the labour power, rights  and conditions of women. The group has  helped women create production collectives, for example, a sewing shop, an  agricultural co-operative or a farm to  raise chickens and pigs. As Magda Enri-  quez explains:  "Our first aim is to achieve not only the  participation of women in quantity, but  also in quality in the reconstruction of  our country.  Through projects that AMNLAE  promotes, we make more women participate  in the production line."  The ministry of social welfare has helped  to organize coffee plantation workers and  is trying to set up day care centres with  Nicaragua needs many more day care centres, but lack of finances has hindered  their growth. Vancouver's B.C.-Nicaraguan Women's Support Group recently  visited Managua and gave AMNLAE a cheque  for more than $2,500. The money will  help to construct a day care centre in  Corinto, a port where women form 80% of  the workers in a shrimp and lobster  packing plant.  "Day care is one of our most important  tasks," says Enriquez. "It's the obstacle for more women integrating into  production. It's precisely — who takes  care of the children? There are 17,000  ~children in rural and urban day care  centres."  So, changes for Nicaraguan women in the  employment field have been gradual, and  hinge on the availability of funds.  The  nation's mixed economy that allows both  free enterprise and nationalization of  companies, has not eliminated the vast  gap between rich and poor. While one  manicured, made-up woman drives a  Mercedes Benz through Managua's fashionable Las Colinas, another in rags and  bare feet begs passersby for change.  However, one cannot ignore the direction  that the women's revolution is taking.  It is synonymous with the national quest  for autonomy and independence.  It is in the military, perhaps more than  anywhere, that women's equal presence  with men is evident. While U.S. intervention and economic embargo threatens,  the role of women in defence becomes  increasingly significant. They are seen  on the streets in uniform, carrying guns  with men and working alongside male  fighters. Women are found in the army,  police, militia, reserve units and a  highly trained elite battalion.  The success of women in production of  employment depends on their right to  defend and protect their country.  In the  words of Enriquez:  "We understand the defence as a whole.  In other words, not only the military  defence, but on the military and political level.  On the military level, we  are 50% of popular militias, we have  formed the women's battalions. We are  part of the regular armed forces and  women are there in the first line of  combat.  "This is very important for us because  we feel that in the history of the world,  there have been many cases where an army  has defeated another army, but there is  not one single case where an army has  defeated an entire people and that's  what they (an enemy) will have to do with  us."  In its struggle to survive, there is no  question that Nicaragua depends on the  work of women. As an AMNLAE pamphlet  aptly puts it:  "For the reconstruction of our country,  women are ready and willing to fight  in the "trenches" of the production, in  our neighbourhoods, and in the state in  order to build a new homeland and thus  forge the new woman." 0_  Margaret Randall will be in Vancouver  March 15 to speak about women in Nicaragua.  Pulp Press and New Star Books are  sponsoring her visit.  ARIEL BOOKS  International Women's Day Sale  25% OFF any item containing the word  "woman" or "women" in the title or  logo / all gay & lesbian non-fiction  titles / all crystal  March 5, 6 & 8  Ariel • 2766 West 4th Ave., Vancouver • 733-3511 WOMEN & THE LAW  March 1982   Kinesis    11  Family court jurisdiction  defined  The long-awaited decision of the Supreme  Court of Canada on the constitutional validity of sections of B.C. Family Relations  Act does little to help women who seek  resolution of family disputes in the courts.  The decision does sort out the confusion  surrounding the jurisdiction of provincial  family courts.  This confusion had existed since April 1979  when a provincial court judge ruled that  the issues of custody and access could only  be dealt with in the B.C. Supreme Court.  The recent ruling means that both B.C.  Supreme Court and provincial family court  judges can grant custody and access orders.  However, the Supreme Court of Canada also  ruled that only federally appointed judges  (who sit in the B.C. Supreme Court) can  issue occupancy and non-entry orders.  These orders, which can give a woman temporary and exclusive possession of the family residence and forbid the man from entering the premises, cannot be obtained  in family court. Thus, the decision means  that if a woman requires anything more  than maintenance and custody orders, she  must go to the B.C. Supreme Court.  What does this mean for women with family  law problems? Women in crisis need access  to legal remedies which can be obtained  quickly and cheaply. If, for example, a  woman is in a battering situation, she  will probably require occupancy and non-  entry orders. But, because of the new  ruling, the door to family court is closed  to her.  The procedures in family court are not as  formal as those in the B.C. Supreme Court,  and a lawyer is not essential there. Family  courts are intended to provide an inexpensive and expeditious forum for the resolution of family disputes. It is imperative,  however, that women understand their legal  rights and obligations if they intend to  represent themselves.  There is a difference of opinion in the  legal profession as to the efficacy of the  family courts. The Vancouver family law  section of the Canadian Bar Association  finds the B.C. Supreme Court quicker,  easier and, in the long run, less costly  than family court.  The Supreme Court of Canada decision "does  nothing to help clean up the dog's breakfast that is family law in Canada". We believe, in fact, that it makes the situation  worse.  What is needed for a start is a new court  to deal with all family matters, presided  over by judges who have a family law background, and who want to deal with family  matters. Q  The news briefs on this page were  compiled by VSW legal researcher  Hilarie McMurray.  Bennett's restraint plan  squeezes equal pay concept  Vancouver Sun columnist Majorie Nichols  calls Bill Bennett's new "restraint" program a cruel joke. It's no joke. The impact of the "Compensation Stabilization  Program" on women's struggle for equal pay  will be devastating.  Under the program, all public sector employees are limited to a 10% wage increase.  Some workers could have their "compensation" (which is not yet defined) reduced  to 8% or increased to 12% on the basis of  "historical relationships". A further exception would allow an additional 2% "to  reward increases in productivity".  Bennett's move comes in the spite of the  fact that Vancouver has the highest inflation rate of Canada's 15 major cities. -  The inflation rate in Vancouver rose to  13-4% in January, and Statistics Canada  predicts that food and energy costs will  increase in February. Yet Bennett's program says nothing about price controls.  The wage controls will affect 200,000  public sector workers, of whom more than  half are women. The unions with the largest number of women members are all public  sector unions. The B.C. Government Employees Union has 50% women, B.C. Teachers  Federation just under 50%, Hospital Employees Union 80%, B.C. Nurses Union 95%,  Vancouver Municipal & Regional Employees  Union 57%, and Canadian Union of Public  Employees 41%-  These unions, some of the largest in the  province, have been in the forefront of  the fight for equal pay for work of equal  value.  It is significant that at this time, the  Hospital Employees Union is in the middle  of contract negotiations with the government, with B.C. Government Employees Union  soon to begin negotiations.  Wage controls have an adverse impact on all  workers, but they especially disadvantage  women workers. Because women are paid only  58% of the average male salary, an across-  the-board percentage increase means an  increase in the absolute dollar difference  between the lowest paid workers (usually  women) and the highest paid workers. So-  called "stabilization" will in fact widen  the gap between men's and women's wages.  Jack Gerow of the Hospital Employees Union  has called for a united front of public  sector unions against the wage control program. Women's organizations must do the  same. Q  Will a woman justice mean  justice for women?  The recent retirement of Justice Martland  has provided the federal government with  an opportunity to appoint a woman to the  Supreme Court of Canada.  The Royal Commission on the Status of  Women recommended in 1970 that the federal and provincial governments name more  women judges to courts within their jurisdictions.  In the preamble to this recommendation  the Commission cited a 1968 comment by  former.Chief Justice of the Ontario Sup  reme Court McRuer: "There are many women  who are practising at the bar of Canada  who would make better judges than some of  the men who have been appointed." (Eleven  percent of Canadian lawyers are women,  yet only three percent of federally appointed judges are women.)  The record of the all-male Supreme Court  on women's rights is a dismal one. In  1928 the court ruled that women were not  persons (the Privy Council in England  eventually overturned that decision).  In 1974, the Supreme Court denied Irene  Murdoch a share in the ranch she has worked  on for 20 years. And Native women were told  by the court in the Lavalle case that  Section 12 of the Indian Act is not discriminatory because all native women receive the same treatment.  More recently, in the Stella Bliss case,  the court found that discrimination in  unemployment insurance benefits for pregnant women was not discrimination on the  basis of sex. The court said if the relevant section of the act "treats unemployed  women differently from other unemployed  persons, be they male or female, it is...  because they are pregnant and not because  they are women." Therefore, it is nature's  fault that pregnant women are treated  differently.  One third of the Supreme Court bench must  be trained in Quebec civil law. The federal government has consistently ensured  regional representation in the Supreme  Court. It would be a small step indeed to  have one woman on the bench.  Although there is no guarantee that a  woman appointee would change the direction  of the court, it would help to foster the  image that women can become equal in authority to men, not to mention the benefits  of bringing a woman's experience to the  bench. The fact that the interpretation of  Section 28 (the equality clause) in the  Charter of Rights will ultimately be decided by the Supreme Court is a further  reason to support the appointment of a  women to the bench.  Though hardly a radical step, this move  would be a step towards recognition of  women's equality in the judicial system. 0. 12   Kinesis    March 1982  March 1982   Kinesis   13  WOMEN WORKERS  Pat has been involved in food co-ops for  five years, and has decided to re-examine  her involvement and priorities. She talks  about burn-out. . .  On demands and expectations:  I jump right in and get involved sometimes  before I have given it a lot of thought.  For me co-ops just happened, and I did not  evaluate what I was supposed to do in terms  of time commitment, and patience and  struggle.  Because it is an alternative, we tended not  to set up the perimeters of our involvement, and expected the life blood of anyone who was willing to give it. We were  always so busy with the day-to-day  struggles of staying alive that we never  gave the necessary time to dealing with  information sharing, criticism, support or  examining responsibilities and who was  doing what.  We did support each other — sometimes.  We did give good criticism — sometimes.  We did share information — sometimes. But  our demands and expectations fell short  too many times. There were too many  issues that we did not, and to this day  have not effectively dealt with — low  wages, high turnover, resentment, sexism,  'liberal compromises', in order to keep  the businesses going.  For me,  the process of becoming involved in  food co-operatives was a rapid one- from  total ignorance of the system to total immersion in the system.  I remember reading  an article early on called "I Quit",  about  a woman's negative co-operative experience.  She felt food co-ops were stuck in a mire  of patriarchal attitudes and riddled with  sexist practices.  Not only was I shocked,  I was also somewhat disbelieving of her story.  Surely food  co-operatives were different;  surely there  was no hierarchy,   let alone a sexist hierarchy in food co-ops...  That was four years ago and today(surprisingly) I am still involved in food co-ops,  Now a little less starry-eyed, I decided  to ask other women about their experiences  in food co-ops. Below you will read transcripts of interviews taped in early 1982;  they have been edited for space considerations only.   — Jill Pollack  On personal growth:  As women, the potential is very high for  an enormous amount of growth.  Inherent  in the system is a morality and ethics  structure which seemingly adapts itself  very well to exploring new areas and ideas  in a safe and supportive environment. In  actual fact, there is more discussion  about the balance of women vs. men and  who is doing what jobs, and very little  action or progress. On an individual  level, the potential is higher, but we  are not addressing, as a whole, those  issues and situations which are holding  us back from being, in any sense of the  word, a true co-operative.  On power:  We are dealing in co-ops, just like in  the rest of the world, with people who  have had strong patriarchal conditioning.  Some of us are trying to rid ourselves of  that conditioning, and are using feminism  as a tool.  But how can we realistically  expect those with the power to throw it  off as they join a co-op? . Food co-ops  have the potential to aid us in regaining  our power and we have not been using  the possibilities in a very constructive  way. Women do have a place in food coops, we just have not fully realized it  yet.  Sue had minimal food co-operative ex-  perience, but 2V2 years ago went to work  for a worker-controlled food co-op  warehouse. She finds the atmosphere and  work conducive to growing and changing,  as well as staying sane in the city . . .  On the status of women in food co-ops:  Co-ops usually cannot afford large wages,  so if a person has to consider supporting  other people or if their goal has been to  make money to do something else, it didn't  really pay very well.  I don't know why  we have had mostly women on the collective;  a lot of the people who come down to do  work are men.  We (the collective) are constantly in the  position of giving out information to  volunteer workers, and most are okay, but  from some you pick up a feeling that they  might resent it a little bit, being shown  how to use a pallet jack. Some of the men  are somewhat patronizing, like they'll  suggest that they do the lifting and you  do the writing.  On the level of participation:  It seems pretty equal.  In the storefronts  we deal with, for example, who have got  paid co-ordinators, it seems reasonably  evenly distributed. And the ordering  collectives seem to be a smattering of  both. The thing you will find about the  literature you get, and it can be from  co-op members, is it'll be 'Dear Sir' or  'Can I talk to the manager or head man?'  But that's mostly from outside (non  co-ops). There's more equalisation for  women in food co-ops though; you are  looked at more as a person than a sex.  On working in a comfortable <  I think there are advantages for people to  work in food co-ops. You don't have to  go through all that crap.  I have never  come across any sexual harassment or  people looking down on one sex or the  other.  Co-ops are much more supportive.  On the effectiveness of co-ops:  It seems like the co-op movement is so  small. When you talk to the outside world,  most people don't have any idea of what a  co-op is at all.  I think it's useful for  the people working in co-ops to get out of  it what they can, but as far as any recognition of women in general from the co-op  movement, it just seems really minute —  the percentage of people involved in it  who have any kind of awareness at all.  But personally, I've had a much wider  choice of things I can do.  I've been in  a' position where I can do every aspect of  dealing with the food industry that's  available.  Gail began her association with food coops in 1975, mainly in the area of co-op  development. She now works in a worker-  run production co-op . . .  On decision-making:  I am involved in decision-making but  because I am aggressive, I kind of pushed  my way in, I don't see my position as  being 'token'.  On attitudes:  In my personal experience, the men in  food co-ops tend to have a higher consciousness than the average joe, and I'm  generalizing now, men who try harder. Men  are in a difficult position, in that they  may be trying, but they're still conditioned, still bound.  The women in food coops are often there because it seems to  be a nicer place to be. On the other  hand, if it's a somewhat safer place  for women than out in the world, and it  ends there, it's achieved very little.  On the effectiveness of food co-ops:  Co-ops for me are not an end, they're a  means to an end. That's why if I had to  priorize whether it was feminism or food  co-ops I work more with, or believe more  in, it's co-ops first. And that's not  just by accident. Part of it's by acci  dent because I fell into it.  I think co-ops are a place where, partly  because of who joins them, partly because  of their structure, partly because of  their operations and what people do .with  them, people can learn more about democracy, more about participation, more about  taking action, more about communities.  I  don't think co-ops should be used as a  tool for feminism or as a tool for increasing women's power.  I think co-ops should  be used as a tool for increasing people's  power.  On information-sharing:  Now it's 'getting to the more subtle stuff  — it's one thing for a man to know and  try not to be macho, it's another thing to  actually sit there and not have some sense  of power struggle when a woman is there to  take stuff away from him or try to make  decisions.  It's not often a problem for  me. As I said before, I'm pretty aggressive — I mean, I'll bully my way through  it whether I'm with other women or men,  but it's easier to do when I'm with men  because of their nature. With women,  you know, I feel like I see women start to  give me dirty looks, whereas I can interrupt more with men because they will  interrupt more, generally speaking.  WOMEN IN CO-OPS  Interviews by Jill Pollack  Maureen has been a member of a worker-   B  run co-op for over four years now. Although  she is committed to worker-run co-ops, she  questions their effectiveness in the overall  movement of social change . . .  On the ratio of men to women:  In my co-op. it's about half and half, but  in the collective I work in, there's twice  as many women as men.  It's partly coincidence in that there were a number of  female applicants available at the right  time, but there have been a certain number  of collective members who have a definite  inclination towards at least half participation by women, myself in particular.  I've had some problems in dealing with the  dynamics between men and women in the coop, particularly in my early years. When  we were less systematic there was more  tendency to fall into traditional roles.  In general, I found that fewer issues came  up between me and another woman than me  and a man. The question of sexism and  sexist practices in the collective have  come up on isolated occasions and been  addressed — the issue certainly is  recognized, but I have also done a lot of  work on an individual level'outside of  the collective in order to clear up some  issues.  On the balance of power:  Power is an issue. There are definite  differences, largely according to exper  ience and the time that people have been  there, and also in relationship to how  much energy people have put into the  collective.  There are people for whom  the collective is their major political or  life work.  People who put in more time  and learn more start to assume pivotal  positions in the collective, whereas  some people who are very confident and  progressive put a lot of energy into outside activities.  So I think there's a  tendency not to move so far forward in  terras of tasks that they take on in the  collective.  The areas that women have often taken on  tend to be in personnel, scheduling,  moving people around. We've often noted,  perhaps because it's somewhat related to  a traditional kind of nurturing role,  that women tend to slip into acquiring  those skills more easily. There is some  pattern in that direction.  On the general position of women in food  co-ops:  I think we have more decision-making power  than in other organizations, but there's  a tendency to fall into particular types  of activities. For example, there are  very few women I see involved in anything  remotely mechanical. More men become  involved in the business/financial  planning aspects than women. The. situation could be better, closer to ideal.  Mary has been involved in food co-ops,      ,  off and on, over the last ten years. Recently, she has begun to work in a member-run  storefront. She maintains that the political  aspects of co-operatives are what holds  the appeal for her. . .  On working/workers:  Most of the people who come into the coop to work are women. Traditionally, we  have been the ones to take care of the  food, and therefore it's the woman's  responsibility to belong to the food cc-op  and do that. Women may be at home more;  again, that's because that's what women  traditionally do, so they come in, and  bring their children in, and end up  working in the co-op that way also. You  know, the men are out there working in  other places, so the women get to do the  co-op work — as though the co-op work  were part of the housework.  On political alternatives:  I think single women and houses of women  would probably join the co-op, again,  because the counterculture types are  there and it's a whole lot easier.  If  you have that political ideology of not  wanting to support Safeway, the food coop is the place to do it because you're  not dealing with really gross sexism.  The subtle forms for sure are there, and  I don't think there's a whole lot that  can be done about that except consciousness raising.  It's more egalitarian in  theory, and therefore you have some say.  You can say, 'look, I have a vote the  same as you'. Again, you have to be  fairly aggressive.  If a woman wasn't,  then she wouldn't get to exercise her  On effectiveness:  If you stick to the rules, and can be  articulate about them, then you have a  better chance at being effective. The  fact of one member, one vote allows women  more room to .voice their views. Women  Have to be articulate and that's where I  find it really hard.  There are women  who won.'t or don't know the rules, or  historically, they have not been allowed  to talk.  Their self esteem is low; it's  like someone else always knows better.  This may even be really valid. They  haven't had a whole lot of experience in  this given area; therefore they feel somebody who has had that experience is much  better at talking about it or voting on it,  and that usually those are men.  On food:  Food is a real basic part of your life.  The co-op is there to provide that need  without ripping you off by giving you a  say in how the store is run. Feminist  women who are going to go in there and  articulate, are trying to use whatever  tools they have to make changes. We can  do it in a food co-op, whereas I don't  think we could do it in Safeway.  Darcy has been involved in food co-ops  for nine years, and presently works with  an all-woman organic produce worker-run  co-op. Right from her first co-op in  university she became heavily involved.  She sees her commitment as long-term.  On division of labour:  I saw right from the beginning that both  the men and women were doing the same tasks.  A lot of the women who came to Fed-Up to  do work weeks were women from the country,  who were really used to working on their  farms or their land.  They usually had kids and had to take care  of them on top of their work, but we gradually worked out a system of dealing with  the kids better as a group so that the  women didn't get the whole responsibility  for that.  My impression of co-ops is that the women  took.more responsibility at the local level  than the men did. But the women were expected to do 'their work' and the co-op  work on top of that.  I think the structure of a food (or any)  co-op gives people power on a very individual level if they want it. And even if they  don't want it, they have to take some kind  of individual power to exist in any co-op.  On being an all-women workers ' co-op:  Mostly we started to hire women because  they were the ones with the skills who  would work for those kinds of wages (low),  and work better in a collective sense.  Once we started hiring, some of the women  we hired only wanted to work with women,  and so we kept on hiring more women. That's  how we are in the position we are in now,  we have never sat down at any point and  said 'this is our firm policy'.  On money and job opportunities:  With my skills I could be getting paid more  in another area of the food industry, but  I probably could not get the job that I  want because I am a woman. Being involved  in a worker's co-op right now affords me  the opportunity to do what I want to do in  terms of the food industry, but financially  I could do better outside of a co-op.  The reason we pay ourselves low wages is  that we're in a really hard business with  produce, and I don't think we realized until we were in it for awhile how hard it  is. But we recently raised our wages and  hope to do it again in the spring. We need  to see that as a real high priority - getting our wages to a more liveable level  than they're at right now.  On feminism and the food industry:  I guess I make the same kinds of relationships between why I am working in food coops, and feminism. Co-ops have some basic  values that treat people more equally or  more fairly, and give them more power in  their lives. For the organic food industry,  they are coming from a disadvantaged position in the whole works and they're going  to adopt those kinds of values because  they're, important to them.  Women can, theoretically, have more,say in  a food co-op than at Safeway. They get involved for the food initially and then  learn about the involvement side of it.  I think that's really good because it's a  space for them to learn, in that they feel  comfortable, they are used to working with  getting food for their families or whatever; it's something they can relate to,  and see different choices from. I also  met the neatest woman I know in the alternative food movement! 14   Kinesis   March 1982  REVIEWS  Moonshot plays on harmful stereotypes of women  by Janet Beebe and Michele Wollstonecroft  As women, we work hard to attain personal  power and to believe in our visions for  the future. Thus it is really unfortunate  that we are so regularly bombarded by the  media message which says we are at best  someone's something, at worst just a something .  When I go to the theatre, I expect something different, a 'cultural experience',  even. Moonshot,, a  recent arrival at the  Waterfront Theatre, is indeed a cultural  experience, but the culture it perpetuates  is one we are all too familiar with.  The story revolves around an encounter  between Michael, a retired American astronaut, and Marguerita, a renowned television news reporter.  Action in the play is interwoven with  video images, which are shown on a series  of monitors above the stage and on the  set, giving the illusion that something  'avant-garde' is happening.  Michael, one of the first men to walk on  the moon, has lived as a recluse ever  since. Now, after twelve years of silence,  he has indicated to the press that today,  he will (via telephone) reveal his story.  Apparently, he has an important message of  peace for the world.  Female lead displays archetypal  'feminine' traits  Marguerita soon arrives on the scene, a  reporter determined to "scoop" Michael's  i story. At first Marguerita denies Michael's  s accusations that she is a reporter.  But when it is clear to her that Michael  recognizes who she is, Marguerita proceeds  to perform in a very archetypal 'feminine'  manner. She begs, pleads, does a quick  take-off-the-clothes number, tells Michael  he is 'like a little boy', and otherwise  attempts to seduce Michael into telling  her his story. (This is puzzling, given  earlier taped sequences we see of her on  video, interviewing world figures, in  which she displays self-assured confidence,  intellectual agility and (could it be?)  integrity. )  At one point in this exercise, she reappears on stage newly attired in a pair  of skintight black pants and a red "pop"  Whether intending to make a  useful statement about nuclear  proliferation, it has played  right into the patriarchal  tradition showing us that  avant-garde is not necessarily  progressive, nor is progressive  necessarily non-sexist.  top, displaying the posture obviously  designed - probably by Rustler magazine -  for these clothes. Where she got the  clothes and why she has changed is never  made clear.  However, in view of the change, it is not  surprising when soon after she pulls a  gun on Michael, announcing that she hasn't  decided if she wants to "fuck" him or  "shoot" him. Stereotypically, she eventually chooses to "fuck" him.  Marguerita a clear example of  powerlessness  At two points in the play, Marguerita has  made clandestine phone calls to a man  called Nicky. Nicky is not identified until later in the play, when we learn he  is a product of the new generation, left  without hope in the face of the escalating nuclear arms race, and consequently(?)  bent on assassination.  Gun-toting Marguerita is apparently his  cohort, and it is through her that Nicky's  drama is played out. It is a startlingly  clear example of how women act out men's  fantasies, never fully owning their own  power. It is, in the end, Nicky, bursting  in out of nowhere (sporting suit, tie and  machine gun) who effectively carries out  Michael's execution.  Marguerita, deprived of the man (Michael)  she has belatedly become attached to, turns  and shoots Nicky, whereupon the play ends.  Sex and violence are strongly connected  in the play  This play makes an appallingly strong  connection between sex and violence. At  one point in the play, when the inner  video monitors are replaying actual scenes  of assassination, the outer monitors show  seductively-clad Marguerita performing a  distracting, and in the context, very  disturbing, erotic number. (I would say  the central conflict for Marguerita in  this play is between the use of sex and  the use of violence to achieve her aim.)  Such is the message of Moonshot. This play  has confused gimmickry with profundity.  Whether intending to make a useful statement about nuclear proliferation, it has  played right into the patriarchal tradition, showing us that avant-garde is not  necessarily progressive, nor is progressive necessarily non-sexist.  Last Call presents a realistic pessimism, but no solutions  by Cole Dudley  A musical cabaret may seem a most unusual  vehicle to present a play about a nuclear  holocaust. However, this was the format of  Last Call, a post-nuclear musical cabaret,  presented at the Vancouver East Cultural  Centre January 29-February 20.  Last Call was written and performed by Ken  MacDonald and Morris Panych, and directed  by Susan Astley. It featured the last two  humans (both male) left alive after a nuclear war. {Last Call made little reference  at all to women - what there was left a  bad taste.)  In the play Bartholomew Gross, ex-con, forces Eddie Morose, blind recluse, into companionship at gun point. The two acts take  , place in the burnt out shell of a cabaret,  where Gross is determined (in fact, violently obsessed) to entertain the "masses".  Oddly, this sombre theme and strange comradeship managed to entertain the audience,  producing some amusing yet eerie songs.  Last Call,  to its credit, was witty, polished and fast-paced.  However, though it talked about nuclear  war, Last Call  presented no solutions or  new insights. The pessimistic characters  portrayed nuclear war as inevitable due to  humanity's inherent violence. There was  little to make the audience feel we could  act to prevent this most destructive of  wars. Why bother? Just sit back, enjoy  yourself and wait for the "silly accident".  The play did offer the audience a choice of  endings (one positive, the other' negative)  but given the overall tone of the play,  the pessimistic view seemed more realistic.  Perhaps the inevitability of war, as presented in the play, was meant to shake the  audience out of apathy by showing us our  own pessimism head on.  Indeed, there was some anti-nuke material  around in the lobby - if you looked. But  the play would have been more effective  had more attention been paid to this aspect.  Last Call  has its place in the political  milieu if only to bring our attention to  the ghastly topic once again. But, though  admittedly it's not easy to write a positive sketch about nuclear proliferation,  it would be great to see someone try. March 1982   Kinesis    15  CULTURE  Judith Atkinson's art describes transcendence  by Michele Wollstonecroft  Judith Atkinson is a prolific artist who  creates two-dimensional and relief pieces.  Her work includes paintings on canvas,  works on paper, collage and installation  pieces. Judith works with unusual combinations of materials such as styrofoam,  plaster, ponytail palm leaves, raku clay,  acrylic paints, coloured pencils, pastels,  graphite, pencil and collage materials.  Judith's work is abstract in style but  implicitly female in content. Her show  Heroics  ,   shown at Women in Focus in September 1981, is a tribute to our fore-  mothers and to earthbound spirituality.  The show included 21 pieces, varying in  size from 35nx6" to 5'x8'. The pieces describe specific herstorical women and discuss all noble women. Judith sees women as  heroic figures because "women have the  courage and stamina, as well as the tenderness that facilitates their transcending  the chaos of our civilization."  Courage and stamina appear in her Heroics  pieces in the shape of triangles and strong  forms. Tenderness is reflected by transparent colour fields that reveal different  colours, depth and inner space, pass  through each other and encircle the viewer.  Heroes are remembered for their achievements  Judith's Heroics  pieces describe the moment  the heroic character transcends her particular chaos. The moment of transcendence  is described by the use of darkness and  light. Arrows indicate the moment of  action. The mythmaking and recording of  the heroic act are described in hieroglyphic shapes reminiscent of ancient civilizations.  Particular to the Heroics  pieces is a  strong sense of surface. This was apparent with the works on paper, which recreate the nature of the paper.  For example, "Heroic Memory" was drawn  with pastel, turpentine, graphite and  white pencil crayon on black paper. .The  surface reflects a dulled black shine in         '    '  hampered by large equipment. She enjoys  the immediacy of the relief process.  Her relief pieces are made of styrofoam  covered with plaster and painted with  acrylic paint. While the plaster was still  wet, Judith engraved the surface with a  bamboo quill, and in some cases painted  on the wet plaster, as in a fresco painting.  Some of these pieces have a parchment material attached, or ponytail palm leaf  and bamboo. Some have additional drawing  on the collaged material. The relief pieces  have names such as "Wounded Stand", "Heroic  Archetype" and "Heroic Life".  One sculptural piece, "Internal Heroics",  which consists of six woven wood pieces  varying in length from 8" to 15", is constructed of alder sapling bark, alder sapling wood, ponytail palm leaves, bamboo  shoots and a hemp-like material.  The pieces appear as layers of wood enveloping more layers of wood. Some layers are  curved, some hollow, and they are bound  together by the alder sapling bark. The  pieces are decorated with ponytail palm  leaf and hemp-like material, both of  which add a feather-like quality. These  pieces are small, delicate and evocative.  Heroic Transcendence #3  places and a velvet-like surface in others.  Judith enjoys working sculpturally, but  like Robin Campbell, does not want to be  Internal Heroics  Judith chose earth tones (green, brown,  rust, pink, copper) for the Heroics  pieces,  tones which appear more as pigment than  paint. Copper is the theme of transcendence, and refers to the age of discovery.  The flesh tones represent human presence.  The greater part of this work did not use  frames. By thus maintaining a "crude" form  it seemed to resist the "slice" nature of  20th century art.  There is a lyricism about Heroics.  As my  eye followed the work around the walls of  the Women in Focus gallery, I was drawn  into the movement of cblourfields and led  from piece to piece by the patterns and  lines. Occasionally, a little shape here  and there indicated a sense of playfulness.  Judith's first one-woman show, Inner and  Outer Labyrinths,   was shown at the Chrysalis Gallery, University of Western Washington, Bellingham, in November 1980.  In this show, she describes a spiritual  journey from innocence through the "abyss"  and back to freedom, but a new eternal  freedom. For this reason, Judith uses the  "Peruvian colour sense" of blue, white,  crimson, black, purple, gold.  The Labyrinths  pieces repeat two basic  shapes: the spiral and the maze. For Judith, these shapes represent a time/space  metaphor. Time is represented in the  coiled shape and space is the activity  within the winding form. The spiral shape  also has implications of male/female and  order/chaos.  The Labyrinth,  luded 23 pieces:  Hidden Labyrinth  nine on canvas, thirteen on paper, and one  long piece on "builder's tar paper". Judith also built an installation piece of  sand, raku and found objects, where the  gallery itself became a part of the piece.  Judith's directness (as exemplified in  Heroics )  was apparent in the Labyrinths  pieces. The works on paper were achieved  by taking rubbings off spiral sewer covers.  In October 1980, Judith rolled out 12-foot  builder's tar paper across from the Seabus  terminal and took rubbings off the sewer  cover. She completed the piece "on location" with graphite, rubbing ink and pastels.  For the Labyrinths  installation piece,  Judith re-created the spiral sculpturally.  Having brought in sand from a beach near  Bellingham, she ritualistically drew a  spiral into the sand with a stick. Pieces  of clay shards were placed at "impasse"  areas, in clusters. In the centre she  placed a silver fishing tackle box, representing the inner chambers of the labyrinth, the dueling place between the self  and the mythological minotaur.  Eight of the canvasses reflect a passage  in Judith's own life, one of struggle and  genuine resolution of events.  The "Labyrinth Journey" series is meant  to be read from right to left. This is an  interesting way of seeing, unique in our  society where we read books, paintings and  the like from left to right. The paintings  when seen as intended progress from light  to dark, and back to light again.  Only two of "Labyrinth Journey" pieces  obviously use the spiral or maze form but  they all describe action within it, the  emotional journey through the labyrinth.  Judith Atkinson is a single parent with  two children, who also works part-time at  teaching and at tropical plant maintenance.  She has shown her work consistently since  1969, and has won several awards, including  the Fred Amess Award (1976), ?..  B._C. Cultural Scholarship Award (1978-79), an  Honours Award from Emily Carr,College of  Art (1979), and a Banff Centre Scholarship (1981). 16    Kinesis    March 1982  REVIEWS  Stevie a passionate, respectful narrative of one woman's life  by Cy-Thea Sand  Women,  whose image has continually been  stolen ...  cannot view the decline of the  traditional film form with anything much  more than sentimental regret.  Laura Mulvey, feminist film critic  The above quote is excerpted from an article entitled "Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema" (Screen,  No. 3 1975).  In it  Mulvey utilizes basic tenets of psychoanalytic thought to illustrate how woman's  image has been appropriated in traditional  film forms in order to satisfy men's desire for voyeuristic viewing pleasure.  She explains, in a pedantic, academic  voice, the discomfort so many women feel  watching Hollywood "entertainment". For  women do no see their whole selves in  most traditional films.-  Stevie,  directed and produced by Robin  Enders (1978); screenplay by Hugh White-  more, based on his play and the works of  Stevie Smith.  Stevie Smith  Aunt  Freddy  Glenda Jackson  Mona Washbourne  Alec McCower  Trevor Howard  Glenda Jackson, in her astonishing performance as poet Florence Margaret Smith  (Peggy to her aunt, Stevie to herself and  the world), demolishes this humiliating  cul de sac as it were, in one fell swoop.  With the force of a Demeter demanding the  return of her daughter, Jackson commands  us to see anew — with clearer vision —  the beauty of a real woman's rather ordinary life exaulted into Art.  Stevie  concerns the life of poet Stevie  Smith (1902-1971) who, with her aunt  (brilliantly portrayed by veteran actress  Mona Washbourne) lived out most of her  sixty-nine years in the Palmers Green suburb of London.  (The nickname is from  her childhood resemblance to famed jockey  Steven Donahue).  The film is essentially a monologue of  musings. Glenda Jackson, as Stevie tells  us of her life in a wonderfully intense,  sardonic style. The film begins with her  arrival home from a recording session at  the BBC, tired and anxious for tea.  The  centre stage throughout this domestic  drama is her living room.  Lion aunt, as Stevie affectionately calls  her deceased mother's sister, fills in  some of the details of Stevie's life as  the story unfolds. They chatter back and  forth with deep love and respect, their  dialogue interrupted occasionally by sepia  toned flashbacks. We are taken outside  their home only to meet the narrator  (Trevor Howard) who reads Stevie's poetry  and shares other intimate details of her  life.  Her poems speak to death as  transcendence  This format may sound mundane and contrived.  It isn't. Brilliant acting,  passionate script and genuine respect for  character combine to stir the imagination.  Indeed, much is left to the audience's  imagination in this film, one of its most  compelling aspects. The reason for  Stevie's suicide attempt is never directly  explained, for example. We can surmise  that the strain of writing while holding  down a secretarial job was exhausting for  her, although her boss allowed her to  write during office hours.  Stevie often speaks of her loneliness and  "the orgy of boredom to which my soul is  committed." Her isolation as a single  woman was a given, of course; "a friendship girl, not the marrying kind" she  said of herself.  Her health is somewhat precarious and she  often complains of fatigue:  "When I'm  asked at the Day of Judgment what I remember best and what has ruled my whole life,  I think I shall say, 'being tired, too  tired for words'." She speaks of her  suicide attempt only to regret the pain it  caused her aunt and office friends.  Much of Stevie Smith's poetry is concerned  with death. One reviewer has compared her  work to Sylvia Plath's, in its obsession  with death as transcendence.  In an interview with the novelist and critic Kay  Dick on November 7, 1970, Stevie said:  "I love death.  I think it's the most  exciting thing ... What pulls one up from  these terrible depressions — it's the  thought that it's in your own hands, that  you can if you want to, make an end of it,  but one never does. Some people do obviously, but I've been more fortunate. I  love life.  I adore it, but only because  I keep myself well on the edge."  Her poems speak not only of this fascination with the power to extinguish existence, but also with politics, religion  and survival.  There is quiet dignity in her vision  Glenda Jackson, who met Stevie Smith at a  poetry reading in the early sixties, says  of her: "It seems to me that her questioning of death was a questioning of life.  Every time she looked at death it was a  way of tasting how much she was alive.  I think that it is one of the brave things  about this woman.  The great danger is  seeing her as merely eccentric. She was  a highly aware, perhaps too sensitive  person, who lived under no illusions  about herself and the world."  This is the life of a poet who won the  Queen's Gold Medal for Poetry in 1969.  Its inspiration, however, lies in its  unpretentiousness.  Stevie Smith worked  as a publishing secretary, lived simply  with a cherished aunt, visited friends in  the country and wrote poetry and prose.  There are no drunken shrieks of despair -  here, no desperate reliance on selfless  women to hold a vision together.  There  is quiet dignity. While her aunt did not  actively encourage her craft, she provided a warm, nourishing environment for  her beloved niece.  The nurturing is reciprocal. Stevie nurses her aging aunt  while enjoying her retirement days of  domestic arranging, naps and writing at  the kitchen table.  It was a house of female habitation,  Two ladies fair inhabited the house,  And they were brave.  Of people who said that because she never  married she had not known love, Stevie  responds: "They are wrong.  I loved my  aunt." As Lion Aunt lies dying, Stevie  bids farewell to the major relationship  of her life.  Hers is a life reflective of what Adrienne Rich has called the lesbian continuum,  in her exploration of the nature of love  between women. Rich is interested in how  women have nurtured and supported each  other, with or without genital sexuality,  within the disempowering architecture of  patriarchy.  There is a profound human  relationship here — Aunt Lion and Stevie  — which phallocentricity has either  sentamentalized or ignored. We have  focussed so exclusively on the dynamics  of heterosexual mating and relating that  the popular imagination has been diverted  from other, more nourishing types of  relationships for women.  Stevie  is the life of an Independent,  creative woman, who, although deeply  saddened by her aunt's death, enjoyed her  last years in solitude:  "I've got used  to living alone, oh yes, I quite like it.  It's wonderfully dreamy to be in a house  all by yourself, you can wander around  and sleep in different rooms every night  if you want to.  It's extraordinary how  unaware one is of time passing ... suddenly you realize how short it all is,,  and how at the end comes death with the  pleasure of certainty."  With this exceptional film, the spliced,  frames of women's traditional silence  and invisibility are destroyed.  The myth  of woman as artist, as virgin, as woman-  unto-herself is celebrated with intensity  and beauty. Don't miss it.  Note:   I was lucky to catch Stevie  at the  Pacific Cinematheque where it played last  month. The management of the Ridge  Theatre in Vancouver has said they will  show the movie again if they receive  requests for it. Please call the theatre  at 738-6311. 0.  PUBLICATIONS  Prose: Novel on Yellow Paper,   1936;  Over the Frontier,   1938; The Holiday,  1949.  Poetry & Drawings: A Good Time Was  Had By All,   1937; Tender Only to One,  1938; Mother What is Man?,   194-2;  Harold's Leap,   1950; Not Waving But  Drowning,   1957; Some Are More Human  Than Others,   1956; Selected Poems,  1962; The Frog Prince and Other  Poems,   1966; The Best Beast,   1969. REVIEWS  March 1982   Kinesis    17  Concert will benefit environmental struggles  by Jill Bend  Life came from water. Life is not possible  without water.  Less than 3%  of the Earth's water supply is  fresh water. For most of our history, fresh  water has been a renewable resource. This  is no longer true.  Man and Business have created new forms of  pollutants that affect water in ways never  before experienced by human society. Acid  rain, radioactive poisons, pesticides and  toxic chemical wastes contaminate every  level of the water cycle.  Corporate expansion is dependent on control  and domination of water. People are now  competing with industries for the use of  diminishing supplies of consumable water.  The nuclear industry cannot exist without  using tremendous amounts of water. The  chemical industry uses rivers and lakes for  its dumping grounds. The practices of the  agriculture, timber and mining industries  endanger water supplies everywhere. Water  is being sacrificed for profit.  We are concerned about life. We are seeking  to raise consciousness about water to protect this necessary element of life for  future generations. Water for Life is not  a political thought, nor is it an organization. Water for Life is a matter of survival .  Bonnie Raitt has made a commitment to the  Native Indian people to help, through her  music, raise consciousness and funds  around the Water for Life issue. The concerts also work to bring together Native  Indian people in their struggle to protect  the Earth, and the white environmentalists  who have up to now primarily only seen the  environmental injustices.  "Water for Life" has grown directly out of  the struggles of the Indigenous communities  L to R: Ferron, Red Cedar, and Bonnie Raitt.  and it is an honour that people here are  now able to unify with them around this  work.  This Vancouver benefit is the first Water  for Life concert in Canada, and follows  the success of a series of Water for Life  concerts in communities throughout the U.S.  with some of the musicians from MUSE (Musicians United for Sane Energy). The money  raised goes specifically to projects that  will help save the water; 65% to Native  Indian groups, and 35% to white environmental groups.  About the musicians, most of us will probably remember Bonnie Raitt for her consistently solid style of blues guitar (and  slide guitar), as well as her gutsy vocals,  that has stayed with the times through the  folk era, the rock era and the new wave  era. There is also a new sound that she  brings with her these days...of thoughtful  consideration of the world we live in and  the possible future we face.  And of course, Ferron is a hallmark of the  Vancouver community and it is always a  treat to hear her exquisitely beautiful  poet's music.  Red Cedar, a five-person Native Soul music  group, sings the traditional music and  songs of struggle of their people. (Don't  miss them! Be there early.)  During,the evening, there will be some  speakers. John Trudell, of the Society of  the People Struggling to be Free, will  speak about planetary survival and the  saeredness of the Water.  We need your support. We need each other.  For details, see the Bulletin Board in  this issue.  Letters from China a rare addition to existing literature  by Mary Woo Sims and Louise May  Letters from China  by Maureen Hynes is  about her experiences in China during her  months there as a teacher of English as a  Second Language at Sichuan University in  Chengdu.  Letters From China  by Maureen Hynes  The Women's Press, Toronto,  The book is extremely easy to read. Her  format, of letters to friends and journal  entries, we found to be a personal and  refreshing style of writing. Hynes is  extremely frank and open about her "expectations and illusions" of life under  Communist rule. As a feminist politically  left of centre, Hynes is able to give  readers a different perspective of China  than what has been available to the public  so far.  Letters from China  will be of particular  interest to anyone who has journeyed to  China, inspired by a desire to study and  teach about the extraordinary social,  political and economic changes which are  taking place there. Those who arrive,  not as tourists, but as exchange students  or E.S.L. teachers, experience tougher  living and working conditions in addition  to a greater assault on their preconceived  notions of life in China.  As in Maureen's case, both of us (having  travelled to China at different times)  were surprised by the survival of an elaborate social hierarchy in China. While  the categories have changed since the  revolution, nevertheless there seems to be  a concern for defining one's own and  other's place on the social scale. This  process is manifested in the obvious  privileges enjoyed by government officials,  the ranking of 'foreign guests' (diplomat,  tourist, teacher, student), and indeed,  the treatment of women.  While it is impossible to generalize about  the lives of women in China, whether past  or present, nevertheless it is safe to  say that while Chinese women hold up a  good deal more than half of the sky, they  are not considered to be men's social,  political or intellectual equals.  If there were to be one criticism of Hynes'  book, it would be that she does not deal  more in detail with the conditions of  Chinese women today.  In the process of  various letters and journal entries, we  do learn that women definitely participate  to a greater degree in social production,  and it is encouraging to see women at work  in a variety of non-traditional occupations. However, the persistence of sexist  attitudes, in spite of these changes, has  prevented women from achieving complete  equality with men.  It is particularly frustrating, as a visiting teacher or student in China, to en  counter these outdated notions of female  inferiority among 'intellectuals' in their  30's and 4-0's. Given the level of consciousness among these people and their  familiarity with a varity of theories  which undermine the foundations of sexism,  it is annoying yet instructive to note  that they persist in these traditional  attitudes.  Letters from China  is a rare addition to  the- recent plethora of publications on  China. A good many of these are based on  the authors' two-week whirlwind tour of  the country, yet proceed to comment on  every facet of Chinese society. Hynes'  generalizations about conditions in China  are few and presented with caution. Her  book, therefore, is an unpretentious but  valuable record of the frustrating and  rewarding experiences of a young Canadian  teacher in China.  N.B.  In January, Maureen Hynes was in  Vancouver to give a slide presentation  on her trip to China.  It was basically  a repetition of her book, except for the  wonderful colour photographs.  Questions  from the floor were plentiful and fielded  well by Hynes. I was able to chat briefly  with Maureen and found her to be as personable as I had expected, by virtue of  her style of writing.  It was an added  pleasure for me to be able to trade  stories about experiences in China, as I  spent a month in Shanghair in August of  1981.- M.W.S. 18   Kinesis   March 1982  REVIEWS  Joyce Bichler took Eli Lilly & Co to court — and won  by Julie Wheelwright  (reprint courtesy The Ubyssey)  At 18, Joyce Bichler discovered that she  had advanced cervical cancer. She immediately underwent surgery which left her  with one ovary and a quarter of her  vagina.  DES Daughter  by Joyce Bichler  Avon Books, 192 pages, $2.25  In 1953 American doctors discovered that  Diethylstilbestrol, synthetic estrogen  which was being hailed as a wonder drug  for pregnant women, was totally ineffective in preventing miscarriage, and was  linked with cancer in the user's children.  That same year, Joyce Bichler's mother  took DES, on advice from her family  doctor, to prevent a possible miscarriage.  In 1971 the American Food and Drug Administration finally banned DES for use during pregnancy but only after millions of  women had taken the drug and startling  numbers of their children developed cancer  Bichler was the first DES daughter to take  her case to court and win. Her autobiography reveals the nightmare of her surgery, and her fierce determination that  the system which allowed Eli Lilly to  market a known, harmful product should be  exposed.  Bichler's story exposes a bungling  medical system  When Bichler was a first year student at  a New York university, she began to have  extended menstrual periods. Slowly she  began to realize that there was something'  very wrong with her reproductive system.  When she finally saw a gynecologist, the  doctor accused her of having a botched  abortion.  "Dr. Collier was chatting to me as he inserted the speculum.  I didn't really  hear what he was saying. All I could  hear was my heart beating.  There was a  silence as the doctor peered between my  legs.  'My God,' he suddenly shouted.  'You look like chopped meat in there!'  "Suddenly Dr. Collier was standing over  my head.  'Where on earth did you have  the abortion?' he demanded angrily.  'Come on now, it's obvious you've had an  abortion. And whoever did it made a  Bichler's story also exposes the  and inhumane medical system which exists  for many Americans. When Bichler first  suspected a problem and phoned for a doctor's appointment, she waited for six  weeks.  When her appointment finally arrived, she  waited hours to actually see the doctor.  One doctor actually took a Pap smear, and  told Bichler the test was negative. She  was given suppositories for a vaginal  infection, and when she returned, bleeding, a few days later, she was given a  lecture on birth control.  Bichler was lucky; her father had a  medical plan that could cover her medical expenses. She had a family that could  support her emotionally during her yearlong recovery.  But her struggle did not stop there. At  a routine visit to her gynecologist for  a check-up, Bichler's doctor mentioned a  Herbst registry that listed the women  who have suffered cervical carcinoma and  whose mothers had taken DES during pregnancy.  Bichler was number 70.  Two years later when "a strong sense of  injustice and anger" surface in her mind,  Bichler went to an attorney with her case  Not until seven years later did it come  to trial.  It was a two-part trial; the first to establish that Eli Lilly and Company was  the manufacturer of the drug Bichler's  mother had taken.  If the first trial  established that Lilly was the manufacturer, they would become the defendant.  If the first trial was lost, the second  would proceed on a joint product liability  theory to contend that even though it  could not be proven who did manufacture  the drug, the pharmaceutical companies  were all equally responsible, since they  had acted together to have the drug  certified.  "Here I was, little Joyce Bichler, fighting Eli Lilly and Company, one of the  major manufacturing drug companies in the  world. My case was of great importance  to all DES daughters around the country.  I, at least, was getting the opportunity  to go to court, " writes Bichler of the  time before her trial.  In many states, other DES daughters had  been prevented from taking their cases  to court by the statute of limitations  and the problem of identification.  (None  af the victims developed symptoms until  12 years after their mothers had taken  DES.)  Corporate profits encourage corruption  Bichler's documentation of her trial reveals how far a company like Lilly will  go to protect its name and its coffers.  The pharmacy where Mrs. Bichler clearly  remembered buying DES had lost its records  in a fire. Lilly also claimed it had  "accidentally" lost all its sales records  for the same period.  And Mr. Willing, the pharmacist, who  swore to Joyce's mother she had been  given Lilly's DES during her pregnancy,  lied before the jury and denied even  knowing Mrs. Bichler.  The Bichler's lost that first trial, but  with determination, braved another.  It was during the second trial that further evidence of the drug company's  corruption was revealed.  In her simple,  straight-forward style, Bichler describes  her growing horror at what the public  had been exposed to because of corporate  profits.  Dr. Alan Goldman, a renowned teratologist,  gave evidence that the drug companies had  never done animal testing of the drug  before it was approved.  In fact, animal  studies showing the link between DES and  cancer were conducted in the 1940's and  ignored, even although some medical  journals warned of the dangers of DES in  editorials.  Goldman also said that DES had never been  tested on pregnant animals before it was  given to pregnant women and he was astonished, because if tests had been done,  as they were years later, they would  have revealed cancer of the>cervix and  vagina in the offspring of mice.  It was  also found that the drug companies were  aware of DES's lack of efficacy in the  late 1940's.  "As Dr. Goldman explained all this, I  found myself clenching my fists with rage.  I had known that the drug companies had  done incompetent research, but I hadn't  realized that they had been quite as  irresponsible as this respected doctor  was saying. They hadn't bothered to do  a simple and necessary test that would  have prevented all the pain and suffering •  that I and others had had to endure.  They had just used pregnant women as the  guinea pigs, in completely unreliable  tests," writes Bichler.  In 1953, even more damaging evidence surfaced.  The Deickman study found that  DES did not prevent miscarriage and that  the risks involved in taking the drug were  high.  FDA, drug industry ties too close for  comfort  Bichler puts her feelings at this point  in- the trial simply: "I had gotten cancer  because the only thing the drug companies  had cared about was profits."  Even the top researcher for Lilly during  the 1940's admitted that a link with  cancer had been found but that it was not  "significant" and the company continued  to work towards the Food and Drug Administration approval.  And how did the FDA approve a drug which  had no known usefulness?  Theodore Klumpp, FDA director when DES  was approved, was instrumental in getting  it on the market. He admitted no independent research was done by the FDA. The  agency based its decision on work done  by the drug companies themselves. The  company, for its part, only admitted  research it felt was important.  "I had always viewed the FDA as an independent agency that monitored, among other  things, the pharmaceutical industry. Was  I ever wrong! The ties between that industry and the FDA are almost as close as  those between the drug companies themselves," said Bichler.  While Klumpp worked for the FDA he made  $6,000 a year. After DES was approved,  Continued on page 19 March 1982   Kinesis    19  TECHNOLOGY  Travels with Telidon: Part Two  by Emma Flyer  Telidon - an information system that uses  visual images on a video display terminal  and has the capacity to communicate virtually anything, anywhere - is, according  to the federal government, the leading  edge of an information explosion that will  revolutionize the western world.  Not only will it change the way we communicate, it will change the way we think,  socialize and work.  In view of this, the federal government,  under the auspices of the Department of  Communications (DOC), developer and soon-  to-be-marketer of Telidon, considers it  important that the Canadian public have an  opportunity to get their thoughts and feelings about this imminent revolution on  record.  The government has established a number of  committees to begin a dialogue with the  public on the social impact of Telidon and  other videotex systems. One of these committees, the Canadian Videotex Consultative Committee's Subcommittee on the Effects  of Videotex on Individuals and Society .  (CVCC-EVIS), held a public forum in Vancouver on February 18.  While it may seem reassuring that the government is undertaking yet another attempt  at participatory democracy before launching  us into the 'brave new world', a few facts  about Telidon should be considered.  Government doing a high-pressure sales  pitch  Telidon has now been in development for  over four years. It has demonstrated its'  capabilities and (more important to the  technocrats) its' flexibility in numerous  field tests.  As with the CANDU reactors, Canada is putting enormous amounts of money and diplomatic muscle into convincing the world  that Telidon is the face of the future.  (A recent item in the Globe & Mail revealed  that Governor-General Shreyer was pressured  into serving as a Telidon promoter during  Ronald Reagan's recent visit to Canada.)  DES DAUGHTER continued from page 18   Klumpp became the president of Winthrop  Laboratories (one of the drug companies  filing for DES approval), with a salary  of $30,000 a year.  "I learned later that  almost every FDA commissioner during that  time went from their FDA position to  head one of the major pharmaceutical  companies."  But the most forceful and moving testimony of the trial comes from Bichler herself.  Throughout the book, she describes  how her anger grew as the injustice of her  situation and that of others was clarified through the testimony of corporate  employees and independent researchers.  "I was speaking to Beatie (the defending  lawyer) and all the people who represented Eli Lilly and Company. I was speaking to the people who where responsible  for my cancer.  "I was conscious of forcing my words  through quivering lips as seven years of  harbored rage emerged.  I looked across  at all those lawyers working for Lilly,  defending a company that had caused so  much pain and suffering. The anger at  that precise point was so intense it  scared me.  'It never should have happened, it never should have heppened to me  or anyone else.  It didn't have to  happen.  It never should have happened.'"  My cheeks were burning as hot tears of  Telidon's further development, in the eyes  of the federal government, is assured.  CVCC-EVIS did little to allay fears that  its function is purely cosmetic when it  appeared in Vancouver.  The 11-member committee included the father  of Telidon, John Madden (formerly of DOC  and now in private business), two other DOC  bureaucrats, an employee of Bell Canada  (Bell, Canada's largest tele-communications  corporation, is very enthusiastic about  Telidon), and an economist from the Science  Council of Canada, another federal body.  Jeanne Taylor  When asked why Bell Canada and DOC were  represented on CVCC-EVIS, the committee  assured the audience that these people were  in no way representing their respective  organizations;' they were simply interested  volunteers. This explanation was greeted  with general laughter..  The audience at this event was interesting  in itself: largely white, middle-class  professionals, and far more men than women.  Traditionally, not people who look with  suspicion or cynicism on duly constituted  government committees. By the end of the  evening, however, the committee had sue-   j!  ceeded in alienating almost the entire au-  i  dience with its defensiveness and evasion. |  Audience questions hazards, loss of jobs  Audience questions revealed some of the    i  fears that Telidon and the new technology  raise for people everywhere.  When asked to comment on the health hazards associated with Telidon, the committee;.  assured us that Health & Welfare Canada  had established that the level of radiation I  emitted by VDTs was safe. But when pressed 8|  further, they admitted that no-one really  knew the long-term effects of low-level   j|.  radiation.  One of the so-called privileges Telidon  will offer us is the opportunity to do paid  work at home. When it was pointed out that ';  this would serve to force women workers  back into the home, the committee reasoned w  that this could be a positive development  - we could become "masters of our work".  Does this mean we'll write our own pay-  cheques?  'Big Brother' here, in the form of  Telidon  Another major concern was our right to privacy. Would Telidon become 'Big Brother'?  One committee member commented that there  really wasn't any need for worry, since  technology to invade our private lives  already exists although, thankfully, it  isn't being used.  After the forum, I phoned the Department  of Communications for more information on  this story. I was put on hold twice and the  line intermittently clicked and clattered.  I wondered idly whether they were trying  to find me, and realized that with Telidon  in my living room, they wouldn't even have  to try.  Cable 10 will broadcast the public forum  on March 16 at 7:00pm.  As jurors deliberated for a week, Lilly  made an offer of $100,000 to Bichler.  She declined and days later the jury  unanimously awarded her $500,000 in  DES . . . then and now  bitterness poured down my face. And I  broke down completely as I confessed  that the reason I worked with the elderly  was that I didn't think I would ever get  to be old myself."  From DES daughter to DES survivor  Bichler describes herself as a survivor.  But even though she is eight years post-  •>.  surgery and in good health, she describes  the fear that is with her constantly.  "For years, every time I had an ache or   ;  pain, deep down inside a voice would  come up and ask if this was a recurrence  of cancer somehwere in my body. Another  voice would answer and say No, don't be  ridiculous. But the fear haunted me  constantly."  Bichler is only one of thousands, perhaps i-  millions, who are victims of DES. The j  drug was not banned until 1971 but it is i-  still marketed under different names.  (An appendix to the book lists 82. ) \  One can only feel gratitude towards Joyce  Bichler for having the courage to write  about her experience. No one should have  to suffer what she did and this book,  which recounts her story and its victory,  is certainly a step towards solving the  problem. 20   Kinesis   March 1982  ORGANIZING  Wards, rate increases are women's issues too  Ward boundaries will assure  integrity of 'natural'  communities  Introduction:   Organizations speaking to  the meeting on proposed ward boundaries all  agreed it is imperative to maintain the  integrity of Vancouver's 'natural communities' when determining ward boundaries,  rather than dividing the city arbitrarily  to achieve 'representation by population'.  As usual, VSW's brief was the only one to  speak to the implications of a ward system  for women.  Even with general agreement on ward boundaries, instituting a ward system will involve a change to the City Charter, and  that requires approval by the provincial  government. That could entail problems.  Hearings on proposed ward boundaries continue. The last public meeting is on March  8, 7:30pm, at Vancouver Technical School  Auditorium, 2600 E. Broadway. Those wishing  to present a brief should register in  writing to the City Clerk, 453 W. 12 Ave.,  Vancouver V5Y 1V4.  This is VSW's proposal for ward  boundaries, generally concurred  with by other community groups.  The following briefs by Vancouver  Status of Women staffer Susan Hoeppnei  may be of interest to Kinesis readers,  The first was presented to the City  of Vancouver during a public meeting  held February 8 to discuss proposed  ward boundaries for Vancouver.  The second was made February 10 to a  Canadian Radio & Television Commission hearing into B.C.   Tel's recent  application for yet another rate  increase.  A short introduction accompanies each brief.  dates who must remain accountable and  accessible to their community in order to  attain re-election. Consequently, issues  such as re-development, daycare, parks and  schools can be dealt with .in the interests  of local residents.  All these criteria seriously affect the  level of participation of women in civic  politics. Working women in general earn  much less money than men, and often return  home to young children and housework. In  When Vancouver Status of Women first started to present our views on the concept of  a ward system for Vancouver in 1976, we  were firmly convinced this system of civic  elections would provide a form of accountability and accessibility not present in  the at-large system of election. Today,  we remain convinced that this is true.  Some problems of the at-large system are  that participation in the electoral process is restricted to those candidates  who have the resources to run a campaign,  the transportation to move freely throughout the city, and the time to acquire the  skills required to run for office.  Wards present a much different picture.  In a situation where election takes place  in a specific neighbourhood, those candidates who have served and understand their  community are already visible. Therefore,  the inequality between those who have access to campaign funds, and those who don't  becomes much more limited.  This system allows people to elect candi-  order to effect the participation of these  women, a community-oriented form of civic  politics is imperative.  Likewise for women who work in the home.  Ties to children and domestic activities  tend' to keep us community-bound. Thus  political participation is dependent upon  what is available in our own community. It  is also crucial that those who represent  us are geographically aecessible.  With these criteria in mind, we move to  the work book for the selection of ward  boundaries, issues by the City of Vancouver. After studying the options presented  in this book, we find that no option accurately reflects the points we have discussed. Therefore, we have included a proposal which accepts City Staff Option F  with 10 wards, re-arranging this base to  make 12 wards. We realize this is not the  only way to re-arrange City Staff Option F  but would endorse a variation of this map  which allowed for 12 wards.  Vancouver Status of Women is concerned  that other criteria be Viewed with as much  concern as ward boundaries. First, in  order to represent a community effectively  it will be necessary to elect two city  councillors for each ward. Toronto has  this system, as well as paid full-time  assistants.  Second, it is extremely important that any  elected ward councillor be a resident of  that ward. If the residential rule is not  upheld, a ward system runs the risk of  becoming an at-large system with neighbourhood offices.  We would add that most cities across the  country have had wards for a number of  years, so the faster the facilitation of  a ward system in Vancouver, the better.  Based on the civic plebiscite held a few  years ago, it is clear that the voters  of Vancouver want a full ward system based  on existing neighbourhoods. We sincerely  hope this will become a reality in the  near future.  Affordability, not profit,  should be main consideration  in determining telephone rates  Introduction:  The Vancouver hearing of the  Canadian Radio & Television Commission,  one of several to be held across B.C. in  coming weeks, attracted close to 200 people  Many organizations, together representing  probably a majority of Vancouver citizens,  presented briefs addressing B.C. Tel's  latest application for a rate increase.  Significantly, no one spoke in favour of  telephone rate increases.  Many groups also favoured nationalizing  B.C. Tel, stating that where it is a question of profit versus affordability of an  essential utility, affordability must take  priority. Those not in favour of nationalization argued only that rates should not  go up because B.C. Tel's service was poor.  In a time when economic restraints are the  order of the day, mere day-to-day survival  is becoming increasingly difficult for most  women in B.C. 22,817 single parent women on  welfare received a $55 monthly cutback in  the recent provincial employability redefinitions. This represents more than 10% of  an already meagre income.  65% of working women in B.C. are not unionized, and take home salaries which reflect  incomes close to the poverty line. 66% of  women over 65 are poor. Although 94 out of  every 100 women marry, only 26 can expect  to live with their husbands until death.  The majority of elderly women barely survive on a fixed income of just over $400  per month.  Large numbers of working women work in the  clerical sector, or in social services.  The recent Dodge Report indicates that the  majority of these jobs will no longer exist  at the end of the 1980s. In addition to  this, education cuts and cuts in retraining  programs make the likelihood of improvement  very slim.  The majority of women are experiencing the  shrinking of already low incomes at the  same time as the cost of living is increasing at an alarming rate. More and more  working women are paying 50% of their income for housing. Women on welfare and  fixed incomes are paying as much as 75% of  their income for housing.  Food such as meat, formerly a daily staple  for most families, is fast becoming a luxury. Re-development in Vancouver has forced  Continued on page 21 ORGANIZING  March 1982    Kinesis    21  RATE INCREASES continued from page 20  many low-income families who cannot afford  cars to suburban areas where public transportation is inadequate. In Kitsilano alone  1500 low-income housing units were lost in  one year through re-development.  In a period of increased economic hardship  for women, B.C. Telephone comes forward  with a request for up to 37% increases in  rates - the highest of any telephone company in Canada. Needless to say, Vancouver  Status of Women is opposed to these increases.  On September 28, 1981, the CRTC granted  B.C. Tel interim increases which were effective as of January 1, 1982. These increases were granted without public hear  ings, despite CRTC rules which require full  public hearings before any increase. VSW  demands that these interim increases be  rolled back because they did not comply  with the CRTC's own rules.  VSW is also opposed to the present request  for additional increases. Requested increases for private residential lines will  have the effect of forcing low-income  people to attempt to manage without a  phone. For the sick and the handicapped,  the result will be to cut off connection  to medical services.  Telephone a necessity, not a luxury for  many  For working mothers, the result will be the  removal of communication with their children, causing stress that may force many  women out of the workplace. For those who  manage at present without a phone, the  doubling of pay phone rates will be financially devastating. For these and many  others, telephones are a necessity and not  a luxury.  In a recent B.C.   Tel Dialogue,   enclosed  with the last billing, the B.C. Telephone  Company included an article from the Vancouver Sun (by Mike Grenby), stating that  telephone service is still an excellent buy.  This article includes a survey which states  that the average weekly income in 1981 was  $420.  This is a common example of the invisibility of women's economic reality. In addition to the fact that women in general make  58% of the male wage, these surveys never  reflect the reality of those forced to live  on fixed incomes.  It is clear that a necessity such as telephones must be provided outside the profit  motive. Hence, public ownership of B.C.  Telephone is.imperative. The role that CRTC  plays as mediator between the public and  B.C. Telephone is not adequate.1 We agree  with the Telecommunication Workers Union  (TWU) that B.C. Tel should be nationalized  and run as a Crown Corporation.  Last call for conference  on immigrant women  DIALOGUE FOR ACTION, a conference sponsored  by the B.C. Task Force on Immigrant Women,  will be held March 19-20 at Hycroft, 1489  McRae, Vancouver.  Friday's program will include a panel by  immigrant women, a series of three workshops on immigration, education, health and  labour issues, and a fundraising dinner.  Saturday, a workshop and a panel will be  given on the subject of lobbying. Panelists  will include Rosemary Brown, Max Beck,  Astrid Davidson and Judith Bezeredi.  To pre-register for the conference, write  Sat Devi, 622 Seymour, Vancouver V5B 3K4.  Registration is $15 (includes lunches). The  Friday evening dinner is $12. Subsidies  may be available to those from outside the  Lower Mainland. For childcare, call Sharon  Wilms, 688-2531- For more information,  call Jenny Pride, 688-4157.  hWrlttrtrt^^  THE POWER POLITICS OF MOTHERHOOD:  A Feminist Critique of Theory & Practice  by Helen Levine & Alma Estable  School of Social Work, Carleton University  Is motherhood more than an individual  experience? Is it a social and political  institution? "The Power Politics of  Motherhood" develops a feminist analysis  of these and other relevant issues in  a refreshingly provocative manner.  Available from Centre for Social Welfare  Studies, Carleton University, School of  Social Work, Ottawa, Ontario K1S 5B6.  Please add 50jz? for postage.  8lpp. $2.50  Pension inequalities start early for women  The pension facts below were compiled by  Hilarie McMurray and Jillian Ridington.   The  facts show clearly the urgent need for pension reform to redress current inequities.  333,000 single, widowed or divorced Canadian women over 60 years of age live in  poverty - three times the number of poor,  elderly men.  Of every 100 Canadian teen-aged women, only  26 will live with a husband until they die.  older women experience poverty more than  any other group in this country. In 1978,  48% of unattached Canadian women over the  age of 65 had incomes of less than $4000.  More than half of B.C. women of working age  are in the paid labour force. Yet women  make, on average, only 58% of the incomes  made by men. The pensions that will be received by B.C.'s 554,000 employed women  will reflect their low earnings.  The 48% of B.C. women who work in their  homes get no Canada Pension Plan in their  own right.  Women can claim a portion of their husband's  Canada Pension Plan credits in the event of  divorce. This fact is little known, especially among poor and immigrant women. Applications for pension-credit splitting  are rare, despite the fact that 59,000  Canadian women were divorced in 1979.  Only 9% of female retirees receive any income from private pensions. Those few widows  who do get a pension from their husband's  employer usually collect only half the  amount their husband would have received.  In 1977, the federal government approved a  drop-out amendment to the Canada Pension  Plan (which would recognize the value of  childrearing). The approval of two-thirds  In 20 years, the number of Canadian women  over the age of 65 will number 2 million.  How many of them will be poor? Will you be  one of them?  If you are interested in helping prepare  a brief to the federal government on the  issue of women and pensions, contact  Hilarie McMurray at Vancouver Status of  Women, 873-1427. Act now to ensure that  the status of older women is improved.  of the provinces, having two-thirds of Canada's population, is required. B.C. and  Ontario are still opposing this important  benefit to women. Ontario by itself, in  fact, holds veto power on this amendment,  by virtue of its large population.  The Old Age Security Pension, given to all  who reach the age of 65 and meet residency  requirements, amounts to only $228 per  month. The maximum amount possible, when  combined with the Guaranteed Income Supplement and the B.C. Guaranteed Available  Income for Need, is $456 per month for a  single person - 14% below the poverty line.  Conference will focus on  education  Pensions - Focus on Women,   scheduled for  March 6 at Hycroft, is an educational conference sponsored by a coalition of 22  Vancouver area women's groups.  Its aim is to educate Lower Mainland and  Vancouver Island women's organizations on  the complex issue of pensions, in anticipation of a federal government "discussion  paper" on pension reform scheduled for  release this spring.  Speakers at the conference will present  both problems and possible solutions from  public, private and union perspectives.  Among the six panelists will be Louise  Dulude, author of Pension Reform with Women  in Mind  (Canadian Advisory Council on the  Status of Women, March 1981) and Monica  Townson, economic consultant.  Conference space is limited. Groups which  have not registered should immediately  contact: Pensions - Focus on Women, c/o  Hycroft, 1489 McRae Avenue, Vancouver, B.C,  V6H 1V1. 22   Kinesis   March 1982  MOVEMENT MATTERS  Research group wants accounts  of non-traditional job experience  A Douglas College group researching  women in non-traditional jobs is developing a curriculum package designed  to supplement basic adult education and  career planning programs.  Its focus is  the effect of technology on the female  labour force and women's work in non-  traditional trades.  Wanted are written accounts and/or poems  of individual women's experience working  in a "non-traditional" job (particularly  jobs in rural B.C. in mining, forestry,  or fishing).  The group is interested in how you found  your job, what you like about it, problems  you have encountered, etc.  If your article  is used in the curriculum package, you  will receive a $50 honorarium.  The article should be two typewritten  pages — deadline is April 15, 1982. Send  submissions to:  Rita Chudnovsky,  Women in non-traditional Jobs  Douglas College, Box 2503  New Westminster, V3L 5B2. Q  Victoria Status Of Women  needs financial help  Victoria Status of Women is at a turning-  point. Like so many other feminist organizations, we have — since our inception  in 1971 — been operating out of individual homes, with no proper telephone  listing or central location for files and  resources. We rely completely on volunteer labour.  We need  an office — a centralized location where files, etc. can be stored —  and a proper telephone listing. And we  would like to hire a co-ordinator to staff  it.  We visualize this functioning not only as  an office, enabling us to streamline our  operation; but also as a drop-in women's  resource centre.  It would enable us to offer more effective  support and information to women pursuing  discrimination-related grievances, and it  would provide a place for women to make  social contact with each other. At present, no such thing exists in Victoria.  For the above reasons, we are now undertaking an extensive fund-raising campaign.  We plan to solicit funds from several  sources, including the women's community,  and we need your help!  If you, or your  CYNTHIA  253-2212  876-9608 (messages)  organization, can be of any  financial  assistance at all, we'd be very grateful.  We realize, of course, that hard cash is  the one  thing we're all short of.  If your  financial resources do not permit a donation to SWAG, perhaps you could share with  us some of your own fund-raising ideas and  expertise.  For further information, or to share resources, call or write Pam Blackstone,  Victoria Status of Women, 9026 W. Saanich  Rd., RR#2, Sidney, B.C. V8L 3S1 (phone  656-7776). Send donations to SWAG, Box  6296, Stn. C, Victoria, B.C. V8P 5L5.  RFR's next issue will focus on  female elders  The July 1982 issue of Resources for Feminist Research/Documnetation sur la Recherche Feministe  will focus on aging.  Despite the fact that elders represent an  increasing proportion of modern populations and that the world of elders is typically a world of women, little attention  has been paid to women's issues in gerontological research.  The overall theme of the issue will be  transititions, changes and continuities in  female elders' lives.  In addition to a discussion forum on this  theme, there will be an annotated bibliography, book and film reviews, course  descriptions, and a section on research in  progress, as well as announcements of general interest. We welcome submissions in  any of these categories.  The deadline for receipt of copy is April  15, 1982.  If you plan to submit material,  contact Emily Nett, c/o Dept. of Sociology  Ontario Institute for Studies in Education  252 Bloor St. W., Toronto M5S 1V6.  Open letter on racism and the  Klan  This was addressed to the organizers of the  workshop mentioned in the letter.   We publish it here to encourage public discussion  of the issue of racism.  As ,a participant in the January 17, 1982  workshop on racism sponsored by the Newspaper Guild and the Centre for Investigative Journalism, I was shocked to learn  later that a member of the Ku Xlux Klan  was also one of the participants. Ann  Farmer attended the meeting, took copious  notes on what everyone said, and carefully  scrutinized the other participants - a  very successful intelligence gathering  for this terrorist organization.  What is especially appalling, however, is  that several organizers and/or panelists  were aware of the presence of the Klan person, and never revealed that fact to the  rest of us.  The decision not to announce the presence  of the Klan to the group attending was, in  my'opinion, elitist and undemocratic.  People who had come to participate in what  they thought was to be a free and open discussion among equals were deprived of the  opportunity to express their views on  whether or not Klan members should be allowed to stay.  A few people (and it is significant that  they were all white) decided that they  know what was best for the majority and  for the non-whites present. The result of  this isolated decision was to deprive the  60 or so people there of the right to  choose whom to associate with.  Nobody should make such a vital decision  for anyone. I believe that we should have  been informed; then we could have decided  as a group whether to permit the Klan to  monitor our deliberations. If there was no  clear consensus, and the decision was to  permit the Klan to stay in the meeting,  :•  then individuals who were loathe to have •  their security compromised could have cho-.  sen to leave the meeting.  Furthermore, if the group had decided that  the Klan member could stay, we are certain  that those who participated vocally would  have perceived the context differently and  consequently would have spoken accordingly.  I was told that the organizers did not want  to "cause a ruckus". Since when is exposing  racism causing a ruckus? The organizers  decided that exposing a racist would result in open conflict and they judged this  to be undesirable.  This decision was made from a privileged  position. Non-white people have to meet the  conflict head on when they are attacked by  the Klan. Is the smooth running of a meeting more important than the security of  the participants?  In a journalists' workshop, the commitment  should have been the free flow of information. In a meeting of equals (or are we  all equals?), we need to involve everyone  in the process of decision making to combat the anti-racist poison of the Klan  wherever it manifests itself.  I raise these issues not to scapegoat individuals but to extend the discussion of  January 17. A good way to start would to  notify all the participants of the presence of the Klan. I have been told that  everyone who spoke out at the seminar  would be informed. Why not everyone?  Racism is more than a "progressive trend  in the community", a "catchy headline" or  a "great news story". To some of us in  the community, it's a terrifying fact of  life. I hope you will consider your privileged position when making your decision  about notifying people.  I await your reply.  Carolyn  Help can * Macho Man's'  anti-woman propaganda  First the Vancouver Sun hired Les Bewley  (of "women have no brains" fame) as a columnist. Now the Province has Jon Ferry.  •The column, a Sunday feature, first hit  the pages of the Lifestyle section in  early'February, with the appearance of an  ad billing Ferry as the "Macho Macho  Macho Man". His first column appeared  February 17.  Ferry maintains in his column that it's  men's turn to complain of "having sand  kicked in (their) face"; "us burly boys,  let's face it, have had a terrible time  of it this last decade". He thinks it's  time for the hunk/stud/masculine man to  "come back into fashion". Women are having all the fun, and he wants a piece of  the action.  VSW wrote the editor of the Province saying we regretted the appearance of the  column "because a column such as this can  only be another indication of the growing  resistence to women who stand up for their  human rights. By publishing this kind of  anti-woman (thinly disguised as pro-hunk)  propaganda, you show a real lack of respect for women."  Help us can this column. We ask readers to  write the Province now expressing your  personal opposition to Ferry's column.  (Lend them some feminist analysis while  you're at it.) We promised to swamp their  letter basket. March 1982   Kinesis   23  LETTERS  Violence against women is  never humourous  Kinesis:  A group of women were thrown out of the  Quadra Thursday November 26, after objecting to a part of a floor show which Quadra  management and staff staged to raise money  for Greenpeace.  The objectionable performance was a heavy-  handed portrayal in mime of ritualized  sado-masochism. One woman, dressed in  leather and brandishing a whip, subdued  another, who grovelled at her feet and  begged her not to leave.  A member of the audience went on stage,  took the whip and threw it aside. The performers were angry at the interruption of  the show and a heated argument followed.  The woman who had initiated the action  was asked to leave and when she was supported by several other women, a potentially violent confrontation arose. About  ten women were forced to leave; they were  joined by several others.  We are three of those women. We were told  we should have left our politics at home  when we came to an event that was meant  to be entertaining. It was said we had no  sense of humour. We were not amused.  Violence against women is never'a humorous subject. It has no appropriate time or  place. As lesbians who live under the  daily threat of violence, we cannot afford  to ignore it in one of the few lesbian  spaces in town.  What do we want from our action at the  Quadra?  * We would like to meet with the women who  threw us out to discuss our position.  * Many of the women who stayed at the  Quadra talked about the incident. We would  like that discussion to continue.  * We would like the women who were also  offended by the show to make their views  known to the management.  * More generally, we would like to talk  about how we internalize patriarchal violence arid direct it at ourselves and other  women, perhaps by a series of letters or  articles in Kinesis.  Judith Quinlan  Kate Nonesuch  Judy Lynne  Goal of Telidon article was to  spark resistance to it  Kinesis:  I'm really sorry that my Telidon article  was so much longer than I told you it would  be, and that you were forced to edit it so  drastically.  Unfortunately, the editing completely mellowed the tone of the article. Telidon  sounded like something people might  want  to get nervous about, at some point in  time - maybe.  My goal in writing about the Telidon experiment was to spark resistance to it. I  wanted to give Kinesis readers information  about the doomsday effects that two-way  cable will have on us in the very near future. I figure if we know what's going on,  it's scary, but we can also figure out what  we can do together to gain more control of  our lives.  Feminists are one sector of society who  will certainly organize and fight the  effects of video and computer technology.  It's no accident that the federal government has targetted the women's movement  for the Telidon freebie.  If you don't think we're being monitored  as the bosses and state work together to  wipe out our work (and our paycheques), get  this:  Eleven days after Kinesis was published  (with the Telidon article in it), a letter  was mailed to me at Kinesis from a liaison  office of the Department of Communications,  in Ottawa.   They're pretty efficient, eh?  Once more, I would like to stress that  women's groups should under no circumstances co-operate with the Telidon experiment .  In sisterhood and resistance  Emma Flyer  Sun article scapegoats the  wrong gender  On January 30,  a feature appeared in the  Vancouver Sun titled "Today's teens:  kewpie  dolls of the future?" by North Vancouver  teacher Leslie Olsen.   The article may best  be summed up by its final words:  If confusion, passivity and complacency are  to be the hallmarks of our next generation  of women, let us at least recognize the  cause. New constitutions, failed government  programs and male-dominated institutions  are not at fault. This time the saboteur  is other women: powerful, educated, professional women who have opted for self-  aggrandizement rather than maintaining any  sense of their feminist bias. In short,  these women have sold out, and their daughters will be the kewpie dolls of the future.  The Sun was apparently swamped with replies  and judging from the selection they printed  February 16,  almost all were critical of  Olsen's message.  Following is one feminist's rebuttal which unfortunately did not  make it to print that day:  Editor, Vancouver Sun:  In her article 'Today's teens: kewpie dolls  of the future?', Leslie Olsen uses women  making inroads in non-traditional fields as  scapegoats for the rising conservatism  witnessed amongst the teens in her school  and our society as a whole. In doing so,  she herself sets an example for those teens  which is as irresponsible as it is misdirected.  The strongest influences in a teen's life  are what they've been for years: friends,  family, school, TV, radio and fashion. Music and fashion have been "retro" for several years. The fifties revival we witnessed  on TV with shows like 'Happy Days' has  moved on. Now we find fashion and music  from the early sixties sweeping in for its  second debut, for an audience that may not  even realize it's being served "reruns".  When economic and political climates shift  into recession as they have in recent years.  most people retrench. Olsen, looking at  the signs of this phenomenon, erroneously  blames women who a decade or two ago succeeded in opening some doors to the future.  We cannot, however, lose sight of where the  true power and consequent culpability lies  in our society. It's held in those primarily male hands that control the economic  and political institutions that have brought  this culture to the brink of economic and  environmental disaster.  The many feminist women who have not lost  sight of this are still acting as catalysts  and examples for those individuals not  currently working out positive alternatives  for the future.  Whether or not Leslie Olsen chooses to take  notice of them, they are organizing in their  unions, demonstrating against nuclear empire  building, protesting the injustices of imperialism, supporting the struggle for aboriginal rights, assisting their battered  sisters, writing and publishing so as to  reach anybody who may choose to support a  sane vision for the future.  We trust that some percentage of those  young women will join us in the future,  even if Leslie Olsen does not.  Alleson Kase  Incest feature invokes anger,  pain, sorrow  Kinesis.-  Your issue on incest was so powerful I had  to read it a section at a time, interspersed with outbursts of anger and rage;  pain and sorrow for my sisters. Thanks to  all of you for your courage in dealing  with such an emotionally explosive issue.  For those who feel incest is too heavy a  topic to print in a feminist newspaper, I  can only suggest they go back to reading  cream puff recipes, how to lose weight in  five days, or 100 ways to please your man  in Woman's Day, Redbook or any other of  those ludicrous, so-called "women's"  publications.  In sisterhood,  Jan Smith  Amnesty International supports  humane treatment for all  Kinesis:  In her article on armed struggle (Kinesis, Feb. '82) Jill Bend says that  "Amnesty International refuses to support  political prisoners if they have used  violence".  This is not true. AI works for: the  release of prisoners of conscience (i.e.  non-viblent prisoners)l a fair and early  trial for all political prisoners;  the  humane treatment of all prisoners.  AI opposes torture and the death penalty  in all cases and without exception,  whether or not the prisoners involved  have used or advocated violence. The  non-violence clause is included to  maximize the effectiveness of AI's work  for all prisoners.  It is not based on  moral considerations.  Frances MacQueen,  Chairperson, AI Group 17. 24   Kinesis   March 1982  BULLETIN BOARD  EVENTS  EXPLORING FEMINIST VIDEO STYLES AND  AESTHETICS, two evening shows at Women  in Focus.  7:30 March 2 - Do Feminists Have A Sense  of Humour? (1) The East is Red, the  West is Bending; (2) Dance/Videotapes;  (3) The Gloria Tapes.  7:30 March 9 - Video as an Organizing  Tool,  (l) Lesbians Against the Right  (2) A Respectable Lie. Video screenings  are open to the public.  IMMIGRATING TO CANADA. People's Law  School production will be aired on  Cable 10 on March 3, at 4:30, March 6  at 8:00 p.m. and again on March 7 at  10:00 a.m.  SEXUAL ABUSE OF CHILDREN WITHIN THE FAMILY  a free public forum sponsored by the  Justice Institute of B.C., Thurs.  March 4, at 7:30 p.m. at Lord Byng  Secondary School auditorium, 3939  W. 16th Ave.  CONCERT SERIES BY ASH STREET PLAYERS. Each  concert will highlight world class  artists along with local artists. For  more info call Dave Watt, 987-1691.  Tickets available at Concert Box Office  (501 W. Georgia), Woodwards Stores, UBC  AMC, Nanaimo Ticket Centre. Series and  single concert tickets available.  Pete Seeger Sings for Peace - Sat. March  6, 8 pm at Queen Elizabeth Theatre  Earl Robinson Salute to Labour - Sun.  April 4, 2pm, Queen Elizabeth Playhouse  Odetta: Salute to Paul Robeson - Sun.  May 16, 2 pm, Queen Elizabeth Playhouse  WOMEN'S RESOURCE DAY sponsored by the  Pioneer Women Na'amat. Sunday March  14, 10-4pm. A series of one-hour seminars and a women's information centre.  Free childcare. At the Jewish Community  Centre, 950 W. 41st Ave., Van. For more  info call Ruth 224-5276 or Louise  872-3387.  BONNIE RAITT BENEFIT CONCERT.  Water for  Life. With guests: Ferron and the Red  Cedar Band. Mon. Mar. 15, 8pm,  Commodore Ballroom. Tickets: $9.50  available at concert box offices, 501  W. Georgia and all Woodwards stores.  Support the struggle for a liveable  world.  COMING EVENTS AT WOMEN IN FOCUS.  Mar. 19: "The Moral Lepers" perform  Mar. 27: "Amazons Then, Lesbians Now",  video for lesbians only.  Apr. 2: Reading by Betsy Warland from  her new book of poetry A Gathering  Instinct  Apr. 18: A day of feminist films by  women producers from other countries.  Tickets for each evening are $3.00.  Childcare by pre-arrangement. Phone  872-2250 for more info.  MONEY IS INHERENTLY FEMALE, a workshop for  women. Healing ourselves from poverty,  guilt, scarcity and greed. Allowing us  to experience individual and collective  economic power. Presented by Cyndia  Cole, tax consultant, therapist, meditation guide, poet. Sunday, March 21,  noon - 6 p.m., 1774 Grant St. Childcare can be arranged. Fee is whatever  you wish to contribute. To register  phone 251-2534.  SOLIDARITY WEEK FOR EL SALVADOR March 21-  28, 1982: March 21, Ecumenical Mass;  March 22, Warren Allmand speaking at SFU  and later at Oxfam; March 26, feature  film El Salvador,   The People Will Win  at  Carnegie Centre; March 27, a march from  Victory Square to Oppenheimer Park, and  later a benefit dance featuring Reconstruction at the West End Community Centre. For more info, contact the Central  American Support Committee. They badly  need donations. All money raised is  turned over to the FDR/FMLN. CASS, 2524  Cypress-St, Vancouver (phone 736-1717).  BATTERED WOMEN, a workshop designed to  enable participants to develop an understanding of the situation of battered  women in the South Okanagan area. Fri.  March 26, 9:00 a.m.-4:30 p.m. Fee $20.  includes materials and refreshments.  Registration is limited, with deadline  March 15. To register, mail cheque to:  South Okanagan Women in Need Society,  #103-304 Main St., Penticton, B.C.  A DAY FOR SINGLE MOMS, Saturday March 27,  8:30-3:30pm at Holly Community School.  Fee $8; daycare, lunch and transportation from New Westminster provided free.  Call 585-2566, or the YWCA, for more  information.  PARTY FOR THE WOMEN'S COMMUNITY to celebrate  the 10th anniversary of the Vancouver  Women's Health Collective, April 3, 9pm  at Women in Focus, 456 W. Broadway.  Childcare will be available, and Women in  Focus is wheelchair accessible.  JUST OUT  1982 INDEX/DIRECTORY OF WOMEN'S MEDIA, a  resource manual of periodicals, presses,  publishers, bookstores, music and film  groups, and other media. Also indexes  women's media activities and research  since 1977. To order, send $8.00 to  Women's Institute for Freedom of the  Press, 3306 Ross Place, NW Wash. D.C.  20008.  BREAKING THROUGH, a docudrama providing  an experimental look at pre-trades and  technology training programs for women.  To rent, contact: Women's Workshop,  499 Hibiscus Ave., London; Ontario  N6H 3P2.  GROUPS  INNER SOURCES OF HEALING AND CREATIVITY  is an on-going group practising meditation, visualization and energy circles  Allow yourself the gift of good feel  ings, beautiful thoughts and positive  changes. Guided by Cyndia Cole, Tues.  7:30-9:30 pm. You may attend on a drop  in basis. Fee is whatever you wish to  contribute.  Phone 251-2534 for  location.  THE GAZEBO CONNECTION, a group of gay  career women formed to provide a safe  and social environment for women meeting women. Monthly functions at various  locations. For more info, call 758-7028  Mon.-Fri., between 6-9 or write #382-  810 W. Broadway, Vancouver.  VANCOUVER WOMEN'S HEALTH COLLECTIVE encourages women with experience/information  in a certain area to be a resource person for others. For example, a woman who  has had a tubal ligation (sterilization)  and has researched this area would be a  valuable resource to other women for  information and support. Contact the  Health Collective if you could be a resource person for other women, or if you  want more information. Call 736-6696.  CLASSIFIED  BONNIE RAMSAY, Accounting Services, Income tax, financial statements, bookkeeping. Call 738-5349.  50 WOMEN BICYCLE TOUR OF CHINA.  August  9-30.  $3,000. For more info, contact  Maridee, c/o D. Campbell, 2756 Allen St.  St. Louis, Missouri, 63104.  THE BEST OF VANCOUVER STREET POSTERS. We  are organizing a show of local political/community street posters at the  Vancouver Public Library, from April 20  - May 9, 1982. We still need Vancouver  feminist posters. If you can lend some  of yours, call 731-2370 or 733-5249 .  evenings.  WANTED TO RENT, 1 or 2 bedroom apartment  in the East end, preferably under $300/  month, by April 1. Call 873-8014 or  684-2834.  TRUCK AVAILABLE AT REASONABLE RATE, for  spring cleaning, moving, rubbish removal, basement cleaning. Call 733-8231.  MAKARA GRAPHIC ARTS & DESIGN CO-OP is ac  cepting applications for a future vacancy  involving layout, typesetting and/or  bookkeeping skills. Previous collective  experience an asset. Call 253-8931 for  more info, or send resume to Makara,  1011 Commercial Drive, Vancouver.  ON THE AIR  W0MANVISI0N on Co-op Radio, 102.7FM, from  7:00-8:00pm each Monday:  March 1 - Funding cuts  March 8 - International Women's Day  March 15 - Anti-Nuclear Movement and  Women in Nicaragua  March 22 - A Comedy Show  March 29 - UBC Women in Science conference.  THE LESBIAN SHOW COLLECTIVE on Co-op Radio  is changing its format. This month  there'll be regular time slots for news  and reviews, music, herstory, drama or  literature, calendar and a 15-minute  feature. They'd like to hear your  thoughts on the new format. Call  684-8494.  RUBYMUSIC on Co-op Radio, 102.7FM, from  7:00-7:30pm each Friday:  March 5 - From the Primettes to the  Supremes -  March 12 - Music from Times Square  March 19 - Etta James and Janis Joplin  March 26 - Louise Goffin, Peggy Lipton,  Carol King, Coco Taylor, Joni Mitchell;  Teresa Trull and more. .