 MAY 1995  CMPA $2.25 KINESIS  #301-1720 Grant Street  Vancouver, BC V5L 2Y6  Tel: (604)255-5499  Fax:(604)255-5511  Kinesis welcomes volunteers to work on  all aspects of the paper. Our next  Writers' Meeting is May 2 for the June  issue and June 6 for the July/August  issue, at 7 pm at Kinesis. All women  welcome even if you don't have  experience.  Kinesis is published ten times a year  by the Vancouver Status of Women.  Its objectives are to be a non-sectarian  feminist voice for women and to work  actively for social change, specifically  combatting sexism, racism .classism,  homophobia, ableism, and imperialism.  Views expressed in Kinesis are those of  the writer and do not necessarily reflect  VSW policy. All unsigned material is the  responsibility of the Kinesis Editorial  EDITORIAL BOARD  Fatima Jaffer, Lissa Geller,  wendy lee kenward, Agnes Huang  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE  Fatima Jaffer, wendy lee kenward,  Laiwan, Wendy Frost, Dana Sanmiya,  Persimmon Blackbridge, Lori Motokado,  Wendy Sylvester  Advertising: Yasmin Jiwani  Circulatjon:Cat L'Hirondelle, Jennifer  Johnstone, Linda Gorrie, Lisa Sorokan  Distribution: Carolina Rosales  Production Co-ordinator: Agnes Huang  Typesetter: Sur Mehat  FRONT COVER  Still from Dream Girls  to be screeed at Out on Screen  in Vancouver  Photo courtesy o  Women Make Movies  PRESS DATE  April 25, 1995  SUBSCRIPTIONS  Individual:$20 per year (+$1.40 GST)  or what you can afford  Institutions/Groups:  $45 per year (+$3.15 GST)  VSW Membership (includes 1 year  Kinesis subscription):  $30 per year (+$1.40 GST)  SUBMISSIONS  Women and girls are welcome to make  submissions. We reserve the right  edit and submission does not guarantee  publication. If possible, submissions  should be typed, double spaced and  must be signed and include an address,  telephone number and SASE. Kinesis  does not accept poetry or fiction.  Editorial guidelines are available upon  request.  DEADLINES  All submissions must be received in the  month preceding publication. Note: Jul/  Aug and Dec/Jan are double issues.  Features and reviews: 10th  News: 15th  Letters and Bulletin Board: 18th  Display advertising  (camera ready): 18th  (design required): 16th  Kinesis is produced on a Warner  Doppler PC using WordPerfect 5.1,  PageMaker 4.0 and an NEC laser  printer. Camera work by Midtown  Graphics. Printing by Horizon  Publications.  Kinesis is indexed in the Canadian  Women's Periodicals Index,  the Alternative Press Index and is a  member of the Canadian Magazine  PublishersAssociation.  ISSN 0317-9095  Publications mail registration #6426  Inside  Kinesis  News  Protesting immigration policies 3  by Sheila James with Deena Ladd  Fighting to protect migrant workers' rights 3  by Agnes Huang  Custody and access ruling in Ontario 4  by E. Centime Zeleke  Features  Women, the media and Pakistan   by Salima Hashmi, as told to Fatima Jaffer  UN Conference on Women's Plan for Action..  compiled by Fatima Jaffer  Protecting migrant workers' rights..  Centrespread  Re-thinking the World Conference of Women in Beijing 10  by Shelagh Day  Arts  Review: The Lesbian Heresy 13  by Helen Story  Review: Witness to Wilderness 14  by Noreen Kamal  Review: The Longings of Women 14  by Janet Mary Nicol  Preview: Out on Screen 15  by Cori Howard  Regulars  As Kinesis Goes to Press 2  Inside Kinesis 2  Movement Matters 5  by Robyn Hall  What's News 6  by Lissa Geller and Shannon e. Ash  Letters 16  Bulletin Board 17  compiled by wendy lee kenward  Got an itch to write for  Canada's national feminist  newspaper?  Then, come to our next  writers' meetings  May 2 & June 6  @ 7 pm at VSW  #301-1720 Grant St w  This column was born in October  1992—a t the height of the fervor over the  referndum on the amendments to Canada's constitution. It was intended as a  chance for the "underworked" editor,  with the support of the Editorial Board,  to keep Kinesis readers' as up to date as  possible, and to allow us to make the  connections between the major and not-  so-major news items in the dailies. This  is the last of thiscolumn by the outgoing  editor [see Inside Kinesis]. However,  we've decided to keep the column going—according to responses to our 1994  Readership Survey,'it's read and it's  popular—but it will come to you next  month with a newer voice and a fresher  perspective.  Much of April was spent on assessing the damage and keeping up on the  fallout from February's brutal federal  budget. One woman who walked into  Kinesis' offices had the right idea—she  wore a button that says: "If I hear deficit  one more time, I'm going to puke."  Items in the dailies listed, among the  many, many casualties of the myth-of-  deficit-cutting-inspired federal budget,  international aid agencies, Canada's  publishing industry, and Toronto's  Harbourfront Centre. The 100 percent  cuts to global education programs on  internationaldevelopmenthaveaffected  almost 100 non-govemmental organizations in Canada, and throw into doubt  the continued existence of NGOs such as  IDERA, and Saskatchewan's One Sky  development education resource centre  and bookstore. From women working in  NGOs, we hear that jobs are being lost  and progressive changes to hiring and  other practices at NGOs are being axed.  We also hear Oxfam's education budget  took a big hit and that $1.4 million was  cut from Canada World Youth's funding.  The federal budget also chopped  book-publishing programs administered  by the Heritage ministry by 55 percent  and slashed subsidies to small publishers through a 24 percent cut to Canada  Post. The cuts seriously threaten Canada's alternative media production. Feminist publications, such as Kinesis, and  feminist publishers such as Women's  Press and Sister Vision, already faced  with rising costs of paper and printing  processes, will see their production and  mailing costs skyrocket and are being  forced to find ways to survive without  passing on costs to their already strapped  readers.  We don't have a lot of space for the  column this month, so we'll be brief.  News received as we go to press is:  confirmation that Sunera Thobani, president of the National Action Committee  on the Status of Women, will run unchallenged again at the NAC AGM in June  for president.  We also just received a notice of  Vancouver Rape Relief and Women's  Shelter's 17th annual walkathon  fundraiser and celebration. It takesplace  Sunday, May 14th, and involves walking, running or cycling for $$s around  the Stanley Park Seawall. The walkathon  concludes with a free picnic and entertainment. For pre-registration, pledge  sheets and further info, call 251-1857.  ^Thanks  Our thanks to Vancouver Status of Women members and donors who support  us year 'round with memberships and donations. Our appreciation to the following  supporters who became members, renewed their memberships or donated to VSW  in April:  Barbara Bell * Annabelle Cameron * Canadian Advisory Council on the Status  of Women * Paula Clancy * Barbara Curran * Karen Egger * Michael & Connie Geller  * Arlene Gladstone * Carolyn Jerome * Barbara Kearney-Copan * Catherine Kerr *  Bernice Kirk * Bonnie Klein * W. Krayenhoff * Barbara Lebrasseur * Joanne Marvin  * Maureen McEvoy * Neil Power * Janet Shaw * Sheilah Thompson * Lynne Werker  CORRECTIONS  In our April issue, in the story on the  execution of Flor Contemplacion in Singapore (page 4), we go the name of the  Filipina domestic worker found murdered wrong. We listed her as Delia  Maga. Her name is Delia Maga.  We also owe an apology to Miche  Hill for not giving her credit for the  photo of the women fasting at the Copenhagen Social Summit (page 12).  In our Bulletin Board photo cutline  (page 23), we inadvertently left out  Thomson Highway's first name. Highway is the author of the play Dry Lips  Oughta Move to Kapuskasing, featured in  Bulletin Board.  In Smita Paul's report on Toronto's  International Women's Day celebration  (page 10), the last sentence of the fifth  paragraph was missing its ending. The  complete sentence should have read,  "The puppets were the work of Toronto  artist, Grace Channer, in workshop with  zvomen activists."  And in the interview with Mohawk  activist Kahn-Tineta Horn (pages 14-  15), we lost the beginning of a sentence  in the last column of the interview. The  sentence should have read, "The department had brought in the CBC to film this  historic event where I would be talking  to the administration..."  The sun shone the whole time we  were in production. Good thing too,  because production in April was a time  of hellos, goodbyes, firsts, lasts, missing  stories and blunt exacto knives. A truly  crazy, where's-that-blue-pencil?, what's-  wrong-with-the-waxer?, time was had  by all.  Lasts first: Kinesis editor Fatima Jaffer  has left Kinesis earlier than planned due  to nervous exhaustion, surgery on an  ovarian cyst...and a good long rest. While  she managed to edit this thinner-than-  usual issue out of her home, hardy volunteers and production coordinator  Agnes Huang did much of the work to  make this issue possible. A big thanks  from the Editorial Board and outgoing  editor to Agnes!  Fatima has been Kinesis editor for  just over three years now...and we're  oh-so-used to her fabulous juggling  acts—you know, where she's talking on  two phone lines at the same time, yelling  out headlines to whoever will listen,  instructing a first-time writer on an angle for her story, filling out a receipt for  an ad coming in, (lighting up yet another  cigarette,) and all the while, plotting in  her mind how to make next month's  issue even more relevant to women who  read, (or haven't yet read) Kinesis.  At Kinesis, we are losing a fearless  leader, a woman with almost tireless  energy and relentless drive, and Fatima's  collection of quirky political cartoons  and photographs of lesbians of colour  that adorn every inch of the doors and  walls of the Kinesis office.  More seriously. ..we're going to miss  her. Fatima's life has been committed to  activist journalism and social change,  and in her time at Kinesis, she boldly  went where no Editrix had gone before.  Her unwavering commitment as the f i rst  woman of colour editor of Kinesis has  been to broaden and expand coverage of  the issues Kinesis carries and the way it  carries them—making the links between  anti-racism, other oppressions and feminism has formed the core of the politics  in practice at Kinesis these last few years.  She worked with and encouraged  writings by women whose voices had  not been read before. In particular, we  will remember her for unique coverage  such as: Black women discussing the  Los Angeles uprising in 1992; the 1992  CRIAW conference Making the Links:  Anti-racism and Feminism; Kinesis' first  Aboriginal Women's supplement 1993/  94; the first multiracial elections in South  Africa, April 1994; the Shabana Azmi  interview (you had to be there); and  much much more.  Fatima's principled and somewhat  feisty nature made life rocky sometimes,  both at Kinesis and at the Vancouver  Status of Women, yet it always meant  we never stopped moving, never  stopped trying or challenging, never gave  up even when everyone around us  seemed to. Kinesis has survived, moved  and grown under Fatima's editor-ship  and we are happy to hear she will continue to work with us as a member of the  Editorial Board.  The good news is Kinesis has a new  editor. Even better, she's our very own,  longtime Ed Board member and outgoing production coordinator Agnes  Huang. Because of Fatima's sudden departure, Agnes will not go through the  usual editor-in-training period, but starts  off on her own with the June issue, with  the support of diehard Kinesis volunteers, ex-staff and the Editorial Board.  Good thing we're all used to her charm,  good humour and...er...unique approach  to deadlines.  So who's Agnes? If you live in Vancouver, you probably know her, and  know that "ubiquitous" (everywhere-  at-once) is the ideal epithet for her.  Agnes is the longest-running member of the current Editorial Board, and  has volunteered at Kinesis in production  and as a writer since 1991. She also  volunteers at Obaa, a show by, for and  about women of colour on Vancouver's  Co-op Radio; with both the West Coast  and national bodies of the Women's  Legal Education and Action Fund; and  at numerous events and for various other  groups in Vancouver. She has a solid  grounding in feminist politics and advocacy journalism and great ideas on how  to further broaden Kinesis on many  fronts—in terms of coverage, writers,  production volunteers, advertising, circulation, and in-house training programs. In facther strongest asset—demonstrated time and again as production  coordinator—is her commitment to soliciting, working with, training and  "sucking up to" volunteers. We love her  already and we look forward to working  with you, Agnes. Welcome to the hot  seat!  By the way, Agnes' ex-job of production coordinator is posted on the  Bulletin Board pages of this issue. So is  the ad coordinator's position. Yasmin  Jiwani, our current ad coordinator, has  decided to leave Kinesis due to Too Much  Stuff On Her Plate. She's only been with  Kinesis for six months, but it seems a lot  longer and we're sad to see her go. We're  sure Yasmin will continue to volunteer  the occasional hard-hitting story in  Kinesis, so it's not an eternal farewell.  And now, hello to the firsts this  month: writers Cori Howard, Noreen  Kamal and Salima Hashmi; and new  production volunteer (but not new to  Kinesis) Persimmon Blackbridge. And a  special thanks to all the volunteers this  issue for pulling through and ensuring  we hit the presses! And if you want to  help get Kinesis out next month, please  call Agnes at 255-5499.  That's about it for us this month.  Hopefully we'll have a less emotional,  crazy time of it next month (but don't  count on it, Agnes!) News  TCAR action to axe the head tax:  No going back!  by Sheila James with Deena Ladd  Over 400 people gathered outside  the Liberal party headquarters in Toronto on April 22nd, to shout and say  "No to Sergio Marchi's head tax."  Demonstrators were referring to the  introduction by the federal government  in February of a head tax of $975 to be  paid by every adult immigrant and  refugee applying to become a Canadian  resident, introduced in the federal budget  in February. The tax is on top of the  existing $500 processing fee required to  become a "landed immigrant."  Other slogans such as "Immigrants  in, Racists Out" and "Cut Marchi's Head  (tax)" were also chanted on a march  down Yonge Street, across Dundas, culminating at the Immigration Office on  University Avenue.  The demonstration was organized  by TCAR (Toronto Coalition Against  Racism) and endorsed by a broad base  of community groups, labour unions  and national and provincial organizations. It was among a series of initiatives  launched by TCAR to raise awareness  and protest recent racist immigration  policies of the Liberal government.  At the demo, hundreds of demonstrators were able to write their own  personal and political messages to Immigration minister Sergio Marchi on a  20-foot banner/petition calling for the  head tax to be rescinded.  Present at the demo were members  of the Korean Canadian Cultural and  Education Centre, who led the march  with their drumming ensemble. Several  speakers from community, labour and  advocacy organizations also particpated.  Helen Lee of the Chinese Canadian  National Council outlined the history of  the head tax and its affect on the Chinese  community in Canada. A $50 head tax  on Chinese immigrants was introduced  required ID papers upon landing in  Canada. It is a bureaucratic trap which  have put "8,000 Somalis in legal limbo."  Winnie Ng from the National Action Committee on the Status of Women  emphasized the racist and sexist nature  of the tax which puts women and children from the South in the most vulnerable positions. As women have the least  economic power in the world, how will  we be able to afford the tax or demon-  As women have the least economic power  in the world, how will  we be able to afford the tax or  demonstrate our ability to repay a loan?  in 1885 to restrict and regulate Chinese  immigration. It rose to $500 by 1903, and  by 1923, Chinese people were being completely restricted from immigrating to  Canada. In Lee's words, "...[the] head  tax represented 23 years of legislative  racism."  Farah Khayre from the Somali Committee for a Fairer Immigration Policy  spoke specifically on the effect of the  government's demand for identification  and birth certificates on Somali refugees  in order to gain landed status. Yet, without a government in Somalia, refugees  from Somali obviously do not have the  strate our ability to repay a loan?. In  addition, with the move away from sponsorship in the family class to the business class, women's access to immigration will be limited even more, as women  generally tend to enter Canada through  family sponsorship.  Adongo Ogony, from TCAR, called  our attention to the Liberal party's work  with the Reform party in passing Bill C-  44, which criminalizes refugees and immigrants and "even allows Canadian  security officials to open international  mail to hunt for travel papers." Even  more shocking is the news that the Lib  eral governmenthas secretly introduced  DNA testing for certain groups of people wishing to sponsor their families.  "TCAR is aware that many individuals from countries like Ghana, Somalia and Nigeria are being asked to  have a DNA test costing $1,625 and to  get their family members to send blood  samples for a DNA test to prove that  they are real family members," Ogony  said.  Other speakers included Sherry  Aiken from the Canadian Council for  Refugees and Immigrants, and David  Onyalo, from the Canadian Labour Congress. TCAR is following the demo with  a community strategy meeting on May 6  to plan th next steps in fighting the head  tax. The participation of all individuals  and organizations politically opposed  • to the head tax are welcome to attend  and join in creating a strong campaign to  Axe the Tax!  To join the campaign, donate or for  more information, contact TCAR (Toronto  Coalition Against Racism) at Box 133,339A  College St, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 1S2, or  call TCAR's Infoline at (416) 530-0262.  Sheila James and Deem Ladd are from  Toronto and members of the TCAR  steering committee.  Protection for migrant workers:  Continuing the fight for rights  by Agnes Huang  Women's and workers' rights organization are continuing to pressure  governments to guarantee protection for  migrant workers' rights. The campaigns  were stepped up following the release of  an autopsy report indicating that Flor  Contemplacion was likely not responsible for the death of another Filipina  domestic worker in Singapore.  In March, Contemplacion was  hanged by the Singapore government  for the murders of Delia Maga and the  young boy Maga was taking care of [see  Kinesis April 1995.] Many people believe Contemplacion was wrongly convicted and executed, and put pressure  on the Philippine government to investigate Maga's death and the treatment of  Contemplacion.  Two weeks after Comtemplacion's  hanging, the Philippine government recalled its embassy staff from Singapore,  and set up a commission to investigate  the matter further.  Maga's body was exhumed and an  autopsy performed to determine the  cause of her death. The medical examiner, Dr. Maximo Reyes, concluded that  extensive injuries to Delia Maga's body  suggest thai someone much stronger  than Contemplacion killed Maga. He  also said the autopsy indicated that Maga  had been severely beaten with a blunt  object, and that her ribs had been broken  before she was strangled to death.  After the autopsy report was released, the Singapore government said  it would re-open Contemplacion's case  if a neutral panel of experts from a third  country—the United States—concludes  that Contemplacion was innocent.  Cenen Bagon, BC regional representative of the National Action Committee on the Status of Women, says that  governments who export migrant workers and those who import them must be  held responsible and accountable for  ensuring that migrant workers are not  exploited and abused.  Bagon, who is also a member of the  steering committee of the Vancouver  Committee for Domestic Workers' and  Caregivers' Rights, says Contemplacion's case is evidence of how little protection migrant workers are given by the  governments that really benefit from  them. She says that host countries benefit from the "cheap labour" of migrant  workers, while countries who export  migrant workers benefit from the substantial remittances migrant workers  make to their coffers.  Supporters of migrant workers'  rights are continuing to lobby governments to ratify the United Nations General Assembly Convention for the Protection of the Rights of Migrant Workers  and their families. Only a few countries  have signed the convention—Canada  and the United States are not among the  signatories.  Cenen Bagon says it is now not a  issue of justice for Flor Contemplacion  only, but of justice for her family and for  all migrant workers. "There are more  Flor Contemplations out there," says  Bagon. "And the responsibility for protecting them as workers has to be on  both countries." News  Custody and access:  Women's right to move  %*> by E. Centime Zeleke   A woman in Ontario has won a  court appeal that will enable her to  move to a new town with her child  without the permission of her non-custodial ex-husband.  In what is being called a precedent-  setting case by some, the Ontario court  of appeal ruled that what is good for the  custodial parent—98 percent are women—should be assumed to be good for  her child.  The case is precedent-setting in that  it means rather than relying on the  "speculative nature of the courts" in  making a decision about a child, the  courts may presume what is good for  the custodial parent must be good for  the child.  The court of appeal ruling overturns  an earlier Ontario court order prohibiting the woman to leave North Bay, Ontario for Tacoma, Washington where  her fiance had found a job. The court  order was filed by the non-custodial  father of the child—her ex-husband—  who has a long history of alcoholism and  wife abuse.  In thedecision, Justice Rosalie Abella  wrote: "We must... forcefully acknowledge that the custodial parent's best  interests are inextricably tied to those of  the child." The ruling applies to all noncustodial parents, including those who  are not abusers.  According to some lawyers, the ruling will have implications on a variety of  decisions divorced parents have to make,  "from the trivial to the dramatic...  whether to change neighbourhoods or  provinces or partners or jobs or friends  or schools."  Barbara Wellards, the lawyer for the  j£- Ontario woman, says a number of fami  lies in northern Ontario were awaiting  the outcome of the case.  While only Ontario courts have to  take into account the precedent set in  this decision, it could also affect how  courts in other provinces interpret divorce law.  Feminist lawyers and women's  groups, however, are giving the decision mixed reviews. Most are concerned  that, rather than there being increases in  mothers' choices, mothers' rights overall are in fact under threat today.  Miche Hill of the Vancouver Status  of Women (VSW) says if the court decision in Ontario does in fact set the precedent in such cases, it would be a tremendous step forward.  not the case and Justice Abella's decision does not address this. As well, Taylor  points out that, in making decisions about  custody, divorce courts build into the  idea of custody a willingness to allow  access.  Taylor says perhaps the only thing  that potentially sets this decision apart  from previous decisions where mothers  have been allowed to move despite the  non-custodial father's objections is that  "[We have] seen many cases where  estranged husbands have used the courts  successfully as a ploy to control women's lives"  - Miche Hill, Vancouver Status of Women -  "VSW has seen many cases where  estranged husbands have used the courts  successfully as a ploy to control women's lives," she says.  However, Hill says she is skeptical  as to whether the decision will in fact  have much impact. "Courts are a funny  thing...they say that the drunkenness  defence will never be used again, but it's  been used again and again all over the  country in the last little while."  Vancouver family lawyer Jessica  Gossen does not believe the court decision will have much impact on custody  and access cases. She says the Divorce  Act already states that what is good for  thecustodial parent should be presumed  to be good for the child. In that sense,  Justice Abella's ruling is nothing new.  Vancouver feminist lawyer Ruth Lea  Taylor agrees with Gossen. She says  each court case hangs on its own merit,  and within a male dominated court system, women will continue to have a  "tough time" until there are fundamental changes to the divorce laws and the  legal system itself.  Taylor adds there is a general misconception that the right to move is built  into divorce law. Hence, women assume  that once they have custody, they can  move anywhere. In practice, this is often  it lessens the role the court will play in  telling the custodial parent where to  move or what job to take. As such, it may  give the custodial parent more power to  make a variety of choices.  Taylor cautions that while the court  decision has the potential to give more  women more choices in the short term,  it could have negative effects. It may  encourage bitter joint custody suitsdur-  ing divorce hearings, or custody may be  given to the father. Taylor points out an  increasing trend recently for courts to  grant custody to the fathers.  Ajax Quinby, a member of Vancouver's Custody and Access Advisory  Group, says that even if the court case  sets a precedent in Ontario, the fact that  the Divorce Act is currently under review could lead to things becoming  "much worse and much, more dangerous for women...  "Courts are allowing an amazing  amount to fathers who often use access  to harass mothers, emotionally, sexually and economically," says Quinby.  Although British Columbia and  other provincial courts generally follow  Ontario rulings, they are not obligated  to do so. For now, it is uncertain what  the implications of Madame Justice  Rosalie Abella's ruling will be on courts  in other provinces.  For more information about custody  access issues, call the Vancouver Custody  Access Advisory Group at 734-5722.  Centime Zeleke is dissecting the possibilities of a polymorphous self. .  inister XX/isdom  A Journal for the Lesbian Imagination  in the Arts and Politics since 1976  Great Issues full of terrific dyke writing and art  agitate, soothe. Inspire, move us to reflection and action:  #35 On Passing  #36 On Surviving Psychiatric  Assault/Creating Emotional  Weil-Being in Our Communities  #37 Lesbian Theory  #38 Lesbian Relationships  #39 On Disability  #40 On Friendship  #41 ItalianAimerican Women's Issue  #42 Open theme (12/90)  #43/44 15th Anniversary  Retrospective (6/91)  #45 Lesbians & Class (12/91)  To get this great work sent to your  home, your office, your friends —  SUBSCRIBE NOWI  Name    Address    City   State & Zip   Subscription rates  1 yr, 4 Issues  $17 1 year, $30 2 years  International: $22(SUS)  Single issues: $6 (postage inc.)  POB 3252 • Berkeley, CA 94703 • USA  iht for-  OUR COMMUNITIES!  OUR PUBLIC SERVICES!  A message from the Public Service Alliance of Canada   •   (604) 430-5631  MAY 1995 Movement Matters  listings information  Movement Matters is designed to be  a network of news, updates and information of special interest to the women's movement.  Submissions to Movement Matters  should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double spaced and may be  edited for length. Deadline is the 18th  of the month preceding publication.  by Robyn Hall  Women and  substance use  A new video resource Women and  Substance Use: Sharing Our Experiences is  now available from the Canadian Public  Health Association.  The video focusses on women's  unique experiences, and the links between substance use and sexual health,  mental health and violence.  Women and Substance Use follows  four major lifestages of women, adolescence, young adulthood, mid-adulthood  and the senior years. It uses monologues, vignettes and the personal stories of women to increase awareness,  explore the differences between use,  misuse and abuse, and to provide a  message of support for women. Finally,  it recognizes that women use substances  to cope with the economic, political and  social inequalities in our lives.  Toorder/receiveorder forms write:  Canadian Public Health Association,  400-1565 Carling Avenue, Ottawa, ON,  K1Z 8R1; or call (613) 725-3769, or fax  (613) 725-9826.  Speaking out  against violence  The National Film Board of Canada  has released a collection of videos called  "Speaking Out Against Violence." The  collection is designed to provoke thought  and discussion about the various forms  of violence against women and children.  "SpeakingOut" isdivided into three  sections with different themes. "Survivors' Truths/Ending the Silence" looks  at a variety of issues surrounding violence from the perspective of survivors,  through personal testimony. "Children's  Voices" looks at violence against children in the home, at school and in the  media. "Challenging the Systems: Voices  From the Personal to the Political," examines individual experiences of abuse  in combination with racism, poverty and  ableism.  Videos in the sections include The  Vienna Tribunal, a documentary  focussing on the personal stories of  women from around the world who  testified at the UN World Conference on  Human Rights. The Vienna Tribunal will  be shown in September at the 4th World  Conference on Women in Beijing.  Also part of the collection are Keepers of the Fire, about Aboriginal women  from all regions of Canada who have  waged battles in some of the most important struggles Aboriginal people have  faced in the late 20th century, and  Sandra's Garden, the story of one woman's journey of healing from incest.  Videos are priced starting from  $21.95. For more information, preview  cassettes, stills and brochures, please  contact: Kimberley Cooper, National  Film Board Montreal, tel (514) 283-9411,  fax (514) 496-2573.  Trade unionist  threatened  Flor de Maria Salguero, a union organizer whose work has been to organize young women in maquilladoras in  Guatemala City, has been receiving death  threats since mid-March, 1995.  The frequent death threats have been  received over the telephone at her home.  The office of her union, the Women's  Committee of Food and Allied Workers  (COMFUITAG) has also been under  surveillance.  Working conditions in the mostly  Korean-owned factories flagrantly violate labour rights. Maquila workers in  Guatemala, through union organizing,  are demanding over-time pay and a  minimum wage, an end to beatings, verbal abuse and sexual harassment and  access to medical services and benefits.  Other union leaders in Guatemala  have also been threatened or killed by  government-sponsored death squads.  Salguero's case has been presented  to the Organization of American States,  where measures to protect her life were  requested.  WIN  kN  ^WIW©  WO   M E  N'S  INTERNATIONAL  N  E  T WO RK  cETA/rO)  i V ■/ V / V— J  187    GRANT    ST.,    LEXINGTON,    MASS.    02173.    U.S.A  WIN    NEWS.    FRAN    P.    HOSKEN,    EDITOR/PUBLISHER  WIN     NEWS    IS     AN    OPEN    PARTICIPATORY  QUARTERLY   BY,   FOR   AND   ABOUT   WOMEN  REPORTS    ON    THE    STATUS   OF   WOMEN   &  WOMEN'S     RIGHTS    AROUND    THE     GLOBE  SUBSCRIPTIONS $40.00 Institutional Check //$30.00Individual Check  SAMPLE COPY  FREE :  PLEASE SEND $ 1.00 POSTAGE  To support Flor de Maria Salguero,  write to the Korean Ambassador in Ottawa informing him of the unjust treatment of workers in Korean-owned factories and gross human rights violations  of women workers. Ask him to contact  Mr. Grek Sum Bang, owner of "Modas  Juana" maquila and the Korean Ambassador in Guatemala about the threats  against Salguero. Demand that the Korean Government respect workers' rights  to form unions.  Write: Korean Ambassador, 151 Slater  STreet, 5th Floor, Ottawa, Ontario, KIP  5H3, or fax 613-232-0298. For more information, contact Nuestra Voz, A Voice for  Guatemalan women, PO Box 1797, Station  A, Vancouver, BC, V6C 2P7, or call 872-  0297.  Welfare Warriors  buy new centre  Welfare Warriors, an American advocacy group of single moms on welfare, has purchased a building which  will serve the community as the Welfare  Warriors Mothers Organizing Centre.  They need your help to raise a portion of  the money.  In response to US government  threats to drastically reduce or eliminate  programs such as food stamps, school  lunches, child care and health insurance, the Welfare Warriors decided it  was time to be even more visible in the  community.  After receiving a $30,000 grant from  a national Presbyterian group, the Welfare Warriors searched for and found a  suitable building. They are now committed to raising the remaining $15,000  needed within the next year.  To support women and children in poverty in the US, please ivrite and send money  to: Welfare Warriors Mothers Organizing  Centre, 4504 N. 47, Milwaukee, WI53218  or phone (414) 383-9459.  Protesting  immigrant fee  A new ad-hoc coalition in Vancouver is circulating a petition protesting a  new immigration head-tax.  The Network For Immigrants and  Refugees Rights came together shortly  after February's federal budget introduced a new fee of $975 on every adult  seeking to immigrate to Canada. The  new fee will discourage immigrants and  refugees from countries where incomes  are low.  The Network is made up of representatives from the Vancouver Chinese  Canadian Association, The Amalgamated Textile Workers Union, the Philippine Women'sCentre, the South Asian  Women's Centre, the National Action  Committee on the Status of Women  (NAC), The Committee for Domestic  Workers and Caregivers Rights and  FORA, a Filipino rights organization.  The fee is being criticized as regressive, discriminatory and exclusionary  by the Network, as well as members of  all three political parties. It is also being  compared to the racist "head tax" imposed on Chinese immigrants earlier  this century.  The poorest immigrants will receive  government loans in order to pay the  fee, but will have the added burden of  interest to repay the government along  with the loan.  The Network's petition asserts that  immigrants and refugees contribute  more in taxes than they receive in public  services, and that effective support and  settlement services for newcomers is a  necessary part of Canada's social infrastructure. It calls for Parliament to cancel the discriminatory fee.  For more information and copies of the  petition write: Network for Immigrants and  Refugees Rights c/o 1957 Kitchener Street,  Vancouver, B.C. V5L 2N6  Congratulations  OptiMSt  The OptiMSt, the newspaper of the  Yukon Status of Women Council, is celebrating its 20th anniversary this year.  Published quarterly out of the Yukon Women's Centre, the OptiMSt has  brought feminist news to Yukon women  since 1975.  Collective member Alison Reid feels  the OptiMSt has survived due to a solid  foundation of long-term volunteers, the  "modest" goals of producing four issues  a year, by showcasing the variety of  experiences of Yukon women and by not  taking itself too seriously.  From one 20-year-old publication to  another (Kinesis celebrated its twentieth  year in 1994), happy birthday and continue the struggle!  For subscriptions write: The  OptiMSt, Box 31011, Main Street Post  Office, 211 Main Street, Whitehorse,  Yukon Yl A 5P7or phone (403) 668-3549.  Palestinian political  prisoner support  A letter writing campaign is being  conducted on behalf of a Palestinian  woman imprisoned in Israel.  Omaima Aghah is a Palestinian  woman arrested in Israel in June, 1993.  She was later sentenced to 8 years in  prison. In September, 1993, she gave  birth to her daughter Hanin in prison.  During and since that time, she has been  neglected and denied access to medical  attention by prison authorities. Her  daughter, now age 1 and a half, continues to live with her in prison, but necessities such as diapers and towels must be  supplied by her supporters outside the  prison.  To protest her treatment, and that of  other Palestinian political prisoners, and  demand her immediate release write to:  Moshe Shahal, Minister of Police, PO  Box 2001, Jerusalem, 91020, Israel, or  fax: 972-2-811832. What's News  by Shannon e. Ash  Prison for  women inquiry  An inquiry will be conducted into  the most recent incident at Kingston  Prison for Women (P4W) of an all-male  riot squad stripping and shackling several women prisoners following a disturbance.  Six women were put into segregation after the incident, which took place  in April 1994. They have since been released, but remain under restrictive con-  ditions where they spend 23 hours per  day in their cells, do not mix with the  general prison population, and have no  access to rehabilitative programs.  A Correctional Service Canada report, which legitimized this treatment,  was called into question in February  after an ombudsman's report and the  release of video footage which showed  the women being stripped by male  guards.  Some of the women involved are in  prison for acts of self-defence against  abusive partners.  Madam Justice Louise Arbour of the  Ontario Court of Appeal will head the  inquiry. A report is due by March 31,  1996. Solicitor General Herb Gray says  he intends to make the report public at  that time.  Canada's cuts to  international aid  The recent federal budget has cut  Canada's foreign aid by 15 per cent and  one of the organizations affected is the  world's leading agency offering family  planning and population education programs in poor countries.  The International Planned Parenthood Federation (IPPF) lost its $8 million annual contribution from the Canadian government, which made up 10  percent of its budget. The London-based  IPPF sent most of the money to its member agencies in 142 countries, many in  HERSPECTIVES  The dialogue of the common woman  Poetry • Letters • Essays  Snort short stories  • Cartoons • Graphics • Humour  Pub. 4xyr sliding scale $22 - 35/yr  (S35-45-US)  InsL $40-50  Sample copy $6  JOIN THE MAGIC CIRCLE  Operine  Banton  Counsellor  202 -1807 Burrard St.  Vancouver, BC V6J 3G9  Tel: (604) 736-8087  Africa, which used the money to run  family-planning centres and clinics and  for education about birth control and  sexual health.  Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA) spokesperson  Chris Neal says support for population  activities will continue "through multilateral and bilateral programs."  Large Canadian aid agencies have  been asked to absorb an average 15 per  cent cut, but some programs and smaller  groups have been cut entirely, such as  the global education programs.  The Canadian Council for International Cooperation, representing 115 aid  groups, has said that 90 groups face  cancellation of their CIDA grants.  Health care funding  Ministers of Health from eight Canadian provinces have criticized the federal government for its lack of support  for medicare.  With recent cuts in federal transfer  payments which provinces use to fund  medicare, there are concerns that a  "patchwork" health system could evolve  across the country. There are already  some differences between provinces,  with some minor medical procedures  being covered by medicare in some provinces and not in others. Alberta is also  moving ahead to allow private clinics.  Ontario's Health Minister, Ruth  Grier, warns that if Ottawa continues to  cut transfer payments, it would be unable to use the threat of holding back  funds to stop the proliferation of private  clinics. The Ministers say cuts in health  care must occur only after consultation.  Meanwhile in Ontario, hospital  workers are sending their own message,  releasing a report on how cutbacks are  damaging hospital care.  The report, released in April by the  Ontario Council of Hospital Unions, was  based on interviews with patients who  called the union's hotline. Half of all  callers complained of difficulties in obtaining food, a bath, or washroom assistance, and one-quarter said they were  discharged while they still felt too ill to  care for themselves.  by Lissa Geller  Cutbacks hit Human  Rights Commission  The Canadian Human Rights Commission's six regional offices may no  longer be investigating human rights  complaints and all such complaints may  now be processed through a toll-free  telephone line to Ottawa.  In a press statement, the Public Service Alliance of Canada, the country's  largest government union, says the Human Rights Commission is shifting investigative work to its Ottawa headquarters in a move to cut $1.8 million  from its budget.  The six regional offices are located  in Toronto, Winnipeg, Edmonton, Montreal, Halifax and Vancouver, and employ about 35 investigators. There is  currently such an enormous backlog in  investigating human rights complaints  that, in the past few years, the Commission has contracted outside workers to  investigate complaints.  Under the staff cutbacks, regional  offices will be reduced to a staff of two,  primarily to oversee the Commission's  public relations and educational functions.  JANET LICHTY  B.A., M.Ed. Counselling Psychology, R.C.C.  COUNSELLOR  1-296 W18 Ave, Vancouver, B.C., V5Y 2A7  872-2611  Lynn Redenbach, r.rn.  Therapy for  Adult & Adolescent Women  • relationships  • weight preoccupation & eating disorders  • trauma & abuse issues  (604) 944-2798  Poll shows support  for lesbian/gay rights  A poll conducted by theAngusReid  Group for the federal government indicates that support for lesbian and gay  rights is strong in Canada.  The report was released under the  Freedom of Information Act just as the  federal Liberals are facing criticism from  human rights groups over their delay in  protecting lesbians and gays in the Canadian Human Rights Act.  The poll shows that a full 80 percent  of Canadians say they believe lesbians  and gays experience discrimination at  work. More than half said they would,  "speak out in support of the gay or  lesbian employee."  "Clearly Canadians view gay and  lesbian discrimination in the workplace  as a fundamental issue of human rights  and equality," wrote Natalie Lacey of  the polling agency Angus Reid in the  report that accompanies the poll results.  The poll was used by the Justice  Department to gauge attitudes on the  issue before formulating policy or  amending the Human Rights Act to include protection from discrimination on  the basis of sexual orientation. Previous  attempts to amend the Human Rights  Act have been opposed by the Reform  Party and some Liberal back-benchers.  g=  'It has been correctly said that: 'if you don't  know where you have been, you don't  know where you are going.'  ,Y^*\ Knowledge of our collective history  C^A       " essential if we are to move  ■     */jjk,      forward, and Labour/Le Travail  consistently provides the best  research and analysis of labour  and working-class history,  drawing important links  between work, family and  community aspects of  our lives.  Nancy Riche, Vice-President,  Canadian Labour Congress  Journal of Canadian Labour Studies  Labour/Le Travail is the official publication of the Canadian Committee on Labour  History. Since it began publishing in 1976, it has carried many important articles  in the field of working-class history, industrial sociology, labour economics, and  labour relations. Although primarily interested in a historical perspective on  Canadian workers, the journal is interdisciplinary in scope. In addition to articles,  the journal features documents, conference reports, an annual bibliography of  materials in Canadian labour studies, review essays, and reviews. While the main  focus of the journal's articles is Canadian, the review essays and reviews consider  international work of interest to Canadian labour studies. Many ofLabour's articles  are illustrated.  Recent issues have included: B.D. Palmer, "Homage to E.P. Thompson"; Charles  Tilly, "Softcore Solipsism"; Nicholas Rogers, "Plebeians and Proletarians in  18th-century Britain"; Melvyn Dubofsky, "Old Deal, New Deal: The Evolution  of the Liberal State in the Modem United States."  Subscribers for 1995 will receive Labour/Le Travail 35 (Spring 1995) and  Labour/Le Travail 36 (Fall 1995) - articles by Paul Axelrod, Gary Kinsman,  William K. Carroll and R.S. Ratner, Don Wells, Alvin Finkel and others.  Subscription rates: Individual $20 foreign $30 US); Institution $30 foreign $40 US);  Student/Retired/Unemployed $15 (Foreign $25). GST exempt  All Back Issues available. Complete sets at special price.  Sample issue available on request.  MasterCard accepted or make cheque payable to: Canadian Committee on Labour History,  History Dept., Memorial University, St John's, NF, Canada A1C 5S7  Articles are abstracted and indexed  America: History and Life; Alternative Press Index; Arts and Humanities Citation IndexTM;  Canadian Index; Canadian Periodical Index; Current Contents / Arts and Humanities;  Historical Abstracts; Human Resource Abstracts; PAIS Bulletin; PAIS Foreign Language  Index; Sage Public Administration Abstracts; Work Related Abstracts.  MAY 1995 What's News  "Battered Women's  Syndrome" defence  An Ontario woman charged with  welfare fraud has been acquitted largely  because Ontario's top court recognized  that "Battered Women's Syndrome"  was in effect. It is the first time that the  courts accepted this "syndrome" as a  defence to a criminal charge which did  not involve self defence.  Lise Lalonde had been charged with  defrauding the Ontario government out  of more that $100,000 when she collected family benefits from 1983-1993  she told authorities her husband did not  live with her and her five children. In  fact, her husband had lived with her for  about two of those years.  But the judge found that Lalonde  had good reason to fear telling welfare  authorities the truth. "If she went to  General Welfare and declared the fact  that he was residing in her residence, he  would get the welfare cheque. She was  concerned, and rightly so, that she and  her children would be at serious risk  that he would drink the money from  welfare and they would be without food  or shelter or both," he said.  "Battered women's syndrome" is a  psychiatric label referring to prisonerlike feelings of vulnerability, worthless-  ness and difficulty of escape experienced  by women to greater and lesser degrees  in abusive relationships. It was first accepted as a defence in Canada in 1990  when a woman who had shot her abusive boyfriend, pleaded self-defence. Lyn  Lavallee argued—and the country's  highest court, the Supreme Court,  agreed—that her actions were designed  to save her life, based on her history as a  battered woman and her boyfriend's  threat that he would come back and kill  her later.  In applying this Supreme Court ruling in the Lalonde case, the judge noted  that Lalonde was acting to preserve herself and her children.  Still many feminists object to terms  like "Batttered Women's Syndrome".  Women's varied responses to oppression are often treated as psychiatric disorders ("hysteria" is a classic example).  Some feminists feel that for the courts to  recognize the barriers facing battered  women only when defined as a psychological syndrome is a questionable victory.  Surprise! Women  earn less than men  Statistics Canada has finally clued  in to something women have been saying for years.  A recent StatsCan study found that  90 percent of the cause of the vast wage  gap between men and women is due to  unexplained factors, which include systemic discrimination.  "It must be something built into  either the work or the system or the  whole labour market," says StatsCan  researcher and author Allison Hale. "We  thought work experience would make a  difference but it didn't. Even controlling  for that, there is still a wage gap."  The wage gap is significant. According to StatsCan, women, on average,  earn only 78 percent of what men do, but  only 12 percent of that gap can be accounted for by di fferences in work experience, educational or demographic characteristics.  The average hourly wage in 1993  was $13.23 for women and $16.87 for  men. However, women make up over 80  percent of single parent families struggling to raise children without the benefit of decent wages. Women also stay in  the workforce longer, and men take more  parental leave and early retirement.  Landmark pay  equity settlement  After 16 years and 232 days of court  hearings, 1,700 female federal civil servants won a landmark $74 million pay  equity settlement from the federal government.  The federal government has agreed  to pay $62 million in retroactive pay—  covering the period of April 1987 to  March 1994—to the federal women employees discriminated against by Ottawa. As well, the women will receive an  additional $12.7 million for the period  beginning last April and continuing each  year until the pay levels of the affected  employees match those of their male  counterparts.  The Professional Institute of the  Public Service—the union that represented the women, began filing complaints a year after the Canadian Human  Rights Act came into effect in 1979. In  • Do You Need Facts  About Menopause?  • Does the Stereotyping of Older Women  Make You Angry?  • Do You want to be Part of  an Older Feminists' Network?  BROOMSTICK  A Quarterly National Magazine  By, For, & About Women Over Forty  Annual Subscription  (US. Funds Only!  U.S. $15:  Canada S20:  Overseas S25:  Institutions $25:  sliding scale available  Sample Copy: $5.00  3543 18th St.. »3  San Francisco. CA 94110  September, 1991, the complaints were  turned over to the federal human rights  tribunal. Its hearings concluded in late  February.  "We never imagined that it would  take more than a decade and a half  before a final resolution of our complaints...," said union spokesperson Bert  Crossman, especially since the "concept  of pay equity is so simple and compelling."  The federal government is also currently involved in a similar dispute with  the Public Service Alliance of Canada  (PSAC), the largest government union.  The dispute, which affects 80,000 public  servants and began in 1983, has been  before a human rights tribunal since  1991, and will resume hearings in June.  10 years of "women's  equality" in law  April 17th marked the 10-year anniversary of the day equality provisions  were proclaimed in the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  The struggle for these equality rights  is a long one. In 1980, when the federal  government announced its intentions to  create a federal Charter, women's groups  began an intense process of lobbying  and mobilization to include strong sex  equality guarantees. When the charter  was proclaimed in 1982, women were  guaranteed those equality rights.  In part, Section 15 of the Charter  reads: "Every individual is equal before and under the law without discrimination, and in particular, without  discrimination based on race, national  or ethnic origin, colour, religion, sex, age  or mental or physical disability."  However, it wasn't until three years  later in 1985 that the Section became law  in Canada. That year also marks the  official birth of the Women's Legal Education and Action Fund (LEAF), which  has used Section 15 to promote women's  equality in the law.  To mark both occasions, West Coast  LEAF hosted a special event in Vancouver to celebrate Equality Day. The event  was designed to recognize the substantial gains made by women since Section  15 came into effect, as well as to recognize that much work remains to be done.  Fran Watters, past president of West  Coast LEAF says that, "...the gains  barbara findlay  B.A. M.A. LIB  is delighted to announce  that she is now practising law  with the law firm of  Smith and Hughes  321-1525 Robson St.  Vancouver  phone 683-4176  Smith and Hughes offer a full range of  legal ser.'iczs to the lesbian, gay and  bisexual communities of Vancouver.  Initial consultations are without charge.  MUNRO • PARFITT  LAWY E R S  quality legal services in a  woman friendly atmosphere  labour/em ploym en t,  human rights,  criminal law and  public interest advocacy.  401-825 granville street  Vancouver, b.c. v6z 1 k9  689-7778(ph)      689-5572 (fax)  women have made over the past 10-25  years are under attack and we may find  ourselves struggling to hold onto what  has been achieved."  The continuing need to struggle for  equality is particularly evident for many  women who facemultipleoppressions—  discrimination based on sex, race, colour, disability, sexual orientation, age  and/or other factors.  City Hall's cuts  hit hard  The City of Vancouver has cut its  funding to a number of community and  service groups in Vancouver—in particular "multicultural" service organizations.  Twelve of the 20 grant applications  for funding that the city cut this year are  multicultural organizations. Immigrant  Services Society of BC lost $10,000 in the  core funding it had last year, and was  refused another $54,000 it sought. The  society is appealing the City's decision  lo cut its core funding.  The United Chinese Community  Enrichment Services Society (SUCCESS)  was refused grants totalling more than  $170,000. As a result, a neighbourhood  cross-cultural program and a women's  and family project planned for this year  have been cancelled.  Other groups cut include: Pacific  Immigrant Resources; the Affiliation of  Multicultural Societies and Services  Agencies of BC; the Hispanic Community Centre Society of BC; and the Somali-Canadian Community Development Association.  A City spokesperson said some of  the groups were rejected because they  were getting additional funds from the  provincial government under a new program to fund multicultural agencies.  All-girls'  public school classes  Research indicating sex discrimination is alive and well in elementary school  classrooms is motivating one Winnipeg  public school to offer girl-only classes as  part of its core curriculum. Twenty girls  have registered so far to attend Grade 7  and 8 classes at Earl Grey School which  are girls-only, and include extra time for  math, science and technology.  Studies show that teachers are more  likely to call on boys to answer questions  in the classroom, particularly in math  and science classes.  The girls will attend the bulk of their  classes without boys, though they will  share most of their elective classes with  the co-ed program.  Winnipeg's School Division 1, the  largest in the province, gave its approval  for the pilot school after requests and  recommendations from teachers, parents and administrators in the area. While  there are several all-girls' private schools  in Canada, there are very few in the  public school system. Feature  Interview with Salima Hashmi:  Political culture in Pakistan  by Salima Hashmi  as told to Fatima Jaffer  Salima Hashmi is an artist, activist in  the media, and an associate professor of fine  arts at the National College of Arts in Lahore, Pakistan. She ivas one of three women  from Pakistan invited to attend UNESCO's  International Symposium of Women and  the Media in Toronto in March. Kinesis  spoke ivith her at the Symposium about  women and the media in Pakistan.  Fatima )affer: Could you tell us why  you were invited to participate in this  Symposium on women and media?  Salima Hashmi: Firstly, because of  the kind of art I do, and secondly, because I have been involved a lot in issues  of women and culture. I am writing a  book on women artists of Pakistan where  I look at women's roles on a broader  scale, at the specifics of Pakistani society, and at how strange it is that in such  a patriarchal society, women are at the  forefront of much of the culture. When  you compare Pakistan's situation with  other countries, you do not find other  places where women play such roles in  all the important art institutions. They  have done that in Pakistan since 1947.  ...because [the  women's movement] has  managed to articulate  publicly what a lot of  people felt, the  consciousness-raising  aspect was tremendous.  My work became politicized during  the years of President Zia. [Zia used martial (military) law to crush opposition in  Pakistan. He was an important ally of the  United States.] I used my works to make  statements which could not be made  through mass communication, such as  television, because certain people, like  myself, did not have access to such  means.  I think for me it began on February  12th, 1981, when there was a women's  demonstration against the new laws of  evidence that were being brought in.  The women were very severely treated  by the police, and the whole thing became a sort of cause celebre.  Jaffer: Could you explain what the  laws of evidence are?  Hashmi: It was that the evidence of  two women equalled the evidence of  one man in a court of law. Of course the  politicians gave references from the  Qu'ran, ignoring the fact that those references did not have to do with two  women having to give the same evidence but that, when a woman stood up  in court, the other woman should be  there to support her.  Jaffer: How did the women's demonstration against the laws come about?  Hashmi: Well, section 144, which  prohibits the assembly of more than four  people, was in effect during Zia's time.  The Women's Action Forum, a broad-  based and loosely constructed body of  women representing various organizations, came together and said, "We will  go to the chief justice at the high court in  twos to hand him our protest against  this law." So very peacefully, this long  line of women walked in twos to the  high court in Lahore. They were stopped  and surrounded by the police before  they got to the high court. When they  didn't disband, they were beaten and  arrested.  A large number of those women  were educated women from upper middle-class homes, whose husbands were  bureaucratsanddecision-makersingov-  ernment. Many of them did not have an  understanding of what the stakes were.  They thought they were acting within  the law. They didn't realize what martial law really meant because they had  never faced it. It was their sisters from a  different class who had had their husbands arrested for being labour leaders.  This, in a sense, began the  politicization of what had been an upper  middle-class lobby. Suddenly we found  a much larger platform to stand on.  Women who were educated and articulate began to voice what was in fact a  political issue. That's when it began for  me. I did a series of paintings on that  whole issue.  Jaffer: You were also involved in  political satire on television and street  theatre skits.  Hashmi: Yes, I have been part of a  group on television which used to do a  weekly satirical program. We were  banned several times, but italwayscame  back. It was very funny so it was allowed. We were banned mostly during  the Zia period, so we took our skits to  popular theatres, to the street level, to  women's meetings, and to any kind of  private gathering where we got a platform. We did skits on the laws of evidence and some skits in which we parodied Zia himself and the drama he put  on for the world—he was supposed to  be a bastion of the free world fighting  against the communist menace in Afghanistan. He was a darling of the West  and the fact he was an islamic fundamentalist was of no consequence at the  time, unlike today.  We also parodied the various edicts  that followed, such as women having to  wear the chahdor [veil] in public and in  parliament. There was a lot of talk from  Zia on safeguarding the chahdor and the  char diwari [four walls of the house]. In  fact, this was the first time in the history  of Pakistan that women were being held  as political prisoners, tortured and beaten  up. Never before had that happened to  women. Before that, women political  activists were treated with kid gloves.  Jaffer: Did this happen to the educated upper-middle class women too?  Hashmi: No. The women who were  brutalised were from the People's Party,  family members and sisters of young  ■P**/"   r*    \  ■ n  ■ 1  In  -4 •     J  ^y        4  Samina Ahmed (left) also from Pakistan and Salima Hashmi in Toronto  boys who had distributed pamphlets.  There was a famous case in Lahore where  16-year-old boys were hung for distributing pamphlets. Women from families  of journalists were also lashed in public.  This was the political and social climate of the time. It wasnot easy to laugh  about it but that was the only weapon we  had. We thought if we parodied or made  fun of his laws, Zia would not be such a  frightening figure but a figure of ridicule. So forms of art like theatre and  puppets, and real life all came together.  Jaffer: And how did mainstream  media handle what washappening from  1981 on?  Hashmi: Television, being a government-controlled media, washeavily censored. It pushed out or silenced people  who did not compromise. Of course a lot  of people did try to work within the  system, which is always hard. Independent-thinking people in the press also  suffered severely by losing their jobs  and being lashed in public.  One of the most important events  was the breaking away of a group of  women journalists from a news magazine because of editorial differences they  had. They started another news magazine. There were ways and means of  resisting and a lot of small newspapers  and magazines came up but they were  heavily censored. Small newsmagazines  often went to press with lots of pages  blanked dut completely.  Jaffer: Could you talk about your  teaching at The National College of Arts?  Hashm i: The National College of Arts  is small but it's important because it's  always been looked upon as being the  place of resistance in the arts. Once I  gave a lecture in a fairly large class and  noticed two people sitting there who.  didn't belong. After the class, I asked  them who they were. They said, "Criminal Investigation Department." I told  them "You're not supposed to be here."  They said, "Yes we are. We are legally  here to monitor your class." That would  happen a lot.  But sometimes it was left to people  in the arts to carry the only form of  resistance because full-time political  workers were either in jail, in exile or  had been silenced.  My father was a famous poet and  every year we would have a mela [fair] in  his name, called Faiz Ahmed Faiz Peace  Mela. The fact that we had four or five  thousand people together in a venue  where they could sing, hear and recite  poetry, was a political act camouflaged  as a cultural event. Poetry was banned  on TV and the radio. The mela became a  focal point for trade union people, peasants, intellectuals, and students who  came from all over the country to listen  to poetry, to sing and to hear folk performers.  Bonds were formed between those  in art production which had a political  or social message and they continue up  to this time. The women's movement is  a very important part of this culture  because, when the political parties were  silenced, laws against women became a  focal point for expressing opposition to  Zia. Women took the brunt of it and  usually survived.  Jaffer: How broad-based is the women's movement in Pakistan today?  Hashmi: It is not really a movement,  it's more a sensibility. It has not really  grown in numbers but because it had  managed to articulate publicly *vhat a  lot of people felt, the consciousness-  raising aspect was tremendous. Apolitical women's organizations took their  cue from this too. The demonstrations  created certain kindsof awareness which  spread throughout the country.  Jaffer: In the rural areas too?  Hashmi: Only in the sense that  women in rural areas were aware,  through television, that there were  women who were becoming public figures. I don't think it affected women's  lives in a large way, but it certainly gave  them aspirations for change.  continued on page 12  MAY 1995 .../...■■ Feature  United Nations 4th World Conference on Women:  Platform for Action  We've heard that at the 4th World Conference on Women and NGO Forum, the  "Beijing" Platform for Action will be the  focus of the discussion, [see article, page  10.] So what is the Platform for Action?  Basically, it's a United Nations document that sets out a global agenda on zoom-  en's equality from 1995 to the year 2000. In  its final form, it is intended to be adopted by  governments of UN member nations at the  Beijing conference in September 1995.  The document has been years in the  making. It is based on recommendations  from intergovernmental meetings held  around the world, as well as input from UN  agencies, and from women's and other nongovernmental organizations.  The following is excerpted from the  February 17th draft of the Platform of Action, which is 70 pages thick and contains  hundreds of resolutions and recommendations. (It has since been amended at a meeting of the United Nations Commission on  the Status of Women in New York, March  15rApril 4.)  I. Mission Statement  The Platform for Action aims to accelerate the removal of obstacles to  women's full and equal participation in  all spheres of public and private life,  including economic and political decision-making. It is an Agenda for Equality which seeks to safeguard women's  human rights throughout the life cycle.  It stresses the principle of shared responsibility and partnership between  men and women as the basis for achieving equality, development and peace.  III. Critical Areas of Concern  37. The Platform for Action aims to  accelerate the removal of the remaining  obstacles to women's full and equal participation in all spheres of life... Toward  this end, the international community,  governments, non-governmental organizations and the private sector are called  upon to take strategic action in the following critical areas of concern:  • The persistent and increasing burden of poverty on women;  • Unequal access to and inadequate  educational opportunities:  • Inequalities in health status and  unequal access to and inadequate health  care services;  • Violence against women;  • Effects of armed and other kinds  of conflicts on women;  • Inequality in women's access to  and participation in the definition of  economic structures and policies and  the productive process itself;  • Inequality between men and  women in the sharing of power and  decision-making at all levels;  • Insufficient mechanisms at all levels to promote the advancement of  women;  • Lack of awareness of, and commitment to, internationally and nationally recognized women's human rights;  • Insufficient mobilization of mass  media to promote women's positive  contributions to society;  • Lack of adequate recognition and  support for women's contribution to  managing natural resources and safeguarding the environment.  IV. Strategic Objectives  and Action  A. The persistent and increasing  burden of poverty on women  39. Poverty is a multidimensional,  complex situation which includes economic, educational, social, political, cultural and technological dimensions. The  prolonged global economic recession, combined with the debt crisis and Structural Ad-  justment Pro  grammes, civil strife  and displacement,  and environmental  degradation have undermined governments' capacity to  meet the basic needs  of their populations.  This resulted in a specific trend toward the  impoverishment of  women, the extent of  which varies from region to region. Migration and changing  family structures have placed additional  burdens on women, especially those who  provide for several dependants. Macro-  economic policies have not been readjusted to respond to these trends. Primarily concerned with the formal sector of  the economy, these policies have tended  to hamper the initiatives of women and  failed to consider the differential impact  on women and men. In order to eradicate poverty and achieve sustainable  development, women must contribute  fully to the formulation of  macroeconomic and social policies as  well as to anti-poverty initiatives.  C. Inequalities in health status and  unequal access to and inadequate  health care services.  72. Through their organizations,  women have raised their concerns about  their own health. Women, who represent half of all adults newly infected by  HIV /AIDS, have emphasized the social  vulnerability in their efforts to control  the spread of sexually transmitted diseases. In national and international fora,  women have articulated that to attain  optimal health throughout the life cycle,  equality, including the sharing of family  responsibilities, development and peace  are necessary conditions.  D. Violence against women  88. Violence against women is a violation of basic human rights. Knowledge  about its causes, incidence and measures to combat it have been developed  since the Nairobi conference. In all societies, women and girls are subjected to  physical, sexual and psychological abuse  which cuts across boundaries of class,  ethnic group, religion, age and level of  development. The Declaration on the  Elimination of Violence Against Women  condemns gender-based violence defined as violence encountered by women  and girls within the family and the community. This includes domestic violence,  rape, sexual harassment and intimidation in the workplace and in educational  institutions, trafficking of women and  girls and forced prostitution, harmful  traditional practices and State-condoned  violence against women and girls.  F. Inequality in women's access  to and participation in the definition of economic structures and  policies and the productive process itself.  112. The globalization of the  economy is undermining women's self-  reliant initiatives of savings, production  and trade. The international and sexual  division of labour has reinforced the  segregation of women into a limited  number of occupations. This trend has  been characterized by low wages, low  skill levels and a lack of job security in  both the formal and informal sectors.  Young and migrant female workers remain the least protected by labour and  immigration laws. Women, particularly  young women, have limited employment opportunities due to inflexible  working conditions and inadequate sharing of domestic responsibilities, including the care of children and the elderly.  K. Lack of adequate recognition  and support for women's contribution to managing natural resources and safeguarding the  environment.  174. There is a linkage between poverty and deteriorating natural environ  ments. In both urban and rural areas,  environmental degradation results in  negative effects on the health, well-being and quality of life of women and  youth, especially young girls, women in  displaced populations (such as refugees),  farm workers, rural women, women in  poor households and households in remote areas of harsh ecological conditions. In many regions, women have  played leadership roles by promoting  an environmental ethic, changing values, and reducing, reusing and recycling resources to reduce waste and excessive consumption. In addition, wom-  en'scontribution to environmental management has taken place at the local  level, where decentralized action on environmental issues is most needed and  decisive.  V. Institutional arrangements for implementation  and monitoring of the  Platform for Action  National level  192. Governments have the primary  responsibility forimplementingthePlat-  form. Commitment at the highest political level is essential to its implementation...  193. Active involvement of a broad  and diverse range of other institutional  actors should be encouraged, including  by legislative bodies, academic and research institutions, professional associations, trade unions, cooperatives, local community groups, women's organizations, the media, NGOs, youth organizations, cultural groups, financial  and other for-profit organizations...  194. Implementation of the Platform  requires actions to establish and/or  strengthen national mechanisms/machinery for the advancement of women,  national statistical services, ministerial  focal points and other institutions with  the mandate and capacity to integrate  women's concerns into policy...  VI. Financial arrangements  232. The strategic objectives can best  be achieved and the required actions  taken if there is a commitment to make  resources available for this purpose...  237. Adequate resources should be  allocated to national institutions for the  advancement of women and other institutions having the mandate to implement the Platform. Where the institutions have been funded on a temporary  basis, consideration should be given to  placing them on an established basis.  240. The fund-raising capacity of  NGOs, particularly women's organizations and networks, should be enhanced  and they should be supported by the  governments... Fourth World Conference on Women:  o^uM**  by Shelagh Day  fce\y*9  If the Preparatory Meeting held in New York City  between March 28 and April 8 is any indication, the  Fourth World Conference on Women slated for Beijing  in September is in big trouble.  This preparatory meeting of governments, which  produced the final version of the Platform for Action  which will go to Beijing for final drafting and adoption,  was characterized by backsliding, obstructionism, and  right-wing propaganda.  The hope for the Platform for Action is that it can  be an up-to-date plan building on the agreements  regarding the environment, human rights, population,  and social development that have emerged from earlier UN Conferences, a statement of the commitments  by governments to implement concrete measures for  addressing women's inequality over the next decade.  The hope is that the Platform will be an agenda for  governments, to which women can hold them accountable.  So far, that is not what we are getting. Unfortunately, the Platform for Action that has emerged from  the Preparatory Meetings is weak, and may even  represent a step backwards. There is a lot that is not  there and a lot of language that is bracketed—which  means that it is still being argued over [see box top right  page 11.} When the conditions of women around the  world are getting worse not better, the apparent unwillingness of governments to make genuine and measurable commitments to improving women's situation  is dismaying.  Right-wing forces mobilized  At the New York meetings, some delegations,  namely those of Argentina, Ecuador, Guatemala, Honduras, Iran, Malta, Sudan, and the Vatican, made  deliberate efforts to stall the process, and to obstruct  progress being made on substantive commitments.  They worked systematically to roll back agreements  already reached at the Cairo Population Conference  (September 1994) and the Social Summit in Copenhagen (March 1995). They effectivily mounted a filibuster  on reproductive health and reproductive rights issues,  blocking any proposals that would call on nations to  deal with unsafe abortion and early marriage, to provide sex education and family planning, and to affirm  women's right to decide whether, when, and how  many children to have, and if, and with whom, to have  sex.  The same member states attempted to  remove the word "gender" everywhere it  appeared in the Platform and to replace it  with the word "sex." This was an attempt to  delete from the document the acknowledgement that society constructs gendered roles  and status for women, and discriminates  against women by doing so. They wanted to  return to the notion that "biology is destiny."  In other words, they wanted to assert that it  is women's biological difference from men  that determines, and should determine, our  status and condition in society.  These governments were ultimately unsuccessful  because the Conference bureau ruled that the word  "gender" appears in many other UN documents, and  should not be deleted from the Platform for Action.  Nonetheless, it took precious time to fight this hostile  and regressive strategy.  Unfortunately, these governments, and the Vatican, had their supporters among the non-governmental organizations (NGOs). These supporters included  Canada's REAL  Women, and its Ameri-  can counterparts.  These NGOs distributed leaflets regularly  to the official delegates, calling on them  to backtrack from previous agreements and  to block language affirming women's reproductive and sexual  rights. They distributed plastic foetuses in  the plenary rooms and  hallways. They urged  delegates to block the  inclusion of any words  like "sexual identity" or "sexual orientation" on the  grounds that they were code words for sado-masochism, pedophilia, and bestiality. (Some NGOs turned  up the next day wearing buttons that said: Take a Pet  to Beijing.)  Though the overtly obstructionistdelegations were  only a few, the majority of delegations, faced with this  barrage of efforts to make the drafting process more  complicated and to block substantive progress, did not  appear prepared for or willing to engage in a concerted  struggle to make the Platform for Action an agenda  that could bring real change to the lives of women  around the world.  The best lack all conviction  Governments that we expect to be progressive on  women's issues sent relatively junior delegations, who  seemed ill-prepared and not sufficiently determined to  Will women be  shut out at Beijing,  while the terms for  dealing with our inequality  are negotiated by  our government  —without us?  face the agressive behaviour and stalling tactics of the  obstructing governments. NGO participants at a lobby  strategy meeting, were informed by the Austrian Chair  of the Preparatory Meeting, that the member nations of  the UN did not commit the same resources to the  Women's Conference that they committed to the Conference on Human Rights, the Conference on Population and Development, or the Social Summit. It seems  clear from the lack of preparedness, the lack of serious  commitment to pushing for  progressive language, and the  lack of resources allocated to  the preparatory work, that  women's issues have not been  made a top priority by even  those governments that claim  to be supportive.  The result: A weak platform  The result of these political dynamics isa disappointing, and potentially problematic Platform for Action.  Though the UN has not issued its offical version of the  latest, post-New York Platform, and therefore women  have not had an opportunity yet to subject the latest  text to careful scrutiny, here is a preliminary, and  partial, list of problems that women can expect to find  in it:  • statements about the diversity of women, referring to the discrimination that women experience based  on race, ethnicity, indigenous ancestry, national origin,  culture, language, religion, sexual orientation, age,  disability and other factors have not been agreed to;  • the Platform is weak on issues that affect women  who are refugees, migrant workers, and immigrants,  and generally on the issue of racism and its effects on  women's lives and conditions;  • the human rights text, which was not discussed  in a public session until two days before the end of the  Preparatory Meeting, is weak. Some countries are  trying to reopen a debate about the "universal" nature  of human rights, arguing instead that such rights are  subject to traditions and culture;  • the section on health backtracks from the agreements of Cairo;  • the draft does not talk about imbalances of power  or about how poverty is created among people. The  Women's Linkage Caucus at the Preparatory Meeting  concluded that the economic analysis is so inadequate  that it is detrimental to women. It fails to mention that  the globalization of markets and rapid technological  change are affecting women negatively, and refers to  the "beneficial effects" of structural adjustment programs. References to the role of transnational corporations in economies and societies have been deleted at  the insistence of the US and the countries of the European Union.  The problems of the content of the Platform for  Action are serious, and some intense strategizing is  needed to decide on ways to tackle them. But the  content problems are not the only ones. There are also  access problems. Barriers to women's access  In Beijing there will be two meetings going on. The  official Conference, where governmental delegations  will complete the final work of drafting and adopting  the Platform for Action, and the NGO Forum, where  women from around the world will gather to talk,  teach, network, and do politics.  Some NGOs will attend only the NGO Forum, and  some have applied for and received accreditation which  will allow them to send representatives to the offical  Conference, where they will concentrate on lobbying  governments to make the advancements for women's  equality.  At the NGO Forum, there will be caucuses operating to help develop lobbying strategies to be used by  the women attending the official Conference, and to  provide reports back to the NGO Forum about the  progress, or lack of it, on the drafting of the Platform for  Action. Women whose organizations are accredited  only to the NGO Forum should still be able to go to the  building where the official Conference is taking place,  to meet and talk with their own and other government  delegations, although they will not be admitted to the  rooms where drafting is taking place.  However, there are fundamental concerns now  about access with respect to both the offical Conference  and the NGO Forum. One concern is about access to the  drafting process for NGO representatives who are  accredited to the official Conference. At the Preparatory Meeting in New York, NGOs were dismayed to  find that in contrast to the transparency of conferences  in Rio (Environment), Vienna (Human Rights), Cairo  (Population and Development), and Copenhagen (Social Summit), most of the drafting went on behind  closed doors. NGOs were denied information, updates  and access. These conditions make effective lobbying  impossible.  Instead of negotiating the text of the Platform in  public sessions, delegations drafted most of the Platform first in "informal" private meetings where NGOs  were barred. This development in New York raises  fears about what procedures will be followed in Beijing  itself, and whether at the final drafting stage we will see  governments opt for closed sessions. Will women be  shut out at Beijing, while the terms for dealing with our  inequality are negotiated by our governments—without us?  In addition to procedural manoeuvring that may  block NGO women's access to the drafting process  inside the offical Conference, there is a basic concern .  about the logistics of just getting to the official conference from the NGO Forum site. Until a few weeks ago,  the planned NGO Forum site was not in an adjoining  space to the official Conference, but on the other side  of Beijing at the Workers' Sports Services Centre. This  posed real obstacles.  But that was last month.  On March31,just5 months before the NGO Forum  opens, China announced that it is moving the NGO  Forum to a new site, not closer, but much farther away.  The explanation given is that "structural problems"  have just been detected at the original site.  The plea of "technical difficulties" is not convincing, however. The move is generally understood to be  a deliberate attempt by China to control and restrict the  NGO Forum even further, and to keep the participants  away from the official Conference, and away from the  people of Beijing.  Women who have investigated the new site report  that the Huairou Scenic Tourist Area is about two  hours away from the official conference by a crowded  highway. There is only one public bus travelling the  route to and from Beijing, so participants would be  dependent on shuttle buses provided by the China  organizing Committee.  Also, while about 30,000 women are expected to  attend the NGO Forum, the site does not have a  meeting space that will hold more than 1,700. The  China group plans to make a makeshift covered space  out of a children's playground that will hold 10,000,  with no interpretation facilities. This is likely to mean  that English is the dominant language of communication, and that women who do not speak English will  not be able to participate. Telecommunications facilities at this site are also minimal, and this will affect  news coverage. For women with disabilities, the first  site was pathetic; this one is a nightmare.  What this means is that there are serious questions  now about 1) NGOs access to the drafting process  inside the official conference; 2) NGOs ability to travel  between the NGO Forum and the official conference  site; and 3) NGOs ability to have an accessible NGO  Forum in which they can meet, communicate with each  other, and communicate with the rest of the world.  What does "bracketing" mean?  At United Nations official Conferences, the language in documents is "bracketed" if, during drafting sessions, there is no consensus on it among the  participating governments.  Unbracketed language is considered to be already adopted; bracketed language is not adopted  yet and is still open to further negotiation. Bracketed  language may eventually be adopted, dropped, or  changed. It is up for grabs.  Developing Plan B for Beijing  Considering all of these problems, what should  women be doing?  First of all, women cannot lose heart. The problems  we are encountering are evidence of fear and intense  resistance to women's advancement. They let us know  it is time to remuster our determination and commitment. Here are some possible steps:  • It.is important now that women's organizations  in Canada determine what the most serious flaws of  the Platform are and prepare a coordinated lobbying  strategy aimed at our own government. Canada should  be subjected to intense lobbying between now and  August. Through the Canadian Beijing Facilitiating  Committee, lead groups have been identified to work  on the different parts of the Platform which deal with  poverty, health, armed conflict, media, education, etc.  If we can look to these groups for help in developing a  lobby strategy, this will be a first step.  • Women's groups should be lobbying the Canadian government, the Chinese government, and the  Secretary General of the United Nations now regarding the site for the Fourth World Conference on Women.  We should be demanding of Canada, and the Secretary-General, that they take the strongest possible  diplomatic actions to ensure there is a suitable site for  the NGO forum in Beijing, close to the official conference. If this cannot be secured, we should urge that the  conference be moved out of China. We should also be  asking for guarantees now for a transparent and accessible process, [see box for addresses.]  3) Most importantly, we should make the consolidation of women's politics—the building of solidarity  with women around the world—the top priority for  Beijing. The NGO forum may be much more important  to us than the official conference and whatever Platform it produces. To face and defeat the backlash,  resistance, violence and increasing poverty of women  around the world, we have to strengthen our own  politics and connections.  We need to consolidate our own Platfqrm for  Action, and make commitments to it and to each other.  The international women's movement is still in its  infancy. This is an opportunity to build it. This is what  is most important.  Shelagh Day is a human rights activist. She attended the  Preparatory Meeting in New York.  Women need to take action to let the United Nations and governments know that we  expect them to do better for women.  1. Write to the following to ensure the Beijing conference does not become in fact a step backward for  women.  2. Let them know that moving the NGO Forum to a site without adequate facilities that is one to two hours  away from the World Conference is unacceptable:  • Fax to: Madam Peng Pelyun, Member - State Council, Chair/China Organizing Committee, In care of  Arthur Holcombe, Resident Representative, UNDP/Beijing at (86-1) 532-2567;  • Fax to: Boutros Boutros-Ghali, Secretary-General, United Nations, New York at (1-212) 963-4879;  • Write to: 1995 World Conference Secretariat, Status of Women Canada, 360 Albert Street, Suite 700,  Ottawa, Ontario, K1A 1C3; or call (1-613) 995-7835; or fax (1-613) 957-3359. Feature  Salima Hashmi, from page 8  On ly thirteen percent of the pop ula-  tion is literate, meaning they can sign  their names or read the Qu'ran. When  you look at the visibility of women in  political writing of history, I'd say literacy is probably closer to nine percent.  But coming from such a narrow base, it's  amazing to find such a large number of  women making it to universities, into  the professions, into politics, and into  government. A lot of women hold management and editorial positions in the  media, and there are large numbers of  women reporters. Some of the newspapers provide transport for women to get  home at night, so it makes these jobs  accessible to women. You find that happening in all kind of professions. I see  dramatic changes five years from now.  What we're watching today is like a  preparation for that.  Jaffer: Tell us about Pakistan today.  Pakistan is among a handful of countries  in the world to have a woman prime  minister. Has that changed anything for  women on the ground?  Hashmi: I don't think having a  woman prime minister has made any  difference to the lives of the majority of  women in Pakistan. Prime minister  BenazirBhutto has not been able toover-  turn the laws because she doesn't have a  majority parliament, nor the political  will to make dramatic changes in women's lives. But the fact of her being prime  minister has altered women's perceptions of themselves in a society where  men dominate. It's a very indirect way  of achieving change, but it is a beginning.  The other difference has been in the  freedom of expression. Women at least  have the opportunity to voice their experiences. There are large numbers of  women producing literature and poetry—poetry especially is a strong and  potent agent of change. When you go to  a mushaira [poetry reading,] there are  thousands of people there.  Women are also documentary filmmakers in Pakistan and while they are  not necessarily making films exclusively  about women, we are seeing a women's  vision on life in Pakistan. It's the same  with the news. The English-language  magazine with the largest circulation in  Pakistan, called Newsline, is owned and  run by women. And all the important  writers at its rival publication, The News,  are also women. Two of the major editors of The News, a large-circulated English daily, are women.  You don't find this in the Urdu press,  which is more conservative, read by  much larger numbers of people, and  owned by conservative, commercial organizations. Yet a large number of the  writers are women. They are hampered  by the policies of the newspapers but  you do find interesting contradictions  between what they write and the newspapers' policies, so they do get away  with a lot.  Jaffer: Could you talk about the difference between the English-language  and Urdu-language presses?  Hashmi: The English-language press  is much more liberal, very open, and  very critical. It is, however, not as widely  read as the Urdu-language press. A recent phenomenon is that one of the news  weeklies published by a woman has  started an Urdu version. Circulation took  off because there was such need for a  progressive Urdu weekly.  So, while Benazir Bhutto hasn't had  success in the political arena or on the  economic front, in other areas there has  been movement because she is supportive of the idea of letting everybody have  their say. The Urdu press is vociferously  anti-Benazir because there is an atmosphere of tolerance.  Jaffer: There is a lot of unrest in  Pakistan at the moment, especially in the  capital, Karachi. Could you explain what  that's about?  Hashmi: The unrest is along ethnic,  religious and sectarian lines, which is  unfortunate because it's difficult to work  out where these actually intersect. The  sectarian and ethnic strife is a direct  result of the martial law, where it's a  known fact that Zia encouraged ethnic  divisions for his own political ends. This  has grown into a monster which is now  difficult to sort out.  Sunnis are the majority in Pakistan  and the Shias are in reaction to anti-Shia  sentiment so wherever there is the possibility of this happening, trouble erupts.  Karachi has been an ethnically torn city  and now with this new phenomenon of  sectarian fighting it's intensified.  The violence is well organized violence. It is certainly not spontaneous or  something that comes out of genuine  feeling in the community. It's an artificially funded, managed phenomenon.  When you ask around in the local community, there is no feeling of animosity  at all. The killers are professionals.  Jaffer: Has the media in Pakistan  tried to make sense of what is going on?  Hashmi: Unfortunately the Urdu  media has got itself involved in taking  sides.  The English-languagepresshasbeen  very circumspect, objective and have  done their reporting on a non-sectarian  Hashmi: Exactly. But the  fact that certain incidents are  being reported in some mass  media is interesting. For example, a year ago, there was a very  small news item on a woman  called Zainub in the English-  language press. It saidshe had  been brought to hospital from a  small town. Her husband, in a  fit of rage, had taken an red-hot  electric rod from a heater and  put it up her vagina. It tore her  insides. The case was taken up  by a women's organization who  reported it to the police and  had her removed to a larger  hospital where there was better medical care.  As Zainub's story got more  coverage, Benazir Bhutto went  to her bedside. Her visit was  covered on national television. Benazir  had tears in her eyes when she talked  about domestic violence on prime-time  television. The next day it was the top  story in every newspaper in the country.  Benazir had talked about how women  everywhere in the country suffer domestic violence in silence and that this  violence is not to be condoned. She arranged for Zainub to be flown to England for treatment because the doctors  in Pakistan didn't think they could save  her.  The trial against her husband could  not continue because Zainub was abroad.  They waited for three months until she  recovered enough to come back. There  is a photograph of her meeting her  mother at the airport upon her return.  Zainub is a 20-year-old girl with a five-  year-old son. She kept saying, "I want  my child to be looked after by my mother  and not my husband." It was a moving  I place myself more in alternative media,  or what we call cultural activities. Those affect  women's lives directly every single day.  basis, reflecting what the intelligensia  feels about this conflict—that it is being  generated by anti-democratic interests  trying to create political trouble in Pakistan.  It is obvious these right-wing religious groups are never going to win  through the ballot so they have to create  a situation in which, stormtrooper style,  they take over the government. They  have tried to do it in the tribal areas  where they have forced Benazir's government to put the sharia [Islamic law]  into practice. They did that by terrorizing the local authorities with arms, forcing them to give in.  Jaffer: And as we've seen everywhere  in the world, the impact of fundamentalist violence falls heaviest on women.  Hashmi: Yes, they are a convenient  target as they're the most vulnerable  and the least likely to react.  Jaffer: And sharia itself targets  women.  Hashmi: It does, but that is not necessarily to do with religion. If you look at  other countries, you find similar  targetting of women, and if it's not religion, it's some other convenient vehicle.  Jaffer: Like the deficit becomes the  excuse to have a brutal federal budget  which targets women's equality in  Canada.  photograph because her face was wonderful—innocent in the sense that the  sadness and brutality of her experience  didn't show.  But after that, the press dropped the  story. Not a single political party made  any statement. Benazir was the only  politician who spoke on this case. Even  her own party members didn't make  any statements. It was as though there  was a male conspiracy of silence on the  issue of domestic violence.  Jaffer: Sounds familiar.  Hflsrwn'.-Butitisstillacase where the  media played a role, even if it was fairly  contained. We now get reports of women  who die through what are called "stove  deaths" [apparently, stoves would burst  in the home, killing the woman.] In 90  percent of these cases, the stoves don't  burst. They are actually like the dowry  deaths in India. It is murder, and the  "burst stove" is the excuse.  . The fact that it is being reported is  important. It also allows agencies like  the human rights commission to actually catalogue what is happening.  Jaffer: Do you think the silence is  being broken because they are so many  highly placed women in the media?  Hashmi: Yes. There is an organization called War against Rape which is  almost entirely made up of media  women. Evenifwomendon'thavedeci-  sion-making power, they at least have  the ability to disseminate information  on activities like these. How it gets reported is a different matter, but the news  item is there. It wasn't before.  Mass media is important because  mass communication is big business.  Changing it has to be given a kind of  priority because access to it means access to a kind of platform women would  never be able to aspire to otherwise. But  I place myself more in alternative media,  or what we call cultural activities. Those  affect women's lives directly every single day.  You don't really think about how  different the songs sung when a woman  is born are from the songs sung when a  man is born. The girl is being told, "Your  life is going to be miserable, you'll grow  up to do this, you'll have to carry the  water..." From the first refrain when a  woman is born to the time she dies,  every thing that happens to her, the way  she carries water, the way she learns, the  way she plans the family or doesn't is  what 90 percent of women's lives are  about. That to me is culture. It has to do  with how one looks at things. If the  culture is not there, you are telling people to do something artificial. Telling  them to be entrepreneurs without providing the sense of identity or the social  will does not work.  For example, this international symposium on women and the media in  Toronto has a narrow definition of media that is Western, aggressive, and  which ignores oral traditions. The Fijian,  African, Aboriginal women and so on,  are saying, "Let's look at all the other  ways women have of articulating and of  communicating." Butit'snot happening  because it's not considered important.  We're having a women's conference  of 300 women from across Pakistan in  Lahore for April to prepare for the 4th  World Conference on Women in Beijing.  Women will bring alternative expressions, such as exhibitions, dance performances, theatre performances, crafts  and after every 15 minutes or half an  hour of formal presentations of papers,  we're planning to have something that is  non-written. We'll have mime, puppets,  songs...equally valid expressions of what  women have to say about their experiences. We want to create a holistic experience. I believe that often, what you  carry away with you is more potent if it  comesintheformof animageora sound  than the printed word.  Fatima Jaffer is a Kenyan-born South  Asian feminist, living in Vancouver.  12 Arts  Review:  The lesbian heresy  by Helen Story   THE LESBIAN HERESY:  A Feminist Perspective on the Lesbian Sexual Revolution  by Sheila Jeffreys  Spinifex, Melbourne, Australia, 1993  The Lesbian Heresy tops the list of  books I wish every lesbian would read  before we haveour next discussion about  sexuality. In it, Sheila Jeffreys tackles all  the tough issues: porn, sadomasochism  (SM), therapy, role-playing and queer  politics. Not coincidentally, those are the  debates which have left me feeling progressively more alienated from the lesbian "community" over the past decade.  Jeffreys' book is a logical extension of  her previous books, which addressed  feminism and sexuality at the turn of the  century (The Spinster and Her Enemies)  and the heterosexual "revolution" of the  1960s (Anticlimax). However, I suspect  that this book will be far more controversial among lesbians.  Sheila Jeffreys tackles  all the tough issues:  porn, sadomasochism,  therapy, role-playing  and queer politics.  Jeffreys' basic premise is that there  has been a lesbian sexual revolution in  the 1980s which "will prove as illusory  for lesbians as the sexual freedom offered to heterosexual women in the 1960s  and 1970s turned out to be." She believes  the new lesbian sex industry is turning us  into sex consumers, "not just of mechanical products but of other women in pornography," and she considers sex therapy  (Joanne Loulan and company) to be a  vital part of that industry. To Jeffreys, SM  and butch / femme roleplaying (which she  sees as a soft porn version of SM) are in  complete opposition to the lesbian feminist project of dismantling the values of  dominance and submission.  Jeffreys makes a distinction between  lesbian feminists and lesbians who are  also feminists. She says "There are many  lesbians who are active in equal rights  lesbian politics...almost indistinguishable from those of gay men, and who  are also feminists in regard to issues  such as equal pay, abortion, and sexual  harassment. But the lesbianism and the  feminism are separate." For a lesbian  feminist, Jeffreys says, the two are  inseperable and "all aspects of lesbian  life will be examined to see how they fit  with the feminist project"—including  what we do in bed.  Jeff reys feels that a number of forces,  including therapy and essentialism,  have combined to declare sexuality off-  limits for political analysis.  She has a knack for explaining concepts like "essentialism" and "post-  structuralism" and her book made me  feel better about my inability to make  sense of what's going on these days in  "lesbianandgay" studies. (That's  Jeffreys' name for theory that apparently makes no distinction between lesbians and gay men.) Essentialism is the  idea that "we're just born that way",  which removes from political discussion our choices to be lesbian, play roles  or engage in particular sexual practices.  Poststructuralism gives an academic rationalization for the idea that  playing with gender is revolutionary.  But Jeffreys says that role-playing, drag  and transsexualism hardly "have the  patriarchs trembling in their shoes."  Neither does the lesbian sexual  revolution, according to Jeffreys. "It is  possible for a small group of lesbians to  have access to some of the male privilege that is expressed in the use of  women as expendable sex toys without  offering any threat to male  power.. ..They become an honorary and  co-opted part of the ruling class, but  they will receive no privileges save a  share in the degradation of other  women."  She remembers that some feminists  used to hope for a brave new erotica  which would be produced by women  for women and embody new values.  What has in fact been produced is almost indistinguishable from hetero-  Easts ide DataGraphics  1460 CoMMERciAl DmvE     teI: 255955? Fax: 255 5075  • AcRylics  • WatercoIours  • Oil paint  • Stretched Canvas  Art SuppliEs  Recycled pApER producis^  sexual porn. Jeffreys feels there have  been serious consequences to "not applying the same standards of what is  good for women to the actions of lesbians as we do the actions of men."  I share Jeffreys' view that the lesbian  movement has gone profoundly wrong  and her belief that part of the reason is  conscious or unconscious repetition of  our sexual abuse as children. She stresses  that, survivors or not, we all learn our  sexuality in the context of male harassment and dominance and that is what  continues to turn many of us on, unless  we consciously rebuild our sexuality.  She calls for a  deeper separation  from male values  as well as a return to  organizing separately  from gay men.  Jeffreys feels that lesbians can operate, even with each other, from "heterosexual desire," which she defines as  eroticized power difference. She suggests untangling the ways in which we  have eroticized violence through con-  sciousness-raisinggroups, which include  discussions of our experiences of egalitarian sexuality.  A previously published essay entitled "Sadomasochism: The Erotic Cult  of Fascism" forms an appendix to the  book. Jeffreys points out that prior to the  Nazi takeover in Germany in 1933, SM  was a flourishing sexual practice among  gay men. Within a few years, SM techniques were used against these same  men as a form of concentration camp  torture. Jeffreys believes that SM is  unredeemably racist, whether or not its  practitioners make use of nazi costumes  and scenes. "Any eroticizing of power,  any glorifying of oppression can only  strengthen the values which maintain  all forms of oppression."  Another interesting idea of Jeffreys'  is that safe sex education has become a  vehicle for the introduction of pornography and gay male sexualvalues into  lesbian culture. She says lesbians' focus  on dental dams, despite the negligible  risk of HIV transmission through oral  sex, may be about a need to see lesbian  sex as "dangerous." She acknowledges  the appeal that outlaw status has for  many lesbians. The result is often involvement in "a queer politics founded  upon transgression [in which]...lesbians  can find themselves with some very inappropriate bedfellows"—most notably  pedophile activists. Jeffreys suggests that  the real outlaws are not "sex radicals",  who she says mimicheterosexual forms,  but lesbian separatists.  Jeffreys' final chapter is devoted to  her vision of a way out of the mess we're  currently in. She calls for a deeper separation from male values as well as a  return to organizing separately from gay  men. She notes that most lesbians separate from men to varying degrees in  practice, while dissociating themselves  from those who consciously choose sepa-  ratism as a political strategy. In conservative times, it's easier to maintain  some degree of man-loving as a form of  protection.  Jeffreys ends the book on a note of  optimism: "As the political tide turns, as  it seems likely to do in the nineties to a  context in which social change seems  possible again, and a new generation of  lesbians tire of much of the bleak fare  offered to them as lesbian culture, then  it is from our separate spaces that the  new growth will spring."  Whether you find the ideas in The  Lesbian Heresy a welcome relief or  whether they enrage you, it's worth read -  ing. It's the most comprehensive, clear  and up-to-date statement I've run across  of a strong lesbian feminist position on  the sexuality debates. The book is packed  with ideas and information, but I found  the language and style quite accessible.  Jeffreys writes with thoughtful passion  and with an edge or irony that sometimes made me laugh and ultimately left  me feeling more powerful and hopeful  than I have in a long while.  Helen Story is proud to be a lesbian  heretic.  (Ji&ti  WA   f   Book&  %**'    Ad Emporium  Western Canada's,  Lesbian & Gay  Bookstore  Open Daily 10am to 11pm  Our Books/Our Issues  Gay Fiction  Lesbian Fiction  Our Magazines & Journals  AIDS/Health  Humour  Erotica  Queer Theory  Feminist Theory  Biographies, Essays, Poetry  Religion & Spirituality  Art & Photography  Community  1221 Thurlow(at Davie), Vancouver, B.C.  Xel:(604)669-1753 or   Fax:(604)685-0252 Arts  Review: The Clayoquot Sound Anthology;  All-in-one read  by Noreen Kamal  WITNESS TO WILDERNESS:  The Clayoquot Sound Anthology  Edited by Howard Breen-Needham,  Sandy Frances Duncan, Deborah  Ferens, Phyllis Reeve, and Susan Yates  Vancouver: Arsenal Pulp Press, 1994  The total number of arrests made at  Kennedy Lake bridge in Clayoquot  Sound was 859. The numerous reasons  that would motivate so many people to  risk arrest are discussed in Witness to  Wilderness: The Clayoquot Sound Anthology-  This anthology contains detailed  accounts from over 120 writers of the  largest criminal prosecution of peaceful  dissent ever in Canada. In brief, the  protests began following the BC government's decision to give MacMillan  Bloedel the authority to clear cut the last  remaining intact temperate rainforests  in the world.  The anthology starts off at the  Kennedy Lake bridge. It then continues  with other pieces about the blockade,  and intense feelings of anger, sadness  and empowerment come through. The  stories then move to the peace camp,  which was set up in a clear-cu t. Towards  the end, the book goes into startling  details about the trials, convictions, fines  and sentences. Much of this information  was not covered in the mainstream media.  Throughout the book, there are  pieces of fiction that express appreciation for all aspects of nature. There is  also non-fiction dealing with the effects  of clear cuts on the entire ecosystem.  Several pieces break the abundant  myths we have been fed by the government and big industry, such as the myth  that it is environmental activism that is  destroying jobs in the forestry industry,  when the real culprit is actually technology-  There are many enlightening pieces  throughout the anthology. For me, the  most astonishing article is Kim  Goldberg's "Axed: How The Vancouver  Sun Became a Black Hole for Environmental Reporting". This article first appeared in This Magazine, and was also  nominated for Project Censored's top  ten list of the most under-reported stories in Canada of 1993. It tells the facts  about how a New York-based public  relations company, Burson-Marsteller,  was hired by BC logging companies to  run a "pseudo-populist" group called  the BC Forest Alliance. She goes into  detail about how The Vancouver Sun  played right into their hands.  Goldberg also contributes her comprehensive article, "Clayoquot Crackdown: Mass Clear-cuts, Mass Trial,"  where she writes about the extremely  unjust sentences that were handed out  [to protesters].  Another important piece in this anthology includes an excerpt from the  Royal Proclamation of 1763 and a clear  definition of Crown Lands which contradicts the "laws" made in the Royal  Proclamation. [The Royal Proclamation  of 1763 affirmed Aboriginal rights over  all lands that had not been formally  ceded to the British Crown. With the  Crown Lands Protection Act of 1839, the  British Parliament took control of all  these lands.]  The poems and prose included in  Witness to Wilderness convey the emotions and ideas of people from different  backgrounds. Luther Standing Bear's  piece titled "Wild West" challenges white  man's understanding and labelling of  nature as "wilderness," and as the "land  'infested' with 'wild' and 'savage' peo  ple. " Standing Bear says this understanding forms the basic mentality breeds  ideologies that justify clear-cuts, and  other destruction to our environment.  The poem "Let Us Worship Nature  Again" by Nadeem Parmar makes a  plea to stop technological advancement,  from which he conveys through an old  story and lines from Sikh holy scripture.  Of special interest is an excerpt from  Kinesis writer Shannon e. Ash's piece,  "Turning the Tide." Reprinted from a  longer piece in Kinesis [see Kinesis, Sep.  1993], the excerpt takes a close, personal  look at women's involvement in the  Clayoquot protests, and at the feminist  principles women put into practice at  the peace camp, such as a code of nonviolence and processes for dealing with  sexual harassment.  In general, this anthology brings  together pieces that have been previously published in various periodicals  in one comprehensive package. Witness  to Wilderness also brings together many  different people committed to not only  the movement for preserving the ancient rainforests in Clayoquot Sound,  but who challenge interlinked oppressions in mainstream society.  If that isn't reason enough to check  out this book, other reasons are that the  struggle to preserve Clayoquot Sound  still continues, and that part of the proceeds from Witness to Wilderness will be  donated to the group, Friends of  Clayoquot Sound.  Noreen Kamal is new to Vancouver and a  first-time writer for Kinesis.  Review:  The Longings of Women  by Janet Mary Nicol  THE LONGINGS OF WOMEN  by Marge Piercy  Fawcett Columbine, New York, 1994  Marge Piercy leads us through turning points in the lives of three very  different women with her latest novel,  The Longings of Women. Piercy probes  her characters' motivations, class culture and networks of support and non-  support. Hervision is of women whoare  broken, healing or strong as they struggle to cope with life in contemporary  Boston.  As with her novel, Fly Away Home,  Piercy incorporates more for the mainstream reader to relate to than she has in  most of her previous works. Piercy's  novels such as Vida, Woman on the Edge  ofTime, Summer Peop/e, for instance, were  about outsiders. The Longings of Women  deftly blends topical feminist issues, such  as poverty and violence, into the lives of  ordinary women.  Leila Landsman, a middle-aged academic, is the central character. As the  story begins, she has just lost her best  friend to breast cancer. The emotional  imbalance this creates in her marriage  triggersimportantself-realizations about  her needs and dependencies.  Mary Burke is Leila's "cleaning  lady," a divorced, middle-class housewife with grown children. Various disastrous events left Mary homeless—a  fact she hides from her far-off family and  customers.  And Becky Burgess is the subject of  Leila's latest academic project; she is a  working class woman in trouble with  the law, accused of murdering her husband.  The reader is drawn into a well-  crafted story as each woman's life is  WOMEN  IN PRINT  BOOKS & OTHER MEDIA  Discountsfor  book clubs  3566 West 4th Avenue  +  Vancouver BC  Special orders  Voice   604 732-4128  welcome  Fax      604 732-4129  10-6 Daily ♦  12-5 Sunday  braided together through their encounters with each other as they confront  obstacles and search for openings.  Men have a marginal but crucial  role with these women; they are lover,  accomplice, burden or traitor and influence each woman's sense of identity. Yet  having a relationship with a man is not  a woman's only option, and is not necessarily a woman's strongest social bond—  a recurring theme of Piercy's.  The description of workingclass life  is especially well-detailed as the suffocating and desperate place that Becky  longs to escape from. Piercy writes as  one who knows, having grown up in a  blue collar Detroit neighbourhood in the  1950s.  VANCOUVER  WOMENS  BOOKSTORE  315CAMBIEST.  VANCOUVER, B.C. HOURS:  V6B 2N4 MONDAY - SATURDAY  TEL: (604) 684.0523 10 AM - 6 PM  The day to day struggles of Mary, as  a homeless person, warn of the fragile  position of women without resources  and the possibility of abandonment by  one's own children.  The suspense is in the drama of each  woman's dilemma, submerging the  reader into a lengthy spell of good storytelling. Of equal value are the messages  Piercy delivers on how women live and  what women want. The Longings of  Women is a moving, instructive and compassionate novel; it moves the reader to  see and care and just possibly, act.  Janet Nicol is a teacher and freelance  writer.  INA DENNEKAMP  Piano Service  • Piano and Harpsichord  Tuning  Reconditioning Arts  Review: Out On Screen:  From lesbian to queer  by Cori Howard   OUT ON SCREEN:  Gay and Lesbian Fim Festival  Vancouver, June 1 to 11  For those of you who have actually  paid to see Hollywood's glamorized and  anachronistic version of lesbian life, Vancouver's upcoming gay and lesbian film  festival Out On Screen promises to give  you much more for your eight bucks.  But of course, being a festival by, for  and about a marginalized group, this  show ain't about money. (The show almost didn't happen last year. This year,  the coordinating staff is somehow pulling it together with several small grants,  program sponsors and corporate donations.)  "Particularly for women and for lesbians," says publicity coordinator Liz  Tevaarwerk, "we have tried to program  work that doesn't have high production  value, such as you see in Hollywood  films. More women have access to video  because it's so much cheaper. And although women often don't have access  to the money needed to make big films,  they still have important things to say.  "Screening these low budget productions also allows us to include the  voices of other minorities and oppressed  groups. We're not just looking for Desert  Hearts all the time because that's just one  voice and it's a voice that gets heard all  the time."  But, adds Tevaarwerk, decisions  about aesthetics in film and video are  not only dictated by access to resources  and money but also by choice—choosing not to use the Hollywood aesthetic  example. "Basically, this allows us to  show a wider expression of subjects in  terms of visuals."  The films being screened, or at least  those I had the pleasure to preview,  don't include any Hollywood renditions  of the evil lesbian murderess or the brainless, nymphomaniacal models. Out on  Screen's choice picks are much more  complex. And although surpassing Hollywood's banality isn't really difficult,  these films have much more to them in  their complexity.  "Sexual orientation is in all of them  in some way, explicitly or not," says  volunteer coordinator Chloe Brushwood  Rose. "They're not necessarily lesbian or  gay. They're queer. One of our goals is to  include a broad definition of what it  means to be queer. But certainly not all  films are about queerness, although the  people who make them are queer. It's  about the intersection of our identities  with other identities and experiences in  our lives.  "To understand the multitude of  names people choose or don't choose for  themselves," she says, "we try to present  films that examine queerness, not only  as sexuality but as politics and other  issues because it relates to so many other  things—like religion, friendship, love,  Alzheimers."  One of the films showing this year is  Academy Award nominee Complaints of  A Dutiful Daughterby Deborah Hoffman.  Still from Dream Girls  This film is a beautiful and moving journey through the various stages Deborah's  mother su ffer s as a resul t of Alzheimers.  Combining home movies, old photographs, current footage of conversations  and outings, and insightful audio clips  of telephone conversations and messages  left on answering machines, the film  provides an emotional commentary on  the impact this disease has on a person  and her relationships.  Through the daughter'sever-chang-  ing response to her mother's delusions,  the film questions the importance of  memory and the 'dis-ease' which society has in acceptingmental illness. "What  does it matter if she thought we went to  school together," says Deborah in the  film, "or if it wasn't May whep she said  it was. It was lighter and more fun to go  along with her delusions. The content  didn't matter."  Also showing this year as part of the  mixed program are two American Sign  Language (ASL) films by Ann Marie  "Jade" Bryan, founder of Deafvision  Filmworks, a company created to produce films and videos exploring multi-  and cross-cultural identities among the  deaf and people of colour. One of the  films, Listen to the Hands of Our People, is  a feature length documentary about  seven deaf people dealing and living  with AIDS. The other, Cutting the Edge of  a Free Bird, is a short film about a deaf  Black girl's struggle to decide between a  deaf or hearing college.  This year's seventh annual festival  includes over a hundred titles (chosen  from twice that number of submissions),  organized into 25 programs. There is an  equal number of films in the women's  programs, the men's programs and the  mixed programs. "Retrosex" is one of  eight women's programs that will show  "sexy lesbian videos of the past and  present." ASL interpretation will be offered during this program as well as for  the two opening night features. The  women's opening night feature on June  1st is Midi Onodera's Skin Deep, the first  lesbian feature made by a Canadian  woman.  Other films to look for are Yau  Ching's short experimental films; Jamika  Ajalon's Shades, a 12 minute montage  exploring issues of race and "sexual  deviance;" and Shasta Woman, a 50-  minute documentary about the life of  Norma Jean Croy, a Native American  woman who is still, despite her innocence, serving time in prison. This film,  while it illustrates the arduous battle  Indigenous people face against America's justice system, doesn't deal with  lesbian issues as much or well asitcould,  touching too briefly on the subject of  how lesbians are treated in prison.  Dream Girls is another must see.  According to Variety magazine: "A savy  little docu portrait of an all-femme Japanese troupe, this is as bizarre as the most  diligently transgressive gender-bender  enterprise and as benignly exuberant as  any kids-in-showbiz tract. Subject of this  straightforward but technically adept  docu is guaranteed to hook any audience that tunes in."  Out On Screen runs from June 1 to  June 11. For festival details, call 685-  1159.  Cori Hozvard is a first-time writer for  Kinesis.  MAY 1995 Letters  Kinesis loves receiving mall. Please  get your letter to us by the 18th of  the month.  If you can, keep the length to about  500 words. (If you go way over, we  might edit for space.)  Hope to hear from you very soon.  Love,  Kinesis  Vancouver's IWD  misrepresented?  Kinesis:  As one of the organizers of International Women's Day 1995 in Vancouver,  I would like to thank all those who  volunteered, donated and participated  in making IWD 95 so successful.  I would also like to point out some  problems with the article on IWD in the  April issue of Kinesis. The overall tone  was rather negative, which I found surprising. While there were some logistical  problems—such as the length and route  of the march—most feedback received  by the organizing committee was very  positive.  The article says the crowd of "around  600" was "smaller than usual." Without  falling into the numbers game, I would  point out to readers that the news release sent out by theorganizing committee estimated around 800 participants—  a number based on head counts, leaflets  handed out, and including the people  who were setting up in the cafeteria. The  April 1994 Kinesis stated there were  "more than 600" at the '94 IWD. I don't  see how that translates to this year's  crowd being "smaller than usual." (This  year's turnout was good despite the  typo in the February issue of Kinesis  about the location of this year's event.)  The article states that the message of  the speakers "was not heard" by those  who most need tb hear it. It is correct  that there was a virtual black-out of the  event by the manistream media. This  was extremely frustrating, as the IWD  PR committee contacted and re-contacted all of the media. Why the media  refuses to cover some events is an issue  which need s to be examined carefully by  activists. Some media contacts told me  personally that the death of the baby  whale at the Vancouver Aquarium was  a bigger story that day, no matter how  DR. PAULETTE ROSCOE  NA TUROPA THIC PHYSICIAN  HOMEOPATHY  COUNSELLING  DETOXIFICATION  HYCROFT MEDICAL CENTER  108-3195 GRANVILLE ST.  VANCOUVER, B.C. V6H 3K2  many people turned out for IWD.  Hoewever, I for one refuse to let the  mainstream media's coverage or lack of  coverage become the deciding factor of  an event's success.  I am concerned that Kinesis, while  stating it carries "News about women  that's not in the dailies," chose not to  carry any quotes of any of the speakers  at the rally. How did this help get the  message out?  As a subscriber to Kinesis, a paper I  respect and enjoy reading, I expect a  more supportive voice. Any readers interested in giving constructive feed-back,  orvolunteeringinorganizingnextyear's  events, please call me at 876-4123 or  Claire at 322-8630. You can help make  IWD 96 an even more successful event.  Yours,  Jane Bouey  Vancouver  The Editorial Board responds:  The suggestion above that the turnout  at Vancouver's IWD '95 celebrations "was  good despite the typo in the February issue  o/Kinesis" is misleading. The "typo" involved a missing line of text from the brief  mention of Vancouver's IWD '95 in the  column "As Kinesis Goes to Press." However, in that brief mention, information on  the change of location was given accurately.  Because of 'Kinesis' publishing deadlinesfor  ^community listings (January 18th), detailed  information on the Vancouver march and  rally was not available for inclusion into  February's Bulletin Board events calender.  In our March issue IWD Calender  centrespread, Kinesis published up-to-date,  accuratecommunitylistingsonlWDevents,  including a statement from the Vancouver  IWD '95 Committee on this year's theme,  and information on the Vancouver march,  rally, information fair and related IWD  Committee activities.  "Naming Murdered  Women" not a debate  Kinesis:  The Coordinating Collective of the  Victoria Status of Women Action Group  (VSWAG) is dismayed by the commentary, "Naming Murdered Women"  (Story & Plunkett), published in your  February issue.  To subtitle this piece "a feminist  debate" is to apply a misnomer—what  principle is being debated? The principle of breaking the silence? VSW AG  KARATE for WOMEN  Mon., Tues., Thurs. 7 pm  Fitness, self confidence,  self defense  ASK ABOUT BEGINNER GROUPS  11203 734-9816  strongly supports the principleof breaking the silence about violence against  women, and we have worked toward  this goal for many years.  However, the events which occured  during the planning of this year's December 6th Vigil found us struggling to  reconcile the principle of breaking the  silence with the equally important principle of being allies to our sisters in  marginalized groups. As feminists, we  pledge that when any woman says, "Stop  it! What you're doing is hurting me," we  will listen to her and re-evaluate our  methods. We at VSW AG remain committed to the principle of breaking the  silence. However, we recognize that  there is more than one way to break the  silence, and we do not have an investment in any one method.  The issue of breaking the silence  about violence against women touches  on our most basic values and rights and  on our wellness as women. The Coordi-  natingCollectiveof VSW AG invites community dialogue on the issue of naming  local women who have died as a result of  male violence as well as on the general  principles which should guide our work  toward ending such violence. We are  committed to actively promoting this  dialogue and to keeping the channels of  communication open.  VSW AG is hosting a feminist forum  at 7:00pm on April 20th at St. Alban's  Church, 1468 Ryan Street, Victoria, to  facilitate a community discussion about  breaking the silence. All women are invited to attend.  We are very disappointed that  Kinesis did not contact us before publishing this article. Instead of facilitating  a constructive dialogue, Kinesis has exacerbated the polarization of this issue  within the feminist community in Victoria. By publishing this biased commentary without contacting anyone at  VSW AG for balance, Kinesis has employed the kind of journalistic ethics we  might expect from mainstream media,  but not from a feminist publication of a  sister women's centre.  The VSW AG Coordinating  Collective:  Sandy McLeilan, Hallie Walsh,  Jaquie Denage, Josie Schofield, Lesli  Prpich, Morag Martin, Linda Shout,  Linda Toddun, Meika Martin, Karen  Berazon  The Kinesis Editorial Board responds:  Kinesis' mandate is partly to act as a  forum for dialogue and debate on issues  within the women's movement. It does this  with editorial independence from Kinesis'  publishers, the Vancouver Status of Women.  "Naming Murdered Women " was not solicited by Kinesis, and was published as an  opinion piece under the head "commentary"  in the February issue. The views expressed  do not reflect VSW policy or policy of the  Kinesis Editorial Board.  CALL   FOR   SUBMISSIONS  £^6*^  The Women of Colour Collective is now accepting submissions  for a special edition of Absinthe magazine for Summer '95. We  specifically encourage non-published, as well as published Women  of Colour, to submit stories, poems, black & white photo essays and  art work, works-inprogress, abstract thoughts, interviews, journal  excerpts and critiques. Please send your submissions and a short  biography to the Women of Colour Collective - Absinthe Project,  #321, 223 12th   As we cannot return your submissions, please do  not submit originals. For further information, please contact the  Collective at (403) 232-8458. (Deadline for submissions - May  30, 1995)  Co-op Radio  CFRO 102.7 FM  Listener Powered!  Community-Based!  Where women have a voice  Monday, 8:00 - 9:00pm:  WomenVisions  For women about women by women. Health, politics, law, spirituality, arts  sexuality and alternative ideologies.  Tuesday, 7:00 - 8:00pm:  OBAA  By women of colour for women of colour. Local community groups and events,  interviews and music not heard in the mainstream.  Thursday, 8:00 - 9:00pm:  The Lesbian Show  Friday, 8:00 - 10:00pm: Rubymusic  12 years on the air, Rubymusic features the best in music by women-old, new,  lost and found.  For a free listener's guide call 684-8494 Monday to Thursday, 10am - 6pm  J MAY 1995 Btjixettn Board  EVENTS  EVENTS  EVENTS  Bulletin Board listings have a maximum of 50 words. Groups, organizations and individuals eligible for  free space in the Bulletin Board  must be, or have, non-profit objectives.  Other free notices will be items of  general public interest and will appear at the discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $8 (+$0.56 GST) for  thefirst50wordsor portion thereof,  $4 (+$0.28 GST) for each additional  25 words or portion thereof and  must be prepaid.  Deadline for all submissions is  the 18th of the month preceding  publication. Note: Kinesis is published ten times a year. Jul/Aug and  Dec/Jan are double issues.  All submissions should include a  contact name and telephone  number for any clarification that  may be required.  Listings will not be accepted over  the telephone.  Kinesis encourages readers to research the goods and services advertised in Bulletin Board. Kinesis  cannot guarantee the accuracy of  the information provided or the  safety and effectiveness of the services and products listed.  Send submissions to Bulletin  Board, Kinesis, #301-1720 Grant  Street, Vancouver, BC, V5L 2Y6.  For more information call 255-5499.  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis? We want to get involved with  you too. Help plan our next issue. Come to  the Writers' Meeting on Tues May 2, 7pm at  our office, 301 -1720 Grant St, Vancouver. If  you can't make the meeting, but still want to  write, call us, 255-5499. No experience is  necessary, all women welcome. Childcare  subsidies available.  CALLING ALL VOLUNTEERS  Are you interested in finding out how Kinesis  isputtogether? Well...just drop by during our  next production dates and help us design  and lay out Canada's national feminist newspaper. Production for the June issue is from  May 16-23. No experience is necessary.  Training and support will be provided. If this  notice intrigues you, call Agnes at 255-5499.  Childcare subsidies available.  VSW WANTS YOU!  Want to get more involved but not sure where  to begin? Join us—become a volunteer at  Vancouver Status of Women. VSW volunteers plan events, lead groups, raise funds,  answer the phone lines, organize the library,  help connect women with the community  resourcestheyneed.andotherexcitingtasks!  The next volunteer potluck and orientation  will be on Thurs May 18,7 pm at VSW, 301 -  1720 Grant St. For more info, call Jennifer at  255-5511. Childcare subsidies available.  HEY VSW VOLUNTEERS  All VSW and KINESIS volunteers are invited  to gather at VSW.301-1720 Grant St, Vancouver, on the first Thursday of every month  to share stories, make newf riends, and listen  to interesting speakers from our communi-  Festival passes are on sale at discount  prices until May 15, at Little Sister's  and Harry's Off Commercial.  Out on Screen  0)  >  3  O  w  C  5  Lesbian & Gay  Film/Video Festival  June 1 to 11, 1995  The Caprice Theatre  965 Granville St.  Pacific Cinematheque  1131 Howe St.  Video In  1965 Main St.  ties. Invite other women who may be interested to join us. Here are some of the  upcoming gatherings: May 4,12-1 pm, speakers from Vancouver Housing Registry on  services for women including.advocacy and  education against sexual harassment. Bring  your lunch! On Jun 1, the Vancouver Women's Bookstore is hosting a special evening  for VSW volunteers. Please call Jennifer to  register. For more info call Jennifer at 255-  5511.  POLITICAL ACTION GROUP  The Women of Colour and First Nations  Women's Political Action Group meets once  a month. For more info please call Miche at  255-5511.   FEMINIST NETWORKING  THe Feminist Network Group meets once a  month. Call Miche for more info at 255-5511.  INTERNET WORKSHOPS  Mayworks Festival of Working People and  the Arts presents a series of workshops and  hands-on sessions on the internet, its impact  on our lives and its potential as an organizing  tool. Hands-on sessions with public access  terminals and support for those learning  about the internet from May 2-5 at Harry's  Cafe, 1716 Charles St, Van. Networking  workshop for women Thurs May 4, 3-6pm.  Sliding scale $5-15. To register or for more  info call Mayworks 874-2906 or e-mail to  mayworks @sfu.ca.  M.A.C. FARRANT  M.A.C. Farrant author of RawMaterialwiW be  reading from her works Tues May 9,7:30pm  at Women In Print, 3566 West 4th Ave, Van.  Admission free. For more info call 732-4128.  JOB OPENING  Kinesis requires a part-time  Production Co-ordinator for a  six month contract position.  The successful applicant will have:  • design, co-ordination and layout skills  (preferably with newspapers);  •knowledge of PageMaker 4.0 for IBM,  or familiarity with computers;  • an ability to train and work with  volunteers;  • an interest in feminist publications  and support for women's issues;  • an ability to work to deadlines.  The Production Co-ordinator works  flexible hours, mainly during the 3rd  week of the month (except Dec and  July when no paper is published), and  attends monthly Editorial Board meetings. A full job description is available  at our office.  Pay: $15.00/hr, 65 hrs/issue  Closing date: May 9 by 5pm  Start date: May 16  First Nations women and women  of colour are encouraged to apply.  Affirmative action principles will  be in effect for this hiring.  Send your resume and a covering  letter to:  Kinesis, 301-1720 Grant St.  Vancouver, BC, V5L 2Y6  or fax to (604) 255-5511  For more information call  (604) 255-5499.  BABAYLAN CELEBRATION  Babaylan (Pinay Lesbian Group) will be holding a celebration of International Worker's  Day and Asian Heritage Month in Toronto  Sat May 6 at 2pm at Jackman Hall, Art  Gallery of Ontario, 317 Dundas W. Features  a screening of ANG PAGHAHANGAD SA  KALAYAAN Longing For Freedom, a documentary video about the lives and struggles  of women workers in the plantations, factories, and service areas of the Philippines,  directed by Melanie Liwanag Aguila and written by P. GaliciaCleto, and perf ormancesby  the Imani Freedom Singers and Panday  Sining.Wheelchairaccessible, sign language  translated, childcare available. Tickets $5.  For more info call (416) 536-0307.  PRIDE FUNDRAISER  The Vancouver Pride Society is holding an  evening of food, entertainment and auction  at Isadora's Restaurant, Granville Island on  Mon May 15. Entertainment by singer Sibel  Thrasher and MC/comedian Tova Fox. Tickets $30-50, available at Urban Empire or  Little Sister's. Proceeds go to this year's Gay  Pride event. For more info call Pat Hogan at  253-7189.  CAROLINE WOODWARD  Kootenays writer Caroline Woodward will  read from a selection of her new and other  works Fri Jun2,7:30-9:30pmatthe Vancouver Women's Health Collective, #219-1675  W. 8th. Free admission. Sponsored by West  Coast Women and Words and Canada Cou n-  cil. For more info call 730-1034.  MEDIATED BODY  Mayworks Festival presents The Mediated  Body, a film and video series curated by  Marusya Bociurkiw, May 3 & 4,8pm at Video  In, 1965 Main St, Van. These films and  videos use alternative media to tell the stories of real lives caught in the fight for women's genes, wombs and bodies. Tickets are  $4-5. For more info call 874-2906.  MARGARET PRANG  Margaret Prang will be launching her new  book A Heart at Leisure from Itself, a biography of Caroline Macdonald, a Canadian social worker who was instrumental in Japanese prison reform in the early decades of  this century, Wed May 24,7:30pm at Women  In Print, 3566 West 4th Ave, Van. Admission  is free. For more info call 732-4128.  GRRRRLS WITH GUITARS  Grrrrls With Guitars presents Marcia  Thompson, Helen Gone, Mo Field, Michelle  Gooding and Kristia Jeanne Sheffield and  the Burning Mon May 29, 10pm at The  Railway Club 579 Dunsmuir St, Van. Tickets  $5 for non-members.  Kinesis is looking for a part-time Advertising  Co-ordinator who is creative, energetic, well  organized, responsible, and has good person-to-person skills and is aware of feminist  issues and values.  This is a six month contract position.  DUTIES INCLUDE  •soliciting new advertising accounts and  maintaining the current advertising base  • invoicing all accounts  Wage based on percentage of  advertising revenues per month  DEADLINE MAY 9, 5 PM  JOB STARTS MAY 16  Women of colour & First Nations women are  encouraged to apply. Affirmative action principles will be in effect for this hiring. Bulletin Board  EVENTS  EVENTS  EVENTS  DESH PARDESH FESTIVAL  The 5th annual Desh Pardesh festival, an  intra-national festival/conference exploring  the politics of South Asian cultures in the  West, will be held May 10-14 in Toronto. The  main festival space will be The Metro Central  YMCA, 20 Grosvenor St. Festival passes are  $40; each event priced separately and range  from $2-9. For more info contact Desh  Pardesh (416) 504-9932 or fax (416) 504-  9973.  MEDIA LITERACY WORKSHOP  A workshop for South Asian Youth on how  the media influences society, the biases and  stereotypes in the media, and how to create  images that best represent South Asian youth  will be held Sat May 13,10am-1 pm at Trinity  Square Video, 172 John St, 4th Fir, Toronto.  The workshop is part of the Desh Pardesh  festival. To register contact Desh Pardesh at  (416)504-9932.  BETTY JANE WYLIE  Betty Jane Wylie will readfrom her newbook,  Reading Between the Lines: The Diaries of  Women, an exploration of women's journal-  keeping past and present, Tues May 30 at  7:30pm at Women In Print, 3566 West 4th  Ave, Van. Admission is free. For more info  call 732-4128.  SEATTLE JAZZ CONCERT  The Laura Love Band and the Billy Tipton  Memorial Saxophone Quartet will be performing Fri May 19 at 8pm at the Museum of  History and Industryjn Seattle. Tickets$12.50  in advance from Bailey/Coy Books or Red &  Black Books or $14 at the door. For more info  call in Seattle (206) 632-4358.  POWERFUL VOICES  Powerful Voices, a benefit concert for the "I  am Your Witness Campaign", will be held  Sat Jun 3, 8pm at the University Temple  Methodist Church, 1415 N.E. 43rd, Seattle.  Proceeds from this concert will go to support  sending women to Zagreb to teach women  self-defence. Tickets are $12.50 from Bailey/  Coy Books or Red & Black Books. For more  info call 632-4358.  CHILDCARE CONFERENCE  The Canadian Child Care Federation's  (CCCF) Fourth Annual Conference, Caring  For a Living, will be held May 25-26 in  Calgary, Alta. This year's conference will  focus on those who care for children. For  more info contact CCCF at 306-120 Holland  Ave, Ottawa, Ont, K1Y 0X6; or call (613)  729-5289 or fax (613) 719-3159.  NFB SCREENINGS  The Canadian Association of Elizabeth Fry  Societies will be holding screenings of four  videos fromthe National Film Board: Without  Fear, The Vienna Tribunal, When Women  Kill, and Twice Condemned, across Canada.  There will be a special screening at Parliament Hill in Ottawa Fri May 5, with additional  screenings during Elizabeth Fry Week from  May 8-14 in Vancouver, Halifax, Kelowna  BC, and Peterborough Ont. For more info,  call the E. Fry Society in your area.  WOMEN'S HEALTH READINGS  Octopus Books is hosting a reading by two  feminist authors who write about women's  health issues Thurs May 11,7:30pmat 1146  Commercial Dr. Julie Vandervoort will read  from her book, Tell the Driver, and Kirsten  Emmot will read poems drawn from her  experience as a doctor in her new book, How  Do You Feel. Admission is free. Wheelchair  accessible. For more info call 253-0913.  SEXUAL ASSAULT PREVENTION  A gathering for South Asian women on sexual  assault prevention will be held in Toronto on  Thurs May 11 from 2-5pm at 519 Community Centre, 519 Church St. This gathering  will provide South Asian women with the safe  space to share their experiences around  sexual abuse and present their visual artwork, prose and poetry. Please pre-register  forchildcareandtranslation needs. For more  info call (416) 504-9932. Visual art must be  submitted to Desh Pardesh, 96 Spadina Ave  Suite 607 by May 8.   A CUT ABOVE  One in Ten Events presents A Cut Above.  For women who enjoy dancing to selected  hits of the 50s, 60s, 70s & 80s in a spacious  smoke-free ballroom (covered balcony for  smoking); with ample seating and a large  dance floor and free onsite parking. Sat Jun  17 at 1495 W. 8th Ave (at Hemlock St). Doors  open at 7pm. Jive lesson and dancing 7:30-  8:30pm. Cold buffet and dancing 8:30pm-  1:30am. Sponsored by and tickets available  starting May 15 at Harry's Cafe (1716 Charles)  and Women In Print (3566 W 4th Ave).  Advance tickets: $15 single/$28 for two, $17  each ticket at the door.  EVENING OF LOVE SONGS  Cris Williamson and Tret Fure in concert: An  Evening of Love Songs Sat May 13, 8 pm at  the Unitarian Church (949 W. 49th Ave at  Oak). "The blend of their soaring, compelling  harmonies sound as one voice". Pioneers in  the women's music industry, at Cris' casual  suggestion in 1971, Olivia Records, the first  national women's record company, was  founded. Tret Fure, singer and instrumentalist, was one of the first women to begin  engineering and producing soundtracks and  albums. Tickets $18-$25. Available at Little  Sister's, Urban Empire, Drive, and Women  and Print. A Sound & Furies Production. For  more info call 253-7189.  KAREN MCLAUGHLIN  Artist and writer Karen McLaughlin will be  showing her visual art and reading from her  novel Choral, published by Press Gang Publishers, Sat May 13, 8pm at Artspeak Gallery, #401-112 W. Hastings, Van. For more  info call Shamina at 876-7787.  VOICES OF MIXED RACE WOMEN  Vancouver contributors to the anthology,  Miscegenation Blues: Voices of Mixed Race  Women, edited by Carol Camper (Sister  Vision Press) will be reading and performing  Sat May 13,7:30-10pm atthe Native Friendship Centre, 285 East 5th (near 5th and  Main). Admission $2-5. Sponsored by West  Coast Women and Words. For more info call  730-1034.  UNION WOMEN  The 1995 Summer Institute for Union Women  will be held at Simon Fraser University,  Burnaby, BC Jun 3-7. Courses and workshops will cover topics such as international  labour solidarity, dismantling racism,  homophobia, and leadershipfor women. For  registration info call Christine Skrepetz at  (604) 430-1421 or Brenda Makeechak at  (604)524-0391.  HEALTH AND SAFETY CLINIC  An occupational health and safety clinic in  BC, Why and When, sponsored by the Labour Studies Programme of Capilano College will be held May 12, 7-10pm and May  13, 9am-4:30pm at the Sheraton Inn Plaza  500, 500 West 12th Ave, Van. This conference will bring together workers, health and  safety advocates, union leaders, doctors  and nurses, and other professionals to discuss such a facility in BC. For more info call  Capilano College 984-4954..  BRIDGING THE GAP  Representatives of women of colour community groups and Simon Fraser University  members will come together for a conference to discuss initiatives and achievements,  and to focus continued efforts on placing  women of colour at the centre of the production of knowledge within the university Sat  May 13, 9am-4:30pm at Simon Fraser University, Harbour Centre Campus, 515 W.  Hastings St, Van. Daycare vouchers are  available. To pre-register please call the  Women's Studies department at 291 -3333.  GROUPS  NEW STAFF AT VLC  The VancouverLesbian Connection has three  new staff people. "Hot femme babe" Terrie  Hamazaki is the centre's new volunteer coordinator, and Sonia Boyce and Tina Hurd  are the new co-coordinators of the Lesbian  Battering Project. To find out more about the  happenings atthe VLC, call 254-8458. Centre hours are Tues and Thurs 12-7pm and  Sat 12-5pm.  SINGLE MOMS HOMESHARING  The YWCA Single Mother's Homesharing  Network is holding info sessions for single  moms who want to find out more about the  Y's homesharing service, network and socialize with other single moms. The next  sessions are: Mon May 1 at 7pm and Thurs  May 4 at 9:30am at 501 E. Broadway, Van.  Free childcare available. Transit fare can be  reimbursed. Please register in advance. For  more info call 873-1189.  GROUPS  DONATIONS FOR BOOKS  Out On the Shelves, the library located at the  Gay and Lesbian Centre, has started a new  club for people who wish to help develop the  library collection and receive a tax break at  the same time. Donations will go to purchasing books or other material. For specifics or  for more info regarding the library contact  Out On the Shelves at the GLC, 1170 Bute  St, Van. The library is open seven nights a  week from 7:30-9:30pm and on Thurs from  12-3pm.  MATURE LESBIANS  Are you starting or continuing the coming out  process? Are you looking for friendship and  support? Come out and join us for lunch, and  help plan some social activities. We're Just  Out. Please call Geri at 278-8497 (evenings).  NOT SO STRICTLY BALLROOM  Not So Strictly Ballroom invites lesbians to  share a large dance floor, music and social  dancing every Saturday morning at Trout  Lake Community Centre, 3350 Victoria Dr,  Van. Two-step, tango, waltz, rhumba, cha-  cha and more. To register or for more info call  Hazel at 255-1937 or Gay at 254-8998.  VLC WRITER'S GROUP  Doyou write? Wouldyouliketo?Doyou want  critiques and helpful suggestions while pursuing your endeavours? Come join the Vancouver Lesbian Connection's writer's group  as we write, share techniques, critique and  work with each other. Next meetings Sats  May 13 and May 27, 7pm at the VLC, 876  Commercial Dr.  OUT ON SCREEN  Out On Screen, Vancouver's lesbian and  gay film/video festival needs volunteers to  help mountthisyear's 7th annualfestival Jun  1-11. If you can help, please phone Chloe at  685-1159.  VOICE MAIL IN FRENCH  If you know French and would like the opportunity to speak it on a regular basis, the  Francophones and Francophiles from the  gay and lesbian community invite you to  listen to their voice mail, 688-9378, ext 2120.  A&iefav**:  Canada's best Latin American Women's magazine  covers a broad spectrum of issues and interests,  with interviews, literature, testimonies, essays,  humour, reviews and visual art.  Aquelarre is published four times a year in English and Spanish  Available at bookstores or  by subscription. Great deal!  Yearly sub. only $15 Cdn.  Enter  Win  his year's topic: Androgyny. Se  our 2nd annual  "In the First Person"  literary contest  $300 first prize  $150 second prize or  >75 third prize  lo Roon  of One's Own Co  lest. PO Box  46160. Sta  onD,  Vancou  er. BC. Canada V  6J5G5.  Judging and prizes: Blind  |ud   n —typ  name, add  ess.  telephone number on sepa  will be published  Room c  /One's Own.  in Kinesis?  Callus Bulletin Board  SUBMISSIONS SUBMISSIONS  DA JUICE  Da Juice, a new black lesbian magazine,  wants ideas, poetry, rap, stories, essays,  songs, recipes, love letters, slides or photographs, collages, quilts orclothing, hairstyling  tips, etc. Work written in languages other  than English welcome. All submissions must  be double spaced and typed or neatly printed.  Works u nder another name accepted. Please  enclose SASE and bio. Send submissions to  Da Juice, PO Box 156, Stn P, Toronto, Ont,  M5S 2S7. For more info call (416) 423-8031.  Deadline is July 15.  COUNTERING FMS'  Daniela Coates, a ritual abuse consultant is  seeking submissions for a book exposingthe  detrimental effects of False Memory Syndrome. Submissions should be 1000 words  or less. Requests to use an alias will be  respected. Submissions can not be returned  so keep a copy for your records. Send submissions to Daniela Coates, PO Box 29064,  Delamont Stn, Vancouver, BC, V6J 5C2 or  call 731 -5243.  CRIAW CONFERENCE  Northern Visions: Northern Futures, a conference co-hosted by CRIAW/ICREF Prince  George organizing committee and the University of Northern BC is seeking submissions of papers and presentations which  address women enabling women to build  connections in the North and for the North.  Send proposals to CRIAW Conference '95,  c/o Deborah Poff, University of Northern BC,  3333 University Way, Prince George, BC,  V2N 4Z9. For more info call (604) 960-5611.  Deadline for proposals is May 15.  Bed & Breakfast  A Beautiful Place  Centre yourself  in the comfort and tranquility  of B.C.'s Super Natural  Gulf Islands.  Healthy Breakfasts  Hot Tub & Sauna  5 acres of forested  foot paths with ponds  ocean and mountain views  A Memorable Escape  (604) 537-9344  1207 Beddis Road,  Salt Spring Island, B.C. V8K 2C8  LESBIAN SHORT FICTION  Women of Diversity Productions are seeking  short fiction containing significant lesbian  content for inclusion in Lesbian Short Fiction,  a new English language periodical to premiere in the Spring of 1996. Mystery, humor,  fantasy, science fiction, horror, gothic, romance stories etc are all welcome. Stories  should be 10,000 words or less. Payment is  1 cent per word plus two copies upon publication. Send SASE for guidelines to Jinx  Beers, Editor, Lesbian Short Fiction, 6507  Franrivers Ave, West Hills, Calif, 91307,  USA. For further info call (818) 704-7825  (9am-6pm). Deadline for inclusion in first  issue is May 30.  POSTCARDS FOR BEIJING  The Toronto Women for a Just and Healthy  Planet invites women to create images for  the Lookout Postcard Project. Submissions  should represent a feminist perspective on  health, housing, human rights, militarism,  arts and culture, poverty, childcare, environment, globalization, work, etc. Send good  quality photocopies of your work measuring  5x8 or 4x6. Write your name, address and  phone number clearly on the back of each  submission and mail themtoTWJHPc/o Box  332, Stn A, Toronto, Ont, M5W 1C2. All  submissions will go to Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing and will be part of  the International Day of Women's Action on  Sept 6.  PREGNANCIES OF INCEST  Have you been pregnant by incest? Are you  achild born of incest? Little is written of incest  from the point of view of the women and  children themselves. It is my intention to  gather more stories and publish them to end  the silence and shame and to provide a  resource for those not ready to tell their  stories. Send essays, poems, or line drawings to Claiming Our Whole Lives, PO Box  204,125A-1030 Denman St, Vancouver, BC  V6G 2M6. Deadline is Jun 30.  CLASSIFIEDS  THE ART OF HANDKNITTING  Rediscoverthe lostfemale art of handknitting  while enjoying the beauty and quality of our  100 percent natural fibre yarns: wools,  mohairs, alpacas, cottons, linens and silks.  Patterns, kits and how-to books—whether  you're a beginner or an^expert, we have  something for you. Catalogue and complete  yarn samples $4 (refundable with purchase).  Elann Fibre, PO Box 771, Cranbrook, BC,  V1C4J5. Toll free fax/voice mail: 1 -800-720-  0616. Visa accepted. All female owned and  operated.  READINGS AT THE WESTERN FRONT  Three exciting Vancouver writers will be reading at the Western Front  Lodge in Vancouver on Wednesday, May 17 at 8:00 pm. Larissa Lai  (pictured above) will read from her novel, When Fox is A Thousand,  forthcoming from Press Gang Publishers this fall. Nadine Chambers, a  Jamaican Zami who writes to read, will read from her series The Pillow Talk  Tales. Shamina Senaratne, a poet, visual artist and dramatic writer whose  Theatre/Dance show River Run appeared at this year's Women In View  festival in Vancouver, will read from her current works. Admission is $4/$3.  The Western Front is located at 303 E. 8th Avenue.  CLASSIFIEDS CLASSIFIEDS  APPRENTICESHIP OPPORTUNITY  Woman-run organic mini-farm on beautiful  Lasqueti Island offers 8-week apprenticeships. Short-term work exchanges also considered. Write to Rainwalker Farm, Lasqueti  Island, V0R 2J0, or call (604) 333-8644.  SUSAN DALES R.P.C.  Counselling for women. Taking a feminist  approach to healing from painful childhood  experiences, battering, loss, and other personal problems. Sliding fee scale, free initial  half-hour consultation. Call 255-9173 for an  appointment. Canadian Guidance Counselling Association member.  LYDIA KWA, PSYCHOLOGIST  I'm pleased to announce the opening of my  private practice in clinical psychology  (Granville Island office). I'm a feminist therapist and I work with clients on a variety of  issues. I welcome new clients, especially  survivors, gays and lesbians, women of colour, artists and writers. Call Lydia Kwa at  255-1709.  ECOMARINE  OCEAN KAYAK CENTRE  Coastal Kayaking  School  Ocean Kayaking for Women  Join us for this introductory all-women's course.  No previous paddling experience necessary.  Dates: May 29 & 31 or  June 19 & 21  Cost: $70 - equipment included  To register contact Ecomarine Coastal Kayaking School at 689-7520  GENERAL PRACTITIONER  Joan Robillard, MD, Obstetrics, General  Practitioner for all kinds of families is now  located at 203-1750 E10th Ave, Van. Phone  872-1454, fax 872-3510.  SEARCHING FOR ROOMMATES  One woman and two men trying to form a  people of colour household. Looking for two  additional roommates—women of colourpre-  ferred. Character house: hardwood floors,  garden, fireplace, recycling. Gay-positive  environment. Two rooms available for May 1  or Jun 1: $275 and $175 per month, plus  utilities. Call 876-4876.  MENOPAUSE THERAPIES  Hormonal Migraine and alternate therapies  for menopause. Seminars, counselling, 4nfo  packages. Norma Roberts, BSW, Health  Educator. 874-9590.  GUEST HOUSE FOR WOMEN  The back hills—a guest house for women.  Come retreat to 10 private hillside acres.  Enjoy delicious breakfasts and cozy wood  fires. We are only a half hour from Victoria,  minutes from ocean beaches and a short  hike to a spectacular view of the Juan de  FucaStrait.andtheOlympicMountainsstarts  at our back door. Very reasonable rates.  4470 Leefield Road, Victoria, BC, V9B 5T7.  Call Marlene or Margaret at (604) 478-9648.  WOMENFRIENDS MUSIC CAMP  Enjoy a weekend with women where your  infinite creativity and musicality can find expression. Play, sing, chant, jam, perform,  compose, meditate, giveortakeaworkshop,  or simply relax. Nov3,4 & 5, Camp Alexandra,  Crescent Beach. Sliding fee $150-$250 including catered meals and accomodation.  For info and registration call Penny Sidor at  251-4715.  KINESIS W^flg^^^^f0^  1   One year                   D Cheque enclosed      If you can't afford the full amount for Kinesis  1   Lj$20 + $1.40 GST     □ Bill me                     subscription, send what you can.  1   Two years                 □ New                         Free to prisoners.  1   D$36 + $2.52 GST     □ Renewal                   Orders outside Canada add $8.  1   Institutions/Groups  □ Gift                          Vancouver Status of Women Membership  1   D$45 + $3.15 GST     □ Donation                  (includes Kinesis subscription)  D$30+$1.40 GST  cc 1  11  2 1  1  I 1  1   Name  1   Address  1   Country                                                                        Postal code  1   Telephone                                                               Fax  Published ten times a year by the Vancouver Status of Women  #301 -1720 Grant Street Vancouver, BC V5L 2Y6