 SfCCi.'i C0J.LF.CTW9  KIN€SIS  The Feminist News      35c  november 76  vol 5 no6l|)  Emmeline Pankhurst — Marlene Miller  €lection$: feminist issues  Life in the Lace Ghetto  at VSWf       Kinesis means change RAISE THE  FEMINIST ISSUES  ARE YOUR CANDIDATES SHOULDER-TO-SHOULDER  ON WOMEN'S ISSUES?  OR DON'T THEY KNOW  THERE ARE ANY?  In preparation for the civic elections  which are taking place this month in  various parts of the lower mainland,  VSW, in cooperation with the Vancouver  Women's Health Collective, with Vancouver  Rape Relief, with Vancouver Women's  Transition House and with the Pooh Corner  Daycare Society, have prepared a series  of questions concerning women's issues  in civic politics.  The objective of this questionnaire  is to raise consciousness about xromen's  issues under municipal government. If  you are voting for a particular candidate,  or along party lines, we urge you to  find out what your candidate's or party's  stand is on women's issues. Find out  if s/he is committed to feminism. Feminism, as Websters says, is "the theory  of the political, economic and social  equality of the sexeso" A person or  party committed to feminism cannot,  therefore, be working to maintain the  ascendancy of a narrow economic elite.  Make sure you know where the candidate  stands on feminism before giving her  or him your mandate.  HOUSING  Housing is a major area of concern to  women in Vancouver. It is a recurrent  and serious problem for single-parent  women, women earning low wages and  women on fixed incomes.  Few women  can afford to buy or build according  to our outmoded cultural ideals.  Cooperative housing is one answer  to women's housing needs.  It is  not only economically much more  feasible for us, but also offers women  a sense of community and self-help  usually denied to women in traditional  single-detached homes.  ASK YOUR CANDIDATE  AS A CANDIDATE, WHAT WOULD YOU DO,  IF ELECTED, TO ENCOURAGE THE DEVELOPMENT OF MORE COOPERATIVE HOUSING IN  THIS CITY? WOULD YOU ACTIVELY  ENCOURAGE THE BUILDING OF CITY-OWNED  RESIDENCES FOR ELDER WOMEN, SINGLE  WOMEN, THE RECENTLY WIDOWED AND  EMOTIONALLY DISTURBED WOMEN?  Many women encounter discrimination  in housing even if they can afford  adequate accomodation. Less than  1% of Vancouver landlords said they  would rent to single-parent women  who are 10% of this city's population. Single-parent women are  considered irresponsible and their  children are deemed undesirable  as tenants.  Landlords are reluctant to rent  to women from minority groups : to  immigrant women and to native women.  IF ELECTED, WHAT WOULD YOU DO TO  ENFORCE THE ELIMINATION OF SEX-  DISCRIMINATION IN 'RENTAL HOUSING  IN THE CITY OF VANCOUVER?  Women constitute the majority of  residents in public housing which is  supposed to meet their needs, yet  public development in this city  lacks childcare centres, women's job  training facilities, and any kind of  reactional facilities geared to women.  IF ELECTED, HOW WOULD YOU CHANGE PUBLIC  HOUSING PROJECTS TO SERVE THE NEEDS OF  THE WOMEN WHO OCCUPY THEM?  In 1975, Vancouver Women's Transition  House, which offers temporary crises  shelter to women and children, accomodated 753 people. However, in the same  period they were forced to turn away  883 desperate women and childen due  to lack of space, staff and funding.  A large percentage of the people coming  to the Transition House have left  their homes after physical and emotional  abuse from their husbands. With little  money and clothing, with no jobs or  transportation, they require financial  and emotional support, counselling and  care for a longer period of time than  Transition House can give them. Due  to limited facilities, single women  must leave VTH after two days.  Women with children may stay for no  more than 4 weeks. Lack of adequate  housing often forces these women back  into dangerous situations, while  the city owns expropriated houses  which have been vacant for years.  IF ELECTED, WOULD YOU FAVOUR GRANTING  FREE SPACE, HEAT AND LIGHT IN PUBLICLY  OWNED BUILDINGS FOR THE OPENING OF  MORE TRANSITION HOUSES FOR WOMEN?  THE RED DOOR  About three quarters of the residents  of Vancouver Women's Transition House  obtain low-rental accomodation through  the Red Door Rental Agency, which is  operating on a short-term grant from  city hall. This grant is due to expire  shortly. A majority of the women at  VTH are unable to afford the fees of  the profit-making rental agencies.  About 250 families a year depend on  the Red Door.  IF ELECTED, WOULD YOU VOTE IN  SUPPORT OF PERMANENT, REGULAR FUNDING  TO THE RED DOOR RENTAL AGENCY?  DAYCARE  Women form 43% of the B.C. labour  force. Over half of these women have  small children at home. In many cases,  working mothers are the sole support  of their families, and in others,  they provide the necessary second  income which keeps their families  above the poverty line. For many whc  cannot afford or find daycare, welfare  is the alternative to work. If women  are to have equal opportunity in the  work place, the responsibility for  day care must be shared by society.  The Canadian Council on Social  Development has estimated that  200,000 more daycare centres are  needed in Canada. Daycare services  are poorest for children under three  and for older children who have no  supervision after school until  supper time. The Vancouver School  Board has agreed to make school  space available for after school  daycare yet they have left the  decision up to the principal of the  school.  IF ELECTED, WOULD YOU SUPPORT CITY-  FUNDED HOMECARE PROJECTS FOR SICK  CHILDREN, TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS  FOR CHILDCARE CENTRES AND FOOD  FACILITIES FOR THEM, TOO?  This city has some strange priorities  when it comes to providing for the  well-being of its citizens.  Vancouver by-laws require that  developers provide a certain number  of parking spaces for cars in their  building project. However, space for  children and play areas are not required  under the law. Which are the more  important? Children or cars?  IF ELECTED, WOULD YOU VOTE IN FAVOUR  OF A MUNICIPAL BY-LAW REQUIRING ALL  DEVELOPMENT TO PROVIDE ADEQUATE IN-DOOR  AND OUT-DOOR PLAYSPACE FOR CHILDREN? Kjnesis  ISSN 0317-9095  Volume V, #61  SUBSCRIBE  NAME   MEMBERSHIP DONATION  $  November '76.  INSTITUTIONAL SUB: $10 a year  RENEWAL MEMBER    KINESIS is sent to all members in  good standing of the Vancouver  Status of Women. Membership fees are  by yearly donation. In determining  your donation, we ask you to balance  your own financial situation with the  fact that KINESIS costs approximately  $5.00 per person to print and mail.  KINESIS costs 35 cents per copy in  bookstores.  KINESIS is published monthly by the  Vancouver Status of Women. Its objective is to promote understanding  about the changing position of women  in society.  Views expressed in Kinesis are those  of the writer and unless specifically  stated do not reflect the policy of  V.S.W.  PUBLICATION DATE : The last week of  each month.  COPY DEADLINE: The first of the previous  month (e.g. Nov 1st for the December  issue).  KINESIS EDITORIAL AND PRODUCTION  COMMITTEE: Janet Beebe, Linda  Hourie, Gayla Reid.  SUBMISSIONS: KINESIS welcomes submissions from members of V.S.W. and  will certainly consider those from  non-members. All submissions,  including letters to the editorial  committee, must be accompanied by  the writer's name and address.  Pseudonyms will be used where requested. Where necessary, the  editorial committee shall edit for  brevity, clarity and taste.  CORRESPONDENCE: KINESIS, Vancouver  Status of Women, 2029 West 4th Ave.,  Vancouver, B.C. Canada V6J 1N3  CREDITS: Cover, Chomo Uri; p.2,  Second Wave; p.4, The Critical  List; p.4 photo and Carr comment,  The Vancouver Sun; p.6 Issues in  Radical Therapy; p.7 Maggie Shore  photos; p.11-12 Maggie Shore photo;  p.18, Emergency Librarian; p.22  Big Mama Rag.  REMEMBER: VSW has orientation  meetings on the second and last  Thursday of each month, at 8.00.  Lesbian drop-in every Wednesday  night, at 8.00. Phone 736 3746  for details.  IN THE FUTURE: A closer look at  Affirmative Action - does it foster  the growth of the Corporate Woman?  A comparative analysis of provincial  party policy on women's issues. A  regular film column, women's graffiti.  Vancouver  electoral politics  In researching material at the City  Clerk's office at Vancouver City Hall,  I gleaned the following information  about women in politics in this city.  In the last decade, since the rebirth  of the women's movement, the number  of women running in the Vancouver  city elections has increased by 400%!  In 1966, there were only 11 women  candidates.  In 1974, there were 40  women running.  However, the number of women elected  during the period 1966 to 1974 increased from only 5 to 7, or by 40%.  Ten times more women ran for election  in Vancouver than were elected. To  put it another way, only one woman  in ten was elected.  There has never been a woman mayor  of Vancouver, although female mayors  are common in smaller British Columbia  towns. Maybe we'll get one this time.  Over the last ten years, most women  ran for school trustee of alderperson.  Parks commissioner was their third  choice and mayor last.  It seems that only every other election did a woman decide to run for  mayor, and only one woman did so each  time.  In 1966, there were 75% more men than  women candidates.  In 1974, there  were 24% more men running than women.  But it seems that the more women run,  the more they are elected.  More than a few women were housewives  at the time they declared their intention to run for the election. Others  listed their occupations as: teacher,  student, secretary, social worker,  doctor, researcher, writer, florist,  daycare worker, realtor, nurse, dietitian, consumer advocate, minister,  biologist and retired.  So if you think you aren't qualified  to run in the city elections, THINK  TWICE. Municipal elections are a  good place for women to start their  political careers. (KR)  I would like to send a friend a  complimentary copy of KINESIS.  My name is  My friend's name and address:  Name   The B.C.Teachers' Federation policy  states that "elementary and secondary  classes shall not be segregated on the  basis of sex." In 1975, 41 out of  62 Vancouver elementary school play  reas were segregated. In secondary  Jschools in Vancouver, physical ed-  ■ucation, home economics and industrial  jarts, as well as guidance and counselling classes are still sex-segregated,  [as well as many teachers' staff rooms.  IF ELECTED, WOULD YOU FAVOUR STRENGTHENING THE VSB POLICY BY AMENDING IT  TO CONFORM TO BCTF POLICY? DO YOU FEEL  |THAT VSB POLICY AS IT STANDS PERPETUATES  DISCRIMINATION IN EDUCATION? WHAT ROLE  DO YOU SEE FOR EDUCATORS IN REDRESSING  CENTURIES OF SEXUAL INEQUALITY IN  EDUCATION?  IF ELECTED TO SCHOOL BOARD, WOULD YOU  LOBBY FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF  'NON-SEXIST CAREER COUNSELLING? WHAT  ■ALTERNATIVES WOULD YOU FAVOUR TO DEAL  [WITH THE PROBLEM?  VSB  [Vancouver School Board emphasizes the  development of self-concept and  individual potential to equip students  for self-actualizing lives. Yet, with  sex-role stereotyping in the education  system, it is difficult for young women  to become self-actualizing.  VSB policy urges educational staff to  be sensitive to the Provincial  Advisory Committee on Sex Discrimination's  guidelines, called "Equal Treatment  of the Sexes."  HOW AWARE DO YOU THINK MOST EDUCATORS  ARE ABOUT SEXISM? WHAT LEADERSHIP  ROLE DO YOU THINK VSB HAS IN RAISING  THEIR CONSCIOUSNESS?  IF ELECTED,  WOULD YOU ACTIVELY SUPPORT IN-SERVICE  WORKSHOPS FOR TEACHERS AND ADMINISTRAT  ORS TO ALERT THEM TO THE SERIOUS  DANGERS OF SEX-ROLE STEREOTYPING?  ■Vancouver School Board believes that  ^"opportunities to hold administrator's  positions should be open to men and  women equally." Yet of the 112  elementary and secondary schools in  the district, there are only 4 women  principals and 8 women vice-principals.  That is an increase of only 1 woman  administrator in the past year.  ARE YOU SATISFIED WITH VSB POLICY AND  PRACTICE IN REGARD TO EQUAL OPPORTUNITY  FOR FEMALE TEACHERS?  IF ELECTED, WOULD  YOU SUPPORT AN AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PLAN  TO ENFORCE EQUALITY?  Recently, the B.C.Department of Education published a Women's Studies Course  for grades 11 and 12. It will be locally  developed and requires approval from  each school board.  IF ELECTED, WOULD YOU ACTIVELY SUPPORT  [THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THIS COURSE IN  ALL VANCOUVER SECONDARY SCHOOLS? WHAT  KIND OF DIRECTIVE ON REQUIREMENTS  WOULD YOU LIKE TO SEE ACCOMPANY THIS  COURSE?  Studies have documented that young  women have the lowest level of  physical fitness in the country.  IF ELECTED, WOULD YOU SUPPORT  INTEGRATED SPORTS ACTIVITIES FOR  BOYS AND GIRLS?   ■Call Nadine for more questions. 736 3746 RAPE  Rape is one of the fastest growing  violent crimes in Vancouver. Statistics  show tht only approximately 10% of  all rapes are reported to the police.  More rapes are reported to Vancouver  Rape Relief. In the last 2 and a half  years, the Vancouver Rape Relief has  handled well over 400 cases of sexual  assault, and dealt with another 50%  informational calls.  Yet the majority of rapes are never  reported, due to the shame and fear  that victims suffer. And due to lack  of funds and publicity, many women  simply do not know that Vancouver  Rape Relief exists.  Vancouver Rape Relief is experiencing  an increased demand for its services,  which include emotional, health and  para-legal counselling. In addition,  public education and prevention programs  are being demanded of them by a needy  community. The agency averages one  speaking engagement request per day.  Clearly, the services which this  agency provides are vital. But the  provincial government has cut back  their funds by 55%.  Vancouver Rape Relief HAS NEVER  RECEIVED ANY FINANCIAL SUPPORT FROM  THE CITY OF VANCOUVER although it  serves a clientele which is mainly  resident in Vancouver. The $300  per month office rent is in itself  prohibitive to the continuing  operations of Rape Relief.  At present, only one afternoon in  the whole training program is devoted  to instructing Vancouver police in  how to deal with rape cases. The  police manual contains only two  paragraphs on the subject.  IF ELECTED, WOULD YOU COMMIT  YOURSELF TO OFFERING VANCOUVER  RAPE RELIEF FREE RENT, HEAT AND  LIGHT IN A PUBLIC BUILDING?  IF ELECTED, WOULD YOU BE WILLING  TO PRESSURE THE VANCOUVER CITY  POLICE TO HIRE MORE FEMALE POLICE  OFFICERS TO DEAL WITH THE VICTIMS  OF SEXUAL ASSAULT?  IF ELECTED, WOULD YOU PROPOSE AN  EXTENDED RAPE RELIEF TRAINING PROGRAM  FOR ALL POLICE PERSONNEL?  AFFIRMATIVE ACTION  The majority of working women in Vancouver are under-employed in low-paid,  low-status jobs with little chance for  advancement. They are clustered at the  bottom end of th'Äûe occupation ladder,  with little or no job security, bargaining power, or fringe benefits.  Yet many women must support themselves  and their families on low or fixed incomes. Many supply the necessary second  income that keeps their family above  the poverty line. Immigrant women  workers suffer the most.  A number of Canadian cities, among them  Toronto, have mayor's task forces on  the status of women. In addition, they  have equal opportunity offices operating  in the city personnel department at  city hall.  But not Vancouver. We have  not yet developed a plan to integrate  women and minorities into all fields  and levels of municipal employment.  In July 1975 Vancouver city council  approved a committee to plan and implement an equal opportunity program  for women employed by the municipal  government. The committee was composed  of city council members, representatives  of women's and minority groups, as  well as members of civic employees'  unions.  However, city hall did, not provide  the committee with paid staff or  office expenses with which to do the  job. Consequently, the program was  doomed to failure. A year later,  little has been achieved. The program  requires renewed and serious commitment  from the new city council. One full-time  salaried worker plus office expenses  are required for at least one year to  design the affirmative action plan  for city hall. After that, a deadline  for action, a monitoring system and  funding for implementation of the program are needed over a several year  period to make the plan effective.  What is needed is an affirmative action  plan. This means the preferential hiring  of qualified women into jobs they have  traditionally been excluded from by  discrimination. It involves training  programs to educate women for better  positions, non-sexist career counselling,  deadlines for achievement of goals for  women's employment, monitoring systems  to make sure the plan works. Affirmative  action is designed to ensure women equal  opportunity in all aspects of hiring,  promotion and superannuation.  WHAT IS YOUR DEFINITION OF AFFIRMATIVE  ACTION? WHAT IS ITS PURPOSE?  HOW DOES  IT WORK?  WHY IS IT NEEDED? IF ELECTED,  HOW MUCH TIME, MONEY AND STAFF WOULD  YOU ALLOT TO SUCH A PROGRAM?  Next month's KINESIS will carry a summary of election promises, so that we  will be able to compare them with performance.  WOMEN'S CENTRES  In recent years, a number of women's  centres have been operating in Vancouver  with inadequate and infrequent funding  from provincial and federal governments.  Several of them are now threatened with  closure due to funding cutbacks, despite  the increasing demand for their services.  Women's centres serve a clientele which  is based in this city yet they have  received little or no funding from  city council, although it seems obvious  that Vancouver has a responsibility to  support community operated women's  social services.  Many women turn to their local women's  centre as their last hope after experiencing discrimination or benign neglect  from their employers, landlords, social  workers, banks, doctors and lawyers.  Even the best intentioned civil servant/  professional is often totally unaware  of the specific needs of women and  therefore often recommends biased and  inadequate solutions.  In contrast, women's centres offer their  clients a non-sexist, supportive and  self-help environment where they learn  how to use community resources, and  gain an understanding of the bureaucracies affecting them.  In addition, women's centres act  as advocates, monitoring city agencies  to make sure they respond to women.  Given the city's limited financial resources for grants to community groups,  the city could at least offer women's  centres free space, heat and light in  publicly owned buildings. This small  gesture would go a long way towards  improving the status of women in  Vancouver.  AS A CANDIDATE, WHAT IS YOUR DEFINITION  OF A WOMEN'S CENTRE? WHICH WOMEN'S  CENTRES IN VANCOUVER AP.E YOU PERSONALLY  FAMILIAR WITH? IF ELECTED, WOULD YOU  VOTE IN FAVOUR OF COMMITTING FREE SPACE,  HEAT AND LIGHT IN PUBLICLY OWNED BUILDINGS FOR WOMEN'S CENTRES IN THIS CITY?  Although we have applied these issues  to the Vancouver situation, they 'are  equally important in all parts of the  lower mainland.  action  On Wednesday, November 10th, at 9.30  in the evening, The Vancouver Status  of Women will present a televised  all-candidates debate on our Woman  Alive Program, on Channel 10.  action  V.S.W. has prepared an extended  version of this questionnaire which  includes questions on HEALTH and  TRANSIT. You can drop by the office  and pick up some copies.  Phone the local headquaters of your  party or your candidate and find out  when the all-candidates meetings are.  Take a copy of the questionnaire, or  a copy of KINESIS so that you will be  able to find out where the candidates  stand.  Go to meetings held by your  party or your candidate and raise the  feminist issues. If you don't, nobody  else will. THIS TIME, VOTE FOR A  PERSON WHO IS COMMITTED TO FEMINIST  ISSUES.  action  If you can't make it to a meeting,  PHONE YOUR CANDIDATE'S HEADQUARTERS  and ask about her/his stand on these  issues. out to fight controls  OUT TO FIGHT CONTROLS  Women from across Canada were out to  fight controls on October 14th.  Throughout British Columbia, women  from the women's movement joined with  women and men from organized labour,  with housewives, pensioners, students  and the unemployed, with native and  gay people, with working people from  every sector to protest the Liberal  government's repressive AIB legislation.  In Vancouver, scene of the. largest  protest in the country, it was probably the biggest demonstration of  labour which this city has ever seen  marching in its streets.  Although  men were definitely in the majority,  and although so far only 22% of the  female work force of this country is  organized, there were as many women  protesting October 14th as there  were at the Women Rally for Action  Day in Victoria last March.  The  National Day of Protest was an important one for women, and here's  why.  THE AIB LOCKS WOMEN INTO LOW-PAY,  DEAD-END JOBS  While the government advises Canada's  low and middle income families to  practise restraint, they have permitted Bell Canada, for example, to  increase its profits by 30% within  the first six months of 1976.  While  even AIB chairperson Pepin admits  that "businesses have too many ways  of using the rules to their advantage"  the AIB continues to roll back wage  increases and to freeze wages at 8%  over what they were last year. Women  in the workforce earn about half of  what men earn.  Now, with the wage  freeze, we have lost the right to  fight for equal pay for equal work.  We are locked into our low-paying  jobs, with the percentage increase  never allowing us to catch up.  About 40% of the Canadian labour  force is female. This is not to mention (of course) the millions of  hours which women spend yearly in  domestic labour, which goes unrecognized as work and which is regarded  as being irrelevant to this country's economic and political life.  72% of all women are channelled into  y\  When government...asks one segment to accept an  unequal burden, the only course is dissent on a  massive scale.  Shirley Carr, CLC Vice-President.  V  either the retail trades, service or  clerical areas. This is where the lowest-  paid, the most repetitive and the most  menial dead-end jobs are.  This is where  society makes full use of its sex-trait  conditioning of women to demand the  greatest degree of meekness, compliance  and subordination to management.  THE AIB PERPETUATES THE WAGE GAP  Each year, the wage gap widens in  every job category and the AIB's  legislation to compensate for this'  is completely useless.  Between  1969 and 1972, the wage gap in  office occupations, to cite an example, widened by 70%. Even in  occupations where women predominate,  men earn far more.  In fact, working  women now earn less, relative to  men, than they did in 1939.  Sexual  discrimination is a handy device  for maintaining a cheap labour pool.  The AIB freeze makes this discrimination more salient than ever.  WOMEN ARE HARD-HIT BY THE AIB'S  DEMONSTRATED INABILITY TO CONTROL  PRICES  That poverty is a women's issue in  Canada can never be glossed over by  the appointment of a few women to  choice professional posts. The female head of family in this country  has a 40% chance of living below the  poverty line, simply by virtue of  her being female. Almost two-thirds  of the total low-income unattached  individual population is female -  predominantly elderly women living  alone in the city.  More than two-  thirds of the women under 25 have  incomes of less than $5,000 per annum, whereas less than one third of  the men of corresponding age have  incomes of less than $5,000.  As the cost of living continues to  rise, women living in poverty are  pushed further below the poverty  line.  The AIB is a repressive legislation  which uses sexism as one of its tools  to get working people to bear the  brunt of the economic crisis.  That's why women were among the one  million Canadians protesting October  14th.  Gayla Reid  October 14th was the National Day of Protest. V.S.W. was there. sorwuc  PORT HARDY WOMEN JOIN  The Service, Office and Retail Workers  of Canada (S.O.R.W.U.C), which is a  union formed and controlled by women  workers, now has applications before  the Canada Labour Relations Board for  11 bank branches in B.C.  The latest  of these is an application to represent  the ten employees of the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce.in Port Hardy.  When the Victory Square Branch of the  Imperial Bank of Commerce decided to  join SORWUC this summer, it was the  first application ever received in the  history of that bank.  Employees not  only from the Bank of Commerce, but  also from the Bank of Montreal and the  Bank of Nova Scotia have decided to  join SORWUC.  The workers at the Port Hardy branch  of the Commerce, in common with bank  employees from across the province who  are joining SORWUC, feel that bank employees have not been treated fairly  in terms of benefits and wages.  They are tired not only of low wages  and lack of benefits, but also of the  lack of respect and recognition for  their skills and seniority. They are  joining SORWUC because they have decided that bargaining collectively is the  only way to improve their condition.  With banks using the AIB wage freeze  to keep wages at a minimum, the need  for the protection of a union contract  is now greater than ever.  Negotiating with management as a certified bargaining unit is much more  likely to produce results than waiting hopefully for management to  volunteer better working conditions  and pay increases.  HOW TO  GET  STARTED  If you think a union in your bank is  a good idea, the Bank Employees  Organizing Committee of SORWUC has  the following suggestions about how  to go about it:  The first thing to do is to talk to  other people in your bank about it.  If there are a few of you with the  same idea, you can be an informal  organizing committee maybe dividing  up the job of talking to everyone  else.  You should only talk to  employees about the union, and not  to anyone in management.  It's a  good idea to join the union first,  before you talk to too many other  people about it, in case there are  >AUNlONFOR  S  ^ WORKING   £  any hassles. And you should talk to  people at lunch time or after work,  as it is an offence under the Labour  Code to do this on company time or  property.  Be discreet - x^hile technically you can't b'e fired for union  organizing, management can always  find some reason to fire troublemakers !  Each person who joins the union must  fill out an application (which you  can obtain from SORWUC at #1003-  207 West Hastings Street, Vancouver)  and pay $3.00.  The person who fills  out the receipt for the form must  first be authorized by the union  to accept memberships.  This means  that one or two people in your  branch should join, and then the  national officers of the union can  authorize them to sign up everybody  else.  When you are signing people up as  members, make sure the person who is  joining pays the $3.00.  Don't lend  her the money or pay it for her.  Make sure that the new member signs  the form, and check that the dates  on the form are all correct.  As soon as you have a majority of  the employees signed up (actually it  only takes 35%), SORWUC can make an  application for certification to the  Labour Relations Board.  If you want help signing people up,  union members from other branches  are available to talk to the people  in your branch after work or at lunch  time.  A SORWUC member will also give you  detailed information as to how the  certification process takes place.  Once certified, your contract could  include cost-of-living increases,  sick children leave, job security,  grievance procedures and an end to  discrimination by parenthood, sex  and age.  BANK EMPLOYEES HAVE FORMED THEIR  OWN LOCAL  With membership growing so quickly  the bank employees have formed  their own local of SORWUC.  On September 26, 197 6, the Bank  Employees Organizing Committee  was granted their own charter.  It was an historic and exciting  meeting for all bank employees.  As Local 2, the UNITED BANK  WORKERS, as they have chosen to  call themselves, elected their  first Executive and adopted their  Local by-lax<rs. All officers are  bank employees.  IT'S A  MYTH  THAT  BANKS  CANT  UNIONIZE  UNITED BANK WORKERS, Local 2 of  SORWUC, is now organising to  research their present benefits  to compare them with unionized  offices. They see this as being  a very important task in determining how and what to bargain  for when they negotiate their  first contract.  If you would like to receive  more information about forming  a union in your bank, fill out  this form and send it in to  UNITED BANK WORKERS, 1114 - 207  West Hastings, Vancouver 2, B.C.  I would like further information about  the Bank Employees Organizing Committee.  Employed by  FOR FURTHER  INFORMATION, CONTACT  UNITED  BANK  WORKERS,  Local  2 of  SORWUC  at  1114 - 207 West  Hast-  ings, Vancouver 2, B  C. Or  give  SORWUC  a ca  11 at 684  2834.  (bank and branch)  Home phone  (All replies in strictest confidence) many groups, one B.C.F.W  THE THIRD ANNUNAL CONVENTION OF THE  BRITISH COLUMBIA FEDERATION OF WOMEN  will be held November 5,6,and 7 in  Vernon, B.C. This will be a working  convention for delegates from the  B.C.F.W. member groups. Interested  observers are welcome. Any woman who  would like to attend the convention  as an observer, and whose group has  not received information packages  could contact the B.C.F.W. Convention  Registration at 1061 East 40th Ave,  Vancouver, for more information. A  registration fee of $4.00 will be  charged, delegate or observer.  This working convention will hammer  out policy in many areas, including:  HEALTH; WOMEN IN PRISON; LESBIAN  RIGHTS; CHILDCARE; RAPE; LABOUR;  EDUCATION; HUMAN RIGHTS; MEDIA;  CONCERNS OF NORTHERN WOMEN and  GENERAL ACTION.  In preparation for the Convention,  a parliamentary procedures workshop  was held for delegates from the lower  mainland area on October 21st.  Delegates to Convention are reminded  to bring their copy of policy resolutions with them.  The following is a brief summary of  the major items in the last standing  committee report submitted by the outgoing standing committee. Both the  educational provisional subcommittee  and the communications provisional  subcommittees were not active during  the summer and early fall,  RIGHTS OF WOMEN IN PRISON PROVISIONAL  SUBCOMMITTEE was very active this  summer and fall. Their main projects  were : monitoring the condition of the  Doukhobor women at Oakalla who were on  hunger strike; setting up programs for  women in Oakalla, including one on  nutrition; writing policy for the  November convention. The subcommittee  also participated in the August 10th  National Prision Justice Day, held to  protest solitary confinement.  The subcommittee decided to change  their name from Rights of Women in  Prision Provisional Subcommittee  to Women Prisoners and Prisoners'  Family Rights Provisional Subcommittee.  According to the B.CF.W. constitution,  this name change must take place at  Convention.  The reasons for the name change are  important'ones. First of all, the  provisional subcommittee felt that it  was necessary to help the wives, mothers,  sisters and girlfriends of male prisoners, because these women are also  "serving time." Secondly, since a  large number of the subcommittee's  members were from areas other than the  lower mainland, where most of B.C.'s  prisons are located, women in outlying  areas could become actively involved  in working for prisoners' rights if  the families of prisoners were to be  included within the subcommittee's  constituency. Thirdly, there are only  about 80 women in prison, compared to  1,000 men. Therefore, it's impossible  to change the prison system without  touching on the situation of male  prisoners. If the subcommittee only  works on the situation at the women's  unit at Oakalla, they will never be  able TO CHANGE THE PRISON SYSTEM  WHICH ENSLAVES MEN AND WOMEN BOTH.  THE REGIONAL REDISTRIBUTION COMMITTEE  has confronted the two basic problems  concerning regional representation on  the B.C.F.W. The first of these is  that more regional representation was  needed on the standing committee so  that all areas of the province could  be equably represented. Therefore,  they have divided the province along  electoral boundaries into twelve  regions, adding only one extra regional representative.  The second problem  is basically insoluble. This is that  women in rural areas must travel long  distances to a few women's groups, while  women in urban areas must visit many,  many women's groups within a short  distance. The redistribution committee is looking for feedback upon  the new regional representation along  electoral boundaries, especially from  those women who live in rural areas.  THE LESBIAN RIGHTS RATIFIED SUBCOMMITTEE  has a particularly active lesbianism/  feminism workshop, which has been giving  workshops for women's groups. Response  to these workshops has been so good  that the subcommittee has been unable  to meet the demand, because (of course)  they have no money at all. They are  encouraging lesbian feminist groups  in other areas of B.C. to be responsible  for groups wanting workshops in their  region. One of the subcommittee's projects this fall is the compilation of  their workshop material into a WORKSHOP  KIT which will give women's groups the  tools to explore the material in the  workshop in greater depth.  This will  be especially valuable in communities  which the workshop is unable to reach.  VSW can provide more details about  the lesbianism/feminism workshops to  interested women's groups.  Next month's KINESIS will carry a full  report on the Convention, including  details about the new policy, subcommittees and standing committee,  as well as reports on the workshops  and general business.  third annual convention  NOVEMBER 5,607 WOMENS INTERACT CO-OP  HERSTORY  In the spring of '75, several women  artists in the Vancouver area began  meeting to discuss the need for a  communal studio.  Such a studio would provide the community needed  for the development of a feminist art consciousness. WANTED:  a space where women could share  resources, inspiration and information.  It was an ambitious and demanding undertaking. What was needed  was a large space which could  accomodate not only a shared  darkroom and kiln and numerous  individual studio spaces, but  also public performances of dance,  poetry and song, skills workshops and critiques.  The group began meeting regularly to shuffle the formidable  forms which would transform them  into a legal co-op, and to develop  their common goals.  Twelve months  and many meetings later, they  located a large area under the  Avalon Hotel, at 165 East Pender.  It was dim and dusty, but it was  a home. Co-op members painted the  whole space white, and rented out  a total of 10 studios at 20 dollars  a month each. Gradually, women  began to put up walls and shelves  and to build desks. The workspaces  took shape.  DARKROOM  Several co-op members built themselves a darkroom, which is now  well-equipped with enlarger, trays  and so on. At present, it is used  by five members who purchase  chemicals communally and who share  expenses. Darkroom instruction is  available and any new member may  use the darkroom. If you are interested in becoming a member-user,  call Judith Sandiford at 733-  3681 or Maggie Shore at 738-9454.  Interests of the co-op members are  diverse: painting (oils and acrylics),  drawing, ceramics, sculpture, filmmaking, puppetry, photography,fibre  art, plastics, graphic and urban  design, writing and printmaking.  maggie shore and gayla reid  THE WOMEN'S INTER ART CO-OP  is a feminist studio at 165  West Pender.  From October 19  to October 30, Co-op members  held their first exhibition  at the HELEN PITT GALLERY,  which is located just above  and adjacent to their basement studio.  This successful first exhibition introduced the public not  only to the high quality of the  art coming out of the co-op, but  also to the concept of women  working together in a strong,  supportive art community.  moving through  the flower  WOMEN'S  INTERART  COOP  **JUDY CHICAGO *** THROUGH THE FLOWER *** JUDY CHICAGO *** THROUGH THE FLOWER  By excluding the work of women artists  from history, men not only maintain  control of women, but also of the  world o..  Since men assume that their view of  reality is the real one, they measure  our perception against theirs and,  because they are dominant, validate  our point of view .only to the degree  that it corresponds to their own.  The silence about women in history,  about women's accomplishments, and  most importantly, about women's point  of view as it is expressed in art, is  not an accident.  Once a woman has challenged the basic  values that define her, those that  tell her what she is supposed to be  as a woman, she will inevitably challenge others as she discovers in her  creative journey that most of what  she has been taught to believe about  herself is inaccurate and distorted.  It is with this differing self perception that the woman artist moves  into the world and begins to define  all aspects of experience through  her own modes of perception, which,  at their very base, differ from  society's.  WORKSHOPS, SEMINARS, READINGS, CRITIQUES.   SEARCH FOR FUNDING  As the co-op has grown over this summer  and fall, women with information and skills  in particular areas have begun to give  workshops and to hold seminars. Recently, there have been darkroom workshops  on developing and enlarging techniques;  lecture-and-slide presentations on  Brigit Riley and Barbara Hepworth; seminars and demonstrations on fibre and  plastic arts. There have also been a  number of poetry and journal readings,  and any woman writer is invited to  participate. These events will continue to develop over the winter  months, and a calendar of co-op  events is contained in their monthly  newsletter.  If you would like to  receive a copy of this newsletter,  call Maggie at 738-9454.  Over the past eighteen months, the  Inter Art Co-op has grown into a fully  functioning studio where women can  explore together what it means to be  a woman and an artist in this society.  Already, the co-op's skills workshops  and educationals have reached out  into the community and the co-op women  have found that there are many eager  to share their facilities and resources.  Because the Inter Art Co-op has much  to offer the community, we hope that  the powers-that-be will provide it  with the necessary funding so that  it can become an integrated and  energetic part of this city's art  community.  Periodically there are meetings at  the studio or in women's homes where  co-op members gather with their most  recent works for critical discussion  and analysis.  THE CO-OP WARMLY WELCOMES NEW WOMEN  If you are interested in finding out  more about the co-op, call Shelley  at 683 6296; Ellie at 255 1823 or  Maggie at 738 9454.  .MOVING "THROUGH THE FLOWER" IS A PROCESS THAT IS AVAILABLE TO ALL OF US, A PROCESS THAT CAN LEAD US TO A PLACE  WHERE WE CAN EXPRESS OUR HUMANITY U.S.  THAILAND  CHILE  A California firm which hires mercenaries to fight ir Africa, Asia  and South America says that nearly  half of its recruit'; are women.  The firm, El Tanas vn'cerprises of  Anaheim, states that Tcmen are  especially goer'  work and as pi3  experts. The  said, "Uncle S.  these skills or  many, many yer  El Kamas hire^  yearly contrac  or more. (TOW\  in intelligence  ots or demolition  Lrm'a director  n has had women with  its payroll for  'ñ†ron^.n  on weekly and  3 at $350-500 a week  IRELAND  IRISH WOMEN'S P.ACE. MOVEMENT  The last two months have seen a wave  of peace marches in Northern Ireland,  involving thousands of women, both  Catholic and Protestant.  The women have joined forces to demand an end to Lhe sectarian violence which plagues everyday  life in Northern Ireland.  The two women who started the  campaign are Betty Williams,  32, a housewife from Belfast,  and Mairead Corrigan, a 23  year old secretary. Mairead t  Corrigan is the aunt of  young children x;ho were  crushed to death last  August, when they were  hit by a car which was  being driven by an IRA  gunman fleeing from the  police. Betty Williams saw  the children die.  The peace campaign has met  with violent opposition from  some groups of Roman Catholics,^  who have attacked the women and '  disrupted the marches. An official\  statement issued by the IRA said  that the IRA respected the right of  women to demonstrate for peace, while  asking them not to forget the struggle  of the past years, and not to call for  peace at any price, which would be to  surrender.  Opponents of the Irish Women's Peace  Movement claim that the women have  little analysis of the complexity of  the struggle, and that they support  the presence of the British security  forces in Northern Ireland.  YUGOSLAVIA  In the Islamic region of Yugoslavia,  wives are still sold for an average  of $4,000 and are expected to be  complete slaves to their husbands.  Zihriaja Hussein, the rebel leader  of women in the area, is training  young women to take as much as they  can from their husbands in gifts  and bridal fees and then to run  away and 'remarket' themselves.  "We old-timers were taught to be  guerillas in World War II, and can  train guerillas again,'.' she said.  (BMR)  Seventy young Thai xvomen workers were  holding and running a blue-jeans factory in Bangkok for over five months  earlier this year.  The workers locked the factory bosses out after unsuccessful protests over wages and  working conditions. They raised wages  by 150%, and with the elimination of  profits, were selling the jeans for  one-third the former price. Many  workers were living in the plant to  prevent a move by the former owners  to take it back. They withstood  attacks from hired thugs and police.  Before the takeover, starvation wages  had forced them to fight each other  for piece work materials.  The women  said they were willing to wage a militant struggle to retain the factory.  What the fate of these Thai sisters  has been now, after October's military coup in that country, is unknown.  (BMR)  women  round  wof]  THE COMMITTEE FOR THE DEFENSE OF HUMAN  RIGHTS IN CHILE is a group in Burnaby  which organizes monthly letter campaigns for Chilean political prisoners.  Here is a list of prisoners on whose  behalf the defense committee is writing letters of protest:  YVONNE SZASZ PIANTA - lawyer, xrork-  ing for ENEMI in La Serena. Arrested  on October 30th, 1974 in La Serena.  Married, 26 years old, home address:  Infante/Rengo, kept at the 'Casa Cor-  reccional', being processed through  the 'Fiscal Melo' process in the. Second 'Fiscalia Militar'. Her mother,  a Swiss Citizen, is being kept hostage  in Santiago.  REINA WALKIRIA JORQUERA ITURRIETA  - social worker. Arrested on January  20, 1975 in Valparaiso.  Single, 25  years old. Home address: Avda. Gomez  Carreno 4287, Vina Del Mar.  She is  being kept at the 'Tres Alamos' concentration camp.  VALESKA CONTRERAS ALVAREZ - housewife.  Arrested on August 13, 1974. Married  with three children. She is 59  years old. She was arrested together with her three children  and is being kept at 'Tres  Alamos' concentration  camp.  SEND YOUR LETTERS OR  CABLES to several or all  of the following :  Horacio Arce, 56 Sparkes  Street, Ste 816, Ottawa.  General Augusto Pinochet,  Edificio Diego Portales.  Santiago de Chile.  Ministerio del Interior, General Benavides  Edificio Diego Portales,  Santiago de Chile.  ElMercurio, Compania 1214,  Santiago de Chile.  Also, please send a copy  f of your letter or cable to  /the COMMITTEE FOR THE DEFENSE  'OF HUMAN RIGHTS IN CHILE,  ' P.O.BOX 80593.  ''Find out more about what you can  do for our Chilean sisters by  contacting the Committee at the  above address. They have a phone  number at their downtoxm offices  (906 - 207 West Hastings Street) which  is 669 - 5545.  SWITZERLAND  It's a free country, so do as  you're told. The federal Swiss government, under pressure to liberalise the current abortion laws, has  proposed a referendum on the subject-  but suggested that people vote against  it.  As the laws stands, abortions are  permissable only when the woman's  health is in danger. According to  the Swiss Union for the Decriminalization of Abortion, this situation  is leading to an increase in illegal  abortion to around 10,000 a year.  Safe abortions can be obtained, but  at a price beyond the reach of most  women. The government's proposals  would allow abortion when pregancy  resulted from rape, when the foetus  was deformed, or when the woman  would suffer a health risk or social  stress. These proposals were acceptedj  with some modification, by the Lower  House but were rejected by the more  conservative Upper House.  (WR)  ENGLAND  A group called "Free Sanitary Protection"  is asking the National Health to provide  free sanitary napkins and tampons to women.  They group explains that women spend anywhere from $630 to $1,000 in our lives  having periods.  They are protesting the profits made  by Tampax and Southalls, the major producers of sanitary protection.    (TOW)  By now we  should be used to commercial  enterprises capitalising on the women's  movement while at the same time seeking  to destroy it.  In Britain, they are  filming a super-budget remake of  King Kong which exploits the women's  movement.  The new beast is to be  Queen Kong, the first liberated lady  gorilla, 64 feet tall and accompanied  by forty exotic jungle 'girls' all  bent on reducing London to rubble. (WR) Sisterhood mokgs the newS  MURDOCH  MURDOCH GETS 1/4 RANCH  The Supreme Court of Alberta awarded  Irene Murdoch one-quarter of her husband's property in the amount of  $65,000 despite her lawyer's request  the estate be divided in half.  Ms. Murdoch's fight for an equal  share in the marital property on  separation from her husband.in 1968  gained her nationwide publicity and  support of the women's movement.  During the past six months, Ms. Murdoch, now 51, has lived with her  mother in an $80 per month basement  apartment.  $200 a month maintenance  payments from Mr. Murdoch are supplemented by $51 per month in provincial social assistance.  Although Ms. Murdoch maintains she  worked as hard as her husband in  running the ranch over the past 25  years and contributed financially to  the purchase of the ranch, the courts  ruled there was no evidence of this.  Mr. Murdoch is expected to appeal  the judgment against him. Ms. Murdoch's lawyer asked for a lump sum  settlement on her behalf of $133,000  while her husband's lawyer argued  $15,000 would be appropriate.  (K.R.)  BANKS  It is true that women are under-  represented among the economic  elite of this country. There are  only about five female bank directors in Canada. Both the Royal Bank  and the Bank of Nova Scotia say they  have been unable to find a woman  qualified to sit on their boards,  due to financial restrictions in  the Bank Act which require a member  of the board to own 2,500 shares  of bank stock. That's about $100,000  at today's prices. Both banks  have been presented with lists of  sufficiently wealthy and qualified  women.  The federal Advisory Council on the  Status of Women advises women to  withdraw their money from banks  xtfhich do not yet have xromen on  their boards.  Even if women enjoyed a 50% representation on the boards of banks, how  much would this accomplish for the  majority of women? What difference  does it make to the woman who cleans  the office if it's a male tycoon or  a female one?  UIC  CODE RULED SEXIST in U.S.  Women who must leave their jobs due to  marriage, joining their husbands in  new localities, or raising children,  can no longer be denied UIC since*  the Third District Court of Appeals  in California ruled that a section  of the UIC code there was sexist.  Previously, the law distinguished  between primary and secondary  support earners, the majority of  secondary earners being women.  (K.R.)  SUPPORT    LCSBIAN PRIORITICS  NATIVC WOMCN  The struggles of native women are  often overlooked or suppressed by  the male establishment media. These  women urgently need the support of  the women's movement both in Canada and the States.  JOANNA LEDEAUX was an organizer and  legal worker for the traditional  community in Pine Ridge.  On September 22, 1975, she was jailed for  refusing to testify before a U.S.  Grand Jury investigating the deaths  of two FBI agents on the Pine Ridge  reservation. Joanna is pregnant  and suffering from malnutrition.  Her baby will probably be taken  away from her by the Welfare Department. And she has not been  charged with any crime. Donations  can be sent to the FREE JOANNA  COMMITTEE, c/o Gridley Nasser,  101 Main Street, Sioux Falls, S.D.  57105.  YVONNE WANROW is a member of the  Colville Tribe in eastern Washington.  She has been sentenced to  25 years for killing 'Chicken Bill'  Wesler. Wesler had raped her babysitter's daughter and attempted to  molest her young son. When he  barged into her house, Yvonne, in  two leg casts and crutches, fired  point blank at Wesler and killed  him.  She immediately called the  police. They, in turn, produced  a tape of her call in court alleging  that her calm tone of voice indicated premeditated murder.  She is  now out on appeal and in desperate  need of support. You can contribute to her defense fund by sending  a donation to YVONNE WANROW, CENTRE  FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS, 853  Broadway, New York, N.Y., USA 1003.  (IRT)  WOMCN WORKCRS  Much of the Fourth Annual Gay Conference, which took place in Toronto  over the Labour Day weekend, revolved  around the question of the organization of lesbians.  At a panel discussion during the conference, Gloria Geller, of the Toronto  Gay Academic Union, read a short  statement from the Rights of Lesbians  Subcommittee of the B.C.F.W.  The  statement said that lesbians must  choose between gay liberation and  women's liberation and, further, that  they must choose the latter.  It  suggested that lesbians should put  off their struggle over their sexual  orientation until the fight for women's  equality had been xron.  Gillian Chase, of The Other Woman, a  Toronto feminist newspaper, delivered  an eloquent criticism of both the  women's movement and the gay movement,  warning that both were in danger of  being coopted by capitalism and integrated into the market system to  peddle liberation as a product.  Terry Faubert, of the Toronto Gay  Alliance Toward Equality Lesbian  Caucus saxtf no contradiction between  the women's movement and the gay  movement and added that they both  serve the interest of lesbians.  On  the subject of lesbian participation  in the gay movement, she advocated  the policy of lesbian autonomy which  she has been developing among politicized lesbians over the last year.  She expressed the hope that the  National Lesbian Conference in October would produce some clarification  on the question of organizing lesbians around their oppression.  Marie Robertson of Lesbians of Ottawa  Now saw lesbian autonomy from the gay  movement as a healthy development  which would simultaneously allow lesbians to take practical steps towards  their liberation and broaden the scope  of the gay movement. (Body Politic)  AMERICAN WOMEN  WOMEN'S INCOME GAP  In America the income gap between men  and women continues to widen. In 1974  women made only 57% of the typical  male take-home pay. In 1970, they  averaged 59% of the male median income.  WORKING WOMEN  Single women aren't the largest group of  the female labour force. In 1974 in  the U.S., married women living with  their husbands comprised 60% of all  women workers.  BREADWINNER MYTH  In 1950 in the United States, the  traditional family model of husband-  provider and wife-homemaker was  valid for 56% of families. In 1975,  it is true of only 34% of all  families. (Monthly Labour Review)  LIP  Among the LIP grants announced this  month was one for the Women's Automotive Resource Centre in Vancouver.  The money will allow the centre to  employ two workers to give women  basic or intensive instruction in  automotive mechanics. This group  is better known as MOM'S REPAIRS,  and they repair and teach at  976 Ringwood St, Vancouver.  Phone 876 0635  RAPC ASSISTCR  When Joan Elizabeth Vance was appointed  as the first national assister to rape  crisis centres across Canada, on October 1st., some semantic subtleties were  ignored.  National rape assister.  Rape a-sister.  Not funny.  Surely  they could have looked up a Thesaurus  to check out synonyms for assister. It  would have been a sisterly thing to do. NORTH€RN NOT€S     diana bisscll  Dear Sisters,  I'm writing this while on the plane  to Whitehorse, having just spent the  grand total of 3 days at home in  Prince George (oh luxuryI) after  being on the road in the northwest  for 3% weeks. What a time of year  to travel - the trees are so beautiful and each day that I had to  drive any distance the weather was  great - wish you could all share the  grandeur of this part of B.C. with  me.  Flew over to the Queen Charlottes  September 17 on a clear day (you  could see forever!) and flew back  on the 27th (in a 50 mph gale!),  and the 10 days there were fascinating.  I spent a lot of time with  members of the Q.C.I. Society for  Continuing Self Development - an  all islands women's organization.  They have been active for several  years and received a small IWY grant  from Gene Errington's office last  year. The Society has a constitution  and an all-islands Board of Directors  made up of reps from each "branch" -  there's one in Masset, Port Clements  and' Queen Charlotte City.  Each  branch has its own activities and  priorities, they each contribute  to the newsletter, and all share in  the materials and resource people  brought in by the Society. Any  money that is applied for is done by  the Society as a whole - the new  Fraser Vally Women's Council uses  somewhat the same concept.  Anyway, in Charlotte City the group  runs a super thrift shop out of an  old one-room schoolhouse and they  have fixed up a backroom of the shop  into a sitting room where they have  some sofas, coffee/tea, bulletin  board, and lots of resource material.  Craft workshops and meetings are held  here and if anyone has an old oil  stove to give away they'd appreciate  hearing about it!  In Port Clements, Gail Scholefield  has organized a group of women around  a series of projects designed to offer them an opportunity to get out  of their own homes and to raise money  - not for charity but for furthering  the activities of the group. These  projects have included bazaars, quilting bees and bake sales and have  brought in a goodly sum of money to  be used for more equipment, supplies  and funding for new ideas.  The Port  Clements Recreation Society has applied for LIP monies and included in  the proposal is a space for a "continuing self-development centre" for the  group. This is a good example of how  to begin organizing to meet the needs  of women in a small town - Port Clements is a small logging community  with one general store and although  the history of the town goes back a  long way, the present industry attracts a lot of relatively short-term  residents. An immediate need is to  socialize - and one works from there.  In Masset, Sharon Finkleman organized  a meeting at the new Health and Human  Resources building and plans were  made to get hold of some films (ISIS,  where are you?!) for several film  nights. Masset is an entirely different town from Port Clements or  Queen Charlotte City - mainly because of the Canadian Forces Station  located there, complete with row  housing, rec centre with a pool, a  bowling alley etc. and about 800 personnel including spouses and children.  The .base is one of the few in Canada  built on an "open" concept - there  aren't any barbed wires etc.  It is  incorporated right into the town and  the base recreation facilities are  available to everyone for the same  fee.  This is in direct contrast to  Port Clements where there aren't any  recreation facilities, and Queen  Charlotte City, where the people have  voted consistently against incorporating as a village because many of the  strong individualists who live there  don't want to be told what to do by  anyone - be it over garbage dumps,  building codes or taxes.  I mention  all this because it is fascinating to  realize what makes different communities tick, because the communities  reflect the people living there and  because if we are interested in reaching the women who live there it's a  good idea to look at the whole community first and ask some questions  ...questions like "Who lives here?  Why do they live here? Do they want  to live here? What kind of facilities  are available - medical, educational,  social? What is the community's history?" etc.  It's interesting to speculate on the  urban/non-urban, north/south differences in all organizations, including  the women's movement.  I suspect that  in non-urban areas in all parts of  the province the successful groups  take a closer look at those questions  and the answers before acting.  In  the larger cities where there are so  many more people, one can afford to  start a group xvithout asking such  specifics (supposedly) but once you  get to a small centre, it doesn't  work at all. No one will show up at  your meeting - it's that simple.  For me, recognition of the different  needs of the community, and the community of women really helps me to  understand the not so mythical  "split" between north/south, urban/  non-urban women in the movement.  The differences are not so much  over the content of movement rhetoric (although some would probably  debate that comment vigorously), but  rather over it's method of application to the community.  I'm hoping  that some of the fantastic women's  groups that exist up here can get  time to write down the "how-who-  what" of their organizing skills to  share with others and that these  groups will use regionally oriented  federations like the B.C. Federation  of Women to blast forth with their  priorities and help to direct the  women's movement more effectively.  It isn't a matter of "my needs being  more important than your needs" -  it's a matter of the recognition of  the differing needs of women in very  diverse areas - understanding that  they are tied together with the same  knot (call it oppression or whatever)  but that there are different ways of  untying that knot, and then learning  which method is most, effective in  what area.  Well, the plane is getting ready to  land soon (there's snow on the ground  up here!) so I'd better start wrapping this up. Just wanted to add  that the Prince Rupert Options for  Women group has applied for Secretary  of State money, Kitimat, Burns Lake  and Fraser Lake groups have applied  to LIP for women's centres, Hazelton  women are meeting regularly, twenty  women came to a verbal self-defense  gathering in Smithers and a group  will be starting there. Terrace  Women's Organization is having Eileen  Hendry up to do an assertive training  workshop and the Northwest College's  credit women's studies course is going  strong in Kitimat and Prince Rupert.  I sat in on the first class in Rupert  - about 20 women and 1 man - and it  was quite moving to listen to them  all speak so- eloquently about why  they wanted to take women's studies  and to remember how hard the women's  groups of the area had xrorked on getting the course - and they had succeeded.  Time to run - love to all, Diana  P€OPL£'S LAW  SMALL CLAIMS COURT  This is the first of a series of columns explaining how to use the Small  Claims Court. The Small Claims Court  is a court in which the layman can  sue a person who owes him money or  who has caused him some damage.  For example, a motorist may have negligently damaged your car where the  insurance does not cover all of your  expenses. You can sue the driver in  Small Claims Court for your losses.  The amount you are suing for must be  $1,000.00 or less.  If you are owed  $1,200.00 and do not want to sue in  the higher court (which would involve  lawyer's fees and higher costs awarded against you if you lose), you can  waive the $200.00 and sue in Small  Claims Court for $1,000.00  There are various forms and steps  required to starting an action (your  claim) in Small Claims Court.  This  and future columns will outline the  steps to follow, but for more information and assistance x?ith forms you  can seek help from the Clerk of the  Court in your area.  The court costs total about $26.00.  If your action is successful, the  Judge may order the other person to  pay those costs.  The fee to register  the summons (the document which starts  the action) is $10.00. The summons  is served by the Sheriff for a fee of  $10.00 plus mileage charges.  It will  also cost $2.00 to register the judgment you receive. You may have additional expenses in transporting witnesses to the trial.  If you win, the  other party can be required to pay  $6.00 for each witness you bring,  including yourself.  Future columns will explain how to  start your action and how to prepare  for trial. For more information,  contact the Vancouver People's Law  School at 681-7532 and order our  booklet on Small Claims Court Procedure, or contact your local Small  Claims Court Clerk. UF€INTH€LAC€GH€TTO  WOMCN IN TH€ URBAN €NVIRONM€NT  a feminist perspective by VIVIANC HOTZ  LIFE FOR WOMEN IN BEAUTIFUL BRITISH  COLUMBIA'S CITIES - TRICK OR TREAT?  It is civic election time, and all  over the lower mainland, candidates  are full of promises about' what they  can do for us in our urban environments.  Just what are the issues  of white middle-class women in the  cities of the lower mainland?  Women in Canada are only now beginning to realise how oppressive the  middle-class way of life is for women.  ♦  Look around you, and what do you see?  *Poverty in a city of affluence  inequality in a tradition which  speaks of equality  *Elite policy making in a structure of democratic norms  *Isolation in the midst of high  density  There has been very little interest  in Canada or indeed elsewhere in the  issues concerning women in the urban  environment. These issues were not  included in the Canadian Royal Commission on the Status of Women. They  have not been included in the demands  of various women's groups.  There  have been particular points raised,  such as the need for day care centres,  but there has been no overall understanding of the many issues that concern women in the urban setting. We  are just now beginning to realize  that exploitation of women is reinforced by planning - in the home, at  work and at our leisure.  The struggle for women's liberation  must actively recognize the changed  and changing roles of women in regard  to the planning of our cities.  The  growing diversity of women's activities in their private and public  lives demands a nex/ diversity in  the physical space in which we act  out our new roles.  The traditional impact of this type  of housing is shown clearly by the  main bedroom being called the Master  Bedroom - and the biggest bed is  called the King Size.  Single family detached housing is  obviously wasteful of space in a  crowded world.  It is, as well, an  inequitable distribution of scarce  resources as many cannot afford such  houses. The Keep Off the Grass sign  on the front lawn should read Keep  Off My Status Symbol.  There is an interesting dichotomy  that is going on between the individual family house and the community.  We are constantly searching for the  ideal community. We are asking where  is the sense of community? And asking where are the community networks  and community centres.  * POVERTY IN A CITY OF AFFLUENCE  INEQUALITY IN A TRADITION WHICH  SPEAKS OF EQUALITY  ELITE POLICY MAKING IN A STRUCTURE OF DEMOCRATIC NORMS  ISOLATION IN THE MIDST OF  HIGH DENSITY '  Yet the very house,  the single family detached house, reinforces the  isolation and lack of concern for the  community. The houses stand alone,  one by one, along the straight streets  of the city. The only centre of the  suburbs is the shopping centre - the  ultimate of consumerism under one  roof.  outdated single  detached family  dwelling  The single family detached house in  the suburbs is publicized loudly as  the ideal living accommodation in  Canada.  It has the Good Housekeeping Seal of Approval and the approval  of the government through tax rebates  and government funding. Yet when we  look closely at the single family  dwelling we can ask many questions.  HOMES LIKE THIS ONE CARRY A HEAVY  BURDEN OF TRADITIONAL ATTITUDES  TOWARDS WOMEN  In the context of women and planning  it is especially important to understand that the single detached family  home carries a heavy burden of traditional attitudes to women.  Such  housing has a very strong moral image  of life pivoting around some supposedly ideal - and self-sufficient - nuclear  family consisting of a father and a  mother and two children - and two cars  and a barbeque pit.  Such an emphasis placed on the single  family detached house is outdated by  the changed outlook of women.  There  are new and important needs.  There  are the special needs of sole support  single parents, usually women.  At  least one out of every four young women now preparing themselves mainly  for marriage - and a nuclear family -  will be forced to support themselves  as well as their children in later  years.  There are the snecial needs  of students, of career women, and of  elderly women.  Sexism and city  planning  All women suffer the disadvantages of  discrimination in our sexist society.  We are aware of many of the disadvantages ranging from low wages to lack  of educational opportunities.  These  problems have at least reached our  consciousness.  Discrimination in  planning is so subtle and so insidious that it is only now reaching our  awareness.  The discrimination in planning is  based on the preconceived ideas of the  supposed ideal life for a woman - a  woman limited to the two roles of  wife and mother. This way of thinking finds its way into the legislation and city bylaws that regulate  how we are supposed to live - not how  , we want to live. We find this outdated thinking expressed in many  areas that affect women in the urban  environment.  Even if a woman wanted  to own a house, the regulations of  mortgage companies make it hard, if  not impossible, to do so.  There are very few women in planning  and very few women in the decision  making processes of planning such as  alderpersons, mayors or those in  position of power in the government.  There are few women interested in the  planning of cities.  There are many reasons for the lack  of interest in women's issues in the  urban environment ranging from education to social attitudes which include the problems of gaining confidence to participate in the decision  making process. TH€ CXPLOITATION OF WOMCN IS RCINFORCCD BY PLANNING  Let us look at education for a minute.  There are still hurdles for a woman  to overcome in getting an education.  Perhaps the greatest hurdle is the  early socialization of girls. From  birth children are colour-coded. The  boys in blankets of blue, a blue  that suggests the limitless sky. The  girls are in pink, a pink as wobbly  as strawberry jello.  These colours  stay with us. The strong dominant  colours of the males, and soft demure  and non-descript pastels of the females.  Our education expresses these  colours. The strong, purposeful  courses are for the males and the  soft, dithering courses for the females. These attitudes permeate our  lives so that we grow up still with  the ideas of the strong men and the  weak woman. We are conditioned so  thoroughly that we think that this is  natural.  This tragic waste of valuable woman-  power must be changed. We need to extend education to our entire lives,  through woman's equality in the so  called hard sciences of planning and  engineering and architecture. We need  retraining programs for adult women  and a sharing together of lifetime  learning. Women through education can  not only benefit themselves as they  change from dull and frustrated people  living on for others - or worse, through  others. Truly liberated women can  benefit society through their contribution of alert and questioning minds.  We need new skills, new approaches and  a new confidence so that our aim is  not a second car but a second interest;  not a second home but a second opportunity.  Education is a valuable tool  for focussing attention on the needs  for social excellence rather than  social neglect.  decisions are  made  by economic  elites  Educational opportunities are lacking  as well as other opportunities to grow  because of the lack of power xromen  have in the decision-making process  in our society.  Canada is a capitalist society which means that a few  people have accumulated capital and  a great many have no capital at all.  We call those who have accumulated  capital, an economic elite. This  economic elite are those with top  positions in powerfully dominant economic corporations. What happens  is that the power of capital concentrated in a few private hands gives  awesome power to that elite to make  decisions affecting the rest of us.  Women are the most unrepresented  group in the economic elite in Canada - less than one per cent of the  total are women; women hold less than  one per cent of the directorships of  big companies; and women hold less  than one per cent of the executive  offices.  The reason economic elites in Canada  come into the topic of women and  planning is that our land is usually  privately owned.  For most people  owning a plot of land is their only  investment.  By developing the land  as they wish they perpetuate the  spread of suburbs further and further into arable or undeveloped land.  In the hands of a few, however, the  economic elite, there is the power  to speculate on land and to create  blockages in the supply process that  lead to expensive housing or to a  shortage of housing.  What the land is used for - housing  or land speculation - is primarily  uncontrolled by elected officials.  Land should not be a commodity to be  bought and sold as it belongs to us  all. Yet land is sold to the highest  bidder and those who can buy it control land use - and the land market.  They - not us - make the decisions  as to land use.  When white explorers first came to  the shores of North America the Indians were amazed that someone would  even think of something so perverse  as buying land - to buy something  that was for the use of all, much as  the fresh air and rays of the summer  sun.  we  tmf  its  MACAUIAYI  MAITLAND&CO.LTD  HARRIS  PLANNING  MUST CHANGS  Perverse ideas can be changed. The  inequalities now present in our society can be eliminated. The first  step is public control of the use  of land.  We can discuss planning in three ways.  The first, functional planning, which  is a means of organizing our activities. The second is environmental -  the conditions under which we act out  our lives. The third, symbolic, a  visual presentation of ideas current  in our society.  *m'5&*  THE SCENERY IS STUNNING, BUT THE SYSTEM IS SEXIST  When we speak of functional planning  we are discussing how many of our  activities are organized for us. We  need private cars because of the urban layout and the lack of public  transportation. We lack efficient  public transportation as the suburban  density is so low that it is not  economical. We need a babysitter in  every home because of the lack of  community facilities; we feel isolated  and alone because of the lack of meaningful contact with others; one third  of all Canadians are overweight because of the lack of recreational centres; we must work downtown because  there are no jobs in the suburbs; the  list could go on and on. The point  I want to stress is that decisions  made by others in regard to planning  vitally affect women.  For instance, the suburbs are highly  specialized catering to those who have  enough money to live there. The  specialization is depriving to the  women who spend most of their lives  in the suburbs.  The uniformity of  street after street of suburbia  results in nothing more than living  the standards proclaimed on the soap  operas of television.  There is little room for personal growth. The  wondrous diversity of people, choices  and activities are just not available  in most suburbs.  The system of buying and selling lots  details what size house can be built  and often the design as well.  The  system of uniform lots is useful for  buying and selling in a market economy  but it prohibits community development.  As well, in the suburbs as elsewhere,  there is the persistent idea of single-  use zoning instead of the far more  stimulating mix of age, class and  activities.  Our houses and our apartments and our  cities and our streets are x<rhere we  act out our lives.  Our environment  has an impact on the way we live our  lives.  The quality and quantity of  our surroundings will either allow for  expansion of self or the inhibition  of self.  Instead of optimum condi  tions, our cities are planned as res-  trictively as last century's corset,  binding our freedom to breathe. There  is a new freedom in clothing to express our personalities - let us have  planning do the same. Outdated ideas  are strangling us.  As an example, let us look at the  most urbanized - second only to Hong  Kong in density in the world - and the  most serviced area in Vancouver, the  West End.  The apartments are built  for middle aged middle class couples  who have no children, no pets and no  stereo. Yet thirty per cent of those  living in the same area, the West End,  are families with one parent, usually  a woman.  Many problems arise from the difficulty of raising children alone in an  environment not suitable for children.  There is no place to play and no  place for noisy laughter.  To plan  for couples only is crippling for  others who have to live there. It's  like wearing someone else's shoes.  This type of planning is alienating  as there is no human diversity allowed, no individualism permitted.  It  is alienating as there is no sense  of belonging to or having an effect  on those apartments - it is often  even prohibited to hang pictures on  the walls.  Such apartments are alienating as well as there is great difficulty in having contact with the  community at large.  Symbols present visually ideas in our  society.  I have mentioned the single  detached family home as a symbol of a  moral image of life centred around a  nuclear family; but there are many  symbols other than that in our cities.  For instance the symbolic and ceremonial centres of our cities are the business centres. The high office towers  in the very centre of our cities announce very clearly who is running our  cities.  Our cities are straight-  edged, shiny, glittering office  buildings - a symbol of our material  prosperity - not our human prosperity.  In contrast, think of the ancient  towns in Europe which were once dominated by the steeple of the church and  the bright colours of the adjacent  market square where goods and information and a sense of community were  exchanged.  When we look at the city we can see  the image of women, the long row of  solitary houses - the high apartments  reflecting the right-angled grid plan  of our streets. The blank windows  reflecting isolation and the interior,  the maintenance role women play in our  society. Our lives are fragmented  and the various pieces are only tied  together with long bus rides. We need  new symbols to speak loudly. Symbols  that proudly proclaim that women are  recognized as full participants in  the urban environment.  There is nothing inherently ugly and  alienating about cities.  Cities reflect - are a mirror image - of our  civilization. When we say the city  is an unpleasant place we are saying  that our civilization is an unpleasant thing. Now we are but a planner's  pin on the urban map.  But we can  change this.  It is vital to change  cities to reflect a new social order  where women are active participants  and not bystanders. Mental health  and satisfaction with our environment  depends on our understanding and actively molding,the social and physical space in which we live.  eight people  in 2 rooms  & vice versa  There are many specific problems in  our city that have a special importance to women.  The age-old problem  of poverty hits women hard - particularly in poor housing which is all  that is available for those on a low  income.  In wealthy areas such as  British Properties two people live  in eight rooms, in the low income  areas of the East End, eight people  live in two rooms. Where are the  equal wages, the opportunities, the  fair share for women in the city?  Women with sole responsibility for  children are often below the poverty  line.  Female heads of families are  almost five times more likely to be  living below the poverty line than  their male counterparts. The poor  lack decent housing and access to  social, recreational and resource  support centres.  Other women, less  visible and less vocal, suffer hardship from poverty too: the old age  woman pensioner on a fixed income  and immigrant women.  Many women fear violence in the city.  One solution put forward is that the  only way to be safe is to keep behind  locked doors. That is no solution.  We have the right to safety and security on our streets.  By staying  inside we reinforce the old image as  weak and defenseless women.  The high  statistics of rape and crimes against  women must be stopped.  Even such  elementary beginnings to safety such  as lighted bus stops are missing.  One problem which is immediately associated with women in the urban  environment is the need for day care  centres. This is not solely a women's  issue as this reinforces the role of  the woman as the main guardian of  children.  Surely children are the  dual responsibility of both the father  and the mother.  Day cares, however,  are especially important in cases  where the family is headed by a woman.  A new look at day cares would suggest  that men as x^ell as women could gain  from day care centres close to their  work. The father now has little contact during the day and with day care  centres in work areas there could be  a renewed sharing in the upbringing  of children.  Women with children, single women and  the elderly are the chief users of  public transportation. The infrequent  and often the total lack of transportation creates problems of mobility  to work, friends and relatives and  access to recreational areas. Women  have little or no say in the bus routes  which are planned by the city planners  who undoubtedly have cars.  A new look  at public transportation would suggest  that it is not mobility that x*e lack  as much as access.  If the city were  rearranged so that recreation, work and  home were clustered rather than the  present sprawling arrangement there  would be little need for gas guzzling  cars and buses.  More and more women are now working  outside the home.  In the work place  as well as the home there is a feeling of distortion and confusion and  often frustration due to the lack of  facilities and the lack of understanding of the environment. There  are few women unionized and those who  are,are often not represented on the  union executive.  Immigrant women are  the most exploited and underpaid,  compounded by work conditions which  are totally unacceptable.  Even those most advantaged women in  our society - the young, the pretty  and the white woman - the woman who  is hired at the show office towers -  these are women too who are discriminated against.  N€XT TIME  YOU GO  DOWNTOWN  ...look at the work conditions  in the new underground shopping mall,  Pacific Centre. There are no facilities provided for such a simple activity as eating one's lunch. Not to  mention the lack of provision of recreational or educational stimulus  during the lunch hour. All one can  do is buy a lunch - which women can  little afford at their salaries - or  go shopping which is always an option  in our consumer society. What happens is that if a woman brings her  lunch she must sit at her desk, or  sit on a stool in the stockroom eating off a cardboard box, or perch on  a bench in the busy Mall under the  escalators near the fire hydrant. WOMCN'S ISSUCS IN URBAN PLANNING  ■ .■.- .  from p.13  No provision of lunchroom facilities,  surely a basic requirement for the  numbers of women who work in the  Pacific Centre, reveals the lack of  consideration for women. In a subtle  way women are put down as being non-  important. We don't count, anyway.  Often we feel frustrated about having  to hide in a corner, passive and mute.  There is no provision made for us.  We often turn the frustration inward  and blame ourselves - rather than  rally against the obvious failure of  planning the building complex.  There are many other specific problems - but one of the greatest is  that of housing. Different women  must have access to different housing  for different needs. The basic need  of course, is adequate accommodation.  But after adequate housing the psychological and social effects are important.  Single women are discriminated against in apartments. They  are claimed to be loose and financially unreliable. Older women on  fixed incomes are often forced to live  in cheap inner core areas which increases their fear of violence.  Even  the acceptably married woman is  closely scrutinized by landlords and  asked if she is pregnant as many  apartments do not permit children.  These urban invasions into a woman's  personal life are intolerable.  We need innovative housing experiments. We need the opportunity to  try new lifestyles. The difficulties  of experimenting with co-operative  living or communes in the fixed space  of traditional housing is evident.  New ideas are available such as compact housing but women must actively  join together to demand such housing.  One point I would like to emphasize  is that it is important to remember  that all problems in the city must  be considered in relation to the  larger issues - such as land use  patterns and the control of speculation.  J  hopping  We live in a capitalist society - a  consumer society.  Capitalism by its  very nature first underproduces social  goods and secondly creates unequal  distribution of all goods. Women  buy the most goods - goods for private consumption. We buy goods because they are necessary but we also  buy goods to define ourselves - such  as raspberry smelling shampoo. We  are bamboozled by Madison Avenue into  the perfect consumer.  Even our status in Canadian society is often defined by how much we buy.  Shopping for many women is their main  activity in the city centre.  For  necessity, as I said, but also as a  substitute for recreation and productive leisure. We use our leisure time  to go shopping; even on holidays we  - go shopping. One of the reasons is  that there is little else we can do  downtown except shopping. Where  else do we go but downtown shopping  when we desperately feel we must get  out of the house?  Shopping is escapism. There is a feeling of a diversity of goods, movement of people and  colour. This is often not so, as in  fact there is little diversity in  goods and although we see the movement of people and bright colours we  have little or no contact with other  shoppers.  The city as we now know it  is beyond the control of women at this  time. We are not involved. We participate in our urban centres mainly  as consumers.  Cathy Cade, Women  We have the wrong things on our  shopping list. We shop for soap-  flakes - Arctic Power - and not for  womanpower. Until we put social  goods such as safe streets and  neighbourhood centres on our list  we will continue to not understand  or participate in the shaping of  our environment.  Advertisements bombard us on signs  and T.V. We believe the slogans of  conspicuous consumption. We believe  the image of these one-dimensional  women. The price we pay for this  image is frighteningly high.  Few  women attain the goal of this so-  called ideal woman and when we cannot we are frustrated. This is a  false frustration.  It is false as  we are trying to reach this image -  an image which nas nothing to do  with a fulfilled woman but rather is  an advertising campaign.  Even those  of us who see behind the ads are  fooled.  It is as difficult to avoid  advertisements as it is to avoid  owning a television set.  The very pervasiveness of the advertised image of women prevents any  widespread expression of the ideas  of women which are, without question,  more important.  Our consciousness  is packaged as neatly as other products.  Coca-Cola is not the real  thing - self-awareness and self-expression are. We must actively seek  to change the structural barriers in  our society. The barriers of the  proper place for women; the barriers  of inertia and the barrier of our  attitudes to ourselves and to others.  ID€OLOGY  Ideology is a compact word  which is defined as the term given  to any form of that which has been  used by those in power to some end.  For instance, behind the apparently  objective, or even noble attitude,  of the government to support financially the single detached family home  for all is the idea that this type  of nuclear family is the most beneficial to the government. The nuclear  family developed in direct response  to the demands of industrial production.  Industry requires a compact  mobile family to move to wherever industry needs a work force.  Ideology is when ideas and thoughts ax  distorted or directed in a desire to  conserve and retain the present social  order - to retain the status quo.  One  of the chief ways to promote the present social order is through the  media.  It is most significant that  those who wield the decision over the  use of land, the economic elite, are  often the very same elite that owns  and controls newspapers, the radio  and television.  all powerful group  the current ideas  Planners reflect  popular among  ion-making power,  from those xtfho  the control over  This means that a si  has the say in what  are in our society,  the ideas currently  those with the decis:  And these ideas come  have the money - and  land use.  The point I want to make, and this is  very important, is that the source of  real change in town planning is not  within the planning profession itself.  THE SOURCE OF REAL CHANGE IS WITHIN  THE ECONOMIC AND POLITICAL STRUCTURES  OF OUR SOCIETY.  SOCIAL  CHANGG  There are three ways for social change  to come about. The first is to work  within the system - to reform the  greatest injustices while leaving  the system intact. The second way  is to work outside the system - to  drop out, to disassociate.  The third  way for social change is to fight the  system - to force conflict.  Reform is a piecemeal effort and a  slow process - it is a tinkering with  the strictures laid down by others.  Many women have dropped out or disassociated themselves from changing  the system. They have set up alternatives such as communes or alternate  lifestyles.  The idea is that when  such alternatives are successful,  others will turn to them and make the  moral and value judgment that it is a  good thing.  In fact, it is a conceit  of their power to subvert the system.  I am not questioning here whether  the alternatives are right or wrong,  but I do question the tactics. Like  the hippy movement, it is doomed to  failure. The essence of dropping out is an  avoidance of conflict. Women are  socialized in this in any event. It  is polite.  There is no trouble to  anyone, let alone those in power.  It is a belief in liberal enlightenment, that is, a belief that men  and women are basically good and  thus reason will triumph over all.  The problem with this type of thinking is that it is not consistent with  historical change. ALL CONCRETE  HISTORICAL SOCIAL CHANGE HAS INCLUDED  STRUGGLES FOR POWER.  We must not avoid conflict. We cannot avoid conflict to attain our goals.  We must confront. We must stand up  and be counted. Nothing results for  good ideas or alternate lifestyles unless we assert ourselves in meaningful conflict. We can work logically  and methodically to expose the contradictions. We must challenge. There  are many channels even in the parliamentary system that have not been  THE SOURCE OF REAL CHANGE  IN TOWN PLANNING IS NOT  WITHIN THE TOWN PLANNING  PROFESSION ITSELF  THE SOURCE OF' REAL CHANGE  IS WITHIN THE ECONOMIC AND  POLITICAL STRUCTURES OF  SOCIETY  ALL  CONCRETE HISTORICAL  CHANGE HAS INCLUDED  STRUGGLES FOR POWER  used. Another tactic would be to  learn from advertising. The Greenpeace marketing and media compaign  has been most successful.  The result  is that there is more concern over  baby seals than baby girls. We must  use any tools available.  Social change comes from conflict -  not the avoidance of conflict. Today  planning is the allocation of scarce  resources, a few geegaws of aesthetics and a reinforcement of conservative ideas as to the "proper" place  for women.  Feminism is the endeavour  to obtain political, economic and  social rights for women.  The sooner  women realize x/hat is happening in  our cities, the sooner change will  be possible.  We need participation  in the decision of the allocation of  the scarce urban resources.  This is  basic to reaching our goals of feminism.  Only xtfhen planning is a visual  statement of feminism will we be  satisfied.  ACCCSS  ACTION  These matertials are available  at the V.S.W. offices.  WOMEN'S URBAN ISSUES IN VANCOUVER  This is an extremely informative,  brief prepared for The Ministry  of State for Urban Affairs by  the Women's Design Centre in the  first half of 1975. It covers  the major issues : housing,  transportation, daycare, educatior,  employment, health, pollution,  women and poverty, women and violence, women and decision-making,  with an extensive bibliographies  for each section.  PRIORITIES, May 1976 carries an  article by Elizabeth Cull, Nancy  Hood and Jill Davidson on  Socialism, Feminism and the  Urban Environment.  BRANCHING OUT, July/August 76 carries  an editorial on the role of women  in the planning process, as discussed  at the Habitat Forum, the U.N. nongovernmental conference held in  Vancouver this summer.  This article is itself based upon  a presentation which Viviane Hotz  made at the Habitat Forum.  This is civic election time, and the  issues raised in this article must be  brought forward. Read the first article  in this month's Kinesis, "Raise the  Feminist Issues" and let your candidate  knoxtf that you won't vote for her or him  unless s/he indicates some consciousness about women's problems in the  civic environment.  At election time, pressure your candidate about the way in which women  are neglected in the urban planning  process. Architecture, urban and  social planning must take into account  the needs of women in the area of  daycare, transportation, employment  and housing.  One reason for the  ignorance about this very important  aspect of city planning is that there  are very few women working in this  area.  Ask your candidate :  IF ELECTED, WHAT WOULD YOU DO TO ENSURE  THAT MORE WOMEN ENTER THE PLANNING  PROCESS AND THAT WOMEN'S SPECIAL NEEDS  ARE INTEGRATED INTO COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT? DO YOU FAVOUR HAVING PLANNING  BOARDS CONSULT WITH LOCAL WOMEN'S  GROUPS IN THE DESIGN PROCESS?  Also pressure your candidate about  TRANSIT. The majority of those who  use the bus system in Vancouver are  women, and women are at the bottom  end of the pay-scale. Yet B.C. Hydro  is planning a bus fare increase,  claiming that they are operating  at a loss. Why on earth should a  public transit system even speak of  the need to operate at a profit?  Working women have to truck their  children back and forth to daycare during rush hour, with no  place for strollers or parcels.  Why are there no storage racks on  the busses in this city?  Ask your candidate:  IF ELECTED, WOULD YOU OPPOSE  ANY PLANNED INCREASE IN THE BUS  FARE, GIVEN THAT MANY OF THOSE WHO  USE THE TRANSIT SYSTEM ARE THOSE  WHO ARE FORCED TO LIVE ON LOW AND  FIXED INCOMES?  WHAT WOULD YOU DO TO IMPROVE THE  TRANSIT SYSTEM SO THAT IT SERVES  THE NEEDS OF THE MAJORITY OF ITS  PASSENGERS, THE WOMEN OF THIS  CITY? FEMINIST RESOURCES  The demand for VSW reference library  information over the past several  months indicates that more than ever,  we are seen as an information-clearing  house on women's issues in addition  to other services we offer.  This fall especially, students are  returning daily in twos and threes  to do research for their xfomen's  studies projects for high school,  college, and post-graduate study.  We are continuing to develop the  reference library as much as possible on a very limited budget. Luckily, there are many free and/or  inexpensive feminist materials around.  In future, we hope to start producing  some new VSW publications for sale.  Our reference files are jammed with  as much as we can possibly get into  a large four-drawer filing cabinet  and we're waiting for the arrival of  another cabinet to take the overflow.  A lot of material was floating around  the office over the past few years,  but was not organized!  Do come in to see me any day from  9 am to 5 pm (except Tuesday mornings  when we have staff meetings and preferably not late Friday afternoon!).  I'll be glad to show you what we have  or refer you elsewhere. The following materials are now housed in the  VSW reference library, or soon will  be.  See you soon.  - Karen Richardson  WOMEN IN PRISON  THE WOMAN OFFENDER REPORT: bi-monthly  publication on female inmates and  changing their status.  Free from  National Resource Centre on Woman  Offenders, American Bar Association,  1705 DeSales Street NW, Washington,  D.C, USA 20036.  WOMEN IN PRISON: by Katheryn Watter-  son Burhkhart, Doubleday and Co.,  Garden City, N.Y., USA.  $10.00.  Describes inequitable and antiquated  justice system and psychologically  debilitating environment for female  offenders.  THE WOMAN OFFENDER: BIBLIOGRAPHIC  SOURCEBOOK: list of publications,  journal articles, books, doctoral  dissertations, etc. on female  offenders.  $1.75 from Laurel Rans,  Entropy Limited, 214 S. Craig St.,  Pittsburg, PA, USA 15213.  TIGHTWIRE (Women's Penitentiary  at Kingston, Newsletter) Box 515  Kingston, Ontario. Subscriptions are  $2.00 a year.  SINGING women prisoners' creative  writing. From Bernice Lever, 79  Denham Drive, Thornhill, Ontario  I4J 1P2.  WOMEN IN TRANSITION: fact sheet on  female offenders free from California Commission on the Status of  Women, 926 J Street, #1011, Sacramento, California, USA 95814.  FROM CONVICT TO CITIZEN, PROGRAMS  FOR WOMEN OFFENDERS: collection of  proposals for initiating and mobilizing support for programs to rehabilitate women offenders, free from District of Columbia, Commission on  Status of Women, Rm. 204, 14th and  E Street, NW, Washington DC, USA.  MINORITY WOMEN  PRIORITIES: newsletter on issues  facing black, Indian, Asian and  Hispanic feminists published by  Minority Women and Women's Rights  Task Force of the National Organization for Women, donations to  Del Dobbins, 5319 Landgrave Lane,  Springfield, Virginia, USA 22151.  ISKWEW: monthly publication of  Saskatchewan Native Women's Movement.  $1.50 sub from them at 21-  1850 Broad Street, Regina, Saskatchewan.  DIALOGUE WITH IMMIGRANT WOMEN:  nine cassette tape panel discussions on Italian, Portuguese, West.  Indian, East Indian and Latin American women. At cost from Cross  Cultural Communication Centre,  1079 Bloor Street West, Toronto,  Ontario.  MINORITY WOMEN AND PROFESSIONAL WORK  - GETTING AHEAD IF YOU'RE A MINORITY  WOMAN: two articles on the problems  ethnic and immigrant women face in  seeking jobs commensurate with their  education.  Both free from Minority  Women Employment Program, 40 Marietta  Street NW, //808, Atlanta, GA, USA  30303.  SITUATION OF IMMIGRANT WOMEN IN  VICTORIA: 15 page report of study on  new Canadian women in the home,  labour force and society.  Free from  SWAG, 32 Paddon Avenue, Victoria, B.C.  LIVING IN VICTORIA: A SURVIVAL GUIDE  FOR IMMIGRANT WOMEN: 14 page brief  aimed at new Canadian women, information on medical coverage, employment, human rights, learning English,  financial assistance, daycare, family  allowance, citizenship, legal services, etc. Free from SWAG, 32 Paddon  Avenue, Victoria, B.C.  WORK AND WOMEN  WOMEN AND THE STATUS OF PART-TIME  WORK: a review and annotated bibliography, free from Provincial Library  Service, 14th Floor, Mowat Block,  Queen's Park, Toronto, Ontario, as  printed in Ontario Library Review,  1974.  JOBS WITHOUT GENDER: 45 women interviewed on jobs not usually associated  with females.  Free from Women's  Bureau, Department of Labour, Alberta.  MOTHERS AT WORK: 16 page booklet examining why mothers work and the  special arrangements they must make  for childcare with suggestions for  housekeeping shortcuts.  Free from  Department WEN, Health and Welfare  Division, Metro Life Insurance Co.,  180 Wellington Street, Ottawa, Ontario.  UNION WOMEN POSTERS: 6 pictures of  union women performing non-traditional  jobs.  Free from Ontario Federation  of Labour, 15 Gervais Drive, #202,  Don Mills, Ontario.  HANDBOOK ON WOMEN WORKERS: 435 pages  containing wealth of info on progress  or lack thereof , of women workers in  in the USA, relating to economic,  civil and political status of women.  $4.70 from Women's Bureau, Department  of Labour, from Superintendent of  Documents, U.S. Government Printing  Office, Washington, D.C, USA 20402.  CAREERS FOR A CHANGING WORLD: series  on jobs for xromen in health care,  arts, transportation, business, hospitality and recreation. Free from  Careers, New York Life Insurance Co.,  Box 51, Madison Square Stn., New York,  NY, USA 10010.  TRAINING THE WOMAN TO KNOW HER PLACE:  booklet on sex discrimination, sex  role conditioning and presumed incompatibility of family and career for  women.  Free from Dept. of Education,  Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Box  911, Harrisburg, PA, USA 17126.  WORKING FOR YOUR LIFE: A Women's Guide  to Job Health Hazards: how to combat  'women's jobs' hazards.  By Audrea  Hricka, $5, from Labour Occupational  Health Program, 2521 Channing Way,  Berkeley, CA, USA 94720.  U.S. WORKING WOMEN: A CHARTBOOK:  56 charts describing the role of  working women in America over the  past 25 years including data on  white and minority women, marital  and family status, income, education,  job tenure, etc.  $1.75 from Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Govt.  Printing Office, Washington, D.C.  USA 20402. Prepared by Bureau of  Labour Statistics for IWY.  WOMEN AND HEALTH  WOMEN AND ALCOHOL: PROBLEMS AND SERVICES, VANCOUVER: 53-page review of  relevant literature on female alcoholism, wives of alcoholic men, prognosis and treatment, services for  wives, emotional and crisis agencies,  contact with the law, detection, overview, plus bibliography.  Free from  Water Street Research Group, 205-310  Water Street, Vancouver B.C.  BIBLIOGRAPHY ON WOMEN AND DRUG RELATED  ISSUES: 50 cents from Stash Library,  118 South Bedford Street, Madison,  Wisconsin, USA 53703. STUDY OF CHILDCARE SERVICES AT  re NADIAN UNIVERSITIES: gives 5  recommendations to improve childcare on campus.  Concludes that  .tabic, long-term university-  iised childcare is imperative.  $2.00 from Association of Universities and Colleges of  Canada, 131 Slater Street,  Ottawa, 0 itario.  ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY ON FAMILY  DAY CARE: background paper, $1.50  from Project Child Care, 185 Bloor  Street East, 3rd Floor, Toronto,  Ontario.  CHOOSING CHILD CARE: guide to help  parents select best possible daycare services including discussions  and check lists for searching. $3.00  from Parents and Child Care Resources,  1855 Folsom Street, San Francisco,  California, USA 94103.  EDUCATION FOR WOMEN  NON-SEXIST EDUCATION FOR YOUNG  CHILDREN, A Practical Guide:  discusses the media's roles in  socializing children, chapter on  non-sexist materials, toys,  photos, puzzles, games, records,  dolls, and filmstrips.  $3.25 by  Barbara Sprung, from Citation  Press, 50 West 44 Street, New  York,  NY, USA 10036.  TODAY'S CHANGING ROfeES: APPROACH TO  NON-SEXIST TEACHING: curriculum  resources for elementary, intermediate, and secondary schools to raise  student awareness of sexrole stereotyping.  Free from Resource Centre  on Sex Roles in Education, National  Foundation for Improvement of Education, 918-1156-15 Street NW, Washington DC, USA 20005.  IDENTITY FEMALE: a comprehensive,  non-sexist multi-media women's studies  program for high school and junior  colleges, with women's viewpoints on  anthropology, history, psychology,  sociology, economics, law and politics.  $215.00 from Dun-Donnelley Publishing  Corp., 666 Fifth Avenue, New York,  N.Y., USA 10019.  EDUCATION FOR SURVIVAL: analysis of  ways classrooms perpetuate sexism  in education, resources for change,  increasing teacher awareness of  stereotyping.  Free from National  Education Association, Teacher Rights,  1201-16 Street NW, Washington DC,  USA 20036.  FOCUS ON WOMEN: 37 page pamphlet  outlining American federal programs  aimed at broadening women's educational opportunity, preparing minority women for pre-professional jobs,  projects facilitating entry of domestics into post-secondary education,  retaining women in science disciplines.  Free from Office of Policy Communication, 3017-400 Maryland Avenue  SW, Washington DC, USA 20202.  POSITION PAPER ON THF ONE-PARENT  FAMILY: April 1976 30-page brief  suggests basic re-examination of  social, economic, taxation and legal  policy concerning families headed  by women.  WOMEN AND THE PERSONAL  INCOME TAX  SYSTEM: April 1976 47-page study  of income taxes on self-supporting  single women, married women who  work outside the home, women who work  with their husbands, housewives,  women with children, sole-support  mothers, low-income women.  NOTES ON SELECTED FEDERAL STATUTES  RECOGNIZING COMMON-LAW RELATIONSHIPS:  13 page paper, July 1975.  MATERNITY LEAVE AND BENEFITS: 47 page  study of federal laws and recent  amendments concerning job security  for pregnant women and their entitlement to maternity benefits, May 1976.  INDIAN WOMEN AND THE INDIAN ACT:  April 1976 10-page brief proposing  that native women be protected from  sex discrimination in new human rights  legislation and under the Indian Act.  Explains Indian rights, the definition of Indian and covers the Lavell  case.  DEFINITION OF MEANING OF EQUITY IN  MARRIAGE: 3 page brief, May 1976, outlining concept of marriage as economic  and social partnership of legal equals,  recognition of unpaid work in the home,  right of partners to equal share of  assets on marriage dissolution.  m ib iiHi  THE UNFINISHED ASSIGNMENT: EQUAL  EDUCATION FOR WOMEN: summary of  world-wide trends in schooling  of women and implications, $2.00  from WorldWatch Institute, 1776  Massachusetts Ave. NW, Washington  DC, USA 20036.  ELIMINATING SEXISM IN PUBLIC  SCHOOLS: 58-page checklist for  monitoring sex discrimination in  primary and secondary education.  Geared to US. Title IX but of  general interest to Canadians.  $1.50 from Education Law Centre, 605  Broad Street, #800, Newark, New Jersey,  USA 07102.  HANDBOOK ON HOW TO END SEXISM IN YOUR  SCHOOLS: 46 page paper with strategy  for changing education policy on sex  discrimination plus two case studies  in affirmative action. Free from  Leadership Training Institute, 1001  Connecticut Ave. NW, Washington DC,  USA 20036.  CINDERELLA IS DEAD: Film on sex role  stereotyping in public schools. Free  from Manitoba Teachers' Society.  GUIDELINES FOR WOMEN'S STUDIES GRADES  1 - 12: pamphlet of suggestions on  what teachers can do in the classroom  to combat sexist attitudes.  Free from  National Organization of Teachers of  English, 1111 Kenyon Road, Urbana,  Illinois, USA 61801.  RAPE OF CHILDREN'S MINDS:, report on  sexism and racism in Grades 1, 2 and  3 textbooks in Ontario. Free from  Board of Education, Borough of North  York, 5050 Yonge. Street, Willowdale,  Ontario.  ASCW MATERIALS  The following materials are now available from the Federal Advisory Council  on the Status of Women, 63 Sparks St.,  Box 1541, Station B, Ottawa, Ontario.  Are are free, and bilingual.  MATRIMONIAL PROPERTY (Towards an  Equal Partnership): 15 page booklet  explaining marital property, the  famous Murdoch divorce case, methods  of dividing property in marriage and  common-law relationships, the ACSW  position on the rights of married  women.  PARTICIPATION OF HOMEMAKERS IN THE  CPP: May 1976, 4^page paper of rec-  commendations for changes in the  Canada Pension Plan to ensure older  women financial security after a  lifetime of unpaid work in the home.  FRINGE BENEFITS: 16 page booklet on  working women, their pensions and  fringe benefits, and suggested action  to improve financial security for  older women.     >    >  STUDY PAPER ON DIVORCE: June 1976,  looks at divorce laws prior to 1968,  the present law, proposed reforms in  other lands, ACSW recommendations for  reforms, comparison of divorce rates  in earlier times.  REGARDING RAPE: 16 page booklet looking at rape law past, present, and  future, and proposed changes in the  criminal law and the court system,  and an overview on rape in marriage.  BIRTH PLANNING: 16 page booklet on  contraception and the law, birth control for the poor, plus ACSW recommendations for change.  HERSTORY  OUT FROM THE SHADOWS: historical  bibliography of women with listings  of pieces written by and about Manitoba women. Free from Human Rights  Commission, Info Services, Rm. 229,  Legislative Buildings, Winnipeg,  Manitoba.  WOMEN IN ANTIQUITY: annotated  bibliography of materials on historical women from 475 A.D. covering ancient Greece, the Minoans,  Rome, etc.  $7.00 from Leanna  Goodwater, Scarecrow Press, P.O.  Box 656, Metuchen, N?J., USA 08840.  WILDERNESS WOMEN: biographical  essays on nine early Canadian  women by Jean Johnston.  $4.95  from Peter Martin Associates,  35 Britain Street, Toronto, FEMINIST  BOOKS  BOOK REVIEWS  The following books have now been  received from the publishers and  are waiting for reviews to be written by our members for publication  in Kinesis:  Shoulder to Shoulder, A Documentary - by Midge Mackenzie  She Named It Canada, Because  That's What It Was Called - by the  Corrective Collective  Birth - by Caterine Milinaire  The Mother Knot - by Jane Lazarre  The Suffragette View - by Antonia  Raeburn  Immaculate Deception, a New Look  At Childbirth in America - by Suzanne  Arms  How to Avoid Alimony - by Maurice  Franks  Generations of Denial: 75 Women  in History - by Kathryn Taylor  Free Space: Perspective on Small  Groups in Women's Liberation - by  Pamela Allen  Momma: A Start on the Untold  Stories - by Alta  Marxism and Feminism - by Charnie  Guettel  The Traffic in Women and Other  Essays in Feminism - by Emma Goldman  Prepared Childbirth*. Controlled  Childbirth*. Rape*, and Menstruation*  (all in the Women's Action Alliance  Series).  If you are interested in reviewing  one or more of the above books,  please give me a call or drop into  the office to pick them up.  After a review has been printed in  Kinesis, we send two copies off to  the publishers who then send us more  feminist paperbacks.  So you're  helping to develop our reference  library by doing reviews. Thanks.  - Karen Richardson  WOMEN TOGETHER: A HISTORY IN DOCUMENTS  OF THE WOMEN'S MOVEMENT IN THE UNITED  STATES, by Judith Papachristou, (New  York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1976).  "This book," writes Papachristou, "is  a re-examination of American history  that is going on today." She tells  us that the Movement today provokes  the same kind of opposition and anger  as it did over a century ago and that  there is a striking similarity about  the goals of the 1970s and those of  the 1850s.  The first stirrings of the Women's  Movement began with Anti-Slavery societies in the United States but did not  gain momentum until the Seneca Falls  Convention in 1848. All these details  are known to most of us and the names  of the women involved—Mott, Stanton,  Anthony, the Grimke sisters—are as  familiar to us as the names of our  friends.  (That they are also, and  primarily, the names of the husbands  and fathers connected with these women  is a problem we haven't solved yet,  but that is beside the point.)  This is a really stirring book; the  remarkable eloquence of these sisters  must make us doubly conscious of how  much there is still to do.  Interspersed with the documents of the  Movement are sections of social analysis by Papachristou which helps us  to keep our perspective.  She has  taken the large view and warns that  "this most recent phase of the Women's  Movement is less than a decade old,  and its accomplishments as well as  its history await the future." This  is a sobering though: but one we would  do well to remember.  This is an invaluable book for women's  centres, libraries, and all of us who  are concerned with the historical  continuity of our Movement.  Jane Evans  FATHERS AND DAUGHTERS: RUSSIAN WOMEN  IN REVOLUTION, by Cathy Porter  (London: Virago, Quartet Books, 1976)  Cathy Porter is a graduate of the  School of Slavonic Studies in London  and her work on the life of Alexandra  Kollontai, the only woman in the first  Bolshevik government, led to her  interest in the prejudices that excluded women from "total participa—-  tion in Soviet Society." This is a  history of Russian women from early  times to the assassination of Tsar  Alexander II in 1881, for which five  men and one women, Sofia Perovskaya,  were hanged in public.  The Russian word for wife, zhena, derives from the Sanskrit dzhan, to  bear.  From earliest recorded social  history, women of the Russian tribes  have been subject to rape, abduction,  and forced marriage. Many girls were  married by thirteen, some even at  eight. A man might beat or murder  his wife with impunity. Not until  the 18th century was any education  available even to women of the  aristocracy.  Catherine the Great  was the first ruler to consider that  women could be fully integrated members of Russian society. '  By the 1850s, the growing Women's  Movement in Europe and America had  caught the attention of women in  Russia. The bravery of the volunteer  nurses in the Crimean war had impressed all who saw them, and intellectuals began to urge changes in  women's social roles and the granting  of intellectual independence.  Great changes now began to take place.  The radical thinkers were busying themselves with the "woman's question"  and then, as today, the espousal of  this serious cause by those in search  of a political bandwagon proved to  have disastrous results.  Women who  had chafed under parental or matrimonial tyranny left home and.flocked  to the larger cities only to find  that the little work available to  them was depressing and degrading.  Porter writes, "despite reports in  the press of large scale unemployment, prostitution, and suicide,  girls continued to flock to (the)  Promised Land."  All this led to the politicization  of many women; those who went abroad  to study fell under the spell of  revolutionary leaders such as Bakunin  and eventually returned to Russia to  work for a revolution from within.  The assassination of the Tsar, however, brought all progress to an end.  At the trial of Perovskaya and the  others, the Imperial Prosecutor said  that "the best proof of the Party's  (the People's Will Party) impotence  was that such a matter had been entrusted to the feeble hands of a  woman."  An impressive amount of research has  gone into this useful book. The only  drawback to this is that the author's  apparent determination to include  every woman even remotely involved  in social change has led to a certain disjointedness and lack of narrative continuity.  Still, it's a  must for Marxist feminists, Sparta-  cists, anyone in fact interested in  the beginnings of the Russian social  experiment.  Jane Evans  ARIEL  BOOKS  GOOD NEWS. Vancouver has a new women's  bookstore. ARIEL BOOKS has recently  opened at 2766 West 4th Ave, at Fourth  and Macdonald. The bookstore carries  a large selection of feminist materials,  including many small press titles.  The store is beautiful, and there  are cosy old chairs for quiet reading.  Go down to Ariel Books soon and see  what's there. You can call the  women at the bookstore, Greta and  Liz, at 733 3511. FILMS  FILMS BY WOMEN  The following films by, for and about  women are available on a rental basis  from Iris Films, Box 26463, Los Angeles, California, USA 90026.  HOME MOVIE, color, 16 mm sound, 12  minutes, rental $30.00. An autobiographical film about grox^ing up lesbian and coming out. By Jai. Oxenberg,  1975.  I'M NOT ONE OF 'EM, b/w, 16 mm sound,  3 minutes, rental $10.00. A woman  spectator at the roller derby talks  about her unique experiences with  lesbianism, humorous and painful.  By Jan Oxenberg, 1975.  A COMEDY IN SIX UNNATURAL ACTS, b/w,  16 mm sound, 25 minutes, rental $50,  Satire on stereotypes of lesbianism,  selected by American Film Institute's  International Women's Year film festival. By Jan Oxenberg, 1975.  MENSES, color, 16 mm sound, 4 minutes,  rental $10.00. Wry comedy about  menstruation, taboos, myths, etc.  By Barbara Hammer, 1973.  WISHFULFILMING, b/w, 16 mm sound,  13 minutes, rental $20.00.  About  the struggle to work collectively  in non-hierarchal women's film group.  By Santa Cruz Women's Media Collective, 1973.  OUR LITTLE MUNCHKIN HERE, color, 16  mm sound, 12 minutes, rental $25.00.  Sex-role stereotyping of adolescent  girls.  By Lois Tupper, 1975.  WE'RE ALIVE, color, and b/w, 16 mm  sound, 30 minutes, rental $60.00.  A film.about women in prison.  By  a group of filmmakers from UCLA,  1975.  THE MAN WHO FELL TO EARTH is a superficial film, with a disorganised  plot involving man-made intrigues,  with men competing and building  capitalist empires and ripping each  other off on a cosmic scale. The  visitor from out of space is destroyed by drink, by TV and, of course,  by Woman and her sexuality. The  few and incidental women in the  film are variations of the mother,  whore and saint stereotypes. On  the one hand there is the madonna/  wife who waits on the planet Anthea  for her husband, the man who fell  to earth, to return. On the other  hand there is the hotel maid whom  the man lives with while on earth. She  provides him with all the practicalities of life so that he can get on  with his grand mission. When she  grows old, she becomes neurotic and  bitchy.  In all, this is a film of  sexual stereotypes, and is a statement of a narrow and degrading  attitude towards women. (WR)  ALBUM  ALBUM REVIEW  VERA JOHNSON: BALD EAGLE  (Boot Records)  Reviewed by Connie Smith  Vera Johnson is reminiscent of the  anti-war era of the late 60s and  early 70s.  She sings of Canadian  causes as in her song "The Word"  which she dedicates to the B.C.  Department of Education, and in  her love song to Pierre Trudeau.  I found "jesus was a preacher"  too long in coming.  The length-  of-hair rebellion for most individuals is over; however, I admire  her attitude. Unfortunately, we  could have used her song five  years ago.  Ms. Johnson sings of railroad  families, distaste for Nixon and  the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission,  and the young boy's unfortunate role  in war.  The prize on the album is "That  Minx from Pinsk", a Russian melody  she constructed in 1949'.  It's  lively, her commentary is naively  funny, and at first hearing, I  found myself dancing.  Her material, unfortunately, is  not particularly feminist; but she  does not claim to be one. There  are, however, subtle realizations  in her lyrics that something is  amiss, but she fails to unite the  personal with the political.  999  WOMEN'S  STUDIES  The following papers were presented  at the fourth B.C. WOMEN'S STUDIES  ASSOCIATION CONFERENCE which was held  at Capilano College on the 1st and  2nd of October.  They are available  from the WOMEN'S RESOURCE CENTRE,  4/45 Kingsway, at 50 cents per copy.  WOMEN IN FOCUS also taped the papers  and their subsequent discussion and  those tapes are also available from  WOMEN IN FOCUS at the same address.  "Constance Lytton, Suffragette. The  validation of a woman's exoerience."  - Marion Barling.  "The Experience of Being a Women's  Studies Student in the Interior" -  Kim Lyster.  "My Personal Observations on Being a  Member of a Women's Studies Class at  Cariboo College." - Jeannine Eiccum.  "A History of the Simon Fraser University Women's Centre." - Michelle  Nickel.  "A History of the Salmon Arm Women's  Centre." - Pat Maika.  "Problems of the Alternatives to the  Nuclear Family." - Kate Braid.  "Sexism, Schools and Society: A  Strategy for Interaction with the  Community." - Reva Dexter.  "Women in Teaching" - Margot and  Meredith Pue.  "Sexism in Language and Communication"  - Janet Summerton.  "Domestic Servants and the Suffragette  Movement: Problems of Household Labour." - Margaret Benston.  There are also a number of more  exclusively academic papers which  would be of interest to women's  studies students (Mirror Imagery in  Margaret Atwood and stuff like that).  For details, phone 872-2250 (Women's  Research Centre.) ADDRESS: 4/45  Kingsway, Vancouver B.C.  ARTICLES  ON RAPE  RAPE, CLASS AND RACISM (Issues in  Radical Therapy, Vol. 4, #1) links  the struggle against rape with the  struggle against all forms of oppression. As long as anti-rape  groups do not work from within a perspective committed to prison reform,  but opt for law and order instead,  we will never build a united movement and rape will continue to increase. Law and order colludes with  anger and violence taken out on  other human beings, and further dehumanizes us all.  If we continue  our power plays both with the system  and with those who have used the  violence resulting from the system  against us (i.e. the rapists), we  might as well do nothing and save  our energies. Might as well all  stay home and watch Police Woman.  (VSW has this article on file)  October's CHATELAINE carries an article on our 'new' rape laws which  are already badly out of date.  Changes in legislation (Bill C-71)  limit defense counsel's right to  cross-examine a woman about past  experiences and give judges power to  insist that a woman's identity be  kept secret.  These changes are, as  the Advisory Council on the Status  of Women puts it, "very minor".  The  code should spell out circumstances  in which a xroman may be questioned  about her past sexual conduct, rather  than leaving it to the discretion of  the judge.  Furthermore, the idea of  closed rape trials perpetuate the  attitude that rape is an 'embarrassing  and shameful crime for the victim."  Now that Parliament is back in session,  write to Justice Minister Basford  (Parliament Buildings, Ottawa, no  stamp) urging him to speed up the  revision of the Criminal Code as it  relates to rape and other sexual  offenses.  (This article is on file  at VSW.) L£TT€R LOBBY  [eizem  HUMAN RIGHTS: HOW ABOUT SOM€?  WHEN IS THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT GOING  TO DO SOMETHING ABOUT HUMAN RIGHTS?  The federal government continues to  delay passage of human rights legislation which it has been promising  since 1973.  Every province in Canada  now has a human rights commission,  but the federal government, although  it did produce a human rights act in  1975, never passed it.  Discrimination on the basis of ethnic  origin, colour, religion, age, sexual  and marital status is still legal  for organizations under federal jurisdiction, such as banks, insurance  companies and airlines.  IF YOU ARE A MEMBER OF A MINORITY  GROUP, this means that services and  accommodation can be denied to you  because of your race and colour.  IF YOU ARE AN OLDER WORKER, it means  that employers under federal jurisdiction - such as banks, insurance  companies, airlines and telephone  companies - can legally refuse to  hire you because of your age.  IF YOU ARE A MEMBER OF A RELIGIOUS  GROUP, it means that services and  accommodation can legally be denied  to you because of your religion.  IF YOU ARE A WOMAN, it means that  you can be denied accommodation,  services, employment or equal opportunity for advancement.  It also  means that your employer can legally  provide smaller pension and insurance  benefits for you than for male employees.  Previously proposed amendments to  the Canada Labour Code which would  have offered protection for women  against discrimination in the workplace were dropped by the federal  government in 1973 on the grounds  that such protection would be included in the proposed human rights legislation.  That was three years ago.  On October 25th, a national letter-  writing campaign criticizing the  federal government for its inaction  on human rights legislation was  launched by the federal Advisory  Council on the Status of Women.  Letters went out to more than 2,000  organizations across Canada, to  minority groups, women's organiza-  LET'S MAKE SURE HE ACTUALLY DOES IT.  ...the Government will introduce a  Human Rights Bill. The major effect  of the Bill will be to prohibit  discrimination on the grounds of  race, colour, national or ethnic  origin, religion, age, sex, marital  status or physical handicap. In  particular, the Bill will establish  the principle of equal compensation  for work of equal value performed by  persons of either sex.  Trudeau, in his speech to the throne,  October 12th, 1976.  tions, religious and civil rights  associations, unions and professional  associations.  ACSW chairperson Yvette Rousseau  said, "We have been trying for over  three years to persuade the federal  government to pass human rights legislation, but they have not given it  priority."  HERE IS WHAT YOU CAN DO ABOUT IT.  Apply pressure. Remember what Agnes  MacPhail said : "The way to get  things out of a government is to  back them to the wall, put your  hands to their throat, and you will  get all they have." Write today  to Justice Minister Ron Basford,  House of Commons, Ottawa, K1A 0A6,  with a copy for your own M.P. No  stamps necessary.  SAMPLE LETTER.  I strongly urge quick action by the  government to pass the federal human  rights act. I am a member of the  Vancouver Status of Women, and I  object to the fact that discrimination  on the basis of race, colour, religion,  age, sex and marital status is still  legal in this country under federal law.  Yours sincerely,  Member, Vancouver Status of Women.  BOUQUETS AND BRICKBATS  It is the Letter Lobby Committee's  policy to give credit when it is  deserved, so we would like to say  that the Committee is pleased with  the appointment of Iona Campagnola  and Monique Begin to the newly  shuffled federal cabinet. We are  sure that they will make an outstanding contribution to cabinet  deliberations and to their own  portfolios.  But we should not forget that there  is still an appalling lack of women  on federal boards, commissions and  councils. Of particular concern to  us right now is the new tripartite  body that will no doubt be set up  to replace the former Canada Labour  Relations Council (all male), now  that the day of protest is over.  We must urge the government to  include the names of some qualified  women in its directives to Management  and Labour. The government itself  could set a good example by appointing one of the many qualified women  with the Department of Labour.  Write to Prime Minister Trudeau  with copies to Labour Minister  John Munro and the Hon. Marc  Lalonde.  The Letter Lobby Committee supports  the establishment of a branch office  of the Advisory Council on the Status  of Women on the west coast.  It is time for the establishment of  a regional office of the Advisory  Council for the Status of Women in  British Columbia. Western women feel  isolated, especially now that the  former English Vice-Chairperson,  June Menzies, has been appointed to  the AIB.  June Menzies maintained an  office in Winnipeg which disseminated  information on the various women's  groups, and she also travelled  extensively in the west on speaking  engagements.  The Head Office of the A.C.S.W. has  been very helpful and encouraging -  but correspondence takes time. Some-  .times we need information and answers  quickly, and a regional office could  supply these.  British Columbia has  perhaps the most active women's groups  in Canada, and this alone should  justify the establishment of an office  here.  In addition, the entire  executive of the A.C.S.W has gone on  record as being .fully in support of  this move.  Write to the Hon.Marc Lalonde, the  Minister Responsible for the Status  of Women, and lend him know that we  want an office in B.C. Send copies  to the Justice Minister, Ron Basford,  and Senator Ray Perrault, the senior  cabinet ministers in B.C., and also  to the new ministers, the Hon. Len  Marchand and the Hon. Iona Campagnola.  Iona Campagnola has been particularly  supportive of the representations that  northern B.C. women's groups have made  to Ottawa. And since the Prime Minister  is no doubt concerned about the reasons  for 'western alienation' right now,  send him a copy to. The address:  House of Commons, Ottawa, K1A 0K9.  The next meeting of the Letter Lobby  Committee will be held on Tuesday,  November 9, at 7.30 pm.  Dorothy Holme, V.S.W.Executive Member.  Yes, it does matter. Do send us a  copy of your letter, so that we can  have a record of ft in our files. It  is helpful to us when we are lobbying to be able to cite the response  of VSW membership. We don't mind  grungy carbons. M'Ç ̈DIA ACTION  First, it was the record cover and billboard ad for the new Stones' album, Black  and Blue. The ad. people at Atlantic,  a division of Warner Bros. Communication,  Inc., had this bright idea.Advertise the  album by depicting a woman with bruise  marks on her body, bound by ropes in such  a way that her hands were lifted over her  head and her legs spread below.  She is  saying, "I'm Black and Blue from the  Rolling Stones and I love it!"  Women Against Violence Against Women,  a national network of women's groups and  individuals in the U.S., prepared a demonstration for June 26, 1976, to protest the  Los Angeles billboard which was a huge  depiction of the 'black and blue' woman.  In anticipation of the protesters' arrival,  local personnel from Atlantic arrived beforehand and whited-out the billboard.  They refused, however, to withdraw the  ad. from magazines such as Rolling Stone  and High Times. However, after a massive S  phone calling, letter-and-cable writing  petition and general educational campaign  along with a feminist call for a national  boycott of the new Stones' record, Atlantic  did withdraw their ad.  The campaign was coordinated by the Houston  Organization Against Sexism in the Media,  in cooperation with Women Against Violence  Against Women. The Houston group writes:  "the ad. for the Rolling Stones album  was a blatantly sexist, violent and degrading depiction of women and implied that  women like to be mutilated." The group adds:  "we are committed to economically undermining each individual or organization  which in any way attempts to depict women  in a degrading manner."  A BRUTALISED WOMAN AS A TECHNIQUE TO SELL  A PRODUCT - THE IMAGE AND THE MESSAGE  ARE ABHORRENT.  Now Warner Bros, has done it again. The  Montrose record, Jump on It depicts an  ambiguous portion of the female anatomy  with the sexually violent invitation to  "Jump on It." This ad. is a form of  soft core pornography. It perpetuates  the rapist mentality. Brutality against  women is an unacceptable sales gimmick.  The tongue-in-cheek tone of this  picture trivialises the serious issue  of battered women and women as victims.  Attention must be paid to the effect of  this depiction of violence against women.  Battered women and women who are sexually  assaulted are taunted by attitudes such  as, 'no woman can be raped against her  will', and, 'women invite assault.'  The perpetuation of the myth that women  like to be brutalised is dangerous. It  is imperative that the recording industry  join with others in taking a stand against  violence in all media. The irresponsibility  of advertisers cannot be ignored.  It is important that women write, wire or  phone STANLEY GORTIKOV, president of the  Recording Industry Association of America,  10022, phone 212 688 3778. Ask him to  bring pressure to bear on the recording  industry as a whole to take responsibility  for and to revise their policies concerning the use of violence in their sales  .promotion. The Houston women report that  Gortikov is becoming a bit more responsive  as feminist pressure mounts.  warner bros  does it again  love among the napKjns P?  HARLEQUIN ROMANCES, the firm which  sold over 72 million romantic fiction titles last year, has come up  with a new scheme to promote sales.  A new novel, by one of their best  selling authors, is being offered  as a premium packed in a selected  large put-up of Kotex feminine  napkins.  A member of Kimberly Clark enthused:  "Already the Harlequin premium has  generated a keen interest in the  trade...the Harlequin reader profile  closely parallels that of our brand  and we anticipate a highly positive  reaction from our consumers."  Harlequin marketing director Dave  Sanderson, with a perfectly straight  face, added : "We are very excited  xjith this project" and the extensive  reach available via Kotex products.''  A series of similar promotions is  planned. Envisioning possible  permutations could provide hours of  enjoyment. (Quill and Quire, 9/76) ISHTAR  5'sters  SOME CHANGES AT THE ISHTAR WOMEN'S  COLLECTIVE  ISHTAR WOMEN'S COLLECTIVE is ver-  happy to announce that the TRANSITION  HOUSE has been re-opened.  It is now  located in LANGLEY, with a 10-bed  capacity.  The Transition House offers temporary  accommodation and support to women  and their children in times of life  crises. Also available are referral  information, assistance in relocating  in the community and advocacy in the  areas of family court, police and  social assistance.  If you need our services or just want  to chat, give us a call and drop by  for a visit.  * * *  ISHTAR WOMEN'S RESOURCE CENTRE no  longer operates out of the MSA Community Services Building in Abbotsford. Due to staff shortage, we  have had to close the Centre. As  a Collective, we will work politically within the Women's Movement  and contribute to community programs  for women by continuing our work with  the Fraser Valley's Women's Coalition  and the B.C. Federation of Women. Unfortunately, the Ishtar Newsletter has  had to be temporarily stopped. We  acknowledge and appreciate those of  you who have a current subscription '  with us. Possibly a coopeative newsletter will start up among those  Women's Centres in the Fraser Valley  Women's Coalition and this would be  the newsletter sent to you in the  future.  The newsletter is very important because it is often the only  contact we have with a lot of people.!  We hope you will bear with us in  this time of Change.  Until a Resource Centre office is reestablished, inquiries previously  directed to the Resource Centre may  now be made to the Ishtar Transition  House staff and they will put you in  touch with Resource Centre volunteers.  ISHTAR TRANSITION HOUSE: Box 613,  Aldergrove, B.C.  (530-9442)  BURNABY  THE BURNABY WOMEN'S CENTRE has been  in existence since February 1976.  The first impetus for the organization of the centre came from the  March Women Rally For Action. Ever  since, they have been holding regular meetings on the first Wednesday  of the month. Now that the centre  has been formed, we're looking for  more women members, and for new  ideas to help us grow.  If you live  in the Burnaby area, give the BURNABY  WOMEN'S CENTRE a call.  The address  is 3755 Warren Street, and here are  some phone numbers: 437-9847 (Noreen  Garrity); 298-1835 or 684-6737 afternoons only (Ada Ho).  VSW, IDCRA FILMS  Carol Kliger  Wednesday, November 10th - 8 Or  9 In The Morning. This film covers  the reorganization of the Chinese  educational system since the cultural revolution. Resource person: Betty-Ann Buss, part of a  group touring China in July 1976.  Wednesday, November 24th - Buenos  Dias Campaneras. This film, made  by a team of Canadian women, takes  an intimate look at the lives of  four Cuban women: a contruction  forewoman, a housewife, a farm worker, and a singer.  Resource person:  Marguerite Reed, who has visited  Cuba twice.  She will also speak on  the family code in Cuba. Throughout  the film shines the undeniable spirit  of the women of Cuba.  VERNON  LAW FOR THE LAYPERSON:  Vernon Women's  Centre will be holding a series of  discussions during November concerning "Law for the Layperson". The  place is Seaton School, Room 36. Time  7:30 p.m. November 1st and 2nd: Land  Transactions. November 15th and 16th:  Landlord and Tenant. November 29th  and 30th: Family Court. These sessions  are free. The Centre is also interested in collecting a list of people interested in daycare exchange.  Give  them a call at 545-6552.  Films are shown at IDERA, 2524 Cypress  Street, Vancouver. Information, phone  Betty-Ann Buss: 732 1496 or Nadine  Allen,VSW: 736 3746. TIMES ARE 8 - 10pm.  Sisters  RICHMOND  RICHMOND WOMEN 'S RESOURCE CENTRE  This is an extremely active new group.  Throughout November, they are holding  afternoon and evening drop-ins at the  South Arm United Church, on the #3  Road at the Steveston Hwy.  Evening  sessions this month are as follows:  November 3 - The Law and You; November 17 - Personal growth through  journal writing; November 24 -  Opportunities for Women. In addition  to these Wednesday night programs,  there are drop-ins and discussions  on Tuesday afternoons from 1 to 3.  The schedule for these meetings this  month is: November 9 - Filling Emotional Needs; November 23 - Separated  Women.  Babysitting is provided. For  more information about the resource  centre, call Naomi Lis: 271 9851 or  Brenda Greenberg: 271 1767.  POCO  Port Coquitlam Area Women's Centre,  P.O. Box 243, Port Coquitlam, B.C.  941-6311.  CONSCIOUSNESS RAISING GROUP  If you would like to join a CR Group  being co-ordinated in September contact the Centre.  WOMAN TODAY  This course, programmed by the Poco  Women's Centre, has proved very  popular in the past. Sign up!  Woman Today is designed to examine, the  changing roles of women today and to  provide an opportunity for questions,  discussion and information on how the  changes affect you as an individual  or society at large.  The programs for November are:  November 4 — Human Rights — Shelagh  Day, Human Rights Commission.  November 18 — Why Physical Self-  Defense for Women?  November 25 — Mature Students.  The programs for December are:  December 2 — Women's Sexuality. "  December 9 — How Women Played Their  Part.  NORTH  SHORE  Rosemary Brown, MLA, will talk to the  North Shore Women's Centre at their  Pub Night, Tuesday, November 2. The  meeting will be held at the North Shore  Neighborhood House, 225 East 2nd, North  Vancouver. Also on November 2nd, the  NSWC, in cooperation with the North  Van Teachers' Assoc, is showing two  films at the Queen Mary School : "What  Will I Be?" and "Fashion as Social  Control". Both films deal with sexism  in schools.  For more information about either of  these events, or about the regular  drop-in Pub Night every Tuesday night,  call the Centre at 987 4822. people's law  The Vancouver People's Law School is  offering a FREE course on LIBEL AND  SLANDER on November 1, 2, and 3 to  be held from 7.30 to 9.30 pm, each  evening at King George Secondary  School, 1755 Barclay Street, Room  210 - 211. To pre-register, call  681 7532. On November 8, 9 and 10,  same time and place : DEBTOR' S  REMEDIES. November 16, 17 and 18,  at the B.C.Federation of Labour, 517  East Broadway: UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE  PROCEDURES. 7.30 - 9.30. November 22.  23 and 24, at Britannia Community  School, 1001 Cotton: LANDLORD AND  TENANT. 7.30 - 9.30.  November 29, 30  and December 1, at the John Oliver  Secondary School: MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE  LAW. 7.30 - 9.30. For further information about course content, call the  People's Law School at 681-7532.  capilano  WOMEN, WELFARE AND FAMILY COURT:  Capilano College's Women's Resource  Centre is now open in the new tower  building of the Lynnmour campus. On  November 1, 3, 8, 9, 15, and 17, it  is sponsoring a series by the Vancouver People's Law School on "Women,  Welfare and Family Court". Times are  7-9 p.m., and the place is the Queen  Mary Community School.  Call 980-5114  to register. THIS SERIES IS FREE.  -events  schools broadcast  LITERARY IMAGES OF WOMEN.  Tuesdays, from November 16 until  December 14, there will be a five-  part series on CBC radio, dealing  with the Literary Images of Women.  This is a schools' broadcast, organized by the Provincial Educational  Media Centre, but it will be of  interest to all women. Time is  2.03 to 2.30. In May of next year  (on the 19th and the 26th), the  Provincial Educational Media Centre will be running a two-part TV  program on Women Artists from the  Renaissance to the Present, with  particular emphasis in the second  program oh Canadian women artists.  mt. pleasant centre  The Mount Pleasant Family Centre,  funded by Vancouver Resources Board,  is opening on November 8th at 2204  Main Street. This centre is a  drop-in designed for women x^ho work  in the home full-^ime, taking care  of small children.  It is a place  for you and your children to drop  in weekdays for creative supervised  play for the kids, x^hile you are  relaxing over tea and coffee, meeting your neighbours, giving and receiving helpful information and  support, and taking part in programs  of interest.  For more information, call Margaret  at 872-7970 or Gail at 525-3000.  Come to the first open house on  Monday, November 1st from 7:00 to  8:30 p.m.   douglas  DOUGLAS COLLEGE: A one-day xrorkshoo  on ASSERTIVENESS TRAINING FOR WOMEN  will be held at the Surrey Campus of  Douglas College (9260 - 140th Street)  on Saturday, November 20th (9am-4pm).  The fee is $12 and the instructor is  Margaretha Hoek. For more information, call the Convenor of Women's  Studies at Douglas College at 521-  4851.  A workshop on workshops for persons  wishing to organize Assertiveness  Training Workshops for Women is  being considered for December 4 and  5, depending on response. Participants should have group experience  and leadership training. Call Margaretha Hoek at 733-9980.  coffeehouse  THE FULL CIRCLE WOMEN'S COFFEEHOUSE  COLLECTIVE organizes a women's space  in the basement of the New School,  3070 Commercial Drive, Vancouver,  every Friday night. They operate on  a non-profit basis with volunteer  labour and they provide a setting  where women artists can perform.  If you would like to perform, call  Penny (669-3397) or Win (731-4350).  religion  WOMEN AND RELIGION:  Paradise Valley  will be the location for a fall retreat called "Woman and Her Faith".  The retreat takes place on November  5, 6 and 7.  For further information,  call Jan Bulman at 682-7556.  Jo Lazenby left the staff of VSW at  the end of September after two years  as editor of KINESIS, and for the  first time, the staff is writing a  good-bye for the person who always  writes them for others.  Jo's love of putting out Kinesis has  shone through every issue, resulting  in a constant stream of appreciative  comments from the membership.  Only  someone who felt Kinesis was "HER  BABY" could type out virtually entire issues, using two fingers at 10  words per minute; cut and paste up  zillions of little pieces of typed  copy for layout; write many articles  <¬£  jo doesn't work  here anymore...  JO'S  GONE  herself; and unremittingly hound  others to get their "promised" articles in on time.  The long and late hours needed to  produce such a fine paper as Kinesis  were always worked with dedication  by Jo, with exacto knife in one hand  and the ever faithful blue pencil in  the other. Delight replaced the  weariness of burning the midnight  oil to meet the printing deadline  when Jo would arrive in the office  with all 1300 copies of Kinesis and  immediately delve into one to see  how it all came out.  events  As well as being highly valued for  her fine work on Kinesis, Jo is also  dearly loved in the office for her  original quick wit and repartee which  have always delighted us all. We will  fondly remember those marathon mailing  days, one a month, when we all folded,  stamped, stapled, and mutilated Kinesis for mailing, and there is Jo, in  the middle, surrounded by mailbags,  address labels, postage stamps, staplers, ink from wet copies smudging  fingers and face, happily consigning  "her baby" to the post office for  delivery.  Love from all of us. This is no ordinary plea.  KINESIS  if a friend  would like  ^afreecop^  simply  fill out  the form  ot\p2  now  It speaks for itself.  (OP  *8  <§ ?  o3g «  3  to to    £•  I  ftM!)