 *w  */MJW£  _\ Must women now  clean the House of  Labour, too? We look at  the curious case of John  Fryer  O David Crombie acts  like the Sheriff of  Nottingham, and'  pretends he's Robin  Hood.  ■ Developing a  feminist response to life  on the planet of the  insane  18 It was the sixth  annual convention of the  British Columbia  Federation of Women in  Victoria  25 >  t You can spend a  cosy winter solstice with  a few close books  26b  iBeing a women's  community playwright  has its occupational  hazards  12.  • KrinZook tells us why  institutions do nothing  to stop rape. Frances  Wasserlein asks, what  about the raped woman?  28 c  9 Down with the male  lion and up with female  penguins: we survey the  non-sexist scene for  literate little people  14.  I At Wild West, they  have it all for you, and  cooperatively, too  30p  I Peggy Seeger  speaks out on singing,  sexism and the struggle  for social change  COVER: The many lives of Sandra Currie. She's the nun on the  left, the flight attendant, the demure bride, the dissipated  feminist. The original photographs went for an undisclosable  sum at the grand auction December 1.  SUBSCRIBE TO KIMEIXJ  Published 10 times a year by Vancouver Status of Women  1090 West 7th Ave., Vancouver, B.C. V6H 1B3  Subscriber  Member/Subscriber  Institution  Sustainer  $ 8  $10  $15  $50  V%  Payment Enclosed _  Please remember that VSW operates on inadequate funding  —we need member support!  —■—"■   Dec 79 Jan 80  KtMEJiJ  news about women that's not in the dailies  \mkw9m.  ^ 2   Kinesis December79 -January 1980  LABOUR  Four's too many, three's not enough  Must women now clean the House of Labour, too?  _z  By Anne C. Schaefer  The Canadian Labour Congress has turned down  a request for affliation made by the Association of University and College Employees  (AUCE). AUCE is a small, democratic B.C. union covering office, technical and similar  workers with locals at UBC, SFU, Capilano  College and the College of New Caledonia.  A majority of AUCE members are women. AUCE  and its sister union, SORWUC, are known  as pathbreaking feminist unions, organizing  the unorganized and going for previously unheard of contract clauses to benefit working  women.  AUCE applied for affiliation last summer  on the heels of a lengthy strike by local  2 (SFU) in which 18 picketers were arrested  on trumped-up charges. Thedecisison to attempt  to join the CLC came out of a provincial convention and was contingent upon the union's  being accepted as a whole rather than by  locals, and on its own terms, i.e., with  its democratic constitution intact. But the  CLC replied, Unless AUCE Provincial is prepared to adjust to the Congress ' structure,  the answer must be in the negative.  AUCE Secretary-Treasur r Sheila Perret and  other members of the provincial executive  met with local CLC representative William  Smalley who said the CLC rejected AUCE's  affiliation bid because the union is redundant.   According to him, three unions  BCGEU, OTEU and CUPE — already cover similar jurisdictions.  If three, why not four? the provincial executive enquired. It seems that CUPE and  OTEU were original members of CLC and that  the BCGEU was admitted later on (rather  than refused as AUCE has been for overlapping jurisdiction) because it covers mostly  provincial employees. And that's why three  is the magic number.  But AUCE, if it':; serious enough about  joining the CLC on its own terms, just  might be able to make it four. It can follow the lead of the Fisherman's Union and  lobby. And lobby.- And lobby. In effect,  the small union would have to divert most  of its resources to another  battle for  the next few years. Still another option Tor AuoE is affiliation with some  other house of labour. The burning question is, of course, which option is  likely to benefit working women most in  the long run?  The Curious Case of  John Fryer: who is  manipulating whom?  Last March, when AUCE 2 at SFU was fed  up with not having a contract for 11  months, and realized its strategy of  rotating strikes to minimize disruption  to campus life was getting them nowhere,  they walked off the hill and set up a  picket line on the main road to campus.  Then they appealed to other unions for  moral, financial and picketing support  in a battle which combined some of the  hottest issues in labour: equal pay for  work of equal value, the right of public  service employees to strike and picket,  and disruption of possibly "essential"  services.  The B.C. Government Employees' Union, large,  powerful, and the potential recipient in a  demonstration effect of any major gains  AUCE might make at the bargaining table,  came forward with a $20,000 grant, a godsend  to a poor union with, virtually no strike  fund. Local 2 asked for, and got, assurances  that there were no strings attached .— BCGEU  insisted they had no intention of trying to  use the funds to force a merger.  Two weeks after the walkout, a student rally  was held on the picket line to demonstrate  solidarity with the striking workers.  One of the speakers was John Fryer, the sec-  A member of AUCE Local 2, during last year's dispute at Simon Fraser. A few weeks later, John Fryer  support pickets out on to the road  retary-treasurer of the BCGEU. Rally he did.  He called a scab a scab and led picketers  off the medians into the middle of the road,  to stop traffic going up Burnaby Mountain.  He left before the RCMP got there. Eighteen  people were arrested, 12 of them members of  CLC-3C Fed affiliated unions.  affiliates at Simon Fraser University  (AUCE 2) and it is clear that a repetition of such a situation is not  in the best interests of all public  service employees.  Which brings us-up to the present...  November: Fryer gets wind of the CLC decision  regarding AUCE and whips off a letter to local  2  at SFU stating he and is executive were  available to speak about affiliation, when  the Industrial Inquiry Commission settling  the dispute up there is finally finished  (two items are still outstanding).  Sheila Perret of the provincial office says  they were somewhat taken aback by this, as  Fryer should have known a provincial affiliation committee had been struck to research  the options available to AUCE. It also seems  obvious that AUCE is unwilling to break itself  up. Norma Edelman at SFU says they wrote back  informing BCGEU that the correct channel is  the Provincial Affiliation Committee, because  Local 2 is not dealing with that matter on its  own.  Perret stressest^nat this committee is not  conducting amal^anation talks  as reported in  the press. Its mandate is only to research  all the options open to the union.  Later in November:'The B.C. Federation of  Labour (CLC) holds its annual convention  in Vancouver. AUCE, of course, isn't there.  Trials of the SFU 18 continue in Burnaby.  BCGEU lets them use half its table to  muster support. They don't get any. A  resolution amalgamated from those offered by involved affiliates is killed. The  Fed won't even issue press releases commenting on convictions.  According to Perret, the sum total of Fed  support for the 18 has been one telegram  to the Attorney General demanding that  the charges be dropped.  Fryer, as chair of the Public Sector Committee, presents a report to the convention. It is passed. In doing so, the B.C.  arm of the House of Labour puts its weight  behind statements such as. these:  * Many public sector unions remain outside the Canadian Labour Congress and the  Federation....   (They)  have set themselves  apart from the mainstream of Canadian  1 Labour as easy prey  to be picked off as  individuals.  * The attitude of some of these unions  is not healthy. They are unwilling to  involve themselves in the development  of policy and in the day-to-day operation  of the Federation.   They avoid the financial  and time commitments involved,  yet expect  to be able to run to the Federation whenever they need help.  Free Riders can only benefit our employers.  These unions need the resources of the Federation and the  Congress,  and must  learn  they cannot manipulate the mainstream  labour movement to meet their own ends....  ■ The report of your Executive Council has  outlined the excesses of one of these non-  * The actions of some non-affiliates  are open to severe criticism.  A part-  iculrr example this past year has  been the AUCE dispute at Simon Fraser  University.   That union approached the  Federation and requested meetings pursuant to the picketing policy,  and  then turned around and reneged on  agreements subsequently reached... .  The disarray caused by such actions  can only hurt the union members involved as well as creating considerable frustration among the affiliates  who have attempted to follow trade-  union principles.  * Those working people who are outside  the Federation must be encouraged to  join with us by first affiliating to  the Canadian Labour of Congress,   and  it is  the intention of the Federation  to work to bring those organizations  outside the  legitimate House of Labour  into  the Federation.  To add insult to injury  The next day, the Convention passes a  resolution calling for a study of the'  principle of equal pay for work of  equal value, having heard~that women's  earnings are, on average, A5%  less than  those of men. According to the Sun,  They also supported the principle  of affirmative action to bring pressure  to bear on    employers  to demand equal opportunity for women and oppressed minorities.  Also the next day, a member of the Union  of Bank Employees relates a union victory I  at the Bank of Commerce in Winnipeg. She  is cheered. (Recall that SORWUC/United  Bank Workers broke the ground for unionization of banks by a branch-by-branch  basis, but couldn't compete with CLC's  resources. )  Later, the trade unionists demonstrate  outside the Hotel Vancouver where Joe  Clark is addressing a PC fund-raising  dinner. There are cries.of Joe McTeer.  Even the press says it was an unusually  sedate federation convention noticeably  lacking in controversy.  AUCE responsed to the Public Sector Committee's allegations with a letter to  the BCGEU. Sheila Perret insisted they  were all indefensible. Said Norma Edelman, of AUCE 2, We're still  trying to  find out what they meant by some . of  the things they said,  for instance  that  we reneged on agreements reached with  the Federation.   Our letter to BCGEU  protested that we see  these things in  the press without, knowing what they  mean,  and that we 'd prefer they spoke  with us first before making charges  against us.  All we have is what they said in their  brief, which isn't much at all,  Edelman ► Kinesis December 79 - January 1980  3  continued, We have no details on all of  these alleged infractions, no statement  backing them up.  Sheila Perret emphasized that AUCE has had  a good record in its brief history. We  have had good contracts,  fairly decent  settlements.  It 's only now that AUCE has made the gains  it has,  Perret added, winning contract  clauses that give better protection to  women,   that other unions are showing interest in the issues.  AUCE locals help each other out, with  what Perret termed a cascading or stepping stone effect.     In this way, AUCE  locals look to one another for an example,  rather than working against each other,  The main thing to remember,  Perret continued  is that' AUCE has applied for affiliation intact,  as. AUCE.  The affiliation committee is researching  the other possible ways of affiliating to  the CLC.  In the course of that research,  AUCE is looking at other unions  — unions  inside the CLC,  unions affiliated to the  Confederation of Canadian Unions,  and at  other non-affiliates.  AUCE remains an  option. •  What VSW is doing about  sexual harassment  In last month's Kinesis, we raised the  issue of sexual harassment on the job as  one of VSW's priority issues for the  coming year. Since that time, we have  begun to contact other groups and individuals interested in working in this  area, and have formed a Sexual Harassment Working Group to do on-going  organizing in this area.  Initial tasks for the committee may  include:  1. Establishing liaison with trade  unions and other organizations  2. Preparing educational material on  the issue  3. Organizing a self-help advocacy  programme  4. Preparing a brief to the Human  Rights Commission and the Ministry of  Labour concerning including sexual  harassment explicitly in the Code, and  gaining public support for this  position.  The first meeting of the working group  took place on November 28. We will be  determining a schedule for regular  meetings, and the group is open to anyone concerned with the issue. Anyone  who is interested should contact Debra  in the Status of Women office.  In addition, VSW has recently obtained  copies of "Fighting Sexual Harassment:  An Advocacy Handbook" produced by The  Alliance Against Sexual Coercion of  Cambridge Massachusetts. Although the  specific legal information contained in  the booklet is based on American law, it  nevertheless provides a useful discussion of some alternatives for organizing around the issue. Sample copies  . are available in the office, and we will  be ordering additional copies which  should be available at cost very soon.o  Judy Cavanaugh's trial held  over until January  Judy Cavanaugh, member of the SFU 18, has  had her trial. Both sides have presented  their case, the summaries have been made.  But the judge has reserved his decision  until January 8. Interestingly enough, the  appeal date for another 18 member, Peter  Armitage, just happens to be January 9.  And in the case of Robbie Clarke, the  judge is waiting until January 10 to pronounce. Looks a little like a judges' get-  together over the festive season to sort  things out...»  No sweat for Versatile Cornat  B.C. Ice and Storage  settlement ignores sex  discrimination issue  B.C.Ice and Cold Storage workers have finally got their contract, after 15 and a  half weeks on the picket line. They have a  general increase of 90 cents an hour in  each of two years, but there was no provision to cure the sex discrimination that is  built into the company's wage structure.  Union demands for equal pay for equal work,  spurred by fish-racker Susan Jorgensen's  charges against the company and union of  sex discrimination, were dropped early in  the strike.  Jorgensen has charged that women at the  plant often perform the same work as men,  but are paid 65 cents an hour less. A  Human Rights Board of Inquiry, appointed  a year ago by then-Labour Minister Allan  Williams, will resume hearings into Jorgensen 's case in January. A decision in her  favour would have ramifications for women throughout 'the fishing industry.  B.C.Ice and Cold Storage's parent company,  Versatile Cornat Corp. of Vancouver, announced its profit figures for the first  nine months of the year a few days before  the strike was settled.  The international conglomerate reported  profits of over $18 million to September 30,  and increase of 183$ over the six and a  half million earned in the same period of  1978.  Guess they were waiting to see if they could  afford the extra 90 cents an hour for their  warehouse interest's 80 employees. But certainly the extra 65 cents an hour to rectify  discrimination against the eight women working at the plant would have been too much  of a burden. # By A.C.Schaefer  Grace McCarthy climbs on  collection wagon  The provincial government is going to  set up a collection agency to go after  husbands who have been defaulting on  their maintenance payments to welfare  single mothers.  Under the proposed scheme, the province  will pay the welfare mother her regular  income assistance, plus an amount which  is supposed to be equal to the maintenance paid her by her husband.  The ex-husband would make his payment  directly to the government agency, and  not to the former wife. It would be the  government, not the wife, who would collect from him if he defaulted.  The bottom line has nothing to do with  collecting money,  McCarthy claims. The  whole idea is to make it a much more  caring program for the children that are  the result of these marriage, who by no  actions of their own find themselves in  a one-parent situation.  The trouble with this move is that it  singles out welfare mothers. What about  the other single mothers, working at  lousy low-paid jobs, whose husbands are  also defaulting on maintenance payments?  The most sinister aspect of the plan is  that women on welfare will be forced to  report on the whereabouts of their husbands. That's just great when you know  he's likely to show up and beat you up  for squealing to the government... Women must have a choice about whether or  not they want to go the collection'agency route.  Finally, the scheme is totally In keeping with the Socred imperative: the individual must be made to pay for social  services. Far better to spend it on  something profitable, like tourism.9  SOR WUC lays complaint with LRB  Christmas: Scrooge still  bargaining in bad faith  The Service, Office and Retail Workers  Union of Canada (SORWUC) filed a complaint  October 29 with the B.C. Labour Relations  Board, charging management of the Muckamuck with failure to bargain in good  faith.  SORWUC has asked the Board to demand that  the employer:  * return to the bargaining table  * stop encouraging and permitting strikebreakers to threaten, harass and intimidate pickets  * cease and desist the postings or distribution of flyers containing malicious falsehoods, damaging to the reputation of the  union and its members  * post an apology or retraction for statements that the union does not represent a  majority of employees.  SORWUC is also asking the Board to assess  damages done to the union's ability to  organize, especially in the restaurant  industry.  SORWUC is expecting to hear from the Labour  Relations Board soon.  It's dodgey on the line these days  Meanwhile, the picketing goes on.  Pickets  have had to deal with harassment recently  in the form of raw eggs (thrown from the  apartment building adjacent), walnuts in  their shells (festive season weapons flung  from the hotel across the street) and  buckets of water (dumped on picketers'  heads from the roof of the Muckamuck restaurant ).  Despite this, the strikers are united and  optimistic. They say, "we feel that we  have a strong case against management,  and are confident that we will win this  round at the B.C. Labour Relations  Beard."•  Preparing a brief for Human Rights  Commission  In the next few months, VSW will be  preparing a brief to the Human Rights  Commission concerning, among other  issues, possible changes to the Human  Rights Code of B.C. and our criticisms  of current procedures in the field of  human rights in the province. Areas to  be included in the presentation will be  sexual orientation, sexual harassment,  equal pay, single parents and others.  Several women have already indicated  their willingness to work on the brief.  Anyone else who would like to be involved, or who has input they would like  to pass along, should contact Debra at  VSW.  In addition, we will be discussing  ways in which we may be able to use the  presentation of the brief to gain  publicity and support for our position.* Kinesis December 79 - January 1980  LOCAL NEWS  The paper everyman reads and  nobody admits to publishing  The Vancouver Star, well-known local  porn tabloid, moved last month from biweekly to weekly publication. The Star,  which bills itself as "the paper that  everybody reads and nobody admits to  reading", announced the change as "a  coming of age".  The Star is widely read by men in this  city, along with its "sister" publication the Night Times.  It is common  knowledge, though not advertised, that  both papers are published by the owners  of the Vancouver Free Press (formerly  Georgia Straight), purportedly to  subsidize the Free Press.  Both the Star and the Night Times specialize in explicit and objectified  views of women's bodies, accompanied by  cartoons, letters and articles by men,  and according to the Star, "Vancouver's  most daring classifieds".  Recent issues  of the Star feature a "survey" entitled  "Are Big Breasts Best?" and articles  such as "No More Bitches, No More Lies",  "The Love Slave", and "Powerful Prick".  You might check out the Star or the  Night Times at a corner store, then  write a letter of protest to the publishers demanding an end to this exploitation of women's bodies,  (if you need  more ammunition, refer to the feminist  analysis of pornography in the April/May  '79 issue of Kinesis. )  Address your letter to: The Publisher,  2110 W. 4th Avenue, Vancouver. Save a  copy, and let us know their response.  Jailed for working to feed kids  Recently, a woman came to VSW because she  was facing charges of welfare fraud.  * After 17 years of marria.ee, she left her  husband in 1969, taking the children with  her. Her husband had beaten her so severely  that she had aborted their fourth child.  * Go back to your husband, they told her  at welfare.  x Making ends meet for three children when  you're on social assistance is next to impossible. So she got a job as a chambermaid  in a downtown Vancouver hotel, working on  Saturdays and Sundays, from 197? - 78.  * Iter husband was supposed to be paying  maintenance of $75 a month. But more often  than not, he didn't pay up.  * English is her second language, and,  with a Grade 3 education, she had a lot of  trouble understanding the complexities of  the social assistance program.  * She was charged with extortion for not  declaring her earnings for those nine years.  It works out to $45 a week, or $14000 in  a lump sum.  * In the best interests of society, said  the Judge, she must spend the next three  months in Oakalla.  * Don't you love our justice system?  reassured the Social Credit party members  that B.C. would urge Ottawa not to decriminalize marijuana.  Pathetic pickins but a partial  victory  It was the month before Christmas, and  all through the house, folks were mailing letters to McCarthy the louse.  The Vancouver Area Christmas Bonus Coalition poured hundreds of protest letters  into Santa's bag  The coalition, make up of groups including South Vancouver Family Place and  Stoned and gay  The growing gay population is   largely due  to cannabis,  Vinee Stone, president of the  Surrey-based Marijuana Education Society  of B.C. told the delegates to this year's  Socred convention. He was addressing a  forum on human resources.  Cannabis, you see, contains female estrogen which affects male users of marijuana.  He accused the media of taking a pro-pot  position, that amounts to advocacy journalism.  Unless the data we have is soon transmitted to the public, we will probably witness the decline of Western civilization  as we have known it,   Stone warned.  Former Health Minister Bob McClelland  HOW ABOUT A   JOB /NSTEAD !!!!  Skeena-Terrace Tenants Association demanded that the minister of human resouces,  Grace McCarthy immediately increase the  Christmas bonus in the December GAIN  cheque.  In the past, a family on GAIN got a bonus  of $25 for Christmas,. while individuals  got $15.  The coalition's protest cited section one  of the GAIN Act, which says that social  services are supposed to have as their  object the   lessening,   removal or prevention of the causes and effects of poverty,  child neglect and suffering.  The letters piled up so high that McCarthy  was forced to concede.  On November 26, she announced that this  year, families on GAIN would received a  $50 Christmas bonus. Singles would get  $20.  Pathetic pickins but a partial victory  nonetheless.  Betsy says it's outrageous  Stalwart prison activist Betsy Wood was  fined $100 for contempt of court November  21.  Wood had shouted, "that's outrageous" at  Judge J.J. Anderson after he had sentenced Dwight Lowe to nine years in prison.  She was immediately taken into custody.  "I won't pay the fine," said Wood.  "I  don't think I owe anyone an apology for  saying that."  Defence counsel Marguerite Jackson had  pointed out that Lowe's bank robberies  involved neither violence nor the use  of a gun.  She said that Lowe was a reluctant robber.  In one holdup he had stood in line at the  cashier's wicket twice before he could  make himself go through with it.  Daycare hopes dim as 70's die  This Is the last issue of Kinesis in the  so-called Year of the Child.  Inspired by Nora Randall's play about  childcare organizing, Occupational  Hazard,  here are the sad facts of child  care in B.C.  Daycare is administered by three ministries with three separate and often conflicting policies.  There is no funding for daycare. It is  subsidized on a fee-for-service basis only  to individual parents who can establish  their need for daycare and their inability  to pay for it. These subsidies are difficult to get. Student families are excluded. So are immigrant families.  The staff of group daycares are required  to complete a government course of  training. But the course varies greatly  in quality and cost to the individual. No  guaranteed or even suggested rate of pay  accompanies this requirement.  Few centres are organized into unions.  There is a provincially regulated staff/  child and staff/facility ration.  Since it  is impossible for centres to operate  within this, most centres charge $20 - $30  more a month.  Most children of working parents are in  "traditional" forms of care — with babysitters or relatives.  The government is pushing "family daycare." In this service, none of the  requirements of group daycare exist.  The  adult/child ratio is different.  The  health regulations are different.  Training is not required.  This serves to keep women caring for  children in isolation, to leave the care  of children primarily in the home, where,  as "women's work" childcare is invalidated  as "real" work, and to further conceal the  number of children requiring daycare.  Daycare is not a dead issue. If you are  a parent, contact the Coalition for Improved Daycare Services (CIDS) at 228  0527. If a worker, contact SSEU at 879  4671, or SORWUC at 684 2834  -Rafe Mair's alarm is alarming  In his first week as provincial health  minister, Rafe Mair has found alarming  the recent Statistics Canada report that  in 1978, B.C. lead the country in the  number of therapeutic abortions.  Why should this fact suddenly become  alarming  news for a provincial health  minister? Ever since the federal abortion laws changed in 1972, B.C. has had  the highest rate of abortions in Canada,  a rate which is in.line with abortion  figures in the U.S. and most European  countries.  But Mair says he's going to investigate.  He wants to know if hospitals "granting"  abortions are being less stringent than  required by federal law. V/hy an investigation now?  Rafe Mair said November 29, I'm personally not in favour of abortion.   He added,  but I can  live with the  law of the   land.  Commenting on Rafe Mair's alarm, an executive member of VGH said December 2  that the Vancouver General Hospital's  board of trustees does indeed follow the  directives of Canada's Criminal Code in  performing abortions.  George DesBrisay, vice-chairperson of  the VGH board of trustees explained,  The circumstances under which abortions  are permitted are set out in the Criminal  Code of Canada,  and these are followed  scrupulously by our hospital.  VSW auction and dance was a  good drunk and a grand fiscal  triumph  To all the people who worked on the dance  and the auction: thank you:  May your sisters watch over you this winter solstice,  and always. We hope to clear around $1000  when the loose ends are tied up. Kinesis December 79 - January 1980 5  ACROSS CANADA  Sheriff of Nottingham dons Robin Hood disguise  Crombie scheming to rob women  Family allowances have been paid to all  Canadian mothers since 1954.  Often,  that's the only direct cash that women in  the home can get their hands on.  David Crombie, federal Health Minister,  plans to spirit this allowance away. Why?  Because the P.C.'s need some bucks with  which to finance their feted election promise of a mortgage deductibility scheme.  If they fail to deliver on that one, their  staunch home-buying supporters will be  cross.  To neutralize opposition, they've dressed  the plan up in a rob-the-rich-to-pay-the-  poor costume.  "E.P. Taylor," said one  government source, "hardly needed a baby  bonus."  A child tax-credit system will replace the  universal baby bonus, "to enable more help  to be given to the elderly, the handicapped and the poor." Touching.  The changes will work like this: Take, for  example, a two-child family where the husband is the sole waged worker, earning a  middle-range income of $25,000 a year. A  family allowance of $480 is paid annually  to the wife, but is added for income tax  purposes to the husband's income. The result is that $175 goes back to the government .  Eliminating the family allowance would deprive the woman in this case of $480, while  saving the husband $175.  Then suppose the  husband qualifies for mortgage and property  tax credit. He would save around another  $300 on his taxes.  The ungrateful poor (wouldn't you know  it?) are not impressed. Demonstrating on  Parliament Hill November 15, women from  the Ottawa Tenants' Council made their  opposition vocal.  Dorothy 0'Connell, of the Tenants' Council, pointed out that the changes would  set women against women, to scramble for  the same small piece of the pie.  And she pointed out that women in the home  often have no direct access to their husband's income, however grand that might  be. Wealthy families can disguise the  fact that the wife is only a man away from  welfare.  0'Connell also emphasized that the cut in  baby bonus is no doubt just a toe in the  door for more attacks upon women, next  time the low-income ones.  David Crombie may be somewhat dismayed at  the howls of protest, because he's now  saying in the House of Commons that there  won't be any family allowance changes  until into the 80's. But you don't have  to be Ed Broadbent to know that discrimination in the 1980's is just as grim as  discrimination in 1979.•  Anti-choicers step up Ottawa lobbying  By Kinesis Ottawa correspondent  Campaign Life Canada has hit Ottawa. It's  not (should we be so lucky) a conference  of insurance salespeople, but a gang of  anti-choicers.  On November 22, 1979, they staged a major  lobby effort designed to outlaw abortion  entirely and cut off all government funding of organizations which provide abortion referral and counselling services.  Their efforts are focused on the federal  government, and their hopes are high.  That same day, anti-choicer Robin Richardson (PC - Beaches) asked House Leader Walter Baker, if this government would consider bringing in legislation to amend the  Criminal Code  to protect the unborn child  under our law...  Responded Baker: there has been no discussion in the government with respect to  that kind of legislation...  the abortion issue.  Word leaked out about this campaign's mass  lobbying blitz before their action. Early  in November, Planned Parenthood Federation  of Canada began organizing their response  to this lobby. Every MP received an information packet outlining Planned Parent-  hood's philosophy and their support of the  recommendations of the Advisory Committee  on the Status of Women. The packet had  It won't rest there. Baker added that  changes are afoot in the House of Commons  procedural rules which might allow a private members' bill (such as a new anti-  choice one) to be brought to a vote.  Also on November 22, .anti-choicer Ursula  Appolloni (Liberal - Yoric South-Weston)  dragged out some grisly tales about the  vivisection of human fetuses.  All in all, quite a day. Campaign Life  Canada contacted and presented briefs  to as many MP's as they could, especially the 72 who are said by anti-choicers  to have signed statements agreeing with  their philosophy.  Campaign Life Canada is stressing the  deletion of subsection 4-7 of Section  251 of the Criminal Code of Canada.. This  area provides hospital abortion committees  with the power to make decisions of refusing or approving abortions procedures.  Planned Parenthood targeted in attack  They are also insisting that all public  funding for Planned Parenthood be stopped.  Planned Parenthood,  they claim, is the  largest abortion referral agency in Canada.  The anti-choicers chose this time to campaign because we have a new government in  session, which, they feel, may be ripe for  Studio of NFB is in reel trouble  Because of severe budget cuts by the federal government, the National Film Board  of Canada is being forced into the process  of cutting back on key programs, including  the women's program, Studio D.  Says Kathleen Shannon, of the women's  program, aside from this small program at  the NFB,   the interests of women are rarely  served at all,   let alone well,  by the mass  media.  And she added: unless there is a renewed  commitment from the government  — on behalf of its constituents across the country  — to fund the film board adequately,  the  life of the Board  — and therefore of  Studio D  — is in jeopardy.  Almost every women's group in Canada must  have used the NFB women's program films as  starting points for discussion. Remember  Patricia's Moving Pictures,   the group of  films on working mothers, including Like  the Trees,  Would I Like to Work!,  And They  Lived Happily Ever After?  Write a letter to David MacDonald, Secretary of State, Parliament Buildings,  Ottawa. MacDonald is the minister who  holds jurisdiction over the NFB, and  he's the minister responsible for the  status of women. Hit him up on both  counts over his responsibility to support  the women's program (Studio D) of the  NFB.  Send a copy of your support letter to  Kathleen Shannon, Studio D, National Film  .Board, P.O. Box 6100, P-43 Station A,  Montreal, Quebec, H3C 3H5.«  been delivered by November 19.  On November 21, the National Advisory  Council on the Status of Women called a  press conference in Ottawa, to reaffirm  the right to choose. Women's groups all  across Canada wrote letters to their  local members of parliament, demanding  choice on abortion.  Reinforcement from the grass roots is  essential for the success of this pro-  choice campaign. Every MP must be flooded  with letters from their pro-choice constituents.   These  letters should request  the recogition and implementation of the  recent recommendations of the Canadian  Advisory Council on the Status of Women:  - that the involvement of voluntary agencies in family planning should be increased  instead of discouraged by financial cutbacks  - that the Minister of National Health  and Welfare establish programs and services directly adapted to the needs of  adolescents, low-income groups, and residents of rural communities; and arrive  at agreements with all provinces to put  these programs and services into operation.  Margaret Mitchell, Robinson  prevent vote  Margaret Mitchell (NDP - Vancouver East)  and Svend Robinson (NDP - Burnaby) succeeded November 30 in blocking a private  members' bill aimed at limiting choice on  abortion.  The bill, proposed by Hal Herbert (Lib -  Vaudreuil) would remove any question  that economic or social consequences of  a pregnancy would be taken into consideration by hospital abortion committees.  Mitchell and Robinson kept the debate  on the bill going until the hour reserved for private members' business had  expired, leaving no time for a vote.  This means that the bill will now go  to the bottom of a long list of private  members' bill.  Two anti-choice Conservatives, Doug  Roche (Edmonton) and John Reimer (Kitchener) were loudly in favour of getting  the private members bill before a Commons committee.• 6   Kinesis December 79-January Ii  ACROSS CANADA  Lesbians give thanks in  Saskatoon  by Cyndia Cole  I was laid up with arthritis and not too  sociable.  It seemed a bit bizarre for  me while lame to scrounge together  money, poems and kilos'of prescribed  healing foods and fly away to Saskatoon  for the long Thanksgiving weekend.  Only a special woman, a chance to read  my poems and Metamorphosis '79, a Lesbian and Gay cultural conference, could  have pulled me there.  Though I came off the plane in a wheelchair, as the conference built, I progressed from a cane to walking unaided  to dancing.  The solidarity of women in  celebration can do wonders for the  health.  One hundred and sixty or more of us  danced, talked, rallied, sang, work-  shopped, performed, listened, ate and  drank for four days. The full moon and  glorious prairie sunshine aided our  festival. On Saturday 80 people marched  for lesbian and gay rights through the  downtown area. The streets were narrow  enough that shoppers bothered to stop  and look.  I was very impressed with the courage it  takes to be openly lesbian in Saskatoon.  We ended in Bessborough Park with a  warm circle and group singing.  This highlighted the theme'for. me of  loving connections with each other as  sisters and brothers.  Every time we  played the disco song "We Are Family",  all the women linked arms and wove an  expanding, ebbing and flowing circle.  I  met the shining faces of all these new  women and did not doubt we were kin.  In the workshops on Saturday we began  with a round on why we came.  The story  over and over rang, "I'm so isolated.  I'm the only lesbian where I work and  study.  I came to have a good time."  Large numbers came from out of town,  driving 8 - 10 - 16 hours across the  prairies for just a few days with her  own kind.  7e heard Meg Christian and Ferron and  Charlie Murphy and me. We ran workshops  on self-defense, lesbian culture on the  nrairies, theatre and a lesbian bill of  rights. We confronted gay men on their  sexism and shared news of our feminist  activities across the West.  Most of all we met each other, exchanged  support and smiles and addresses,  ",'e  knew again that we are not alone.  And  no matter how many of us have been  unwelcome or uncomfortable at our  nuclear families' dinners, we had a  family of 150 to give thanks for at our  holiday feast.  It warmed my heart and  healed my wounds.  You can add your name to the 1540 person  mailing list of the Gay Coalition of  Saskatchewan by writing Box 7508,  Saskatoon.  $2 for membership.  Monthly  newsletter by donation.  The list is  confidential and mailings are discreet.  The coalition operates on the principle  that women hold 50% of the decisionmaking power.  Hate messages for Carleton  feminists defile campus  Ottawa - Carleton University feminists  have been subjected to a barrage of obscene insults on tunnel walls, doors, and  blackboards.  On September 20, the Women's Centre log  went missing.  Two days later, intolerable  obscenities appeared on tunnel walls, using the names of centre women: "send your  soiled underwear to (womam's name)", "free  blow jobs at the women's centre", and so  on.  Joanne Brown of the Carleton Women's  Centre says, "it's hate literature,  there's no question about it. People's  names are being used, it's out-and-out  libel and slander."  She added, "it's had both good and bad  effects. In one way, we've had more people join the women's centre, because they  come up so mad about this kind of sexist  stuff going on the walls; they want to do  something...but some people who at first  came up to the women's centre...(are )...  , not coming back because they feel funny  about being associated with this stuff  that's on the walls."  The women's community in Ottawa has lined  up solidly in defence of the Women's Centre and has demanded that the university  remove all obscenities, immediately; that  the university administration make every  effort to identify the individuals responsible; and that the centre be given  support to continue, free from harassment  and fear. (Upstream info)  Now you see 'em,  now you don't  The Business and Professional Woman carried a report on the International Women's  Day Parade in Toronto.  They even had a  nice picture of the parade showing various groups with their banners.  The Lesbian Organization of Toronto (LOOT)  recognized themselves in the picture —  but there was something missing from their  banner...no prize for guessing which word  was blacked out.  They know it wasn't a mechanical problem  associated with printing as the same  photo, untouched, had been published in a  Toronto daily.  LOOT wrote to the editor and received a  reply stating that The Business and Professional Woman is attempting to reach a  greater number of women and they felt the  word "lesbian" might be offensive.  LOOT  was not impressed with this response. You  too can write the editor of the offending  paper. Valerie Dunn, 18-796 Carlaw Ave.,  Boronto M4K 3L2. (Broadside)  St. Johns needs a transition  house  At a recent planning and priorities  meeting of Newfoundland Status of  Women Council it was decided that the  council's energies for the next six  months to a year will be directed towards initiating the establishment of a  transition house for battered women in  St. John's.  The first step will be to  determine the scope and set-up of such a  facility and to work out ways to fund  and maintain it.  It is evident that women in St. John's  are being beaten and are in need of a  crisis shelter where they can escape the  situation and determine a course of  action for themselves. The difficulty  is to convince the provincial government  even that the problem exists.  In August of this year the opposition  health critic submitted a written question to the provincial Minister of  Health asking about the number of  battered women in Newfoundland. Although the government had a week to look  into the question, they were unable to  supply any figures, and the question was  greeted with jokes and laughter by some  members of the House of Assembly.  (NSWC Newsletter)  Physical disability, age and  marital status added to Sask.code  The Saskatchewan Legislature passed a  new Human Rights Code proclaimed in  August, which is a consolidation of previous human rights legislation and adds  three new areas of protection. Physical  disability, marital status and age (18 -  64) have been added as discriminatory  factors to the list which already includes race, creed, religion, colour,  sex, nationality, ancestry or place of  origin.  Physical disabilities, age and sex are  not protected classes in issuing of  public contracts such as insurance plans  or credit.  The definition of sex has  also been expanded to exclude discrimination on the basis of pregnancy or  pregnancy-related illness.  (Prairie Woman)  It's 50:50 for Saskatchewan  marriage break-ups  A new bill introduced by Saskatchewan  Attorney General Roy Momanow in April of  this year provides for an automatic 50:50  split of all matrimonial property and  gives the courts discretionary power to  vary this split if one of the spouses  disagrees with the settlement.  According to Louise Murray, chairperson  of the Saskatchewan Advisory Council on  the Status of Women, this new legislation  has very good points.     In particular are  the two basic premises of the 50:50 split  and the unprecedented recognition of  women 's work in the home as being of  equal value to the financial contribution  of the spouse.     An earlier amendment  passed in 1975 to the Married Person's  Property Act instructed judges to consider  contributions other than financial in  determining property settlements. The  settlements have generally gone 70:30 in  favour of the husband.  If either of the spouses disagree with the  50:50 settlement then the onus is on that  person to prove differently in court.  Amongst the many good points Murray raised  about this legislation is that either  spouse can no longer sell, transfer or  give away any property or money during the  time of divorce and settlement. She went  on to say that women and children are  given built-in protection during this time  period so that their financial hardship is  kept at a minimum.  Murray said that even though the legislation has many good points, she does have  some concerns. (1) It does not include  common-law relationships;   (2)  The  legislation has had three readings in the House  but will not be passed until the end of  this year because of tax implications; and  (3) Even though the criteria are good the  Advisory Council will monitor any future  settlements to see how the judicial  discretion will be applied.  (from About Women/Upstream) Kinesis December 79 - January 1980   7  FALL CONFERENCES  Counsellors develop feminist response to planet of the insane  By Sara Joy David  An enthusiastic group of over 200 women  from a variety of agencies gathered at a  conference on Counselling Women for  Change at the London Psychiatric Hospital  in London, Ontario, October 26 and 27 of  this year. A few participants came from  distant points: Regina, Calgary, Winnipeg,  Vancouver, Quebec and Newfoundland.  Rosemary Brown, a member of the legislative assembly of British Columbia set the  tone by offering a world perspective on  women and mental health.  Drawing on data  from North America, Europe, Britain,  Japan, Australia, New Zealand and the  Pacific Islands Rosemary stated that oppression of women is a way of life in all  countries, and nations, that more and more  women are "escaping" into insanity, and  that the use of prescribed psychotropic  drugs is reaching alarming proportions,  forcing most other forms of traditional  therapy into disuse. She indicted mental  health professionals and volunteers for  their too willing silence and dulled responses to the reality of a society that  would rather a woman be insane than nonconforming.  Rosemary suggested that we live on the  planet of the insane  whose inhabitants  . display a callous disregard for a dying> -■■  environment,   destroy animals and resources  in the name of recreation, cannot communicate with each other, seem intent to  destroy themselves and their planet, and  who are committed to an ideology which  demands that one half the species oppress  and exploit the other.     She stressed the  centrality of social change in any program directed at improving women's mental  health.  Helen Levine, a professor of social work  at Carleton University provided a thorough  description of the condition of women in  society and a critique of conventional  practice. She suggested that such a  feminist analysis must be shared with all  women seeking help as a critical element  in the helping process for consciousness  raising is at-the heart of feminist  counselling.    She stated further that  The answers to personal dilemmas do not  lie in therapeutic blueprints.     They most  often lie in a redefinition of the struggle itself specifically in a redistribution of power,  resources,  and  responsibility  in both public and private  spheres. Because women have been encouraged to be rather than do, feel rather  than decide, react rather than act Helen  urged counsellors to help the women they  see make decisions, take risks, and act  upon the problems facing them,  individually and collectively  rather than  settling for talking,  ventilation,   taking  drugs,  finding temporary relief from  tension.  Small group workshops permitted participants to focus on specific skills and  issues such as crisis counselling with  victims of sexual assault and domestic  violence, career and employment counselling, counselling in traditional  settings, a model of co-operative problem  solving, the use of linguistic exercises  to alter language behaviour and expand  self expression, counselling adolescents,  mediation counselling, and sexual counselling with women.  The greatest controversy was sparked by a  combination of genuine disagreement and  misunderstanding between workshop leaders  about what constitutes rescuing other  women and.whether and when it is appropriate to do so..  Hogie Wycoff, a radical therapist from  Berkeley, California, and author of  Solving Women's Problems and various articles that have appeared in Issues in  Radical Therapy, introduced the issue  of No Rescues.  She defined a Rescue as doing something  for someone she can do for herself,  and doing more for someone than she does  for herself,  or doing something you do  not want to do.  In her book Hogie tells us that she capitalizes terms such as "Rescuer", "Victim" and "Persecutor" to distinguish inappropriate role behaviours from legitimate rescuing - a lifeguard throwing a  drowning woman a line. It is clear that  she recognizes that there are survival  situations where real rescue is warranted  and in no way deprives real victims of  their power. She is merely warning us  about the dangers of reinforcing women's  feelings of powerlessness, weakness and  passivity by taking excessive responsibility for them when they seek help.  The misunderstanding that occurred was  reflected in the agitation experienced  by those who have worked with severely  battered women or women in the midst of  massive breakdown who could not ask for  help, make contracts, or share responsibility in a time of severe stress and  crisis. A few of those counsellors  thought they were being taken to task  for "rescuing" and began to question  themselves or feel guilty. A few others  felt righteously angry.  No real dialogue took place on this very  important issue. I perceived this as a  serious problem resulting from the attitudes of those on both sides of the  issue toward one another and the manner  in which it was raised. Those critical  of Wycoff spoke accusingly and with hostility about the danger of "simplistic  jargon".  Hogie, reacting to the tone of the  criticism judged the critics to be  closed rather than open. As a result  she did not respond to the content of  their remarks. It was a classic example  of how dialogue grinds to a halt when  people fail to apply the principles of  constructive criticism or to use simple  communication skills such as careful  listening, paraphrasing, and checking  out their understanding of terms or  ideas.  It was my hunch that two other factors  widened the gap.  I believe these were  failure of the critics to discharge  frustration and anger that originated  elsewhere which produced a hostility out  of proportion to the issue at hand, and  tiredness, heightened sensitivity and  irritability on Hogie's part which made  her less able to spot what was happening  and rendered her less willing and able  to clarify her ideas in a way that  could be heard.  Increased awareness of such dynamics,  and an openness to giving each other the  benefit of the doubt, is imperative if  we wish to engage in serious debate as  opposed to attack, counterattack or indifferent silence. The actual issue at  stake could have been cleared up simply  and quickly.  What the conference managed to achieve  was considerable.  It provided a feminist analysis to many women in the field  just beginning to open to feminism. It  brought together people who ordinarily  have no means for communicating with or  supporting one another thereby decreasing feelings of isolation and alienation.  It heightened awareness of and  ability to articulate central issues  that must be dealt with in counselling  women for change. It made possible the  beginnings of a cross Canada network of  feminist therapists to develop feminist  therapist rosters, communicate further  with one another, plan future regional  and national conferences, and possibly  take a united stand on political issues  salient to women's mental health. Finally it made clear the need for more  training of women by women with a  feminist consciousness and extensive  knowledge and skills.  Shortcomings that need to be corrected  at future conferences are: the lack of  structure provided for workshop leaders  to learn from and share with one  another; the lack of planning for different levels of knowledge and consciousness; the limited range of workshops (most presented verbal, cognitive  problem solving skills.  There was  little skill training in body awareness  and intervention techniques, emotional  catharsis, or the use of psychic and  spiritual healing techniques); the lack  of structure for groups to form to discuss issue-oriented topics arising from  informal contacts; the lack of a business agenda or forum for taking a political position on current mental health  delivery or national issues affecting  women's mental health; and failure to  provide evaluation forms.  Nonetheless, the organizers of the  conference are to be congratulated for  providing a forum where important beginnings were made. Helen Levine  summed up accurately when she stated  that while a range of different positions were expressed, there were basic  shared values.  Moreover, the large turn-out dispelled  any remaining feelings we may have had  as feminist counsellors of being part of  a "lunatic fringe". On the contrary, we  left reaffirmed and recommitted to the  integration of personal and political  change.• 8   Kinesis December 1979-January 1980  FALL CONFERENCES  National Action Committee conference, "Women in Jeopardy  i\uiiunui su;uim \^umrmiiee i~uri/ereru,e,      rr urricn in jK*jpuru.y  Women gaining strength to confront violence of woman abuse  By Kinesis staff writers  Two men, one woman, all wearing leather  jackets.  One man's fist approaches the  woman's face.  Below, the words ask,  "Are you ready for leather?"  A male body wearing nothing but a sharp  studded penis sheath.  A mother telling of own near-rape, then  breaking down as she describes a sexual  assault on her daughter.  Donnie Patterson quietly, powerfully telling of her experience as a battered wife,  and of the effect of that violent history  has had on her and her children.  Leah Cohen recounting the ordeal of an  immigrant woman of sixteen, a meat packer  who was fired because she wouldn't sleep  with her supervisor, and fighting for  two years before she got her experience  validated, and earned compensation of  $3,500.  All these images locked in my memory  during the "Women in Jeopardy" conference,  held October 26 - 27 at Robson Square  media centre.  When Lee Grills, conference coordinator,  thanked Friday evening's speakers, she  quoted a sign she had seen, The  truth  shall make you free,   but it will make you  miserable in the process.  Lee was right.  We came away with an increased, jabbing awareness of our own  vulnerability, and of the hatred that can  confront us simply because we are women.  But we gained in admiration for victims  who have had the courage to speak out, and  in our determination to support them.  And  we gained in our awareness of the need to  change attitudes, customs, institutional  structures and laws that permit and perpetuate woman abuse.  The conference started with Peg Campbell  and Jillian Ridington presenting slides  illustrating positive and negative images  of women in advertising, erotica and  pornography, and then discussing the meaning, symbolism and ramifications of such  images.  Ridington and Campbell joined forces because their work in these areas has shown  them that the common images of women, used  in advertising, art, and all forms of the  media, teach attitudes towards women that  are the basis of pornography, as well as  other forms of woman abuse.  Women are imaged as sexual commodities;  good women are the property of a male protector, unowned women are whores, deserving of rape and punishment.  The slides  showed the difference between male images, of women on display for the viewer,  and women's images of themselves as complex and fully human beings.  Erotica/pornography becoming clear  They made clear the boundaries between the  erotica which depicts and celebrates mutu-  alistic sexuality and the pornography  which coerces and degrades women.  When we  view images, the lines between these categories are easily drawn.  We find an image  acceptable or exploitative, coercive or  mutualistic, from body language and interactions which are implicit or explicit in  that image.  To translate these boundaries  Into written form in order to define policy is more difficult.  But the definition  is coming closer to a refined and acceptable one as we learn more, see more, and  work together more.  Saturday's first presentation was to have  been Bonnie Krepp's excellent This Film is  About Rape.  Gremlins delayed its projection, and Debra Lewis had to adapt her  remarks to a pre- rather than post-film  discussion.  She did a superb job.  Debra ' s well-documented analysis, gained from  work she and Lorenne Clark did for their  two books (the second now in-press) gave  a strong historical and social context.  She reminded us that rape law is not made  to work for women, but only to protect  the property of women's owners. Her analysis complemented the powerful testimony  of the film.  Following the film, Donnie Patterson spoke  on battered women.  Donnie's subdued, soft  tones belie the horror of her words and  the clarity of her thought, and give her  content great impact. Her presence destroys many myths.  Donnie is no masochistic victim, no castrating bitch.  She is a  strong and wise woman who has learned  from her own experience and extrapolated  from it to an understanding of the forces  which contribute to woman abuse and keep  its victims chained.  Sexual harassment is a newer issue than  rape, wife battering, or pornography, but  we are quickly coming to understand that  it is their sibling, a child of the same  male-defined ideology.  Leah Cohen, coauthor of The Secret Oppression: Sexual  Harassment of Working Women is another  woman who came to work on an issue because  of her own experience.  She is now helping  to set up sexual harassment counselling  centres. She knows the need, because she  had nowhere to go for help when she faced  the problem.  Leah is now contacted daily  by women who are being harassed and know  nowhere to turn.  Sexual harassment is the last frontier  Cohen called the problem the last frontier  of sexual oppression, although it is as  old as  the presence of women in the work  force.     She gave examples of sexual harassment from throughout this century, and  talked of the problems confronted by  women who experience it and try to deal  with it.  Because sexual harassment is so  subtle, so close to the "harmless flirtations" accepted by many people, it is  important to define it clearly.  Leah borrowed a definition: Sexual harassment is any sexually oriented practice  that undermines a woman's job performance  and. threatens her  livelihood.     It includes  physical harassment — from pinching to  rape — and psychological harassment. Any  request for sexual favours with a threat  of reprisals for non-compliance is sexual  harassment. The threat forewarned may be  a beating, a transfer or demotion, or  sabotaged work.  When a woman stands up against her attacker, she runs the same gamut that rape  victims must run.  Her character, her morality, her personal history face trial  rather than the behaviour of her molester.  Cohen advised women to seek out other female employees who might back up the victim  theory.  Until better solutions are found,  Cohen suggested adherence to the late Margaret Mead's call for an incest taboo in  the office.  Her tongue was only partially  in her cheek.  Each presentation was followed by active  and concerned discussion.  A union nego-  Kathe Kollwitz  tiator gave suggestions for contract clauses prohibiting sexual harassment and  giving support to victims. A group was  formed to consider and try to Implement  ways of changing institutions to better  accomodate the needs of battered .women.  As the conference ended, Jillian Ridington  summed up its impact and articulated again  the connections made by all the speakers.  The "little rapists"  It has been said before that pornography  is the theory and rape  the practise.     That  can be expanded.     Violent,  coercive images  of women and pornography are  the theory;  rape,  battering,  and sexual harassment  are the practise.    Rapists,  wife batterers,  and the   "little rapists" who commit  sexual harassment are the actors-out of  cultural values.    Any woman can be  their  victim,  and all of us are.    As the rapist  said in Bonnie Krepps film,   "It could have  been any woman in the area at that time. "  And that's  the point.     All  these forms of  coercion are there  to retain women in the  position we have historically been in  —  subordinate  to men.     They exist to make us  walk in fear,   to ensure  that we do not own  and control our own bodies.  If we are  to take back our lives,  we have  to start by making sure that the difference between mutuality and coercion in all  relationships is made clear and understood.     We have to start by recognizing  our own oppression.    As Donnie Patterson  made clear,   that is often the most painful  place from which to begin,   but we must  start from there.     We must find our own  physical and mental strength,  and learn to  defend ourselves.     From there we can come  together to help and support each other.  We can band together.     We can  listen to  each other without judgement.     Together,  we can create and maintain refuges for all  women who are victims of all forms of sexual oppression.     We can work together to  change  the institutions  that create and  enforce unjust laws.     We can find out who  the real controllers are,  who it is that  reaps  the profits from the exploitation of  our bodies,  and make  their identities  known.  We are stronger than we were  None of this will be easy.     It has never  been easy, and it looks  like it might get  worse,  because of government funding cutbacks and because of the backlash that the  small gains we have made has created.     But  we are stronger than we were.     We have  found our strength by coming together.     We  have  learned how to work together.     We  must continue  to work together,  for ourselves,  for each other,  and for our daughters,  so that we can all be free  to work  and live as we choose,   no matter what our  backgrounds,   no matter what our sexual  preference or our marital status.  The conference proceedings were taped.  Excerpts will be heard on Co-op Radio's  "Talking Law" and "Womanvision" programmes. • Kinesis December '79 - Jan uary 1980   9  TRACY-sponsored workshop  Sexual abuse of children: the problem recognized and discussed  By Ellen Baragon  The Sexual Abuse of Children Workshop  (held on Oct. 23rd at the Justice Institute ) was a successful followup to the  Family Violence workshops held earlier  this year, also sponsored by TRACY, Taking  Responsible Action for Children and Youth.  The workshop was aimed at laying some  groundwork for developing inter-agency  systems in dealing with abuse cases as  they are reported. It also aimed at creating educational programmes for prevention  of sexual abuse.  The workshop was attended by approximately  150 participants, many of whom were agency  workers, including a large number of police and medical professionals. Some disappointment was expressed that very few  educators were in attendance because of  the important role teachers play in a  child's development. Part of the problem  may have been that the conference was  not widely publicized.  Keynote speaker Jennifer James (Dept. of  Psychiatry and Behavioural Science, U. of  Washington) delivered a convincing analysis of sexual abuse with an anthro-socio-  logical perspective.  Sex roles are a major factor  James explained how sex roles are a major  factor in the destructive nature of the  nuclear family where sexual abuse perpetuates itself.  In addition to James'  academic qualifications, she evidences an  understanding of and commitment to grassroots programmes. In Seattle, James reported, the child safety programme has  been implemented in several schools. It  consists of a 22 point list of safety  skills for children in primary school,  including self-assertiveness, swimming  safety rules, what to do in an emergency,  how to help out a friend in trouble and  self-protection against sexual abuse.  The  programme has also been adapted for parents to enable them to teach their own  pre-schoolers.  James also pointed out the importance of  educating police and medical professionals  and giving greater status and monetary  incentive to homemakers and childcare workers in order to provide opportunities for  early detection and treatment for the  abused child.  James expressed her support for prison  sentences for offenders. She said from  her own knowledge of court hearings there  is nothing which substantiates the notion  that children suffer irreparable damage  testifying in court.  The trial provides a solid channel for the  child to obtain complete protection from  further abuse and restore the victim's  sense of self respect and trust of adults.  Halina Klajner from the Child Abuse Team  supported this point in her own lecture^  which immediately followed. Klajner gave  a general profile of the offender and his  victim and how the situation manifests itself inside the family. She pointed out  that statistics on this subject were  scanty due to the lack of research being  done. While some statistics have been recorded, they have sometimes proven quite  contradictory to her experience working on  the team.  Klajner quoted a Rape Relief statistic  that one out of every four female children  are abused. While this may seem exorbitantly high, she said that this is one figure which is relatively consistent with  her first-hand lav jvledge.  Seduction by a child in sexual abuse cases  is a myth, and a dangerous one, says Klajner. Only an extreme power relationship  of adult over child could allow such abuse  to occur. To suggest that the child has  control is misleading and only serves to  protect the offender from his actions.  Also, it is important that adults take  children seriously when they reveal experiences with abuse, rather than discounting  what they say because they are children.  She agreed with Jennifer James that chil- •  dren must be taught self-assertiveness  skills so they may be better equipped to  protect themselves from abuse.  John Turvey, a worker at Emergency Services in Gastown (MHR), continued with an  informative discussion on the situation of  child prostitution and exploitation on the  streets of Vancouver. As Turvey pointed  out, Davie Street was the most active  area in Vancouver for child prostitution.  Approximately 20 new children enter prostitution every month in Vancouver.  Most child prostitutes have a history of  abuse and generally are alone, unemployed  and unskilled before reaching the street.  Having spoken with many of these children,  Turvey reported that most of the young  people would prefer 'straight' jobs and  would be happy to leave the prostitution  trade if they had more solid home lives  and economic security.  Turvey gave a rundown on the Davie Street  Project, which is attempting to form a  committee (made up of street workers and  street kids) to redirect prostitutes into  alternative lifestyles.  At the end of the second day of the workshop a panel of legal professionals, headed by Crown Counsel Jane Godfrey, gave a  brief but honest summation of the situation as it reaches the courts.  While it is relatively easy to remove an  abused child through social workers and  Family Court, convicting the offender  requires an enormous stack of evidence  including a medical report of the child's  injuries, if there are any.  Evidence Act silences children  But the most crucial barrier to a court  hearing lies in the Evidence Act which  excludes children's testimony as short of  absolute.  Coupled with the court's  reluctance to allow child witnesses for  fear of mental trauma and 'family breakdown', incest cases particularily rarely  ever reach the criminal courts. Godfrey  said for example that she has had only two  incest cases in the last two years.  On the last day of the conference five  workshops were held and many proposals for  action were made.  (For a complete copy of  the minutes see Jan Bulman at T.R.A.C.Y.  278-6929) Here are a few:  -To transplant the Child Safety Programme  into B.C. schools  -To strike up a Preventative Education  Committee (first meeting was on Nov. 27  at the Justice Institute; call Jan Bulman  there for details)  -To hire a fulltime coordinator to do research and draw social services together  to form an effective system for dealing  with incoming reports of abuse  -To lobby for a change in the Evidence Act  to include sworn testimony from children  (contact Ellen Baragon through Kinesis  for information)*  Women architects building contacts  By Vivienne Holtz  The Pacific Northwest was fortunate to  host the Fifth Congress of the Union  Internationale Des Femmes Architectes  recently in Seattle.  It was an exciting event. The number  of women architects is pitifully small,  and it was more than encouraging to find  oneself among 300 other women - planners,  landscape architects and architects.  It was a thrill to be able to talk freely  and spontaneously about architecture  in general and women's role in it.  The Union des Femmes Architectes was  founded a long time ago.  Just how long  I could not find out, but some of the  founding members seemed to be well into  their seventies.  The difference of their perception of the  role of women in architecture was strikingly different from that of the younger  architects.  For them it was an act of courage to decide to break into a field totally dominated by men and their aim was to prove  that they were as good as the men, which  was, in other words, an attempt to become  totally integrated in the male system.  It was the only way to survive at their  point in history.  To them it sounded shocking to hear that  women may have a very specific female  contribution to architecture, that there  might be a different perception, and  resulting planning, particular to women.  But nonetheless, all opinions were heard  with interest.  Women involved in landscape  Especially striking was the number of  women involved in restoration of landscape after mining and other industries  had ripped the land open, exploited it  and left it for dead.  There was also a slide presentation about  non-professional women who designed and  built their own houses. Margrit Kennedy,  from West Berlin, presented a paper discussing the space perception of women  and men.  Her theory is that there is a marked  difference dating from way back when man  was the hunter.  The hunting grounds  were wide and semmingly limitless. Women,  on the other hand, were in spaces that  were much more intimate and people-related.  It follows, says Kennedy, that an  environment shaped by women would be significantly different from an environment  shaped by men.  There was a recurring concern about making  the cities (to which most topics related)  more livable, memorable and people-related  by infrastructure (the organizing of public services), scale and detail.  The presentations encouraged all of us to  hang in there. A great wave of renewed  enthusiasm about architecture, and about  being a woman in the field was felt and  shared by the whole group. It was an  encouragement to establish our own values  and implement them in our work.  There was a refreshing lack of monumental-  ity in the buildings presented - monument-  ality is so often predominant in "famous"  architect's (men's) work.  Instead, there was a combination of practical outlooks, energy efficiency and  aesethetics, buildings for people to use -  not for other architects to admire.  There were women from all over the world:  China, Russia, Poland, Ghana, Germany,  Australia, all parts of Scandanavia, and  the United States, to name but a few of  the 56 countries represented. There were  five of us from Canada.  The spectrum of background and experience  was enormous. All tied together by the  fact that we were women in an exciting  area of work. Hopefully, there will be  hundreds more of us by the next time we  meet. That will be in Berlin. • 10   Kinesis December 79 - January 1980  VIOLENCE  The real criminals aren't in the prisons; they're running them  By Emma Lazarus  In this article I do not dwell on the  evils of isolation or any other particular form of abuse.   There is no mention of sex in prison,  or the remarkable .solidarity that emerges among  those who experience imprisonment.  Alternatives are demanded. Again, it  is not within the scope of this article to explore the promise of therapeutic communities, the misuse of  psychology, or the dangers of professionalism.  For the purposes of this article,  all  of the above are to be assumed.  Prison is no more conducive to a creative  lifestyle than is poverty.  Generally, it  is from this background of poverty that  most prisoners derive the incentive to  commit those crimes which have a higher  risk of detection than the crimes of the  affluent. Do rich or influential people  ever serve any but the most differential  kinds of punishment?  People rehabilitate themselves when they  are motivated. There is no indication  that the threat of loss of freedom and  the fear of subsequent poor treatment has  ever acted as a significant deterent to  what is know as criminal behaviour and  anti-social acts.  There is every indication that a prison  sentence accentuates a person's sense of  alienation and feelings of hostility. The  probability of repeated conviction increases  proportionately with each day spent in lockup.  The idea that prison somehow "protects society" or "makes the streets safer" is a fallacy. Prisons make people dangerous, and  only those who have some measure of control  over their lives can be expected to make  responsible decisions. The bitterness that  aceumulat2s during the time wasted inside  simmers just below the surface, waiting  for release. It has accurately been observed that, even long after their emancipation, people who have been institutionalized  suffer more from an inability to cope with  common daily dilemmas than from all the misplaced stigma and prejudice and harsh treat  ment they have come to expect.  Prisons are barricades against the world,  islands of bleak corruption that duplicate  as they illustrate the violence and the  failure of the system under which we operate.  It is as difficult for the concerned individual to gain access to a prison as it  is for prisoners to get past the network  of bureaucracy that isolates them from the  community at large..  We get rumours of what goes on inside.  Fragments of incidents eventually reach  us, a spectacular story splashed over  the newspapers, the predicament of a  friend. We know that prisoners are detained against their will in situations  that intensify instead of remedying the  unhappy, often desperate, circumstances  of their lives.  The real criminals are not in the prisons,  they are running them. Keeping the public  at large uninformed and frightened is a  big part of their job. Of course, not all  of those who work for the system are completely hardened. Some even attempt to  challenge the evils they encounter and go  out of their way to help prisoners if they  can.  There is little tolerance in the system  for "con lovers" however. Rocking the boat  lands those who would be sympathetic in  deep water. As one prison worker, when  being asked to justify a senseless visiting  procedure, put it. We don't think here.  It  isn't necessary.  It's all done for us..  Women in prison a»c even more neglected  Women in prison are apt to be even more  neglected than the men. As there are fewer  women than men imprisoned, they are often  stuck in makeshift conditions. Programs  available, if any, are geared towards upholding female stereotypes. The increase  in awareness reflected in the current  trend of criminal literature and conferences to feature "the female offender"  sensationalizes the sharp rise in criminal convictions against women; and it  tends to focus on the problems of administration rather than possible alternatives and positive options.  This was glaringly obvious at a recent conference in Vancouver held by the Associat-  Photo Canada, Fall '76  ion for Women in the Justice System.  This Association was established to be a  support network and catalyst for the development of women in the justice system  ... to act as an in-depth and criticial  voice in the field of Corrections,  Criminology,   Courts and Legal Services...   especially with regard to the  (a) female worker,  (b) female offender and (c) female victim.  Among the declared goals and objectives  are the intentions to provide consultation,  evaluation and advisory services to the  justice system  and to foster the development and maintenance of standards  while  managing to promote public awareness  and  to participate in projects and programs  in the field.  Women in Justice System conferred  Convened at the posh Harrison Hotel, a setting remote from the problems daily encountered by prison staff, the conference was  organized with some feminist awareness and  skill.  Workshops covered such topics as The Working Mother, Assertiveness Training (introductory and advanced), Wen Do and Affirmative Action.  The benefit of these was overshadowed by  the fact that these workshops were all intended to help participants cope with oppression rather than deal with the fact  that their own roles within the system  uphold oppression, after all. While some  concern was publicly expressed deploring  the decadent and degrading conditions the  prisoners face, the main theme of the conference appeared to be "Upwardly Mobile  Women."  Equal Pay for Work of Equal Value may be  a fine motto, as long as it does not exclude a deeper awareness of what that  work represents. To learn to handle stress  on the job does not even take into consideration the fact that most prison jobs  are untenable, inexcusable and pain-inflicting. It is devastating for women to  affirm their feminism and their individuality at the expense of other women.  Radically different approaches are required. To experiment with treatment without serious inquiry into the disorder is  to manipulate effect without alleviating ► Kinesis December 79 - January 1980   11  VIOLENCE  the cause. Anything that contributes tc  the problem inhibits the solution. The  attention being given to the statistic  that more women are being detained for  violent acts as well as "victimless"  crimes, is a diversion needed to justify  the continuation of the "justice" system.  It takes for granted necessity of control  and behaviour modification and the expediency of locking people up. It does nothing  to address the special needs of prisoners  or the whims of those upon whom they must  depend.  When the Women in the Justice System met,  members of the Women Against Prisons subcommittee of BCFW were there. Women from  Rape Relief bought the rape film for viewing and discussion. The Vancouver Women's  Bookstore set up a table and display.  While some of the participants seemed  very uncertain about our contribution,  nervously scanning the graphics on the  wall, many others demonstrated their  appreciation in the total concentration  they applied to examining each and every  book : new ideas are dangerously contagious, handle with care.  There were some moments of tense confrontation. But for the most part, exchanges  were earnest, and occasionally startling.  Out of the divergent pool of goals and  aims, a common concern — call it feminist awareness — surfaced. Would it be  too wistful to hope that these kinds of  connections could be meaningful?  Women's prisons groups form and fade  Over the last few years, the women's movement has become increasingly aware of the  particular oppression of women in prison.  Sporadic effort has been made to be of  solid help. This is not an easy or well-  defined task, which partially explains  why groups form and fade. A BCFW subcommittee formulated an excellent prison policy (still reproduced in the constitution  handbook) then dissolved as a result of  conflict of emphasis. «  Similar obstacles were faced by an unaffiliated group of feminists (mentioned in  the May/June '79 issue of Kinesis). After  months of energetic weekly meetings, the  group quietly dissipated, the women never  completely in agreement over basic strategy.  Attempts have been made, through letter-  writing and limited personal visits to the  Lower Mainland Regional Correctional Women's  Unit, to establish rapport with the women  locked away there.  The feeling of the group was that only then,  after the women in Oakalla had themselves  indicated what would be useful, could  the group take action.  Only one contact inside was established.  When she was transferred, communication with  Oakalla was severed. It seemed that the  women were wary of writing to enthusiastic  strangers and that their limited, precious  visit time was reserved for family and close  friends.  The hostility of prison administrators towards "outside interference" has contributed  as well to the difficulties encountered by  those who would venture inside.  In April 1979 BCFW approached Marie Peacock,  director of the women's division of Oakalla,  with the proposal that BCFW member groups  be given the opportunity to facilitate a  variety of workshops which quite likely  would be relevant to the women detained  there.  Peacock: cautiously receptive to BCFW  Cautiously receptive to the idea, Peacock  requested further clarification of the project, assuring us all the while that the  facilities, while still in the process  of renovation, were more than adequate  and that ample opportunities were being  given to the girls  to improve themselves.  In the correspondence that followed this  _.meeting, it was emphasized that workshops  would be basically self-help and skill-sharing, flexible to the interests of the women attending.  Permission was requested to visit the prison to give the women who would be involved  a preliminary chance to discuss their concerns. By September, 12 BCFW member groups  plus one kindred individual volunteered to  participate.  The list included the Vancouver Women's  Health Collective, Women in Focus, Vancouver  Women's Bookstore, Ariel Books, Rape Relief  and Vancouver Status of Women. Basic consciousness raising, assertiveness training,  problem-solving, constructive criticism,  journal-writing, poetry and improvisational  dance were some areas to be explored. Women  Against Violence Against Women agreed to organize a special workshop for the women,  many of whom had experienced particularly  violent lives.  Permission to proceed was never granted;  nor was it ever explained; nor was it even  explicitly denied.  Gracious and alert, Mrs Peacock manifested  no overt antagonism. But she could not be  reached for comment.  There is some hope that this may be successfully tried at Twin Maples, a minimum  security prison near Ruskin. A visit there  found staff and women prisoners enthusiastic about the possibility. There was  a marked difference in the atmosphere  between Twin Maples and Oakalla. At  Twin Maples, there is a willingness to  experiment which seems totally absent  at Oakalla (the Lower Mainland Regional  Correctional Centre).  Some positive contact has also been  made with the Lynda Williams Correctional Centre in East Vancouver.  Meanwhile, at the annual BCFW convention,  the provisional prison subcommittee was  ratified to full sub-committee status.  It will actively implement existing prison policy.  In the coming year, Women Against Prisons (the title of the sub-committee)  proposes to continue the attempt to  bring feminist programs into the prisons  and to bring prisoners to feminist programs.  Women Against Prisons will speak out  Women Against Prisons has formed to speak  out against a prison system that is morally indefensible. We will help expose  the truth that can no longer remain hidden  behind the walls.  The goal is to offer solidarity to those  who are and who have been casualties of  the criminal injustice system. And to  alert those who would prefer to remain  complacent to the damage that they are perpetuating by continuing to work within  and to cooperate with an oppressive system.  Prisons are warehouses and the people  trapped there are considered numbered  property of the state. Less than 5%  of  the prison population needs close supervision. Prisoners are sacrifices of  the system to its failure. Their sustained anger and pain creates a chain  of hostility and a climate of despair.  The waste of human potential and the  misery of the prison system must be  faced and corrected.  There are alternatives  There are alternatives. Through the  enlightened dialogue of dissenters we  can approach the beginnings of positive •■  change. Restitution must be made, not  only to the victims of crime, but to  the victims of justice.*  Contact Women Against Prisons through  Vancouver Status of Women  :   736 1313  Academe promotes a strange male fantasy called sexuality  Once again, the academic world has proven  its hostility to women and to feminism.  Students in the English Department at  Simon Fraser University have been organizing against the content of the course  English 374, The Erotic Idiom.  In a  pamphlet prepared by the SFU Ad Hoc Committee of Women against Violence Against  Women, they note that, while the course  claims to be about "human sexuality", it  includes no theoretical text expressive of  women's sexual attitudes, awareness, or  experience.  George Frankl's The Failure of the Sexual  Revolution is required reading for the  course.  The text is, in the words of the  group, viciously anti-feminist,  anti-  lesbian and insulting to the sexuality of  one half of the human race.  Even a quick glance at the claims made in  the book more than substantiates the  accuracy of this assessment.  For example, Frankl says:  Their neglect or inability to study  the  subjective quality of an orgastic experience has  led Masters and Johnson into  making an important mistake.     What they  consider multiple orgasm in women induced  by the stimulation of the clitoris by  means of masturbation,  particularly by  artificial vibrators,  is usually no more  than a series of orgasmic spasms which do  not involve the whole body and often not  even the vagina.     These spasms,  of which  a woman can have many in quick succession,  do not  lead to a full discharge of tension,   to the  "pleasant bodily and psychic  relaxation" that signifies an orgasm.  One can only speculate how Frankl draws  the distinction between "spasms" and "the  pleasant bodily and psychic relaxation  that signifies an orgasm".  It would seem  that he is merely restating the myth that  The only real orgasm involves  a penis?  the only "real" orgasm is one that involves a penis.  In doing so, he exposes  his own "neglect or inability" to account  for the real experiences of women.  Virtually every study done by women in  recent years has shown the fallacy (or  phallasy) of Frankl's statements.  It is  clear, however, that his own hostility  towards feminists or "emancipated women"  makes him totally unable to deal with our  real experience.  However, the implications of Frankl's work  does not end there.  His descriptions of  the sexuality of girl children are little  more than an invitation to sexual abuse.  He notes:  ...If, however, the father fails to acknowledge the little girl as a girl-woman  because of his own inhibitions then her  feminine self-image will be stunted, she  will feel rejected or unconfirmed in her  identity and will develop a hostility to  father that can have powerful repercussions upon her personality.  He further suggests that young girls have  frequent rape (and especially oral rape)  fantasies about their fathers, and that  these are projections of their own  desires.  Frankl's text supplies little more than  an academic justification for rape,  incest and child abuse.  The instructor of the course has been  confronted by students, and a panel on  the issue is being planned for the near  future.  For more information, contact  872-8212.• 12   Kinesis December 79 - January 1980  RAPE RELIEF DEBATE  Why institutions do nothing to stop rape  By Krin Zook  Anti-Rape Centres were initiated because  the needs of victims of sexist violence  were not being met by any existing institution. Nor were any of those institutions  doing anything to stop rape.  Today, anti-rape centers are still pro-  ,,r,r,elling, public ed-  viding support, wunoc.  ucation, court/police accompaniment, and   iting alternatives to using institut-  : with the long-range goal of stopping  crea  ions  rape  Much time was spent exploring how institutions dealt with violence against women  and how our own attitudes towards institutions perpetuated that violence. What  was found was that rape is a result of  society's conditioning of men and women  and that institutions exist to uphold  society and all the values, attitudes,  and prejudices which perpetuate that  violence.  This puts anti-rape centers at odds with  the existing institutions. It was only  after much examination of the centers'  own attitudes, values and fears that  they began to change the way in which  they used or did not use the existing  institutions.  We know that as women we are taught to  give men power, taught that we are not  capable of being strong, intelligent and  assertive. Men are taught to be powerful. It is their "rightful" place, and  when men do not believe or feel powerful, they obtain it by taking it away  from someone seen as less powerful - a  As an extension of this conditioning to  be powerless, we are taught that institutions exist to help us by providing'protection (police, military) and justice  (courts, prison) from the violence which  we experience.  Therefore, when a woman is raped, she  is taught to think that the police will  protect her, that the courts will expose  the rapist and make him understand the  damage he has caused, and that by reporting  to those institutions which she has been  taught to believe in, her experience will  be validated.  It is the experience of anti-rape centers  that only about 30$ of the women who  call them involve the police at all. The  low percentage is a result of many factors.  One is that many women already know that  existing institutions do not provide  what she needs. Institutions exist only  to reinforce those roles which perpetuate  rape.  Tremendous bribes have been given (wealth,  status, prestige) to reward those individuals who most avidly support the institutions.  Institutions tend to hire people  who" will conform to their standards.  There are always slight deviations within  the institution, yet the whole is more  powerful than the individual.  The individual poses no threat, therefore  the institutions can allow these deviations to an extent. Deviations are a  screen, so it seems that they are sincere  in making some value changes'.  Since anti-rape centers are an anti-rape  force, they do not accept the current  value system which allows women to be  raped and beaten by men. When they continue to try to change the institutions,  the centers slip into a pattern of upholding them, in order to keep their access  to those institutions open: for example,  not wanting to criticise the police in  public for their use of the polygraph,  because centers want continued access to  the police college in order to work as  resource people in college training programs.  The only alterations that take place are  changes In protocol rather than real  value changes. Anti-rape centers are not  powerful enough within the institutions  to make the real value changes which  go against everything such institutions  exist to uphold.  How rape crisis centers are developing  as traditional institutions is by  rationalizing that it is important to  show doctors, lawyers, police and social  workers how to do their jobs better and  and that it is important to lobby for  changes in the law.  This supporting of institutions, institutionalizes rape as an accented social  reality. Victims will then have to cope  with the rape.  This is only adjusting,  not facilitating value changes.  To reject these traditional institutions  as a "real" choice for women to take con-  and are at the same time part of an overall ideology and strategy for liberating  women. It is important to create tangible  actions and alternatives that fit short-  term and long-term goals - one works to  further the other, not in opposition.  We are creating the new society for  "after" the revolution, now I  How this works, for example, is that a woman may choose to confront her rapist.  This provides a way for her to take back  control of the situation, directly. It  validates her reality that he, not she,  was responsible for the rape. And it  exposes him so that he is no longer anonymous to those around him. In the long  term it shows us, as women, that we have  the ability to make and create choices  for ourselves.  We no longer have to rely on those institutions' which leave us powerless. No  "Anti-rape centres are developing reforms that improve our  lives and are at the same time part of an overall ideology and  strategy for liberating women. ... We are creating the new  society, for after the revolution, now."  trol of the situation is to take respon-  sibity for our own failures, but the successes give us real strength, power and  freedom to control our own lives.  It is a very frightening thing to take  responsibility. No longer can we blame  someone out there, if the rapist comes  out of jail and rapes again (60$ of them  do). Nor can we blame the police for not  adequately protecting the woman who was  beaten by her husband for the fifth time  that month.  Embracing means that we are not just helping her to adjust to the institutional  brutality, but she is taking choices developed by her with other women and instituting those actions with loving, real support.  This is power; this is revolutionary.  Reformism is stopping short of fundamental  change. It is making reforms a goal in  and of themselves. Anti-rape centers are  developing reforms that improve our lives  longer do we have to wait for some authority to agree that we have been, in fact,  violated; We are giving ourselves new ways  to live where each of us has control over  our own lives and the support and validation from other women to create and to  change.  The criminal justice system does not offer us the means to stop rape or offer  women concrete help. It does not protect  the woman. It does not validate her experience as degrading, fearful, and stripped of power. It does not give her control. It does not expose the rapist, nor  explain his behaviour, nor offer him ways  to learn how to change. Nor does it protect other women. Instead, women call the  criminal justice system their second rape.  No longer will we cry softly, padded by  courtroom walls. We will scream out our  collective fear, anger' and rage.¬a  Krin Zook is a worker at Vancouver Rape  Anger is what is  needed, anger at  the conditions of  an oppressive society and at the  people who keep  it that way. Without anger there  won't be any  change. Kinesis December 79 - January 198013  How is the raped womansupposed to make it through the night?  By Frances Wasserlein  I am alarmed. ■ What has alarmed me is all  the words published in the September/  October and November issues of Kinesis  about rape crisis centres' policy/criminal-justice system/rapists.  The words are  about only those three things. What about  the raped woman? How is she supposed to  get through the night?  It seems to me that the questions under  discussion are being posed from the least  useful perspective. We must take the perspective of the woman in crisis, we must  work with her from where she is, not where  we are, not where we wish she was.  Casey  and Johanna (Kinesis, November 1979,  p. 20) say, ...we are answering her questions with our truths and there is no way  for us to separate feminism from truth.  Here is the crux, 'our truths' are simply  that — they are not yet her truths, and  she cannot be expected to listen to them  or to take them on as her own. As for  feminism, this is the tool  that we must  use in working with women.  Very often a woman's first contact with  those dread creatures, the feminists  (that's us) comes in a time of serious  and violent crisis in her life; she is  raped, she is battered. .m^v».  The woman who reaches out for help does  not need any information about the idiocies of the justice system, she needs a  way to go on living. She needs to change  her perspective and by doing that, her  life. She needs to become a feminist.  Let's face it, it is only after we have  become feminists, or in the becoming, that  radicalization or politicization can take  place.  The woman in crisis is just plain scared.  She has just performed an incredibly  courageous act by telephoning the rape  crisis centre or the crisis line for battered women. She has just taken one step,  one which she may repeat several times.  She may have endangered her life by making  the call. She comes to us only with what  she knows. And she is really not sure  what to do next. She will have some ideas  which it will be hard for her to let go  of.  One of them could be that the police will  provide her with protection from a man  who beats and rapes her. One of them  could be that men who rape women go to  jail and are punished by society for the  crimes they commit.  We do not easily let go of these ideas  because they are what help us stay sane in  times when our lives seem to be completely  falling apart. We reach for the things we  have'always been told will support us in  need, and it is only when they turn to ash  or acid in our hands that we can learn  that there are other ways to be supported.  She has internalized in addition, all  kinds of ideas about women which have nothing to do with the reality of her life  or ours. Often she believes she deserved  to be beaten because she was defiant or  pregnant or not a good housekeeper. She  deserved to be raped because she was walking home alone in the dark, because she  'asked for it,' because she trusted the  wrong man. She believes she has brought  these assaults on herself, she does not  yet see that these events are assaults.  She has these beliefs/ideas because society (her society: parents, husbands, boyfriends, children, teachers, bosses/  supervisors, social workers, doctors, soap  operas, movies, magazines, etc.) have  told her that these things are the truth,  I certainly count myself among those who  would wish to have a real justice system,  one which would be responsive to my interests. I know that I'm going to have to  wait a long time — and I'm going to have  to work hard with others to realize that  goal.  What seems to be really important to re-  - member in this particular context is that  there is a very real and clear difference  between consciously making use of an  institution and supporting that institution or condoning its actions in  general.  To make use of the courts does not mean  that we (as individual feminists or as  groups working in a specific context)  'support' the decisions which are made  there (however, if a decision is made  which 'we' do support, or which seems to  meet our ends, listen to the cheers).  If we are involved in the work of making  feminists (and we must be to call ourselves feminists), then we must surely  see that we cannot simply tell women how  the world (or the criminal-justice system)  is and expect them to believe us.  Is that not exactly what we are fighting  to end — the imposition of a set of ideas  on us and about us in which we have no  real part? To make feminists we must be  real leaders, we must go with women, beside them through their experiences of  this sexist society and point out how it  works, and what is really going on.  We must know how this society works from  the outside in, and we must teach that  knowledge, or we're going to be alone  later — I don't want to be alone, I want  more women beside me.  We have taken on responsibility to women,  and especially to women in crisis. If  groups of us who work together make decisions which if made public will result  in our losing our funding we must be very  careful.  It is also quite clear, and this written  debate in Kinesis is proof, that such  decisions will have wide-ranging consequences and repercussions within the  women's movement (however you may define  that). Funding which comes from the  state has strings attached. We are foolish to cut each other's strings.  Women don't have time, money, for  services we need  Surely we have learned now that women do  not have enough time or money to support  the kind of services we need, and we know  that volunteerism is not sufficient.  Also, we have, I hope, ceased to be so  idealistic as to believe that without our  continued advocacy the government would  provide these services itself (we all know  the arguments from the state about all  the social workers who could/should be  providing the services offered by Rape  Relief, or could/should lead support  groups for battered women, etc.)  We work with women, we know each o+her —  those of use who call ourselves feminists.  We stand in a different relation to the  world than do the majority of women. We  see the world from the point of view of  women, and this is not the prevailing  point of view in our society.  Our consciousnesses have been raised,  some event or series of events, with the  support and encouragement of those women  who had already made the shift, has  changed us — we have changed ourselves.  Abstract theorizing is a luxury  It is only after some time and experience  that we can indulge in the luxury of engaging in abstract theorizing about the  'needs' of raped and battered women (and  even then we must take care to talk about  women and not only the situations/systems/  contexts in which we find ourselves).  To indulge in this kind of elite practice  (I mean the abstract theorizing) is quite  fine when it is restricted to discussions  among the initiated. Women (and this  includes us) need first to learn how to  take our own perspective, and to give up  taking care of everyone else ahead of  ourselves. While we may not intend to  lay on guilt, that can be the result when  a woman in crisis hears, for example, how  awful the prison system really is.  A woman in crisis is vulnerable, and  therefore easily lead. We who work with  her bear a heavy responsibility.  If we  wish to have women beside us to fight for  the long term changes in, for example, the  criminal-justice system, we must change  their lives with them, we must make them  into feminists. We must do so carefully  and clearly. We must remember that one of  the internalized ideas is that we (the  feminists) are dangerous to women. We  must make clear that we are indeed dangerous, but only to ideas and institutions  which hold us back from our full power.  We want to destroy the power of those  ideas and institutions.  We must also remember that it is possible  for us to do two things at once. We must  not confuse work with raped and battered  women with the equally important and quite  different work of transforming the social  relations in which we live. These works  cannot be done in the same ways, but by  doing the first part well we will facilitate the second part.  It will not be women who will lose the  most in this upheaval — we stand together to gain ourselves. • 14   Kinesis December 79 - January 1980  HEALTH  At Wild West, they have it all for you, and cooperatively, too.  By Diana Smith  Wild West is a worker-owned-and-run cooperative, handling mainly organic fruit and  vegetables.  It is also an eight-woman-  mostly feminist collective who share, to  varying degrees, similar ideas about food,  politics and the politics of food.  And, it is also a sometimes lively, sometimes busy, but always dingy warehouse on  East 6th where the women work and where  the food is stored and distributed.  Recently Wild West also became a retail  store outlet on Granville Island, run  collectively by another four people who  join with the warehouse workers to form  the larger Wild West collective.  Our ideas about food and. politics determine what we handle and how we operate and  go  a lot deeper than the cliche you are  what you eat.  They range from the personal — what we do  to ourselves — to the political — how  our North American eating habits cause and  ,perpetuate the exploitation and oppression  of other people, cultures and countries.  Read Open Veins of Latin America  to see,  for example, how being forced to grow coffee and sugar for North American instead  of indigenous and varied crops has, and  still is, crippling and oppressing people  in Latin America.  Questions: where does our food come from?  who has control over its quality and  price? who has access to it? These are  ones we ask ourselves, though not always  clearly and consciously.  Huge gaping hole is ultimate goal  Basically Wild West is an attempt to make  a little dent (the idea being to ultimately make a huge, gaping hole) in food conglomerates and agribusiness that increasingly provide us with more poor quality  food at higher prices with less control  over that quality and cost.  The contradiction to confronting the capitalist system of food production is that  we are also part of that system and governed by its economic constraints.  At Wild West we are constantly juggling  our principles with our existence while  standing on the shaky ground of belief  that alternatives can and will mushroom as  agribusiness withers away.  We have more general ideas, from our  edibly-oriented perspective that society  is controlled by the food we eat via chemicals and preservatives which poison our  bodies and minds and undermine our health.  We get hooked on coffee and sugar which  guarantees a market and the continued  exploitation of the workers and peasants  who produce it.  We've got the idea that our passive and  powerless lifestyles alienate us from what  we are doing to our bodies so that the  sugar and starch and fast foods, a la  McDonald's, moreover, is one of the biggest examples of a profit-hungry massive  business, a notorious strike-breaker, that  uses cheap labour, leaves us overweight,  undernourished and dissatisfied.  Out of the maze of knowledge -and ideas  we have about ourselves and the world,  about food and politics, comes our practice.  For instance, one of our first priorities  is buying and selling quality organic  food.  It is not a coincidence that growers of organic food are largely small operations.  That ties in with our desire to  support small growers rather than large  corporations.  Another priority is to-buy as much as possible from local, regional or provincial  sources.  There are various reasons for  this, including the support of a local  economy. We support the need to be more  regionally self-sufficient and energy-  efficient (cutting down transportation and  gas consumption); to have more direct  knowledge of the quality of food and working conditions; and to stop living off the  backs of people whose exploitation allows  us to drink coffee and eat bananas.  One of the biggest areas where we fall  down at Wild West is in who  has access to  the food we sell, good as it is.  Though we do not favour large-volume customers with discounts, the people who eat  organic food are those rich enough and/or  informed and educated enough to seek it  out.  Notice one trend of health food stores to  switch from funky wooden barrels and  floors to a more trendy plastic supermar-  the contradictions continue to bubble just  like our coffee pot on the burner. We  have people who go into withdrawal when we  don't have any ripe Californian avacadoes  and some of the favoured jobs are those on  the loading dock where the smokers are  free to indulge.  Over the past year the collective has become all-women. This is neither by policy  nor by coincidence. For some members this  was a conscious choice to favour women  and/or not to hire men. But there are  other reasons that we have become an all-  women collective. During a discussion recently, we speculated on the reasons that  this happened — food is traditionally the  arena of women. We don't have high paying  jobs (everyone makes $4-.25 an hour). Out  of the people who applied for the jobs the  !   \_\      ''fc__JSkm* *£  11/ 1 ■-  &                             ±  m  IP        _m  m  Sylvie Beauregard  Wild West people, with cats and pumpkin, in front of their warehouse  ket-style environment with electronic cash  registers.  This not only reflects the profits being  made but also the customers being catered  to.  The location of these stores (i.e.  mostly west of Main Street), including our  own at Granville Island, also reflects who  has access to organic food.  Originally unadulterated food was the norm  but over the years it deteriorated until  it was revived by the hippy-brown-rice  sub-culture.  Organic food is now spreading out again, but selectively, into the  privileged layers of the mass culture  with all its accompanying hype and propaganda .  That we are committed to making good food  available is great, but who is benefiting  from our shoestring attempts? More attempts at public education or pricing policies favouring lower income people are  possible ways to change this.  Our customers fall into three rough categories.  There's the retail health food  businesses of all sizes, whose priorities  range between providing quality food to  making a'profit.  There's food cooperatives and collectives who to some degree  are concerned not only with the quality  of food but with having some control over  where it comes from.  There's also individuals and groups of  individuals who want organic produce and  vegetables and who are willing to buy in  bulk from the warehouse.  Besides wanting healthier food, or food  that wasn't produced at someone else's expense, some people are motivated to change  to organic food when they discover they  have cancer or other serious illnesses.  Meanwhile, for the workers at Wild West  women had better skills, more awareness of  and/or experience with collectives. Generally the men were sexist and some of our  prejudices, based on experience, leave us  with the idea that women take more care of  food and are more compatible to working  collectively.  At Wild West, and especially since becoming an all-woman collective, there is more  of an integration between our work and  our personal lives. We have meetings at  each other's houses and fill in for each  other at work so that we can do other  things important in our lives, like going  to an anti-nuclear demonstration, rehearsing for a feminist play, or writing articles for Kinesis.  We get a chance to learn new skills at the  warehouse, especially those often not  available to women, like learning to drive  a five ton truck, insulating a cooler, and  generally learning all the heady intrici-  cies and pitfalls of running a business  efficiently and  collectively.  At the same time as we became an all-  woman collective we also came out of the  deep dark debted hole' we had been in  since Wild West began in 1976, but this  could merely be a coincidence.  May get a truck with working windows  Not being in debt means we may get a dental plan, we were able to buy a typewriter, we gave ourselves a 25 cent an hour  raise, we opened a retail store and we may  even be able to finance a loan to buy a  truck that has windows that work and which  we don't have to coax up hills.  In the pits of the window-less warehouse  it is sometimes hard to remember our connections with the outside world, but in  reality we are part of a west coast alter-i Kinesis December 79 - January 1980   15  native food network. There are various  official groupings of coops along the west  coast of the U.S. and Canada but for us it  means cooperation on trucking and buying  food with other worker-run warehouses. It  also means shared information on suppliers  and connections with other worker-controlled coops and businesses that have theory  and practice compatible to our own.  One struggle constantly faced by us is the  contradiction between running an efficient  business (eg: letting people with the most  experience do what they are best at) and  creating a structure that confronts unequal power between people and making a  healthy, people-centered environment.  Oh yes, we have it all for you  at Wild  West. The collective struggles; the individualism and cooperation and dedication  to change; the organic fruit and vegetables. Seeing a truckload of fresh picked  green, green peppers and lettuce, undyed  orange oranges, carrots and persimmons  does the heart, eyes and head (not to mention stomach) good! The contradictions,  the fun and frustrations.  The horrendous  mistakes.  Anyone want four obsolete coolers that we  got cheap, $1,000, and which we will have  to pay .someone to take away as we paid  someone to bring them? Or how about 800  gallons of herbal tea, that we are paying  storage on, which we had left over when  the estimated millions of herbal tea drinkers didn't materialise at the Folk Festival this summer?  And the seeming miracle like the finances  that boggle the minds of male accountants  and financial "experts" where, in a few  months, we went from being $23,000 in  debt to showing a profit of $3,000.  And lastly there's the two cats who supposedly keep the mice away from the food  and who we keep away from the butter.  From the holes in the nut sacks and the  bites in the avacadoes, and from the  greasy paws, we all still have a ways to  go. •  Fat Support Groups are springing up all over town  Morgan McGuigan  ovT^-cZklftk°f  Fat Support Groups are a new phenomena  emerging in the women's movement these  days.   Using Susie Orbach's book,  Fat  is a Feminist Issue as a starting point,    ^^^^^ ^XJ_jy     .£^i»/V"^"  . women meet and share experiences regu- iT ▼/ \^ij*% f ^^ fc^"^^ 1 jBi  Hi    '"^0r.DJfe*  "-fc/J*  larly. It sounds a bit like graduate  CR. Here Morgan McGuigan talks about  one of the groups. .   _.. m      _*>■*—^  What do we do in a fat support group?  We do food histories, weight histories,  graphs and life-size cardboard outlines  of our bodies. We do fantasies of being  fat and thin. We role-play what it would  be like to be thin. And we look at our  bodies in the mirror, something none of  us otherwise do, if we can help it.  We give each other support and feedback.  Recently, we've started to work on the  connections between our emotions and  fat.  The group is not to support us about  dieting, or about being fat. Rather, it  is to support"us in the hopes that when  each woman starts to understand why she  eats compulsively and is fat, she will  begin to like herself, and no longer  need to eat.  The reason we call it a fat support  group is that we decided to start saying  "that word." "That word" is one which  has oppressed us for years, and to finally be able to say "fat", "I am fat",  is a liberation in itself.  It's strange for a bunch of feminists  to get together and admit that they  really do care about their looks. From  the very beginning, one of the most important feminist principles has been  that every woman is important, and  that looks are secondary.  But at our first meeting last July, we  started by talking about what it has  meant to us to be fat. The truths that  emerged convinced us that appearances  still had an emotional connection to  women. Although as feminists we intellectually reject judging people on appearances, we retain those judgments for ourselves, in our own appearances. And that  definitely needs to be worked on.  BATING EOfcty,  Fat takes a central role  Woman after woman spoke of the central  role fat took in her life. One woman talked about what it meant to be not a real  person sexually,  even within the women's  movement. Another talked about gaining  weight exactly at the crucial point of her  career : she either had to lose the fat,  or quit the job. Another talked of the  embarassment of eating in front of others,  and how she had had to hide her eating.  The amazing thing was that whenever someone spoke, everyone could remember a  time in her life when that had been happening to her.  Appearances may not be important, but  not being skinny (and, accordingly, beautiful) seemed to be one of the major emotional forces in all our lives. We blamed  everything rotten in our lives on being  fat. The worst thing of all was that every  time we ate, we knew we were failures,  with no self control or will power. And  we hated ourselves with every bite we  took.  Since the first meeting, we have come a  long way. We know know that there is a  reason why we're fat. It is not just an  amorphous "thing" that happens to some  people who are not able to summon up the  necessary will power.  In fact, we are fat because our very fatness gives us (or has given us in the  past) something very important. It gives  each woman something different, but we all  are able to identify the place in our  lives where fat protected us, or looked  after us. (Fat may not do this in the  best possible way, but it does work.)  For instance, one woman found that being  fat was for her connected with being short.  Women are traditionally seen as small and  weak. Part of the power men get is just  from being tall and huge and loud. If a  short woman is fat, people see her as big  rather than tiny, weak and childish. She  can feel and be a strong woman.  The fat protects us from sexuality. People  don't tend to see fat women as sexual  beings. Fat women are thus protected somewhat from being sex objects (at what a  price!). But we rarely need to be sexual,  even if we might want to.  Fat can protect us from men. On being  called at by a strange man while walking  down the street, one woman was horrified  to discover herself thinking, It doesn't  matter,  he doesn't truly mean it because  I am fat and unattractive.  As if being  slim and beautiful would make it any  different! Men who catcall at women  don't care if it's a fat or a thin one  they're spewing out their hate upon.  Fat keeps us quiet. Food soothes away  our emotions and angers. One woman found  that when she didn't eat, she would start  to fight and scream with others. If she  kept on eating, she could stay quiet and  soothe over the worries and upsets, rather  than act. Food stuffs down emotion, and  all it leaves behind is self-hatred.  It's a double life  Fat protects us from failure. If you are  fat, then you are already a failure. It  is not the real you that's a failure, it's  the fat. In this way we lead a double life,  In many ways, the Fat Support Group has  seemed like the consciousness-raising  groups I've always read about in femin-  ist propaganda, but never really believed  in. We talk to each other, connecting the  personal in our lives with the political  meaning it all has. Far from being a distraction from political action, acknowledging these personal needs and crises  as important gives us the space to start  fighting back once again.  This type of group is for women who have  been active politically as feminists for  many years, but who need the support that  comes from a closely-knit circle of women. Trying to change the world is a  tiring business, and we feminists particularly need a place to return to, where  we can become strong again. • 16   Kinesis December 79 - January 1980  WORK AND WOMEN  Staying alive  Getting into a non-traditional work area and making it work  * Most working women aren't on the  dizzy journey up the corporate  ladder  * For the majority,   the new Old  Girls ' network has as much practical  relevance as the treasures of King  Tut's tomb  * The goal is not escape from the  typing pool,  but wages and respect  equal to the work we do  there  * The goal is equal pay and equal  work  It is with those points in mind that '  Kinesis embarks this month on a new  series.     We'll be  talking with women  who are re-shaping their worklives,  and liking the changes.  Give us the occasional shot of optimism, why don't you? Kinesis readers often make that request.  So here's a response.    A cheerful  series.'  Pat Jones is a woman  who lives on a shoe...  At 16th and Camosun, there's a Jones Shoe  Repair.  The fact alone is hardly enough to make  you leap on a crosstown bus with your busted boots.  Until, that is, you learn that  the Jones is a Pat Jones, one of the two  women in Canada who own and run a shoe  repair business.  Jones is a refugee from social work. I  got very  tired of dealing with people and  with problems.     Dealing with leather,  she's happier.  Although she's been in business for only  four months, she's making enough to afford  a few treats — the odd meal out, a movie  now and then.  Living behind the store  keeps overhead to a minimum, and the job  fits the priorities Pat Jones developed  for herself.  How did she make the changes? I asked her  to describe her work journey for Kinesis.'  After a two-and-a-half years stint in  Smithers, where she helped set up a women's  'centre, Pat Jones returned to her home  province of Ontario, to work for CEC (Canada Employment Centre, as current euphemism has it).  While completing research on women in non-  traditional work, she decided she might  as well do the CEC aptitude tests lying  around the office. She scored well. I've  always been good with my hands,   explains  Jones.  By  this  time I knew I wasn't happy where I  was,  but I didn 't know what I wanted to  do.     She set out to make up a list of  priorities.  I want to never have a boss,  ever again.  I need to have a reliable skill to support myself.     I know I'm going to have to  work until I'm 95.     I want to be able  to  live in a small town.     And I want to work  in the  trades.  What could she do? Her major research  focused on women working as machinists,  but Jones didn't like the idea of working  in a big shop. She feels that unions all  too often turn a deaf ear to the needs of  women in the trades.  Fate stepped in, you might say.  One day  Pat Jones ruined her shoe.  Around the  corner from the CEC office (this is in  Whitby, Ontario) was a shoe repairer.  Male, naturally.  On my drive home from work that night it  in the spring of  dawned on me that the work of repairing  shoes would fit my list of priorities  exactly.  Back to the shoe store she went, asking •  be allowed to come in on Saturdays, on  off-hours, in the night, to learn the  skills.  He hit me with every cliche in the book:  women aren't capable with machines,  we  aren't strong enough in the upper arms,  it 's a dirty job...  But, she points out with irony, J was  taller and heavier than he was.  He agreed to teach her the trade. He  spent five months trying to dissuade me,  but still he  let me come.  That was two years i  1978.  Is there a recognized apprenticeship program for shoe repair? There is supposed  to be a two year apprenticeship in Canada,  but no programs have been set up.  I spent the next six months running around  Ontario trying to find someone  to apprentice me,   Pat Jones continues. I ran into  cries about there only being one washroom.  I said that I had used the same washroom  as my father at home and that it had never  bothered me.     I was thinking about going  to Chicago,  or to Britain.  The only course in shoe repair offered in  Canada is given at Vancouver Vocational  Institute  (WI).     I had to find this out,  in Ontario,   through friends.     There was no  resource information about it available  through the usual channels.  I tried to convince the government to ship  me out for the course.     At CEC they would  not hear of it.  Everybody there_ considered it a fly-by-night notion.   .  J packed my knapsack and came west,  anyway,   to investigate a possibility of  working in a store in Squamish.     While in  Vancouver,  I stopped in at VVI.     There I  found out that the one woman in the  course,   Giselle Perrault,   was just getting ready to leave.     Nobody at CEC had  let me know the space was coming up.     But  within a week I'd gotten in to the course.  You have to fight.     If you want something  you have to just go ahead and forget what  everybody is telling you you can't do.  The WI course was due to end October 1,  but the opportunity to get the shoe repair store happened to come up at the  beginning of September.  The upshot was that Pat Jones did not  finish at WI and was one month short of  a certificate. It's not fair.     I'd done  all the work except for the first aid.  She's in the process of protesting-the  decision.  Does she enjoy the day-to-day work in her  shoe repair store?  There's a lot of things you don't run  into at school,   that crop up when you're  out working.     I have to take a look at a  shoe and make up my mind quickly if I want  to attempt it.     You have to plan how  you're going to go about a job.     You have  to figure it out before you tear something apart,  or you're  left holding the  pieces,   literally!  Pat may soon be joined by Canada's third  shoe repair woman (the second lives in  Thunder Bay).   Giselle Perreault,  says  Jones,   is in negotiations for a store.    •  Sylvie Beauregard Kinesis December 79- January 1980   17  HOMEWORK  Meet the homeworkers: they're invisible, and highly exploited  By Laura Climenko Johnson  When the youngest of her four children was  2\  years old, Denise took a job folding  sheets in a hospital laundry to help meet  family expenses. Five days a week, she  brought her youngest child to the home of  a neighbor — a service which costs $30 a  week. Denise feels that this arrangement  was not good for her son. He was just not  happy,   she says. He cried a lot.    He lost  weight and kept trying to run back to his  own house.  Denise and her husband agreed that she  should leave her job and try to find a way  to work at home and care for the children  at the same time. Home sewing seemed a  solution.  Denise found a job making rag dolls at a  rate of $1 a piece.  It takes Denise at  least 45 minutes to complete each doll.  She estimates her net weekly earnings to  be around $25.  'What image comes to mind when one thinks  of the modern working mother? Clerical  workers in glass and steel office towers;  blue collar workers in automated factories; professional women, teachers,  nurses — all of these jobs are typically  held by women.  But for thousands of women in Canada, like  Denise, work means spending eight to 10  hours a day doing industrial sewing in  their own homes for piecework wages.  These homeworkers produce clothing, children's toys and other labor-intensive  articles. Their earnings rarely reach  minimum wage levels, and they typically  receive no benefits.  Many are immigrant women  Working in the privacy of their own basements, these women represent an invisible,  highly exploited segment of the female  labor force' in Canada.  The largest group of homeworkers consists  of immigrant women who, like Denise, are  mothers of young children.  Inaccessibility of quality day care forces them to  remain at home. They struggle to care for  their children at the same time as they  push themselves to keep their rates of  production up.  One homeworker, a mother of two preschool  children, admitted that her work sewing  women's dresses prevented her from responding to the needs of her children. J have  to keep sewing fast,  and I can 't stop,  eVen when the children want my attention.  I get so mean to them.  Ontario employment standards legislation  specifies that an employer of homeworkers  must obtain a permit from the provincial  labor ministry. According to this legislation, minimum wage rates apply to home-  workers. Enforcement of the provisions of  this legislation is quite limited, with  the result that a significant proportion  of the homework is unreported and underpaid. Most homeworkers do not manage to  earn even the minimum hourly wage for  their work.  Giovanna is an experienced sewing machine  operator whose financial situation is  representative of that of many homeworkers.  She spent 11 years sewing brassieres in a Toronto factory, but has not  worked outside her home since the birth of  her two children.  For the past three years, Giovanna has  been sewing dresses on an industrial machine in the basement of her house. She  works on her sew'.ng for about seven hours  a day, five days a week. Piecework rates  for the dresses range from $1.90 to  $2.50 each.  Earned $4600 in 1978  Her most recent assignment is a two-piece,  full-length, polyester-knit dress which  takes her about l£ hours.  She'thinks she  1  ■  y 4-  1  1  m  "m       5l »                        H2  l;  »-       **      'W   ml  will receive about $2.35 for each of these  dresses. With average weekly earnings of  about $90, Giovanna's total income from  piecework was $4,600 in 1978.  Homeworkers are generally responsible for  the purchase and maintenance of the equipment they use. Three years ago, Giovanna  bought a used industrial sewing machine  for $375. Another homeworker, a novice,  uses an ordinary home sewing machine to  Pamela Harris/The Women's Almanac  the fortunes of homeworkers in the garment  industry. When employees' earnings are  set on a piecework basis, the complexity  of clothing styles determines the amount a  worker can earn in a given period of time.  One long-time homeworker blamed the "gypsy"  look for her meagre earnings of the previous year. With all those ruffles and  long skirts,  I only earned $4,500 in the  Because homework is a relatively secret,  "I have to keep sewing fast, and I can't stop, even when the  children want my attention..."  produce children's dresses. She knows  that she could work faster and earn more  with an industrial machine, but notes  ironically, I would have to sew these  dresses for half a year just to pay for  the machine.  Homeworkers' wages are not only low, they  are also irregular and unpredictable.  Most homeworkers are employed in the  needle trades, an industry which is based  on a seasonal market. There are several  periods during the year when production is  slowed down or halted.  When homeworkers don't work they don't get  paid. Between these slack periods, there  are also periods of peak demand when they  find themselves working from early morning until late at night, often for six or  even seven days a week.  Pays $15 for 1000 shower caps  Doreen, for example, has been sewing and  packaging shower caps for the past two  years. Her work involves sewing a circle  of elastic thread on to an 18-inch square  of thin plastic, and then packing the cap  into a plastic envelope.  The sewing takes  11 seconds per cap, packing takes another  five seconds.  Bundling the caps in bat-  • ches of five takes more time and Doreen  often persuades her children to help with  that work.  The employer pays $15 per 1000 caps. When  there is a .rush job — a big order for a  hotel —Doreen works seven days a week.  There are also slack times, such as when  her employer ran out of elastic thread  which had to be ordered from San Francisco.  For two weeks, Doreen had no work, and no  pay.  Changes in clothing fashion.also affect  unregulated phenomenon, it is difficult to  obtain accurate statistics on the prevalence of this type of employment.  There are several published estimates of  the size of Canada's population of home-  workers, but these give no source for  their data, and the estimates appear to be  very low.  Used as strike-breakers  The report of the Royal Commission on the  Status of Women in Canada includes some  data on homeworkers in Quebec and Ontario  where, it is noted, the majority of home-  workers are to be found.  The 1969 report  states that Today,   there are several thousand women who work at home and on their  own time for industry.     The report goes on  to observe that the majority of home-  workers are employed by the garment and  needle industry.  It also notes that in  1969 there were more than 1,000 homeworkers employed in the glove industry  alone.  The needle trades in Canada represent a  low-wage industry. The use of homeworkers may help to keep wages at their low  levels. The garment workers unions are  well aware of this relationship, and have  long worked for contracts prohibiting the  use of homeworkers in their shops.  Nevertheless, enforcement of such provisions Is difficult, and there remain instances where employers use homeworkers as a  reserve army of workers which can be  ignored during slack times and then depended on in rush periods or even during  strikes. •  Laura Climenko Johnson has been interviewing homeworkers, union and government officials in Toronto. She prepared this article  for Perception. /* Kinesis December 79  FALL CONFERENCES  ■January 1980   19  It was the sixth annual convention of the British Columbia Federation of Women: we shall remember  By Kinesis staff writers  The British Columbia Federation of Women  (BCFW) held its sixth annual convention  in Victoria November 9-12.  The structure of BCFW remains elusive, as  the Sunday plenary indicated. Here, is a  cross-section of comments made at the mike:  BCFW is a myth, an alias for member groups  to use when they take action.  BCFW is nothing more than you,   t.  of the member groups.  We use analogies to try to describe the  cross between entity and nonentity which  is BCFW.   It's too simple to say that BCFW  is us.  BCFW should be more  than a myth.  We should abolish the BCFW standing committee; we don't need it any  longer.  The structure of BCFW may be an impediment,  but I take exception to the idea that the  standing committee is irrelevant.   Communication among member groups is essential,  and that's  the role of the standing commit-  _tee.  BCFW has become a club for militant women.  We have some of the best policy in North  America but what are we doing with it? BCFW  should be supporting trade union women so  that they can take BCFW policy into the  trade union movement.  It's essential  that this convention give  the standing committee a clear mandate  for the coming year.  Giving the standing committee more of a  mandate,  more of anything to do,   isn't  the  solution.  There was an agreement that BCFW should  take some specific issues, around which  actions could be organized at the regional  level during the year.  One day will be set aside for unified provincial action about violence against women. Convention suggested that this day be  close to Mothers' Day, May 11. Watch Kinesis for more detailed information.  Week of Action Planned  BCFW is also planning a week of action concerning the economic position of women in  B.C., addressing the issues of women and  work, welfare and UIC cutbacks. Each group  will be assisted in their action with a  packet of information coordinated by the  standing committee.  Again, keep your eyes  on Kinesis pages for further developments.  Some specific actions came directly out of  convention. We participated in the Remembrance Day ceremonies on an informal basis.  We sent a telegram of support to the women  who are challenging Stelco's sexist hiring practices at the Hilton plant in Hamilton. We also sent a message of solidarity  to the strikers in Shelton, Washington state,  who are out over a sexual harassment issue  (see the international pages of this Kinesis ).  Member groups, plus the BCFW standing committee, protested the anti-choice lobby  in Ottawa, November 22, by sending letters  and telegrams affirming a woman's right  to choose on abortion.  As we go to press, BCFW is planning a strong,  highly visible presence at the Human Rights  Commission's window-dressing conference in  Vancouver December 8.  Solidarity with the SFU 18 was expressed by  convention, which passed a resolution in active support of the SFU 18 defense campaign.  BCFW representatives attended an organizational meeting November 18 to build support  for the 18, with emphasis on the issue of  equal pay for work of equal value.  Convention endorsed several important policy additions and changes. Among them was  policy on sexual harassment, submitted by  Working Women Unite. It resolved that the  BCFW oppose sexual harassment, that BCFW  encourage member groups to support women  who are sexually harassed, and that BCFW  encourage organizations such as unions  and community groups to develop and endorse strong policy opposing sexual harassment.  Vancouver Rape Relief presented policy to  replace the existing BCFW policy on rape  and sexual assault. The following resolution was endorsed by convention:  That BCFW member groups actively support  and encourage the creation of,  and the  use of,  alternatives to the existing  medical,   legal,  psychiatric,  and social  service institutions when these alternatives are based on the concepts of:    co-operation,  collectivism,  shared decisionmaking,  self-help,  skill and information  sharing,  and the demystification of knowledge,  professionalism,  and hierarchical  structures.  BCFW ratified a new prison sub-committee,  known as Women Against Prisons. There  are sixteen women on the sub-committee,  from three BCFW regions, and they propose to bring feminist programs into the  prisons and prisoners to feminist programs.     They will also represent BCFW  at conferences,   rallies and demonstrations,  and participate in actions that  oppose incarceration.   Through speaking  engagements, workshops, and article-  writing, they will expose the prison injustice system.  Manual Coming Out  The Rights of Lesbians Subcommittee announced that its Workshop Manual on Lesbianism/Feminism will be available in  the early months of 1980. Prepared by  Nym Hughs, Yvonne Johnson, Yvette Per- "  reault and Esther Phillips, the manual  will be used as a resource on lesbian  oppression and lesbian feminism, and as  a strategy manual for workshops, seminars  and discussion groups. Say the authors,  this workshop manual reflects the commitment of many women  linked through BCFW  who struggled to validate our belief  that lesbianism was crucial to feminism  and that confronting our shared pain  and anger would strengthen us individually and as a movement.  BCFW convention is also a time for reports from the numerous sub-committees,  regions, and standing committee. In this  reads BCFW statement to reverent crowd  For every woman raped in every war,  we bring this flower.. .  The usual November 11, Remembrance Day  ceremonies took place at the cenotaph in  Victoria, B.C. Thousands of men, women  and children came to pay their proper  respects by remembering all the soldiers  who died in all the wars.  This year, however, there was a new, .unexpected speaker.  Amid the booming  cannons, after the last scheduled person  had spoken and as the last hymn was  being sung, a representative of the BC  Federation of Women stepped up to the  microphone to also pay her respects, but  to the many women  who had died in wars  past and to remind people in B.C. that  women are still at war, fighting to  claim our own freedom and to end all  violence.  The prepared statement was read with  such respect and in such a calm, serious  tone that the crowd, the police, the  soldiers, the TV camerapeople and the  radio reporters, along with the TV  audience (it was a live broadcase) did  not realize that this was indeed an  unplanned  program item.  Not until the BCFW representative re-  By Yvette Perreault and Krin Zook  membered all the women who had died and  are still dying today from coat-hanger  abortions and from wife-battering did a  murmur of confusion ripple through the  crowd.  Toward the very end of the presentation,  a man came forward and tipped the microphone away — undaunted, our unknown  woman stood her ground and continued  shouting her speech.  The man gave up  and let the microphone go. The last  two lines echoed across the lawns of the  Victoria parliament buildings.  After the presentation, another BCFW  representative placed a rose on the  cenataph as a symbol of all the women  who had died. Then, with dignity and  respect, the 200 women from BCFW walked  slowly back to the convention. As we  left the crowd, we were greeted with  tears and words of thanks from several  of the older women. Some hostility and  confusion was also apparent from some of  the crowd.  This was an extremely successful action  -- one that we recommend to any group  wanting to make a statement about  women's part in all the wars. Everyone  in B.C. who watched this year's Remembrance Day ceremonies will remember  that women too have a place.  REMEMBRANCE DAY SPEECH 1979  We the women of the British Columbia  Federation of Women are bringing this  flower in rememberanee of all the women  who died in all the wars that men have  fought.  We remember the nurses who died tending  the wounded of both sides.  We remember the women who were raped by  soldiers of their own country and by the  invaders who were then rejected by their  fathers, their brothers and their sons.  We remember the '.<omen who died or were  wounded because they lived in cities where  bombs fell out of the sky.  We remember Indian women who were killed  by European settlers and settler women  carried off by Indian war parties.  We remember all our sisters, non-  way, it is a retrospective on the past  year.  Miriam Azrael, who took over the job as  BCFW coordinator early in '79, when Marg  Verrall resigned, gave a detailed report  to convention about her experiences in  that position.  That I was not formally voted in  (as coordinator) by the  last convention made  me hesitant to speak out.   I was in terror lest I deviate the slightest bit from  formal policy and inadvertently offend  some of the very women I was supposed to  be representing.  This fear I had to overcome quickly,  as we all must if we are  to continue effectively.  A.zrael went on to describe the demands  placed upon a coordinator. At times, it  seems as if nothing is happening, then  there's a sudden surge of cooperative  energy which the coordinator has to ride  with even unto burn-out, an honourable  end to a feminist.  She asks, surely there  must be a better way to pace ourselves,  so that we can avoid this?  The thing that puzzled her the most  during her time as coordinator is the  lack of response from our own women.  Why is most of the work done by the  same people,  and why is it so difficult  to maintain enthusiasm and commitment?  Mandate Needed  Action facilitator on the standing committee for '78 - '79 was Pat Smith. In  her report, she, too, had some sober comment for convention participants.  Throughout the year, Smith pointed out,  many things have been said and done in  the name of BCFW. As action facilitator,  she adds, some of these happened with  my participation, some with only my encouragement, and others without even my  knowledge.  What became clear to me,   Smith went on,  is that if an action has the enthusiasm  and commitment of the member groups,   then  an action facilitator is not needed.  If  it does not have commitment,   there is  nothing on earth a facilitator can do.  Pat Smith used to think that the wide  variety of resolutions at the end of  conventions was exciting. I now think  that this is a mistake.  Standing Committee meetings, she explained, were devoted to carrying out the  combatants whose lives were ended or  foreshortened or crippled because  their fathers and brothers went to war  against the fathers and brothers of-their  sisters in another land.  We remember too the women of the world  who are dying today.  The beaten and abused wives, the  victims of coathanger abortions,  rape and unsafe birth controls.  The women who die slowly and watch  their children die from malnutrition and disease.  The native women whose culture and  and population are decemated by  genocide.  Our mother, the earth is dying  from the effects of nuclear  technology.  We weep for our sisters.  We do not forget them.  Let us pause to remember that our war is  still going on. We are still waiting  for our armistice day.  busy-work created by last year's convention resolutions.  J have come to wonder how many of these  resolutions would pass convention if  each delegate voting for them actually  had to bear some responsibility for  their implementation.  What the Standing Committee needs, said  Smith, is a mandate from convention.  I think that we should narrow our focus  to no more than two areas.   We should develop at convention a sketch,  an idea  of action.   We should use our regional  meetings to build support and sketch in  the details.   We should use the entire  standing committee to facilitate the  action.  This is, in effect, what emerged from  this year's convention: a mandate to  focus on two areas - violence against  women, and women in the economy.  Reports from BCFW regions attest to  action, tenacity and commitment despite  hard times. Women from the West Kootenay Women's Association, for example,  took part in the sexual assault and  abuse workshop this spring. Out of this  conference came a committee from the  community to set up a rape crisis line.  Training for crisis line volunteers  began this fall.  The Atlin Stikine regional report indicated that BCFW women have taken  part, for example, in these actions:  * The first daycare centre in Kitimat  has become self-sufficient after working under a Canada Works grant for one  year. The enrollment is up to 70 children.  * A women's centre opened at the beginning of the year in Terrace. It has four  workers, who work as a collective.  Although the grant ends with the year,  the group is making extensive efforts  to secure funding if only to pay the  rent...  The list of regional activities is extensive. And it is impressive, despite  the fact that some" groups have had to  close down, and that some areas have  not been able to send reps, to the  standing committee meetings. One of the  more depressing reports came from the  Peace River. When the women's group in  Dawson Creek put up March 8 posters mentioning lesbians, the uptight citizens  of the area freaked out... and it is  almost impossible to organize freaked-  out folks.  BCFW sub-committees also reported to convention. The Human Rights subcommittee  has had a lively year, going after the  obscene sexism of the B.C. Human Rights  Commission. Working Women Unite was another intensely busy subcommittee, organizing the superb Working Women conference October 17, and supporting the  AUCE strike and subsequent SFU 18.  --This year's BCFW convention was a mixture of social good times, action (at  the cenotaph) plenary debate and workshops. The workshop which appeared to  generate most intense discussion was  the one on civil disobedience. From the  energy of that workshop, a Women Against  Nukes group has formed. They are organizing a one-day workshop on civil disobedience for feminists early in the  new year. Watch Kinesis for details.  Among the business of convention was  the election of the standing committee  for '79 - '80. Miriam Azrael is doing  another round as coordinator, while  Stephan Crabbe is secretary-treasurer.  Prabha Khosla is this year's action  facilitator. Internal communications coordinator is Jesse Gossen, and Nina  Westaway is external communications  organizer. For many more details, watch  for your group's copy of the BCFW minutes., 20   Kinesis December 79 - January 1980  INTERNATIONAL  Harrassment issue triggers strike  In one of the first actions of its kind,  some 1400 mostly male unionists at a Washington state plywood plant walked out on  strike last October to protest a contract  violation stemming from the company's sexual harassment of a woman worker.  The dispute began when a woman sued the  Simpson Plywood Company. She charged she  had been refused a job because she did  not accept the sexual advances of the company interviewer.  The company, apparently frightened of an  adverse ruling, hired the woman. But when  she refused to drop the complaint, it fired  her, 26 days later.  In firing her the company violated the contract, say leaders of the International  Woodworkers union Local 38. They called a  strike to demand her reinstatement.  When the union explained the situation to  its membership, several other women came  forward to file affadavits attesting to  the same type of conduct by company personnel officers and supervisors. What would you  be willing to do to get a job with Simpson?  one woman was asked at a job interview. Another said she was asked to take off her  blouse, another was asked if she wore a bra  and a third was asked to have sex with her  supervisor.  The company says it fired the original complainant for poor work performance. But local president Jim Lowery.said, the charge  is a lot of malarkey.   We have affidavits  from other workers saying she was doing  a fine job.   Lowery added that the union  believes she was fired in order to intimidate other women from complaining about  this type of thing.  The walkout is only the second one in 25  years at the plant. For more information:  IWA Local 3-38, P.O.Box 98, Shelton Wash.  98584. (Guardian)  WHO bans advertising for  Nestle "breast-milk" pap  World Health Organization/UNICEF have finally taken a stand against Nestles breast  milk substitute which has been flooding  third world markets for at least a decade.  The statement was issued by WHO/UNICEF following a four-day meeting in Geneva, in  which 150 representatives from industry,  government, the medical profession and  consumer groups participated.  A major part of the statment was a recommended ban of all sales promotion  and promotional advertising to the public  of breast milk substitute and supplement  products.  Nestle says it terminated consumer advertising and direct consumer promotion of  such products in July 1978.  The WHO/UNICEF statement further announced  the organization of a process by which  WHO/UNICEF will develop an international  code of marketing which will serve as a  model for governments to adopt.  'v.*.*  No mention was made about the products'  which still remain on third world markets.  Aged sperm will do you in, too  Now what? The rhythm method produces unhealthy babies?  Findings of a four-year study of factors  affecting the outcome of pregnancy, directed by Dr.George Tokahatu, head of Pennsylvania's bureau of health research, showed  that women who use the IUD or the rhythm  methods of birth control seem to- run a  slightly higher risk of having unhealthy  babies when they do get pregnant.  Tokahatu and colleagues interviewed 13,050  women;who gave birth at five hospitals  in Harrisburg, Pa. area from 1974-78.'  They discovered that women who had previously used the IUD had 2% ex.cess of subsequent  infant deaths, premature babies and babies  of low birth weight. The rhythm method  users had 1%  lower chances of having a  child born dead. These groups were compared  with women who used no contraceptives, all  other things being equal.  Tokahatu said it was possible the problem  associated with the IUD may be due to the  damage to the lining of the uterus, which  is in contact with the device.  Problems with the rhythm method might arise from a greater likelihood that the  egg was fertilized by an "aged" sperm.  What's  an aged sperm? Wouldn't it be an  equally open house for elderly sperm if  you're not using any form of contraception?  Dr. Jean Parker, chief of maternity services for New York city health, urged caution in interpreting the study.  (Star)  Israel maneuvers anti-choice  An ultra-orthodox faction within  Menachem Begin's government, the Agudat  Israel party, is pressuring to have a  vital clause in that country's abortion  law cancelled.  The clause permits abortions if a pregnancy is deemed to cause "serious harm"  to a woman because of difficult family  and social conditions.  Too permissive, the orthodox faction  pronounced. Begin would lose his majority  in the 120 seat Knesset:, if the Agudat  Israel party defected over the issue.  Begin and the boys have been successful  in postponing the showdown for one more  month. Meanwhile they're reported to be  scrambling around trying to get enough  votes in favour of cancelling the  clause.  California wife rape  After nearly a decade of struggle,  California will join the rank of states  affording wives protection against  spousal rape.  Legislation making such acts a crime  punishable by up to eight years in  prison was signed into law by Governor  Brown in late September, effective  January 1.  California will join the group of 22  states that provide partial protection  against marital rape. Currently 15  states specifically deny wives protection against rape by their husbands.  Twelve states offer wives full  protection against rape.    (Plexus)  Swiss "apron money'' no big deal  The Swiss have just revised their marriage laws, for the first time since  1912.  A woman will now be allowed to take a  job without obtaining her husband's  consent.  Under the old law, the husband had the  power to decide where the couple would  live, and he had the right to forbid his  wife to sign contracts.  Now both partners have equal rights to  signing contracts, and can decide together where they live.  The most splashy change is that women in  Switzerland have gained the right to  cash payments from their husbands for  working in the home as housewives.  The money would be in addition to housekeeping expenses and would have to be  the same as the working partner used for  his/her own pleasures: "the right to an  equitable amount of money to dispose of  freely."  Don't get too excited about this one.  The husband is supposed to shell out  these extra treats himself. Who is  going to enforce the arrangement?  Abortion victory in Portugal  A 22-year old nurse, Conceicao Massano,  was acquitted October 29 in Lisbon of  charges that she had had an abortion  three years ago.  The case of Massano, who had been denounced to the authorities by someone who,  Massano said, found my diary in my nursing school locker and read what I had  written,  had aroused strong protest  from the women's movement.  The Campaign for Abortion and Contraception mobilized women for support  demonstrations. On the day Massano was  acquitted, according to the Washington  Post, riot police swinging clubs  fought  women demonstrating on her behalf. Four  people needed hospitalization.  According to Portuguese activists, some  180,000 women have illegal abortions in  Portugal annually. (Anne Fuller/Guardian)  Created to do little things  Mother Theresa, the winner of the 1979  Nobel Peace Prize for work among India's  poor, said recently, "The greatest  development of a woman is to be just a  woman, a mother, a wife...We have not  been created to do big things...We have  been created to love and be loved."  For the second time in two months, some 20,000 women marched through the streets of Paris mid-November  demanding their rights on abortion. The demonstration ended with a spirited gathering at the Eiffel Towner Kinesis December 79 - January 1980   21  WAP was confused over prostitution, but sparked debate  pom  -BBSS  wm  MC4&'  '*''ñ†    ^/WaTNST PORNOGRAPHY  Some 7000 women march through New York City's Time Square to denounce pornography and violence against women  On September 15 and 16 Women Against Pornography (WAP), a six-month old Manhattan  -based group sponsored a conference to  discuss pornography as a feminist issue.  The conference attracted over 800 women  including many former activists and newcomers to the women's movement.  Women Against Pornography began with 24  founding members, many of whom had been  part of the women's movement establishment over the past decade. Familiar  names include: Jane Alpert, Susan Brownmiller, Andrea Dworkin, Leah Fritz, Robin Morgan, Adrienne Rich and Gloria  Steinem.  At the time of the conference WAP had  managed to raise $25,000, the majority  of which had come from individual donations of founding members. The group  also received funding from New York  city, with the 42nd Street Redevelopment  ;Corp. providing WAP free office space.  Accepting the money from these two sources  became a controversial issue. The 42nd  Street Redevelopment Corp. is interested  in closing down massage parlours and  generally "cleaning up" the area. (Jack  Volrich would love 'em. ) People claim  claimed that "cleaning up" means forcing  out the black and the poor.  Women Against Pornography obtained and  used a copy of the slide show created  by the San Francisco based group, Women  Against Violence in Pornography and the  Media. Making some slight revisions in  the show, they set up slide displays  as their initial organizing tool.  These were followed by anti-porn consciousness raising sessions. The most effective  organizing tool, according to New York  Radical Feminist Dolores Alexander, has  been the guided tours of the Times Square  porn district. Reaction to the tours is  interesting: at first we feel timid and  embarassed.   Later we feel ashamed... finally,  we feel angry.   Porn has become a hot  issue and the media has been reporting  upon the porn tours with great excitement.  On to the conference itself: it began with  the slide show, followed by welcoming  remarks by Dolores Alexander. The slides,  displaying a mix of soft and hard core porn  raised some intense emotions. Next, excerpts  of letters around the country were read,  discussing harrowing incidents of porn  violence. Testimonies of beatings, incest  and sexual assault of children were related.  One woman from Vermont had written how she  was shocked to find that men staying in  a nearby cabin were using centrefold pin-ups  for target practice. The nipples of women's1  breasts were the bulls eyes.  Subsequent to the letter reading, a violence  speak-out took place, with conference participants describing similar personal expediences .  The day continued with speeches from the  stars: Susan Brownmiller, E.M.Broner, Bella  Abzug, Robin Morgan et al.  On the following day, workshops and CR  groups were offered. Several prostitutes  were present at the "Women in the Pornography Business" workshop. A number of women commented throughout that workshop  that WAP was unclear on both pornography  and prostitution.  When WAP was questioned about their stand  on prostitution, their answer was that they  stood nowhere... There would be  100 different answers for 100 different women...We  want to involve as many women as possible  ...We don't want what happened in the Old  Left to happen to us - factionalizing.  To stand nowhere on an issue is disconcerting. Many women were uncomfortable about  this and wanted WAP to make it clear that  they weren't against prostitution, and  they wanted WAP to differentiate themselves  from the right wing on this issue. The majority of participants saw prostitution as  as a matter of economics. Women who become  prostitutes, do so because they don't have  other options.  A left-right-liberal free-for-all  Heated debate was engendered by the "Pornography and Politics - the Left, the Right  and the Liberal" workshop. With a title  like that you can predict the outcome - an  all-out free-for-allI  Some of the discussion revolved around the  lack of definition of pornography. One member of the audience claimed that the Old  Left was anti-pornography while the New  Left is pro-pornography.  A Trotskyist woman claimed that the Nazis  flooded occupied countries with pornography  as a counter-insurgency tactic. She then  attacked the New Left's pro-porn position.  As the workshop wore on, the debates became  broader and broader. A black lesbian responded to someone's question :why weren't there  many black women present? There's so much  racism and fighting amongst ourselves at  feminist events, she said. Another lesbian  said that when there is talk of violence  against women, the issue of what women do  with men personally is important and could  not be skated around any longer.  Later during the WAP open mike session a  definite lesbian-straight split began to  show. Class and race came in poor seconds.  Name-calling broke out.  The conference ended with unanswered questions: how do we define pornography? What is  our position on prostitution?  It is unlikely that WAP will split along  lesbian-straight lines, but it may well  split if the prostitution issue is not  clarified.  During the conference a march was organized for October 20. The rally and march  were open to both women and men. Eight  thousand attended the afternoon march  against the Times Square pornography district. Some placards read: "Take the Hard  Core out of the Big Apple", "Porn is the  Theory, Rape is the Practice" and "Arrest  Johns, not Prostitutes."  In a compelling speech at the rally, Andrea Dworkin said, this movement against  pornography is...a movement for speech,  the speech of those who have been silenced  by sexual force,   the speech of young women  and young girls.  And it will never be silenced again.  Work on pornography has so far concentrated  on linking it to power and violence, and  separating it from sex. If this conference  spurs feminists to further analysis about  the sexual connection it will have accomplished a great deal.(By L.W.  from 00B info)  AID ok by BMA  A move to declare artificial insemination  by donor (AID) for lesbians unethical has  been defeated by the British Medical Association.  The motion, which would have mandated expulsion for any doctor allowing AID for  a lesbian was turned down by a majority  of the BMA at its annual meeting recently in Liverpool.      (Lesbian Tide)  Action against fetus fanatics  "Kill her now, it's murder... three months  ago, abortion." Under the bold letters, a  picture of a new born baby.  This anti-choice chestnut glared out from  25 billboards and ran in local papers recently in Madison, Wisconsin. To the tune  of $10,000, Madison anti-choicers were  aiming ads. at soliciting programs in the  local high schools.  Time for the Billboard Brigade to swing  into action. Overnight, every single billboard was corrected. Techniques ranged  from paint bombs to sprayed messages.  The most creative change read: KILL HER  NOW, IT'S DINNER ... 3 MONTHS AGO, OMELETTE  Instead of a baby, they painted in a chick-  That particular gem was hatched and signed  by the Revolutionary Young Chicken Brigade.  ',  (Matrix)  Little Green Book is incoherent  Tripoli: In Libya these days, the word  of Col. Moamer Qadhafi, is doctrine. In  his little "Green Book", he expounds oh  the relationships between women and men.  His logic would make any Philosophy 100  student gape.  The male has played the role of the  strong and tough without compulsion but  simply because he is created that way.  The female has played the role of the  beautiful and gentle not because she  wanted to but because she is created so.  This natural  law is just,  partly because  it is natural and partly because it is  the basic rule for freedom.  Whatever that means. 22  Kinesis December 70 - January 1980  CONNECTING OPPRESSIONS  "Pm supposed to be pleasant; Pm not supposed to complain.  Eight years ago,  Jill was in a serious car  accident.    As a result,  she cannot stand  or walk for any  longer than ten to 15 minutes an hour.    Mostly,  she's in bed or  perched on the mountains of pillows that  dominate her apartment.  Anything requiring eye-hand coordination:  writing, reading, watching TV, are difficult to impossible. On good days she can  answer the phone, she can listen to tape  books. The day I visited her she'd just  finished a chemistry and a biology text.  (Think for a moment about  chemistry charts by ear...)  Jill wants to start a consciousness-raising group for handicapped people.  She has a friend,  Marilyn,  in Burnaby,  who  is also confined to bed with back injuries.  Says Jill,   "It's really helpful to talk  with Marilyn,   to hear that people say the  same things to her as they do to me.    And  then I know it's not me,  it's society."  A feminist,  Jill knows that what she  shares with Marilyn  — an understanding of  the personal and social oppression of  handicapped people  — she can share with  others.     "I know there must be more people,  but I need to find them. "  If you are interested in joining a CR  group for physically handicapped people,  or if you know of a friend who might be  interested,   call us at VSW 736-1313.  We'll pass your number along to Jill.  I asked Jill to tape some of her feelings  and perceptions about being handicapped.  Here are excerpts of what she said.  I'm supposed to be pleasant.  I'm not  supposed to complain. And if I want people to stick around, I'm supposed to tell  them all the constructive things that I  do. Tell them how I go swimming every  day, and how I walk around the block three  times a day.  I can throw in a few things  about how it's hard, but it's alright with  me. Then they say, Oh,  but you are so  positive!  Somebody said that to me the other day,  someone from an agency. And she added,  you haven't given up,   like other people.  I wanted to say, I've given up trying to  tell people what it feels like.    And I  know how to mind-fuck you right back.  But I didn't say that. What I did say  was, Nobody gives up.    That's nonsense.  Social pressure like that is very hard to  take. Also, if you don't see what's happening, it's very harmful to your sanity.  About eight years ago, I was in a really  bad car accident. I've had a lot of trouble with my back all my life. I have a  crooked spine and a swayback.  I was in  some lesser accidents when I was younger,  too.  For the first year or two after the major  car accident, I was drugged a lot, on  pain-killers and muscle relaxants. They  had me so doped up on Valium it was  disgusting.  Finally I got allergic to all the drugs,  which was lucky. They made me totally  unable to cope. It's funny, they give  those drugs to people who can't cope J  I have to spend about 22 hours a day in  bed, since I had a relapse around two  years ago.  I've learned a lot from it.  I've been  forced to. Part of being a woman for me,  anyway, was never being alone. Always  having boyfriends, then a husband, and  never having my own space at all.  This  has taught me to have my own space. It  was not a pleasant way to learn.  People who are handicapped have a lot of  problems that are very difficult for other  people to understand or to see.  It's  really analogous in a lot of ways to the  situation women were in before the women's  movement. Women were isolated in the  home and subjected to a lot of hostile  messages that would never be directly  acknowledged.  As a handicapped person, almost all the  communications that people give you are  indirect..  I find basically that if I want to tell  someone how I feel, how I really feel, it  means I lose a friend.  It's a Catch 22  because if I don'.t tell somebody, if I  say, I feel fine,   I still have the friend,  but in a way I don't, because we don't .  have the intimacy.  I have one friend who is an exception to  that, thank god. My friend, my good  friend who is honest, says very clearly,  I hate you because you are a cripple.     And  I say, I hate you because you can walk.  It feels really good to get that out in  the open.  I think it's very hard for people not in  the situation to really hear how it feels.  One, because it's difficult to hear pain,  intense pain. It's very hard, and I have  a lot of trouble letting myself feel it.  Also I think people who aren't injured or  handicapped feel guilty. It's like men  trying to listen to women. One of the problems with men really listening to women  is that they have to face the fact that  they've been oppressors themselves. I  think something similar happens with a  handicapped person and a non-handicapped  person (a temporarily able-bodied person J ). There's an overwhelming sense of  guilt.  And there's a recognition that basically,  handicapped people have been left.  I  often feel like I've been left to die,  actually. I think that's pretty heavy  to deal with on the other side, too.  For the first few years after the accident, I was very depressed.  I had been a  competent, intelligent, active woman and  now everything was gone, including my  husband.  Husbands usually split  He split, most men split. When someone  is seriously injured, the marriage breakup rate is very high. Twice as high if  it's the woman who's injured. Somewhere  around 100/?.  I don't think my husband could cope with  the fact that I wanted him to cook and  clean. Mind you, we'd had fights about  that before. He couldn't stand to cook,  and he wasn't going to.  I was unable to.  Here it was, going on for three years  after the accident, and I wasn't getting  better.  I was getting worse. I'm a very  logical, scientific type person, so I  figured that I was never going to get  better.  "You can't  think like that or you won't  get better," people would say.  In retrospect, I see that as the most incredible  mind-fuck.  I think a lot of people who have been injured, and a lot of people who are handicapped, take that one on.  I think it's  really self-destructive.  People couldn't deal with it.  They  weren't able to say to me, which would  have been the honest reaction, don't tell  me this.    I don 't want to hear it.    My ►  rirpi  Pencil drawing by Wendy L. Davis Kinesis December 79 - January 1980 23  anger was real, my rage was real.  I've done some therapy in the last few  years and I've learned to cry. When I  feel hopeless, I can say, it's hopeless.  And when I'm finished with that I usually  have some energy for doing some positive  things.  And that feels much better. It's not  pleasant to cry.  It feels better afterwards .  The anger has to go somewhere. And the  depression. Of course, it would be very  unpleasant for the powers that be if  handicapped people were to get very aggressive.  If people got into their real feelings,  there would be troublel  The pressure is to be a certain way that's  convenient for other people.  I like what  Sara David says in Women Look At Psychiatry: there are lots of groups of people  in this society that are oppressed and  discriminated against. There's tremendous  pressure exerted to prevent them from getting into their real feelings about that.  If people were to get into their real  feelings, there would be trouble!  Services for the handicapped are terrible,  and of course the job discrimination is  almost total.  Nobody will hire somebody who lies on the  floor, let me tell you!  A friend of mine has cerebral palsy and  he's worked at a lot of jobs. But when  he goes to apply for a job, they always  assume he can't do the work.  People's feelings are so strong when  they're dealing with a handicapped person,  their guilt is so strong that it's difficult to say to a handicapped person:  What can you do and what can't you do?  And be prepared to say, That's not  enough.     Rather than put themselves in  this position, employers would rather  avoid the situation.  It would be really good to have encounter  groups between handicapped and non-handicapped people.  I know there's places  where police and non-police have had encounter groups and it's been good for  community relations.  I did a three-month encounter group at  Cold Mountain a year ago, lying on my  back. Let me tell you, it was exciting!  I have a lot of hostility towards people  who walk around which would be lovely  to  say in a handicapped/non-handicapped  group.'  What happens to us is very similar to what  happens to children and old people.  Children and older people are dependent,  they do need things from other people, so  they don't get treated like human beings.  As women we could only really get strong  when we got together and heard other women  telling the same stories. Once you know  that this other woman's husband is saying  the exact same things as yours is saying,  you begin to understand that what's going  on is a social thing...  With handicapped people, it would be just  so liberating for us to hear each other  saying the same things.  Starting a CR group for handicapped  people  The CR group I have in mind would be for  anyone who had a physical problem they  considered serious.  People with back and  neck problems, people who have lost a  limb, paraplegics, r ;ople with cerebral  palsy, blind people, deaf people.  I'd see it beginning like a women's CR  group — self-consciously.  '.Ve could develop where we wanted to go as  we went along.  Dealing with dependence  would probably be a big topic. All handicapped people are more dependent than non-  handicapped people.  We could talk about our self-concept, our  feelings about our bodies. My friend,  Marilyn and I are always joking about how  we hate our bodies: god,  don't we get  refunds, we do we get an exchange?    Feelings about sexuality.  I can't make love  the way I used to.  We could talk about all the indirect communication. How can we deal with it? How  do you manage to be direct yourself?  I feel that I was very indirect and manipulative for years after the accident,  although I'd been a pretty direct person  before. Here I was, suddenly very dependent and with no external power, and I  started manipulating.  We could discuss how to get a job, how to  function. There are skills you need when  you're handicapped that you've never  been taught. I'm always thinking: how  what do I need and how do I get it? I'm  forever putting ads. in the Buy and Sell  magazine to get someone to read to me. It  takes encouragement and practice to learn  what you have to do like that, and to keep  on doing it.  Money. My feeling about money has totally  changed. I always used to feel competent  in terms of making a living, but now I  hang onto every penny in grand penny-  pincher style.  If I can find enough people to start a  group, and eventually I will, we could  then get a grant proposal together.  I would like to see information about  available resources given to people who  are seriously injured. Maybe they could  be contacted six months later...  It took me three years after my accident  to find out that I could have a homemaker  service from the ministry of human resources. And two years from the time I  began to have trouble reading to discover  taped books.  That's outrageous.  There's  no reason for that to continue.  I also think it would be good for handicapped people to organize into their own  groups to make jobs. We could think together about what we could do. My friend  Marilyn has a teaching certificate, and  used to teach problem children. I've  studied psychology and done counselling...  Handicapped information line would be  a good idea  A handicapped information line would be  good, a handicapped talk line. When  people call me up with problems, I love  it.  One of my fantasies is doing some  serious academic work on my own. Another  is of being a therapist and of having  people come here and perch on my bean bag  chair!  One of my projects that I keep forgetting  to do is that I should start making some  tapes about what it's like to be in bed.  I'd like to see a book about handicapped  people's issues along the lines of Women  Look at Psychiatry — it could be really  powerful.  When I think about all there is that needs  to be done, I feel really energized.  Be-  ,cause the feeling of being non-functional  is terrible, the thought of doing something fills me with glee.  I worked in the  women's centre at SFU for one semester, 30  hours a week. I lay on my back and I  talked to people and I gave out information on the telephone and I thought it was  heaven.  People really need something to  do.  Non-working is not healthy.  I used  to think that was all Protestant bullshit.  Well, it's not.  Try the neighbourhood exchange  I work with the neighborhood exchange. It's  a work exchange, it's community-run,  there's no agency. The idea is that people  exchange work for work, rather than work  for money. All work is considered to be  of equal value.  If one person does babysitting for four hours, she gets four  hours worth of credits.  If another person  does bookkeeping for four hours, she gets  four hours worth of credits. You get on  credit for every half-hour of work performed and one debit for every half-hour  that someone does work for you.- People  arrange between themselves. They have lists  of all the members.  Then they call me up, and I record the  credits and the debits. It's quite simple.«  (If you want to register for the exchange,  call  VSW for Jill's number.)  New School for Democratic Management  offers Vancouver courses  Community Business Training is a mutual  endeavour of the New School for Democratic  Management in San Francisco and a Vancouver-based committee of volunteers.  Many of those on the committee are members of food co-ops, workers' co-ops and  other community organizations and had attended the New School courses when they  were held in Seattle.  It seemed overdue  for a similar session to be brought to  Vancouver — one that utilized a more  appropriate Canadian course content.  The New School for Democratic Managemement  has offered business training courses  based on principles of democracy in the  workplace, since 1976.  Its practicality  is based on a simple premise: that it is  more productive,  and a better use of resources,   to increase  the authentic participation of employees in the running of  organization.     It seeks to make business  education widely accessible to those who  have never had it — community enterprises, co-ops and non-profit organizations.  The session will take place February 20  through 24, 1980 at a cost of $65 per  course, ($120. for two courses, $150. for  three).  Participants can choose up to  three of the nine courses offered.  We are  including courses from all the major areas  of business knowledge — finance, planning and management.  Two courses that have proven popular in  the past and will be offered in February  are:  Financial Development: Strategies for  raising money and budgeting growth with  special attention to the problems of undercapitalized business.  How to evaluate  financial performance and condition, how  to project capital needs', developing credit and negotiating loans.  Participants  learn the essential components in a business plan.  Democratic Management: Structures that  support democratic operations; how to  combine leadership and management with  sharing and division of labour; how to  handle hiring, firing and training; how to  plan for organizational growth.  The seven other courses that will be offered are: financial management, accounting, planning, dynamics within an organization, marketing, management of co-ops,  fundraising and grants management.  Each class will run for two hours every  day of the five days.  Included in the  cost of tuition will be lunchtime workshops on a wide variety of topics.  The  course instructors will also be available  for individual consultation if you have a  specific problem in your organization that  needs their attention.       251-1006  For more information contact: 738-2362 24   Kinesis December 79 - January 1980  MOVIES  Don't bother relating to this "relationship" movie, save $3.75  By Pat Findel  If they're not about disasters, films  these days are usually about relationships. Starting Over is one such  "relationship" movie.  As entertainment it is hardly worth  reviewing (though I have seen it described as everything from hilarious to  charming.) As one of the multitude of  Hollywood's "post-feminist" statements  on relationships of the 70's (or is this  a preview of the 80's?), it is a  disturbing piece of heterosexist  propaganda.  In a valiant effort to incorporate and  at the same time totally undermine feminist concerns, the fathers of Hollywood  have given us a "man's" film.  (After  all, women have been getting plenty of  air time in all their so-called  "women's" films. )  The trouble is, there is nothing new at  all about this man. We're subjected to  the same old familiar refrain from the  bewildered male: Poor me.     She's  leaving  me.     Isn't she  horrible and selfish!  What do I do now?    (this last usually  moaned to another woman).  To this refrain the producers have  added a large dollop of humour, topped  with several dabs of sex and romance,  and now no one apparently even notices  how hostile this film is to women.  In  fact, what they have is a box-office  success.  The men in the audience love  it.  The story line: our "hero" Phil Potter  (Burt Reynolds) is left one day to fend  for himself when his wife (Candace  Bergen) leaves him to go and pursue a  career as a singer/songwriter.  After a brief flirtation with bachelorhood and a divorced men's group, he soon  finds another woman (Jill Clayburgh).  Just when he is about to set up house  with her, onto the scene comes his now  successful wife, hoping for a reconciliation.  After some waffling back and  forth, he goes off to live with his  wife, then changes his mind and returns  to Jill Clayburgh to get married,  have  kids, and presumably live happily ever  after.  You would think from this sketch of the  story, that we're dealing here with the  divorced man's confusion and indecision.  But as I watched the Big Screen, I  realized that somehow the strongest  message I was getting was that women  are  the ones who are confused and don't know  what they want, and essentially don't  mean No when they say it.  Men need not take liberation seriouslv  Furthermore, men need not take all this  liberation nonsense seriously at all,  and what all we women really need is a  nice sensitive man.  The disturbing thing about the film is  the way it takes those familiar moments  in relationships (you know, the ones  you'd rather forget) and presents them  from a particular point of view (the  man's) to make its ideological points.  Take for example, Potter's wife calling  him up and apologizing, seductively, for  attempting to seduce him away from his  current flame, saying that it's easy to  make a fool of yourself when you're in  love.  Now who could argue with that  statement?  But somehow it is almost always someone  other than Potter who's being the fool  and at whose expense we're laughing.  It's usually the women's expense.  In  fact, almost every independent or strong  gesture made by either woman is made by  the filmmaker to look foolish or  manipulative.  The wife who goes off to build herself a  career is made into a plastic and hopelessly off-key singer writing pathetically banal songs about "liberated"  women.  Not only that, she soon is led  to the discovery that the headiness of  success is a poor substitute for marriage and a hubby. So she gets to re-  enact the passive seductress role, coyly  offering herself up to Burt on a  platter.  Clayburgh, meanwhile, plays the independent single woman who would rather catch  leprosy than a divorced man.  I even  laugh when she turns around and yells  ferociously at the strange man  (Reynolds) following her down a dark  deserted street.  I do not  laugh with  the rest of the audience when she  is em-  barrased and mortified to meet this same  man a few minutes later as a fellow dinner guest at a friend's house.  Why, I wonder, does he get the last  laugh? Because women are all overreacting to the threat of violence in  the street? Because not every man is a  potential rapist?  Another classic moment in the film comes  when the two "rival" women meet, on the  day Clayburgh has moved in with  Reynolds. He returns home to the two  women smiling demurely at him, having  spent the afternoon chatting. We hopefully imagine that this film may make a  breakthrough yet — think of the possibilities. Alas, the two women part  polite rivals — Clayburgh noble, while  Bergen gets Reynolds to drive her the  long way home...and eventually to move  back in.  The grand finale comes when Reynolds  sees the light and decides to return to  Clayburgh, who has previously extracted  a promise from him that he will under no  circumstances do just that.  Of course,  she recapitulates and is even gloriously  and literally swept off her feet, after  delivering a tirade against Reynolds'  arrogant assumption that she can be  swept off her feet.  (Women are so cute  when they're angry. )  In an article attempting to rename  different kinds of film to include the  work of feminists, Ruby Rich refers to  Validative and Medusan films (see her  article, "The Crisis of Naming in Feminist Film Criticism", in Jump Cut,  No. 19, Dec. 1978).  The first is the kind that names and  gives value to the parts of our lives  that have been belittled or silenced.  The second refers to a method of disarming your opposition by poking fun and  making a joke of what they take seriously. The patriarchal film industry  understands these methods well.  In Starting Over we see validated not  only men's confusion (and I have no  argument against a little genuine confusion) but also'their deep-seated hostility towards women for our refusal to  be their props. We see the serious  issues that feminism deals with exaggerated and made silly — the butt of  endless jokes.  The film is an insult to any man who is  sincerely committed to changing sexist  behaviour and to dealing with the  personal and public issues presented by  feminism in a constructive way.  Love is a public as well as a private  act,  and love between equals has no  social history.     We're only just  beginning to give it one.     (Robin  Morgan). Starting Over is certainly no  contribution to that history. •  In Due Season is a good herstorical read  CHRISTINE VAN DER MARK'S IN DUE SEASON  Published by New Star Books, Vancouver,  1979.  6.95 paper  14.Q5 cloth  This book makes great reading on several  accounts.  If you are into Canlit you will  be happy to see yet another fine women's  novel in the bookstores, in time for  Christmas.  If your bent is history, as is mine, you  will be pleased to see a good readable  novel which has a single parent aa the  main character of a novel about the  pioneer experience in Canada.  And if you are into a good read, then I  suggest that you sit down and take in  Christine van der Mark's excellent  novel set in northern Alberta during the  1930's.  The novel begins with the trek north by  Lina Ashley, her daughter Poppy, and her  aged father, Benjie. They are leaving  behind them their windswept dustbowl farm  and head north to get away from the  drought.  The husband has gone on ahead to  stake some land, and after several days of  travelling, they reach what is to be their  new home. Meantime, Sym Ashley has disappeared, and Lina begins the hard and  lonely job of making a go of the farm on  her own in the wilderness.  The novel centres on her struggle.  I  found it engrossing.  I knew that there  must have been women who managed the farm  and their families — I knew several when  I was growing up.  But I never found them  in Canadian history books (not even  Broadfoot's so-called people's histories),  nor in Canadian novels set in the pioneer  period.  Christine van der Mark has presented us with such subject matter, although it is written from the outside, and  in several instances is not at all  sympathetic to Lina.  It is this aspect of the novel that marks  it off as a period piece.  Van der Mark  wrote the novel in the 1940's and it was  published first in 1947.  Lina's husband,  Sym, is a fairly minor character in the  book, yet the author is obviously very  sympathetic to him. In my opinion he is a  ne'er-do-well, who considers that it is  more important to repay his gambling debts  than to provide for his family.  In fact,  he disappears for over a year, without  letting Lina know if he is dead or alive.  Lina and her f-mily not only survive without him, they prosper. But it is through  Lina's work, and her deals — one of which  leads to the undoing of a neighbouring  family. She is staunchly independent.  When a neighbour asks her to marry him,  she responds: "No, Sven.  I've had all I  want of men."  The book also gives a rare insight into  the relationships between the various  ethnic groups that make up the community.  Ukranians, Poles, Swedes, Anglos, Metis,  and Native Indians are all portrayed in  the novel. The latter peoples — the  Native Indians and the Metis — are  treated with a great deal of sympathy. We  see the process of their displacement  from their land, and the racism that they  face as colonised people.  One of the most  moving threads of the book is the development of the relationship between Lina's  daughter, Poppy, and a Metis, Jay.  In  the face of Lina's opposition.  It is rare that such a strong woman is  presented to us as a role model.  It is  even more rare that such a character is  presented to us in a novel about western  Canada and the pioneer experience.  By Gillian Marie Kinesis December 79-January 1980   25  NON-SEXIST BOOKS FOR ADULTS  Spend a cosy winter solstice with a few close books  A Flight of Average Persons  Stories and Other Writings  by Helen Potrebenko  New Star Books Ltd.  2504 York Avenue  Vancouver, B.C.  V6K 1E3    1979  (available in paperback for $5.95  or in hardcover at $14.95)  By Diana Smith  Since I've read more than enough about  voluntary creative solitude, college  and communal experiences, and the lives  of "swinging singles", I found A Flight  of Average Persons a welcome change.  The book is a collection of 26 stories  and poems written between 1970 and  1978. ' Thirteen are non-fiction and the  other thirteen are fictitious; all reflecting Potrebenko's personal experiences.  The non-fictional pieces, including five poems and a play, describe  Potrebenko's experiences: as a cab driver, a hitchhiking feminist, and as a vicT  tim of a male psychiatrist. She includes  anecdotes about the treatment of women in  a sexist society, and stories reflecting  her life as the daughter of poor Ukrainian immigrants.  So far as I can tell, the only thing that  differentiates the poems from the rest of  the writing is ^... the way the words are  laid out— shorter sentences and a bit  more of a staccato style characterize  her poetry.  I find the poems just fine,  just so long as I don't get hung up trying to impose a definition on poetry.  One poem in particular, A Celebration of  Pigs (an epig poem), gives an example of  Potrebenko's dry kind of humour:  One day when she was entertaining  other dignitaries' wives at tea,,  the pig came tripping through the  room  in the dainty manner of small pigs.  The dignitaries ' wives did not remark on the pig  tripping daintily,  they were too polite.  Only when they were  leaving,  did  one of them ask earnestly:  Nora? Was that a pig?  I have always thought this was a  turning point in Nora 's  life.  Basically, Potrebenko has a 'dry' ap;~  proach both in her humour and in her portrayal of feelings, as in another poem  where she describes her pet gosling  whose parents are carried off by coyotes:  It died in less than a week.  I cried a  lot over that goose,  and can remember it more clearly now  than I remember my  last  lover.  r"his dispassionate quality also occurs in.  the fictional stories, as in the one about  a man who is ill.  The story ends with:  ...and when I got back they told me Willie  was dead.     All very much to the point,  and working class: stoic, roll-with-the  punches approach.  If I have to choose  between this and a tragic dose of navel-  gazing indulgence, I'll take the former  every time.  Still, I wouldn't have minded more insights into the feelings of the  various narrators.  Her fictional stories deal with poverty,  alcohol, work, "madness", and relationships.  The stories make credible vehicles for exposing the incompetence of  professionals"and the violence of men a-  gainst women whi^n is not so much sensational as it is traditional.. The effect is  agonizing to read.  However, Potrebenko's  work leaves one with an optimistic note:  that deep friendships are possible between  - women; as in Taxi Drivers Don 't Cry    and  New Girl.  Another reason I like Potrebenko's book is  that I didn't need a dictionary to read it.  She uses straightforward language and commonly used words to describe the experiences of ordinary women,   working,   raising  children,  picketing,  making ends meet.  A Flight of Average Persons is the kind of  book I'd love to see as a cheaper paperback  in drugstores and on newsstands, next to  the too accessible Harlequin romances.  Unfortunately, it will probably find its  highest profile in women's bookstores, alternative and Left-leaning outlets as well  as "better" bookstores, like Eaton's,  where higher priced books mean higher  profit and may not reach the women who  need to read it.  Too bad.«  The Story of Che  An Account to Settle  The Story of the United Bank  Workers by the Bank Book Collective  Press Gang Publishers  By GILLEAN CHASE  Collectively written and collectively  edited, An Account to Settle is the story  of SORWUC (Service, Office and Retail  Workers Union of Canada) which grew  out of the Working Women's Association (WWA) in October of 1972. Although SORWUC addresses itself to  helping unionize workers in offices  and restaurants, given the limits of  numbers, resources, and labour support, its main work has been done in  B.C. with bank employees.  SORWUC  major campaign methods were effective  utilization of the media to publicize  the issues, and the unremitting commitment of underpaid bank employees  determined to better their working  hundred and eleven individual bargaining units in various banks across B.C.  and Saskatchewan.  One can credit to  SORWUC the fact that in 1978, after  nearly seven years of struggle, bank  tellers received the largest pay increase of -any category of clerical workers-- 15.4%.  In addition, all union-  affected banks have introduced dental  plans and paid overtime. Management no  longer deducts tellers' wages to cover  cash shortages. Managers' secretaries,  loan officers and part-time employees' in  certificated branches have all won the  legal right to belong to a union.  SORWUC was the union which won the decision that banks could be organized on  a branch-by-branch basis. The impact of  this decision is enormous. Credit must  go to SORWUC for having broken the  ground, for having undertaken the long  and costly legal challenge, and for having won.  An Account to Settle is a series of personal testimonials on the part of the  Bank Book Collective, the active members of the campaign to make SORWUC an.  effective bargaining unit.  Pages of  political testimonial are alleviated  by the graphics of Pat Davitt and by  the smatterings of organizing verses  from various union songs which introduce each chapter. Chapter headings are  also imaginative, with word plays being  made upon settling accounts and striking a balance sheet.  Overall, the obvious "debits"' in the  labour account have to be credited to  the Canadian Labour Congress (CLC);  which has opposed SORWUC's efforts by  attempting to divert support to a CLC  affiliate union.  This union (OPEIU)  offered itself as an organizing tool  in Canadian banks while failing to address the bread and butter Issues.  Lack of a coherent and unified labour  What!  no* impossible... inevitable.  conditions.  That commitment SORWUC  very much needed, as bank management  resorted to blatant and subtle antiunion techniques ranging from "layoffs", wage freezes, divide-and-con-  quer/emotional appeals, and stalling  of negotiations.  Bank management also brought in special personnel to  break the unionizing effort and used  every legal technicality at their command to strain SORWUC s budget and to  discourage the union's chances of suc-  The bulk of SORWUC s achievement rests  in the drive to certification of one  analysis led to the usual result: SORWUC  was not able to take strike action  or to set up a strike fund for workers  beyond a very temporal point.  Hence,  CLC, the giant voice of Labour,again  revealed itself as reactionary and in  league with management on yet another  issue of worker control.  An Account to Settle is well worth the  time it takes to render an account of  the struggle; against management and  the large somewhat myopic labour movement  in Canada. It is not by far a battle  which has been won. • Kinesis December 79 - January 1980  DRAMA  Being a women's community playwright has its hazards  By Margo Dunn  Traditionally, a critic writes a review  while observing a time-worn code of behaviour and ethics. He/she does not kibbitz  with persons connected with the production  about any subject remotely concerned with  the production. He/she does not share  comments about the show until the review  appears.  Actors position friends to study the critic's face during the performance. Theatre  people wait up for the morning paper with  THE REVIEW. If the critic has liked the  show, he/she is described as "perceptive".  If not, he/she "belongs on the sports  page".  Traditionally, too, a play has nothing to  do with the reviewer's or anyone else's own  life. I've seldom seen a play which didn't  need a strong boost through "universal  meaning" to become something I could identify with. Most plays about women have been  frothy (like Claire Booth Luce's The :Women  or tragic (Greek drama). Most left-wing  political plays have been about war or  prison.  As theatre becomes less a fairy-world for  the well-to-do, we're going to see ourselves portrayed on the stage more often.  Finally, as with Occupational Hazard,  more plays will be written about the  lifestyles and actions of those involved  in the struggle for women's liberation.  With more approachable plays, criticism  too can become approachable, no longer  an isolated act of praise or trash. I  feel conversations with actors, crew,  fellow audience members are as legitimate sources to a reviewer as reading a  script.  As Canadians slowly gain confidence in  Canadian plays, distinctive theatrical  trends have emerged. One current preoccupation is with doeu-drama. In the  1970s, more and more theatre companies  have created plays about subjects given  short shrift in the history books. Riel,  Sitting Bull, the Komogato Maru incident,  the 1837 rebellions and the suffrage  movement have shown historical figures,  warts and all. We can see peoples' weaknesses, yet marvel at what they accomplished.  Dealing with the contemporary has been  more difficult. Sarah Anne Curzon wrote  a play in 1882 about the struggle of  women to be admitted to Canadian universities. The Sweet Girl Graduate has Kate  Bloggs in drag as Tom Christopher leading  her class, then emerging triumphantly  female at her graduation where she gains  the top prizes. It worked. Women were  admitted to University College in 1884.  But on the whole women playwrights such  as Carol Bolt (Red Emma), Sharon Pollack  (My Name is Lisbeth, about Lizzie Borden),  Red Light Theatre's What Glorious Times  They Had (about Nellie McClung et al),  and Megan Terry's Approaching Simone  (Weil) have dealt with women's earlier  personal and political battles.  OUR FIRST  To my knowledge, Occupational Hazard  is the first full-length contemporary  political play to emerge from the Vancouver - possibly the entire Canadian -  women's movement. .  In the past few years, several groups of  women in Vancouver have worked together  as feminist theatre companies, but  little came of Our effortr except skits  or guerilla ther ';re for demonstrations.  Hot Flashes Theatre company produced  several shows, including one of Nora D.  Randall's one-act plays in summer 1974,  but the company seemed to disappear along  with its funding.  But each production and company helps a  playwright like Nora to write and a play  like Occupational Hazard to find a pro-  fessional director such as Moira Mulholland in a position to fight for its scheduling at a studio theatre such as the  Dorothy Somerset at UBC.  Occupational Hazard is exciting both as a  dramatic re-enactment of an event in which  many Vancouver women took part, as well as  being in itself another history-making  event.  Briefly, the play dramatizes an occupation  of a government office which administers  daycare services. Clearly the services do  not meet the needs of the clientele. A  large group of people take the drastic  action of occupying the lobby to underline  their criticisms and demands. Rather than  filling several stages with 150 demonstrating women, children and men, Nora D.  Randall chose to focus upon a specific  incident. A few demonstrators seize a  fifth-floor switchboard, which totally  immobilizes the building's normal functions until the minister in charge agrees  to meet with the daycare activists.  The characters on the fifth floor represent the diversity of the people involved  and Mary considers leaving because of  Carrie's presence, Carrie reminds her  mother: ...you're backing down on all you  believe about mothers not having to do  everything for their kids...Look what the  Trapp kids went through cause of their  parents' beliefs. Are you going to be  outdone by Julie Andrews?"  Lynnie does not support her mother throughout the occupation. She appears in the  crowd outside, but Donna does not succeed  in communicating her concern for her. The  emotional peak of the play comes when Star  conveys, publicly, because of increased  police control, a hysterical message from  Lynnie: "Donna. When you get home, if you  get home, I won't be there. I can take  care of myself better than you ever did.  You're not my mother anymore."  Should the negatives about political people  be kept in the family? In my job editing  the letters of Charles G.D. Roberts, I met  people who would treasure any new detail  about Shakespeare's life yet deny access  to letters of major Canadian authors so  that no one would know a grandmother had  had an affair or that Archibald Lampman's  sister was bisexual.  (L to R) Donna,  Mary and Carrie bed down for  the night.  From the Dorothy Somerset production.  in such battles. As character Harvey Wohl,  the daycare bureaucrat, says, what they  have in common is that "if they were the  kind of women who would leave because I  asked them to leave, they wouldn't be here."  Nora focuses in depth upon Star, the  youthful optimist, energetic, capable, but  at times patronizing; Mary, "an experienced  radical", tired, but there because she knows  she should be there; her daughter, Carrie,  trying hard to be a typical teen; Dave, a  spaced-out jeweller from Mayne Island, the  kind of person swept into these things  without anyone knowing why, and Donna,  "big woman; big purse; big heart", a  dauntless, creative fighter totally committed to the cause.  Harvey Wohl, lawyers and two women cope  represent the other side. The voices of  the demonstrators provide the background,  and link the characters on stage with the  audience. As the occupiers scan the  street through the windows at the front  of the stage, they see and hear their  supporters positioned roughly where the  audience sits in the theatre.  The play's artistry rests with its exploration of relationships among the occupation forces rather than reportage of the  2\  day occupation.  Through deft telescoping devices, such as  the inclusion of Mary's daughter, Carrie,  and allusions to Donna's daughter, Lynnie,  Nora provides an insight into the essential  dilemma of the parent concerned enough  about being an effective parent to lobby  for childcare - what do you do about your  kids while you're fighting for day care  for them?  How do daughters feel about their mothers'  activities? Carrie at first scorns and balks  at her mother's actions, but when wickets  get sticky after two days of occupation  How long do we have to wait to understand  our past? How long until women's ordinary,  scandalous lives, women's lives of protest  can be openly discussed?  It's strange to objectively look at ourselves becoming historical. We record our  protests in leaflets, journals, letters,  appointment books. Then there are the  media videos and whatever the police have  socked away.  Mostly we don't think about records - we  do what we're doing without any sense that  a writer or artist may be watching what  we're doing while she's doing it with us.  And sometimes, in the interest of our  causes, those accounts become public.  What did the farm people of Clinton,  Ontario feel when they saw themselves in  Theatre Passe Muraille's Farm Show?  While Nora D. Randall's play is about a  particular collective action, it concerns  not just those who participated in that  sit-in. Although Nora created a play using  characters and events based partly on  reality, the play is not specifically  about them.  THIS IS A PLAY ABOUT  OUR COLLECTIVE FAMILY  Occupational Hazard is a play about our  collective family, for those of us who  find common political goals thicker than  blood. We see women we know in the characters, and like good socialist realists,  we see them warts and all.  Those of us who can identify with one  character or another are challenged in a  particular way. Because we risk so much as  we fight, we come to expect that same  unquestioning love we've been told to  expect from our families. We can be shocked  and disappointed when we learn our movementi Kinesis December 79 - January 1980   27  sisters do not like, or have to like,  everything we do. Our vitamins and our  hemorrages can become mighty tiring in a  2i day occupation.  Nora D. Randall's characters are not the  stereotypes of propaganda, but simply  credible human beings. The occupiers have  their quirks and the woman cop can sometimes act with grace.  The male characters, while not caricatures, are not so fully realized. That's  fine by me. I've seen enough male angst  on stage and screen to last a lifetime.  I was most impressed by Melanie Ray's  characterization of Donna, the character  about whom Mary says, at the end of the  play as the victorious occupation forces  prepare to-leave the switchboard, "It's  your optimism, Donna. Sometimes you're  not very smart, but it's okay, because  you're always right."  Melanie played Donna subtly, avoiding fus-  siness and hamming. So too did Jane Kalma-  koff skirt the obvious opportunities for  slapstick in her "movement heavy" role as  Star.  I was less happy with Lynn Harris as Mary  Malcolm. At times her energy level dropped  along with her voice. She sometimes had  Mary come across as a victim of the situation as much as a protagonist, and many  speeches, like "...having gone the length  of the garden path of real womanhood I  became a feminist...Granted, feminism has  put me in a few ridiculous untenable situations but it has never told me that my  natural function is to give more than I  get" came across as bitter rather than  wry.  The transitions from scene to scene were  covered well with the slides indicating  the progression of time. The play is just  long enough to run with neither an intermission or a twitchy audience.  The music irked me. While the selections  were all pieces of fine women's music,  they seemed detached from the play,  obvious covers for a change of scene.  I would have preferred use of the song  written by some of the real-life occupiers, a talking blues with the refrain  "Cause there ain't no daycare".  Star might have worked out some of the  chords and lyrics in an early scene and  told Donna and the others about it when  she told the rest of the news:  CBC came and got a beautiful clip if  they '11 use it.   We turned the information  desk into a changing table and while they  were filming,  Sally's little boy peed on  the camera lens.   We had the under-threes  in one corner and the over-threes in  another and Vera,   who probably votes  Liberal for chrissake,  explaining to the  camera man that government regulations  require the two groups to have separate  areas...  Further verses of "Talkin' Day Care",  taped as though sung by the "Harmonious  Housewives" and the rest of the crowd  outside would integrate the transitions  in time and locale more tightly into the  mainstream of the play.  The use of the elevator is as brilliant  a theatrical device as I have ever seen.  It serves a triple function: automatic  designation of the fifth floor and lobby  playing areas, as a vehicle for moving  characters on and off the set and as a  fine component in the set design for the  fifth floor office housing the switchboard.  One omission bothered me. I measure many  books, films etc. by the yardstick of  mention of Lesbian involvement. Occupational Hazard makes no allusions to the struggles of Lesbian mothers or Lesbians for  daycare.  I also would have liked the differences  between Donna and Mary to come to the boil  of a top-of-the-lungs argument over the  politics of Donna's improvisational taking of the switchboard.  The sequence where Mary complains about having been tricked into the occupations peters out when both agree to send out for  coffee. One of the strengths of this movement is the strength to disagree, not to  mask anger with sarcasm. Donna and Mary  can afford to let it out precisely because  of the other occupiers and the loyal supporters outside. As Donna says, gee,  it's  three in the morning and there are still 50  people out there.  People are so good and  strong.  What of the message to those who could care  less about having 24-hour free, quality  childcare for anyone who wants it? Will  they see our own playwrights depicting us  as the ugly neurotics the bourgeois media  says we are? Should the women's movement  produce plays or propaganda?  I think Occupational Hazard serves our cause  and serves it well.  Occupational Hazard raises the ever-present  question of daycare once again, both for us  and for others. It shows us where we started,  how we won some battles, how we lost some.  The small factual leaflet distributed at  the performance provided an update without  polemics from the stage. The play can also  be produced anywhere because the specifics  of the 1973 struggle in B.C. are not emphasized.  The script is suitable anywhere, anytime,  until children achieve liberation — a  sobering thought.  Occupational Hazard brings out both the  seriousness and humor of the daycare  struggle. Because it has moments of  pathos, the play is not merely a metaphor for a "really serious" struggle  like the anti-Vietnam war movement. Nor  because it is funny does it parody the  fight for daycare. Slides of the Community Facilities Licensing Act, and the  charming sweetheart deal between the lawyers are serious business.  The bureaucrats' blindness and the actual necessity of having to go to the  length of occupying a building in order  to make an appointment with a cabinet  minister are pretty absurd.  Another important political lesson of the  play is the process of co-option. Harvey  Wohl says to his lawyer, we 're hoping  they'll bring in a lawyer.  Then the  lawyers can bargain and we won't have to  deal with the ladies.   Lawyers, even left  lawyers, "smart lawyers who understand  the issues" can crumble into old boys in  an adversary situation.  But the most valuable contribution of  Nora D. Randall's Occupational Hazard is  the examination of the kind of relationships political women have with each  other. It is through women like Donna,  Mary, Star and Carrie, their creativity,  warmth, zeal and common sense, their  ability to both temper and inspire each  other, and us, that keeps the women's  movement growing.  And it's plays like Occupational Hazard  which will give us a theatre equal to  our needs and achievements. •  From the Advisory Council on the Status of Women  Everybody gets old. Yes, but...  * Women can expect to live to age 77 —  seven years  longer  than the average man.  * Right now, more than one million women  in Canada are over 65 — % of a million  more than the number of men in the same  age group.  * In just 20 years, the number of women  over 65 will reach two million  and' half  of them will be over 75.  * And by the turn of the century, women  over 75 will outnumber men in the same  age group by 2 to 1.  BEING OLD DOESN'T MEAN I'LL BE ALONE  Unfortunately,   * 3 out of 5 women over 65,  and 4 out of  5 women over 75  are widowed, divorced  or single.  * Only half of Canadian women over 65 live  with their husbands, their children, or  any  other relative. (1977)  AT LEAST I'LL HAVE MY HOME AND NEIGHBOURS  Yes, if you're one of the lucky few   * 2 out of 5 single, widowed or divorced  retired women over 70 do live in their  own homes.   (1975)  * But 1 out of every 4  single, separated  or divorced women over 70 live in a  rooming house.   (1975)  * And almost 70% of the residents of  nursing homes  are women over 65.  MY NEST EGG WILL SEE ME THROUGH!  Maybe....but look at the facts:  * 3 out of 4 single, widowed or divorced  women over 70 had annual incomes under  $5,000.   (1977)  * About 333,000  single, widowed or divorced women over 60 live in poverty  — three times the number of men  in the  same circumstances. (1977)  * Women who become widowed after 65 suffer  a sharp, sudden drop in income. The  average income for women over 65 and on  their own, is just £ of the average  income for couples aged 45-64. (1977)  BUT WHAT ABOUT MY PENSION— WON'T IT  TAKE CARE OF ME?  Probably not   * Even with the Government's old age pension, 3 out  of 5 single,  widowed or  divorced women over 65 live in poverty.  (1977)  * Company pensions don't help many women,  4 out of 5  single, divorced or widowed  women over 65 receive no income from  private pensions.  * A woman does not automatically  receive  her husband's pension after he dies,  because:  —He may not have had a company pension;  only 1 in 2 Canadian workers belong to  company pension plans.  —Of those that do, less than half have a  widow's pension option.  * * Those widows who. do get a pension from  their husband's employer usually collect  only half of what their husband would  have received.  THEN, THE GOVERNMENT WILL HAVE TO TAKE  CARE OF ME  But will they?   * In 1976 the elderly were less than 10£  of the population and the government  paid about 5%  of the national income  for their public pensions and health  care.  * By 2031, it is predicted that there will  be even less tax money spent on each  older Canadian. Although 20%  of the  population will be over 65, we will  probably spend only 8%  of our national  income on their public pensions and  health care.  Old age is a woman's issue.  Think about it now.  All facts are based on 1976 statistics  unless otherwise specified. •  Contact the ACSW at Box 1541,  Station B,  Ottawa KIP 5R5 28   Kinesis December 79-January 1980  NON-SEXIST BOOKS FOR CHILDREN  Down with the male lion and up with female penguins  By Margaret Beardsley and Joan Woodward  Are you able to find non-sexist books for  your children more satisfactorily now  than three or four years ago? — at your  local library? — or at bookstores? Do  your children bring home less sexist books  from their school librarh? Are you a  member of a children's book club which  offers any other than the usual  stereotyped fare?  The Richard Scarry books are an example.  Every engineer, farmer, firefighter, carpenter and truck driver is a male animal  dressed in overalls, cap and boots.  All  the female animals are carefully segregated into female roles and clad  appropriately! You never see a female  animal hang a picture, unclog a sink or  start even a car engine!  They do not  reflect reality.  Books like this are  popular and in demand.  Children like them  and the type of book fills a need for  children learning to read.  There is no  reason for publishers to revise them  because they are a success.  For some time, I have been analysing  children's books and looking for nonsexist titles.  I would estimater1that the  majority of book characters for children  for ages four to nine are either male  animal characters or anthropomorphic animal characters on which sexist values have  been imposed.  Among the picture books  which have children as main characters, it  is very difficult to find titles in which  girls have adventures or are in exciting  situations.  Even among the books with  family settings little girls are usually  in passive roles while the boys carry the  story or the action.  There could just as easily be female  animal characters but have you ever seen  a lioness in a children's picture book?  The Happy Lion and Hubert in Hubert's  Hair Raising Adventure both have manes as  do all the lions in Randy's Dandy Lions.  In title after title" and series after  series, main characters are male animals:  Little Pig, Harry the Dirty Dog, Little  Bear, Curious George, The Whing ding  dilly, and on.  Two exceptions are  Petunia and Frances.  You may have  guessed it.  Petunia is usually depicted  as a silly goose and Frances is a girl  badger who always wears dresses, plays a  role in a stereotyped family setting and  is afraid of the dark.  (Bread and Jam  for Frances, Bedtime for Frances), etc.  There must be some younger children's  books where girls have exciting roles,  surely.  There is Dorrie in the various  books by Patricia Coombs but she is a  little witch girl! and witches just have  to be female.  Dorrie is ingenious and  finds solutions to many problems.  (Dorrie  and the Blue Witch and others).  There are  English and European titles where girls  have more interesting roles, but they are  very scarce among American children's  books.  The problem is the cumulative effect of so  many stories where roles are stereotyped  and the usage is always, Little Bear, he;  Curious George, he_: and Peter, he_.  The  message comes through that boys do exciting, adverturous things while girls  often stand in a doorway, waving, or  prepare a tea party.  Further, the books  I have mentioned have appeal, good illustrations, plot and character development.  They have a place in children's book  collections.  To compound the problem,  children's books remain in print for many  years and are reprinted.  Are there alternatives?  There are a number of excellent books  published by feminist presses in Canada  and the United States.  European and  English titles offer a greater variety in  roles of boys and girls. Gradually there  are some titles which are less stereotyped  coming from the large publishing houses.  The cost of printing quality children's  books in colour is very high. The established publishing houses exert a great  deal of control over the content and  style of illustrations because they invest  $20 to $30,000 in preparing a full colour  children's book for print.  They depend on  well known authors and illustrators. Thus  it is evident why children's books with  mass distribution are slow to reflect  changing attitudes.  Books printed by feminist presses are  produced more simply, using fewer colours,  but are not as widely distributed.  As a parent, I would be wary of children's  book clubs.  I would ask about non-sexist  books at my child's school library and  suggest titles.  I would buy some paperback feminist books for my children to  read and re-read.  Here are a few I liked:  Lenthall, Patricia Riley.  Carlotta and  the Scientist.  Lollipop Power, 1973.  (paperback; ages 4-8).  This is a humorous non-sexist story about  penguins which includes factual information but is also fantasy. They do talk  and Carlotta has an adventure at an  Antarctic Research Station.  Arnold minds and hatches the egg while  Carlotta goes on her inquisitive, light-  hearted, curious way to the ocean scolded  by the older, sedate female penguins for  her curiosity.  "Why do I have to be so curious?" asks  Carlotta.  "When I see something interesting, I have to explore it, and then I  forget where I am going."  "But you always get there in the end,"  Arnold reminds her.  On her way to the ocean with the other  female penguins, Carlotta helps an injured scientist and has adventures at the  research station.  The scientist (surprise! ) is female.  In the end, Carlotta takes Arnold and the  baby,fish delicacies too (but not from the  ocean). The expressive illustrations are  an important part of the book.  Kellerhals-Stewart, Heather.  Muktu, the  Backward Muskox; illustrated by Karen  Muntean.  Press Gang.  Vancouver, 1975.  (paperback, ages 5-8)  An outstanding book and Canadian too,  about Muktu, a young Musk-ox whose biggest  worry was her lack of horns.  "She could  not seem to remember which was her backwards and which was her forwards" which  was a serious matter when the herd jumped  into a circle to protect themselves.  The incidents are amusing until a hunter  from the city arrives by helicopter to  take a trophy home. Muktu's backwardness  and curiosity saves the herd.  It is a good story which includes information about muskox and the Arctic and  at the same time has a female central  character.  The illustrations, and combinations of  soft colours are beautiful and show  different Arctic seasons.  Chapman, Kim.  The Magic Hat.  Lollipop  Power. 1973 (paperback, ages 5-10)  Polly, a girl full of fun and adventurous  spirit, finds a hat in a trunk of old  clothes at the dump.  It is a magic hat  because when she puts it on, she is flying  through the air, landing among some very  unhappy boys who have been separated from  some girls by an extremely high fence  which went up to the sky.  Once there had been no fence, no toys, and  girls and boys played together, peacefully  devising their own games.  Who had brought the toys, then  them into boys' toys and girls' toys, and  made the fence? The Busybody.  The boys needed scissors, needles and  thread to make pennants for a baseball  team.  They were on the girls' side.  The  girls were angry because they wanted tools  to make a tree house.  They were all on  the boys' side.  Both the girls and the boys want the fence  to go. Polly parts with her magic hat  which makes the fence disappear.  The illustrations show the children's  frustrations and highlight the problem in  a humourous way.  Allinson, Beverley. Mandy and the Flying  Map. Women's Press, Toronto.  1973.  (paperback, ages 5-8)  Mandy loves maps.  One of them is a magic "  map on which Mandy flies around her town  with a feeling of freedom.  She floats  through the post office talking to people,  singing, and then climbs to a cloud.  A  carefree mood is enough to counteract some  of the cumulative effect of stories where  girls have passive roles.  Two Hardcover Books:-  (not from feminist presses)  Waker, Bernard.  Ira Sleeps Over.  Houghton Mifflin.  1972.  (hardcover,  ages 6-9).  Ira tells how excited he was to plan to  sleep over with his friend, Reggie,  planning what they would do, and intending  to take his teddy bear, but worried Reggie  may laugh. His father and mother encourage him but it is his older sister who  teases.  He decides not to take his bear after much  indecision and teasing.  Both boys tell  each other ghost stories and both want  their teddy bears.  Reggie had hidden his  for the same reason.  Ira goes home for  Tah Tah.  The illustrations are especially good in  showing the little boys' feelings as well  as Ira's parents sharing-cooking, sharing  tasks, doing things they enjoy which are  not stereotyped.  The book is good for discussion of children's feelings about toys, dolls, stuffed  animals as well as family relationships. ► —&ai\r\t kurntug *-  Kinesis December 79-January 1980   29  ^"~l     l^W   CErVmUDETHr &R0UCH Sfl^5.-  —Don't kuyanyH'mg aTall.   Cbr IsTtfijjkt \& no'fkino ku*r a J«r-Jy  **  capifalisf pio+J  Balian, Lorna.  The Sweet Touch. Abingdon  Press.  1976.  (hardcover, ages 5-8).  A story just for fun where Peggy finds a  penny with which she buys a genuine plastic gold ring. When she rubs it at bedtime, a tiny genie appears.  He is just a  young genie, Oliver, who can grant one  wish, not three. Peggy and her dog and  Oliver think of a lollipop tree, 500 ice  cream cones, or a million jelly beans.  Peggy decides and says, "I wish that  everything I touch would turn into something sweet!" The carpet becomes  chocolate; her bed posts, gingerbread;  her jumprope, a licorice whip; her new  crayons, candy sticks; and her covers and  mattress, soft marshmallow.  Peggy, her dog and Oliver fall asleep amid  all the coloured sweets, when Oliver  cannot undo his magic. His mother flies  in through the window to the rescue.  The drawings of Peggy depict a happy,  excited child having fun. A good wish-  fantasy.  For the middle and older child:  For the middle and older child, there is  an even greater dearth of non-sexist  literature.  Perhaps this is because the  older child demands a greater semblance to  the reality of her own surroundings.  Whatever the reason, few writers have  seen fit to challenge sexism in literature  for the middle and older child. So if  there are any potential writers among you,  this is an area that needs work!  Here are just a few that we were able to  come up with.  Pippi Longstocking — Astrid Lindgreen  (p.b.) (ages 6-9) 'Puffin/Penguin  The story of a delightfully eccentric and  very naughty nine year old girl by the  same name. She has travelled widely but  she has never gone to school and so she  knows nothing of the kind of life that  ordinary children live.  Her mother died when she was a tiny baby  and so her father who was a sea captain  has had no choice but to take her with  him on his many voyages. All goes well  until one day Pipi's father is swept overboard in a storm at sea.  Pipi is sure  that he was swept to the safety of a nearby island, and decides to return to their  house on land to wait for him.  And so it is that he comes to live alone  in a rickety old house behind a garden  overgrown with weeds and vines on the edge  of a small town.  She has no mother or  father to tell her when to wake up, what  to eat for dinner, or when to go to bed.  Of course, she much prefers it this way!  She never fails to entertain and astound  the two neighbour children with her  antics. First, there are her extravagant  stories. Then, there is the horse that  lives on her porch, and her pet monkey  who rides on her shoulder wherever she  goes. There are hilarious episodes of  Pippi trying to cook for herself as well  as instances when she shows bionic  strength.  For example, when two policemen  come to apprehend Pippi and to take her  away to the local children's home, she  carries them out of her house, one on each  arm, and sets them down on the sidewalk  outside. On another occasion, she uses  her unusual strength to rescue two little  boys from a burning building.  This is the first in a series of books  about Pippi which are bound to entertain  children in approximately the six to nine  year old bracket. They make good bedtime  story material, and would also serve for  children who are just learning to read on  their own.  A Year in the Life of Rosie Bernard  — Barbara Brenner (p.b.) (ages 9-12) Avon  The setting is New York city during the  First Great Depression. Rosie's mother,  an actress, has just died of pneumonia.  Her father, an actor, decides he can no  longer look after Rosie while he is on  tour with his theatre company.  And so,  she goes to live in an extended family  home with her grandmother and grandfather,  two sets of aunts and uncles, and three  cousins. This context and what happens  within it provides an interesting variation on today's nuclear family of which  feminists are so critical.  Rosie is shown to be a strong willed  little girl and an independent thinker.  At first she has difficulty in adjusting  to her new school where any type of nonconformity is thoroughly disapproved, and  to the many members of her new family.  She is never shown to be able to adjust to  the school, but gradually, she gains a  greater appreciation of her new family.  For example, when Grandfather loses his  job and turns to drink for consolation,  Rosie becomes sensitized to the true  meaning of the word "Depression".  Another episode deals with Rosie's difficulty in accepting her father's new  girlfriend.  Many modern children will  identify with her plight.  Unhappy with  her father's eventual remarriage, she  succeeds in running away from home. Her  courage, her ingenuity, and her ability  to survive are fascinating.  The book could be criticized for its  failure to show Rosie interacting with  other little girls.  However, considering  the historical context, and the fact that,  unlike in Bridge to Terabithia, there is  no clear intent to create non-sexist  material, perhaps this can be overlooked.  The book does provide a positive example  of a little girl's ability to cope with  some of the problems of growing up.  The novel was first published in 1974, has  a breezy modern style, and is available  in paperback. It would probably appeal  to the nine to twelve year old.  Period is a much-needed antidote  Period — Jo-Ann Gardner-Loulan, Bonnie  Lopez, and Marcia Quackenbush (p.b., non-  fiction, 10-12 years) My Mama's Press  A book about menstruation, and the latest  thing in sex-education.  The style is such  that it will appeal to the ten to twelve  year old.  Period will provide a much needed antidote  to what children learn on the subject from  television advertising. While it is  noted that menstruation can cause difficulties for some girls and women, it is  also made very clear that constant pain,  irritability, and so forth, are not  common to one hundred percent of the  female population.  Emphasis on individual  differences goes from noting that each  person may differ from the media stereotype of female beauty and still be just  as beautiful, to reports from different  girls on the various characteristic emotions and physical sensations that are  connected to their periods.  The book is well illustrated and includes  several cross-sectionals of the female  reproductive organs accompanied by very  adequate explanations.  At the same time,  little girls are discouraged from defining  themselves entirely in terms of their  sexuality.  For example, it is pointed out  that just because one girl may start to  menstruate later than another, she is not  necessarily less mature.  The beginning  of menstruation is recognized as an important event, but not as one that separates the women from the girls.  Period can provide a lot of answers to a  lot of questions.  Children are often em-  barassed about bodily changes, and reluctant to ask these questions directly. So,  if you have a little girl who is nearing  puberty, this would be a good book to have  on your shelf.  At Christmas, and all  year around.  Bridge to Terabithia — Katherine Preston  (p.b. ) (ages 10-13) Avon Camelot  This is the type of novel that can be read  and appreciated by the ten to thirteen  year old because it has the kind of realism that children in this age group are  beginning to expect.  The book has an  additional feature which is that it can be  enjoyed by a child of either sex.  It is written in the third person and from  the point of view of a young boy named  Jess.  The story is of a friendship  between himself and a bright, mischievous,  active, and at times very tender and  solemn little girl who has moved into his  neighbourhood.  The story is extremely well written in  several respects.  First, has to be its  realism.  It is set in current times  (first publishing, April 1979) and against  the backdrop of the Pacific Northwest.  References are made to hippies, the save  the whales movement, unemployment, and  other contemporary issues.  Description is  also realistic for its precision.  Second,  there is the inticracy of the plot.  Every scene can be related to every other  scene or chapter in the book; and each  part to the whole.  In addition, the  author's subtle use of symbolism throughout is impressive.  Third, there is the  character portrayal.  Each character is to  some extent a combination of sexist, nonsexist, and/or other good and bad attributes.  People's personalities are shown  to be often as much a kaleidescope of  change as are the times we live in.  The novel deals with a number of themes  — sexism, poverty, and death — which are  not usually found in children's books.  These are rendered with such a beautiful  sensitivity as to make the novel well  worth reading by children and adults  alike.• 30   Kinesis December 79 - January 1980  MUSIC  Peggy Seeger speaks out on singing, sexism, and social change  Peggy Seeger sang in  Vancouver at the  Queen Elizabeth November 25 in her  first  Vancouver appearance in 20 years.  Peggy Seeger and Ewan MacColl have been  key movers in the English traditional  and contemporary music revival.   Their  records,   }iard to obtain in Canada,  are  available from Orders Dept.,  Blackthorne  Records,   35 Stanley Ave.,   Beckenham,  Kent,   BR3  2PU,   England.  While at the Winnipeg Folk Festival,  she spoke with Grant Wichenko of the  Manitoba New Democrat.   Here's some of  what she said.  You refer to the women 's movement as a  middle class rather than a working class  movement.  PS:  It is. I don't know why it hasn't  filtered down. On a working class level,  a lot more actual help is needed. Not  theorizing, not generalizing, but particular help.  You sing one song about your work in a  battered women's shelter.  Have you done  other songs,  for instance,  about women  doing office work,  and the hassles of  that,  or about the notion that  liberation  is women getting to do all the dirt jobs  like working as a flagperson?  PS: This is where I get my ideas. Our  first garbage lady and our first prime  minister, etc., etc.  Do you find that having workshops,  for  example,  on women 's songs represents  a bit of a ghetto?  PS: Yes I do. But I think it's interesting. It's the same as having a workshop  on ballads, or instrumental music. It's  just a fragment.  I shouldn't think that anybody ever said  that you're ghettoizing the banjo players  by having them do something on banjo techniques.  The thing is, women have special problems  in society, and we might as well face  it whether we like it or not. Occasionally, I've been on a stage with a man and  there's been a little bit of a hassle,  not from the men but from the audience.  PS: Yes, women's audience. I don't  sing for women-only audiences anymore.  .And now, in England, you get the Women's  Aid Federation concerts, and the National  Abortion Committee concerts, and places  like that, and you get a fantastic number  of men. I don't really draw the distinction. I think that some women are bitches.  I think that some men are bastards. This  doesn't stop the problem that women are  in a socially inferior position.  But you can't categorize and say that all  women are in socially inferior positions.  It's like the slogan that the Wages for  Housework people have in England. They  say, "All mothers are working mothers."  That's a lot of ... cock. You know, the  Queen's a mother. And duchesses are mothers. Just the biological function doesn't  put you in an automatic soeial position  if you've got the money.  The Old Left used to use music almost as  a means of propaganda - you want to get  people in a hall so you can tell them  something.   People are now saying that  you get the inspiration on a particular  topic, and if there happens to be political  content in the song,   then that's fine.  But your own work seems to be fairly overt  still.  PS: I think there's a lot less sloganizing  in songs today.  That's because people are  more educated as to what folk music is all  about.  I don't know how many people here  who sing it would admit to the fact that  folk music is the music of working class  people.  It is the music of people who have  been denied all the benefits of the society  and yet have produced all of the benefits  of the society. And the songs that they  make up about it - whether it be love songs  about being loved and being left, or about  the conditions at the factory, which just  list the conditions and come to no conclusion, or which list as part of a conclusion,  "I'm going to get the boss," - all these  songs represent a series of values, are a  crystallization of bitter experience, and  they have the harshness of the people's  experience, which is why some of the singers sound so quote-unbeautiful-unquote.  "I feel, when I sing folk songs, as if I  have taken sides in the class war."  Those songs to me are virtually political  songs.  I feel, when I sing folk songs, as  if I have taken sides in the class war.  That doesn't mean I have to say "Down with  the bosess" in every song I sing.  Why won't some folk singers admit,  probably  even to themselves,   that they are doing  that to a certain extent?  PS: I don't know if they are doing that.  I think maybe they find that the music is  more real than any other kind of music that  is offered to them.  I think many folk  singers approach folk music as a museum  piece, to take them back to a good old time  when we didn't have nuclear power stations  and car accidents.  There's a kind of romance attached to it because of the distance  you are in time from it, and also because  of the geographical distance.  Look at the number of people there who live  in New York City who will go down to North  Carolina to collect folk music, and there  it is in that teeming city all around them.  But to them, folk music is something that  is rural, that is separated from their own  lives. Mind you to the people who live  down there, those songs are probably as  real to them in their experience as the  New York songs should be to the New York  people. _      • ■  I remember the kind of concerts you're  talking about.  I wouldn't have said the  political songs were used. I don't think  the early political people: knew how to use  them. I think they were fascinated by the  songs.  I think they found that people  liked the songs, they liked them themselves, but I don't think I ever heard  said, while I was being brought up, that  these songs are the music of the people  who produce wealth.  It took me going to  England at the age of 21 to find somebody who told me that.  What other issues are you trying to raise  in your music?  PS: I've just done a women's" album.  It's  got a song on it about rape, and one about  abortion. It's got a generalized sort of  song about the kind of women who, as I say  in the song, "some women try to be she-men  then say that he-men are worse than demons"  It is a light song, but it's serious, taking a number of the issues which are at  present in the front of-the women's fight.  I think it's important to make women real-  izeon how many fronts they are exploited,  on how many fronts they are given secondary  service, like in employment, like in medicine, like in law.  I've got a song about housewifery which has  two parts, one which is the woman complaining about how much she has to do, and  another which blames the mothers, because  mothers bring their girl children up to expect this, and to carry on their own disappointments .  My goal in writing women's songs is a lot  of things.  First of all, I think that  women are very isolated from one another,  especially once they're married and in the  house.  They tend not to know of one another's experience.  They tend not to complain to one another, and when I sing that  song Emily, the one about the battered wife  it's amazing how many people respond to  that, especially men. Or women will come  and say, "Well, my neighbour...when I heard Kinesis December 79-January 1980   31  MUSIC  her screaming, I didn't go either. Should  I have?"  The other thing that I want to do is to  reach the men. I don't make a blanket statement that men as men are responsible for  this. It's very unfashionable to say this  in the women's movement now, that yem blame  "the system" rather than "the men".  I've  found so many men who are so much more  articulate, about women's problems, and who  are essentially more warm in their approach  to it than are a lot of the women who are  in the movement.  Because they don't carry the bitterness of  their own personal experience. ?  PS: Yes. But you see, I'm at a disadvantage  because I'm not bitter.  I have to interview people who are, and people who have  the problems that I don't have, to write  songs like Emily, and like Union Woman,  and like Talking Matrimony Blues.  I have my grouses - there's still inequality in our house - but I draw attention to  it as it comes up.  I always take the songs that I write back  to the people I interviewed before I finalize them, to say "What do you think of  this?" When I sang that song to Emily, she  started crying, and the same with a whole  bunch of them there. They were just sitting there with the tears absolutely pouring down their faces. Well, that tells me  it's right.  They don't have to say anything after that.  It was the same with Mrs. Desai, an Asian  woman,I wrote a song about. She was easy  brought up, a little woman, and like a lot  of the Asians, she's gentle, and this is  what infuriates the British, that these  people are so gentle, that they don't fight  back.  This little woman worked in a film processing plant in West London. It was a mail  order place, with everything all speeded  up in the summer. Most of the people who  worked there were Asian women, mostly illiterate, 30-50 years old. It got too much,  and she walked out. Her son came with her,  then 20, then 40, and 160 finally walked  out. She didn't go out as a leader, she  just couldn't take it any more. She was a  high born Asian woman, talking high in her  own language, well educated, who'd had  servants in her own house, and now she was  doing shlep work. She found herself at the  head of the, she who had never done any  labour work or union work in her life. And  the issue they walked out on was the right  to have a union represent them.  The owner of the factory locked them out,  and they were not allowed to picket at the  gate. The post office workers came out with  them, and they nearly broke the strike,  until the leader of the post office union  took them back in. Meanwhile,' she was  learning to speak English. Meanwhile, she  was learning how to run union meetings.  Meanwhile, she was making speeches, and going all over London.  It was absolutely extraordinary, and she became a figurehead,  Mrs Desai.  So I decided that in racist-ridden London,  that this woman was a heroine.  I had three  interviews with her.  I found that to make  this song was an almost impossible problem.  I knew I was going to sing it. I knew I  was going to accompany it fast banjo, because I could get that sort of Indian feel  about it, but I didn't want it to be mock  Indian, and I didn't want to stand up there  and say, "I am an Asian Woman, I this and  I that..." because that provides an identity crisis.  I didn't want to say, "She  does this, she does that," because that  places you too distant from her. So I ended up not using any pronouns at all. And  it works.. I took the song back to her and  do you know what she said? She said, "I  hear myself talking".  Why are union songs not be:ng done now?  PS: People are disillusioned with the  unions, with rotten leaders, with crime,  Coming down in three-part harmony  The Roches reviewed  My sisters and I would sing in three-  part harmony when we did the dishes  together:  Where Italian winds are sigh-ighing  Gardens in the dusk are ly-ying  There my eager thoughts go fly-ying  To...a maiden dark and tall  by an ancient villa wall  where the lemon blossoms fall.  The chorus works out the details of the  assignation to take place that evening,  under the lemon tree.  We didn't write our own material. But  the arrangements were our own and, somewhat haphazardly, we would share out the  three musical/psychological modes our  voices — liberated from any lyrical  challenge — could attempt: the descant-  diva flash number, the pulse of the  alto, or the bland belt of the lead  which, like motherhood, gives life to  all and is largely ignored. We used to  have pile-ups on the extremities, and  often enough the line of the song would  be forsaken in order to fatten its outer  edges; no doubt our apprehension of the  death of the Inner City.  Anyway, this article is about the Roche  Sisters, Maggie, Terre and Suzzy. Biographical material is supplied by the  first song on their alburn (The Roches):  they've been a trio since Dec. 4, Anno  Domini unknown; they're from Jew Jersey  — deepest New Jersey — which could be  a geographical or merely an emotional  indicator.  They've been seen on T.V.  and heard on the CBC.  They have an interesting way of putting  things. Some of their songs seem to be  answering the question: What's up?  Others are like conversations, or anecdotes, or semi-coherent mutterings to  one's self. Their voices are clear and  unornamented, and the compactness of  their harmonies makes it difficult to do  dishes alone. They have a guitar-laden  accoustical sound with occasional syn  thesizer and electric guitar.  Hammond Song is an unusual exchange  between some women friends about an  undisclosed subject(s): in an album  unpreoccupied with romantic affairs of  the heart, it offers the line: we'll  always love you but that's not the  point.     In Mr. Sellack, a waitress  pleading for her job back (having "run  out of money again") promises: I won't  be nasty to customers no more.     When  they send their burger back I'll tell  them that I'm sorry.     They are playful  with their songs: the lyrics are often  funny, as is the range and phrasing of  their voices, but the experimentation  is as musical and dramatic as it is  comical. Of all their songs, the most  striking is Pretty and High, a dreamy  elastic story about the vacancy that  lies between a woman's beauty and a  man's eye.  What would interest feminists about  The Roches is not so much their por-  trayal of men - as bosses, lechers,  boyfriends, meal-tickets, intrepid explorers of the female psyche, etc.,  but that they sing for themselves.  These are gregarious songs, stretching  out into everyday scenes - and what we  see is women's views. In this album,  women are not only singing together, but  "talking" together, about each other,  to each other.       By Nancy Pollak  with the Tony Boyles   Is that enough to turn people off unions?  PS:  They're not off in England, but they  are in America. For one thing., I use the  words "working class" quite freely, because  in England it's not considered a term of  oppobrium, but over here, is it?  It is.  PS: Unions are for the defence of the work-'  ing class. If you don't want to admit you  are working class, well...union is part of  the terminology.  I've actually had a taxi  driver turn around and tell me, "Don't call  me working class. I'm not". It could be  the legacy of the McCarthy thing, where you  are made to feel ashamed of any of those  things which would draw you together.  If you do not have a feeling of being working class, and therefore you're not proud  of your history, therefore you don't learn  this basic part of your history. In England  you can be sure they know it.  But is the new generation of folk singers  singing union or working class songs -  say about the Post Office or British Rail?  PS:  Oh yes.  They're very sarcastic about  certain of the union leaders, when there's  a sell-out.  There's a line in a song,  where it talks about "When they sell out,  they get a good price for it".  And the  howl that comes up from the audience is  absolutely fantastic, wherever you sing  this.  In England, you can guarantee, when  we sing, that two-thirds of the audience  will be working class, and they know they  are working class, and they're proud of it.  They know what their union leaders are do»  ing, and they know when there is a sellout.  They're doing their darndest to  make sure it doesn't happen again, but at  least they know it's happening and will  admit that they are part of the group  that either stands or falls on what the  unions get for them.  Claire Kujunciz has small, original  watercolours for sale. From $10 -  ^30. Unframed. To contact Claire,  call 437 3296  Give Kinesis gift subs  Celebrate the sun's journey back to  the northern hemisphere by giving a'  sister or brother a subscription to  Kinesis. We will send them a card  with your name on it and all... and  they can enjoy a monthly shot of  gloom and doom. Fill out the sub.  form we stuffed in this issue. 32   Kinesis December 79 - January 1980  LETTERS  Baragon counters criticism  I am writing in response to Casey's and  Joanna's letter concerning my article:  "To court or not to court."  I am disappointed that the letter by  Casey and Joanna failed to address adequately the concerns I raised.  They dodged the issues with empty rhetoric.  Their letter only confirmed my belief  that Rape Relief is not being co-opted  by the judicial system, but by leftist  political chatter.  Ultimately, Casey and Joanna are saying  that Rape Relief is seeking to use alternatives to the judicial system.  In the month since I wrote that article,  I have spoken with four different women  who expressed dissatisfaction with the  way they have been dealt with by Rape  Relief.  Three of the women who approached me on  this topic were all women who had sought  information on the "Gentleman Rapist"  (as the media has dubbed him). He has  raped nearly fifteen women in the Main  Street area alone, over the past few  months. All three were looking for assistance and advice on how to help identify  and report anyone fitting his description:1  They wanted to know if they could leaflet,  or put up posters, or protect themselves  in any other way from his attack.  One woman was told, rape happens everywhere... take a self-defence course.   The  second was told keep your doors  locked,  while the third was put off over the  phone time and time again until she became  frustrated.  The fourth woman, who was a rape victim,  needing information on the courts, was  told that going to court was not a good  idea. The woman did go to court, and  was assisted by a former Rape Relief volunteer. The man was convicted.  I reject the letter's Implication that  I have less of a right to vocalize my  opinions about the direction of Rape Relief because I am not presently a worker  there.  Firstly, I am a former active member of  Rape Relief in Vancouver.  Secondly, I am a feminist. I feel it is  important for women's groups to be held  accountable to the women's movement and  to any woman whose life is affected by  the groups' services.  Thirdly, I am sorry that Casey and Joanna  view an open and honest discussion of  these issues as somehow being a betrayal  of their collective.  On the contrary. My interests lie in the  success of the anti-rape movement and  any group, individual, or action which  would seem to undermine this important  struggle demands my attention.  I only hope that when we are all finished  laying out our own "gut" feelings about  the "correct political line" on rape  trials, that we can listen to what the  rape victims" gut feelings are. It is  there that we may find the real answers.  In conclusion, I want to express my gratitude to the Rape Relief volunteers, and  to the women in my neighborhood who supplied me wi-th the information necessary  to bring these matters to attention.  Ellen Baragon  was called irresponsible and slanderous  by members of the Rape Relief collective. I am curious as to when Rape Relief ceased to be accountable to the  women's movement.  I find it difficult to comment on the  response by the two Rape Relief collective members in the November issue of  Kinesis. Their policy is suspiciously  unclear and it is difficult to make sense  of the article as a whole.  Their analysis of rape and racism is  confusing at best; liberal at worst.  Baragon's perspective is a far more radical and logical feminist stand.  Rape Relief's funding concern, however,  rears its head. I find the issue of funding irrelevant if it means keeping the  truth from the women's community as well  as attempting to silence those who speak  out.  Connie Smith  I thought Ellen Baragon's article, "To  court or not tc court," in October's  Kinesis, was right on.  I have been the victim of a rape attack  and I took my attacker to court.  • Considering the torment and misery he  caused me, I felt he deserved to be punished with a prison sentence, which he  was. I also feel I did the right thing  to stop him from raping again and again.  To me, nothing can compensate a woman  who has survived a rape. For me, a prison sentence comes close. Ms.Baragon  said what I wanted to say, but didn't.  Karen Sternberg  timid adults. )  I went to the store's customer service  office and filed a written complaint  about the signs. Then I put up a notice  at the Women's Bookstore, and asked all  my friends to please complain, or at  least boycott the store.  This year, I discovered to my horror  that they had not abandoned their sales-  dooming signs, but had instead left the  'Girls' sign exactly as it had been, and  had replaced the 'Boys' sign by one that  reads the same, but is larger and more  prominently displayed!  Once again I filed a written complaint,  which brings me to the point of the  letter — to ask Kinesis readers to  please boycott Sears until they remove  the signs, and to tell them so by going  to their office and letting them know in  writing that the parents of Vancouver  won't tolerate this kind of destructive  stereotyping of our children and ourselves.  Thank you,  Gail Bailey  Kinesis:  Ellen Baragon's article on Rape Relief  was both courageous and enlightening.  The facts she provides are vital if we  are to .consider Rape Relief as an alternative for ourselves or our friends.  However, I am outraged that her action  -8u!A<ifi.©-n/.  Boycott Sears this solstice  Kinesis:  The season of Christmas toy-buying is  rolling around again, and again this  year I am waging a small protest against  the Sears Co.  Last year at this time I noticed that  Sears had small signs above the cars,  trucks, and other action toys, reading  "Boys' Toys".  Needless to say, I  immediately looked around for the  "Girls' Toys" sign, finding it (even  worse than I had feared) hanging over a  section of mops, brooms, and cute  little toy vacuum cleaners,  (incidentally, the boys' section was crowded  with interested children, while the  girls' section attracted only a few  Kinesis:  I am writing to clarify my reasons for  having a home birth, referred to in last  month's Kinesis article on "three women  who...in their thirties". While it is  true that•I don't feel comfortable in  hospitals, my main reason for having  Jess at home was because I was concerned  about the risks involved in hospital  birthing.  I had more confidence in myself, in the  midwife and in my supportive and prepared friends to provide a safe birthing  environment than I had in any hospital.  Thanks.'  Kinesis:  The November issue of Kinesis rates a  "well-done" and the beautiful cover with  those two warm and intelligent faces,  that say to onlooker, this is our  strength.  The article on PoCo women's centre interested me. I. must object to the fact that  the women's centre doesn't welcome the  angry radical. But then ... with any  other image or views but traditional  toned ... they'd be out of business  quick as you can say Jack...etc.  The word radical as going to the root,  fundamental,  basic  is a positive word.  Just being a feminist means you will  be in for a rough time of it, and your  children.  Equality is a dirty word is PoCo. I  rather feel that anger can be a positive  motivation ... and inappropriate not to  feel angry in many cases of injustice.  Pollution and violence within the environment doesn't exactly make me leap  for joy.  Someone has to be a radical and someone  has to be angry enough to bring about  better living conditions.  Woman as subhuman, that image is one that  I do not want to be allied with.  Sadi-Ellen Ross  Comment  Much as I would like to make a huge donation to your excellent newspaper, wealth  and fame have not bestowed upon me the  bucks. But I offer my moral support. It  is refreshing to read honest, pertinent  journalism, without being bombarded  with page after page of the garbage,  sensationalism and misrepresentation that  runs rampant in commercial papers. MOVEMENT REPORTS  Kinesis December 79 - January 1980   33  Self-defence is a necessity  I'm not saying you should fight.. .I'm  saying you should know how!  I have been teaching self-defense to women  in Vancouver for three years. A couple of  months ago, the women who run the Quadra  offered me the use of their club during  the daytime to teach my classes.  Not only was I offered this space free of  charge but they went out and purchased  mats for me as well.  Finding a space that was large enough and  that I could afford has been one of my  biggest problems with teaching. This generous offer was made due to their concern  about the increase of rape in that area of  the city.  These women do not consider themselves  'political' and they are not considered  'politically correct' by some people but  they are women and they are angry about  rape and they have done something about  it!  I thought it would be appropriate to do my  first class especially for the women who  frequent the Quadra: the women who come  and go to and from that club at all hours  of the night.  I advertised for three  weeks and expected an overflow — maybe  forty women.  A grand total of six women  registered.  I cut the class to a two hour workshop and  proceeded to try to figure out why there  was such a poor response.  There are a lot of women who are wondering  and worrying about whether they should or  should not fight if attacked. What these  women seem to have overlooked is the fact  that they do not know how  to fight, so  they don't even have  the choice!  There are a lot of women suffering from  the myths: It will never happen to me,  and  A little bit of knowledge is dangerous.  There are a lot of women who are aware of  the reality of rape and full of anger and  a false sense of bravado and no skills.  There are women who are just not aware of  the danger and reality of rape at all.  I have taught six year olds and sixty year  olds.  The women who come to my classes  are a real cross-section: from doctors to  housewives whose husbands think they're  coming to crochet classes. The women who  come to my classes all have one thing in  common: fear and sufficient awareness to  do something about it.  I'll be doing a series of classes at the  Quadra starting in January.  If you are  interested o." for further information  call: Anita — 732-6071.  Do you  have the choice???       —Anita  You don't have to be a media  freak to enjoy  Media is a women's concern...and a women's  tool...and can even provide women's entertainment! At the Video Inn that's how we  see it and Women's Media Night is how we  show it.  Once a month (watch notices for the exact  date) women are invited to come down to  the Video Inn, 261 Powell Street, Vancouver (688-4336), for Women's Media Night.  You don't have to be a media freak. Just  interested in seeing and hearing what  women have to say...and in saying more.  We've been happening since the summer but  some of you may not have heard about us  yet. So far, we've had a showing of several women video artists, a slide/tape  show, and Video Inn's newly acquired tapes  on women's issues, plus a night of do-it-  yourself home-grown videotaping (it's fun  and easier than it looks — we'll show you  how).  We're taking a break till January, but  upcoming events in the new year will in  clude the famous "Langara" tapes (at long  last) of Judy Chicago and Marge Piercey  and an "old home night" video/slide retrospective of the women's movement in Vancouver (come and see your friends way back  then...remember Manpower?...remember the  Rally?...remember to bring popcorn).  There will also be an evening on violence  and pornography with video from New York  women who took the issue of "censorship"  into their own hands; and possibly, due to  popular demand, a repeat of the Lesbian  Radio Show's workshop with highlights from  some of their programs.  ID RATHER BUY MY OWN TURKEY  ... WITH  MY  OVERDUE PAY RAISE7  In all the media nights there will be room  to learn more, to show your own work, and  room to sit back and watch/listen. Any  ideas or suggestions for further programs  are welcome. Give us a call at 688-4336  (Pat, Claudia, or Shawn).  The media are collectively one of the  greatest perpetuators of the ideas and  attitudes that keep women oppressed. But  they're also a tool and language we can  use for ourselves!  So watch for us on your local bulletin  board, and in your next Kinesis.     Call up  Video Inn and get your name on our mailing  list.  Come and bring your friends to  Women's Media Night. See you there!  —PatFindel  Women's building reveals  blueprints for spring  goodtimes  The women's building planning committee  is pleased to announce that it has passed  through the doldrums and is now, with  renewed energy, making plans for the  spring.  We did not receive the thousands of BCRIC  shares from the community that we, in our  optimism, had been hoping for. We're still  unsure as to why the response was not  d. Maybe people.didn't bother to pick  up their shares ... or maybe people are  still waiting to see if we go through  with our plans. We do know that some women are concerned about what the committee  plans to do with the shares if we are unable to get a building. For the record,  the constitution states that all assets  from the planning committee would, upon  the dissolution of the society, be handed  over to a women's group which had similar  objectives ... that of creating a facility  for the use of women.  Our con t tution is in Victoria and we  should hear shortly that we have been accepted as a society under the Societies  Act. We then plan to apply for a tax-exempt  ion from Ottawa, so that donations can be  tax-free.  We are a member group of BCFW and two of  us attended the recent convention in Victoria. We asked for support letters from  other BCFW member groups so that we could  put them in with our grant proposal to  the Secretary of State (for a small grant  to help pay some of our expenses). Some  letters have come in. If your group has  not sent one yet, get on it.  We should be hearing about the Sec State  grant in the new year.  We are planning three events for the soring  Our aim is to raise some money, publicize  the concept of a women-owned space, and  provide some social and cultural events  for the women's community.  On February 16, we are planning a WOMEN'S  DANCE to celebrate Valentine's Day. If  there are women who want to help with  this, call Sylvie at 873 4588 (W) or at  253 0925 (H). Mark this date in your new  Women and Health Wall Calendars. It will  be a fun time.  We are planning a local women's VARIETY  EVENING to coincide with International Women's Day Week. This will take place in  the Robson Square Media Centre on Sunday March 9, at 8 pm. More workers to  make this a truly joyful ending to IWD  week are welcome. Call Gloria at the Women's Bookstore, 684 0523-  We are also looking into the possibility  of obtaining an historical building for  the Women's Building. Keep your eyes out  for possibilities. We think it should be  on the east side of town, in a "safe"  area, and on good bus routes. There are  many buildings in the city owned by  city, provincial or federal governments.  If you have suggestions, please contact  Gillian at VSW, 736 1313.    -GillianMarie  MERRY XMAS FROM  THE  GAS AND ELECTR/C COMPANY7  BCFW  Standing Committee  meets January 12  The B.C. Federation of Women is an umbrella organization of women's groups  in the province. Each year at convention, a standing committee is formed. It  consists of representatives of each active policy area and region and a number  of members elected to specific task positions such as maintaining books, membership, correspondence and communications. By meeting every two or three  months, the standing committee provides  a means of discussion between members  and helps to facilitate common actions  based on BCFW policy.  The second meeting of the BCFW standing  committee will be in Vancouver, January  12 and 13. It will take place at 45  Kingsway, and all BCFW members are welcome to attend. Out-of-town women who  need a place to stay should contact:  Ruth Busch  3817 West 11 Ave  Vancouver B.C.  Member groups everywhere should get in  touch with their closest rep. before  the meeting. She would like to know  what's on your mind or up your sleeve:.  —Pat Smith 34   Kinesis December 79 - JanuaryJ980  BULLETIN BOARD  EVENTS  TELL ME SOMETHING YOU THINK I SHOULD KNOW,  a video-tape by Anne Mandlsohn (Toronto  visual artist). Women only. In an evening  of video and discussion, Anne Mandlsohn  will explore the possibilities for friendships between women and men. The tape  attempts to delve beyond superficial conversation into the dynamics which make or  break a relationship.  Tuesday, December 18, 7:30-10:00 pm at  Women In Focus, #6-45 Kingsway, Vancouver  (872-2250).  The Women's Caucus of the VANCOUVER GAY  COMMUNITY CENTRE is holding a dance  Friday, Dec. 21, 7pm, at the Scottish  Auditorium at 12th & Fir St. $4 adm.  At the WOMEN'S ART GALLERY:  Dec. 3-31: Sculptures by VALERIE PUGH  Jan. 1-31: THE WOMEN'S ROOM, Soft Sculpture Environment  Feb.- 1-29: Watercolors by FIONA KING  The Women's Art Gallery is open Monday-  Friday, 10am-4pm, Thursday 10am-8pm, at  #6-45 Kingsway, Vancouver (872-2250).  is scheduled for February. It's a fund  raiser for the authors of a new short  story anthology to be published in the.  spring by Press Gang.  The great gala will be an evening of  entertainment —kids' program, food,  variety show, live bands and dancing.  Kids and older people who would like  to participate as performers or join  a production crew are invited to contact:  Marg or Ina  before December 19th  Kids — call Marg Burt at 266-9890  (after school)  Adults — auditions will be January 7  to 11. Contact Ina's Answering Machine, 874-2564.  ON THE AIR  THE LESBIAN SHOW'S December program:  Dec. 6 - The BCFW Convention. The  Lesbian Show Collective is a member  of the B.C. Federation of Women. On  the weekend of Nov. 9-12 we went to  Victoria for the annual convention.  On this show we let you in on what  • happened there and how that relates  to us all.  Dec. 13 - Lesbians and the Constant  • State of Coming Out. Once we've decided that our closets are too confining, we begin the process of  "coming out". On this show we'll  present opinions and experiences of  the-various aspects of "coming out"  at home, at work, to friends, etc.  Dec." 20 - The Best of the Lesbian  Show. Over the past six months we've  been broadcasting, some of our items  have received very positive response  from our listeners. We're going .to  play these pieces again. (If you have  any specific pieces you'd like to  hear again, contact us before Dec. 13  at 337 Carrall St., phone 684-8494.)  Dec. 27 - Lesbians and Music. This month  our spotlight is on Sireni Avedis.  The Lesbian Show can be found on Co-op  Radio, 102.7 FM, Thursdays from 7:30-8pm.  Dec. 31: Reflections .  the 70's.  Look for Womanvision on Monday nights,  7-8pm on Co-op Radio, 102.7 FM.  COURSES  Spring 1980 WOMEN'S STUDIES COURSES at  Simon Fraser University:  Issues in Women's Health & Health Care  Evening course. Instructor: D. Lewis  Perspectives on Women: An Introduction  to Women's Studies. Day course. Instructor: S. Wendell  Women in Canada: 1920 to the Present  Day course. Instructor: A. Fellman  Female Roles in Contemporary Society  Day course. Instructor: R. Hawrylko  Special Topics: Occupation Housewife  Day course. Instructor: A. Fellman  Special Topics: Women at Work. Day  course. Instructor: M. McDougall  Also: Research Project and Directed  Readings  For complete information about courses  contact: The Women's Studies General  Office, 9102 CC (291-3593).  THE USE AND ABUSE OF TRANQUILIZERS, a symposium sponsored by The Alternatives Program  for Chemical Dependencies:  Film: AN EASY PILL TO SWALLOW  A panel will discuss aspects of medication  abuse, answer questions and generate awareness of alternative solutions to prescription drug abuse.  December 13 - Italian Cultural Centre, 3075  Slocan St, Vancouver.  Free of charge. 7:30-9:30 p.m. For further  information, call Alternatives, 873-4201.  Announcing a CONFERENCE ON ALTERNATIVE  THERAPY & SOCIAL CHANGE, to be held  January 19/80 at Thunderbird Neighbourhood House, 2311 Cassiar, 9:30-6pm.  Workshops will include:  ^Principles of radical therapy  ^Feminist therapy  *Women and psychiatry  *Mental patients and the law  *The politics of drugs and electro-  shock  ^Starting a women's counselling  centre  ^Lesbians and therapy  *Gay people and therapy  ^Constructive criticism  *Problem solving groups  *Co-counselling  ^Creating alternatives to the mental  health industry  ^Presentation on the Mental Patients  Association  *Mental patients liberation group  *Men, misogyny and rape  ^Special problems of immigrants and  people of colour  ^Psychiatry in China  #Fat is a feminist issue  *Post partum counselling  *Co-optation  In addition to workshops, there will be  music, theatre and anti-psychiatry artwork. For more information contact  Kristin Perm, 873-0070.  A 9-month INTENSIVE FEMINIST THERAPY  TRAINING PROGRAM is being offered by  Sara Joy David the third Sunday of every  month beginning Jan. 20, 1980. The program is intended for women committed to  working clinically with women outside of  traditional settings or within settings  where they have sufficient autonomy to  create their own programs. For further  information, write to: Sara Joy David,  R.R.#1, Galiano Island, B.C.  WOMANVISION'S December program:  Dec. 10: Coverage of the B.C. Federation  of Women annual convention. Interviews,  workshop coverage, and a live interview  with Mickey Verde, conference participant  and workshop leader.  Dec. 17- Women in the Arts. Music by  by women musicians at the last Vancouver  Folk Festival; Diane Levins, local feminist singer and songwriter talks to Mickey  Verde about her work.  Dec. 24• New Wave music: punk and women's  music with commentaries.  ; women artists of  WOMEN EMERGING WEEKEND WORKSHOPS are being  held Dec. 15 and 16, and Jan. 12 and 13  on Galiano Island. Fee: $40, some reductions possible. For further information,  contact: Sara Joy David, R.R.#1, Galiano  Island, B.C. or phone Carol Boag, 291-3200.  an independent womens newsjournal  politics, health, work, prison  news coverage and political analysis  on the issues that affect womens lives  contributing sub $12 or more  one year sub $6    sample copy 60i  foreign $13    Canada $7  oob, 1724 20th st. nw,  wash, dc 20009  RESOURCES  A Greater Vancouver BABYSITTER'S REGISTRY  is being compiled with sections for each  community, and will be available by the  end of December. If you are a prospective sitter and would like to register,  call 434-7418 (Burquitlam), or 421-2892  (New Westminster). Registrants must be  over 12 years of age.  TERRACE WOMEN'S GROWTH CENTRE, "women  helping women", is located at 4711-  Lazelle Ave., Terrace (655-5145).  Hours: 10-6 Mon-Thurs, 10-4 Friday.  Evening programs offered.  LESBIAN INFORMATION LINE is now open to  calls two nights a week, Thursday and  Sunday, from 7-10pm at 685-4519.  GROUPS  WOMEN ARTISTS - Visual, word, sound,  whatever...at the BCFW convention a  workshop was held on Feminism and Art.  Out of it came the idea to organize  an art show/event on the theme of  "eroticism as defined by feminists".  If you are interested in discussing  this idea further, helping organize,  or participating, come to a meeting  at the Women's Inter-Art Co-op, 165  W. Pender (basement) on Saturday,  January 12 at 2 p.m.  A.A. MEETINGS Monday nights at 7 pm. For  information contact Chris, 876-1285.  A NETWORK OF FEMINIST THERAPISTS/COUNSELLORS is being formed, for purposes of  communication, exchange of materials,  planning conferences and making recommendations about mental health care delivery. Anyone interested in being included in the roster and receiving further information, please send name,  address, phone number and a brief  description of where and how you work  or your therapeutic interests to: Sara  Joy David, R.R.#1, Galiano Island, B.C.  Have you ever been unemployed? For every  100 people in B.C. looking for work  there are only 4 jobs- available - the  other 96 rely heavily on UIC benefits.  Join with the STOP UNEMPLOYMENT CUTBACKS COMMITTEE, 2416 Cassiar St,  Vancouver, B.C.  Anyone interested in starting a WOMEN'S  COUNSELLING CENTRE, contact Kristin Penn  at 873-0070. Kinesis December 79 - January 1980   35  BULLETIN BOARD  The next WOMEN IN TRADES meeting will be  held Sunday, January 13, 2-5pm in the  Information/Conference Room of the Information Centre, Britannia Centre, 1661  Napier St, Vancouver. All interested  women welcome.  The newly-formed LESBIAN MOTHERS DROP-IN  meets Sundays at 2pm, at the Women's  Bookstore, 804 Richards St, Vancouver.  For more information, call Laurel  (525-1336) or Lynn (734-9784).  SOUTH VANCOUVER FAMILY PLACE NEEDS VOLUNTEERS to help staff the centre. We will  train you. All our previous volunteers  are now attending school or have full-  or part-time jobs, but will be available  to train new volunteers. Give us a call  today! Call Pat Feldhammer, Co-ordinator, at 325-5213.  WHAT'S NEW AT THE HEALTH COLLECTIVE?  Skill-Sharing Days  The first Saturday afternoon of every  month the Health Collective is open for  skill-sharing: cervical self-exam, pap  testing, blood pressure. Other physical  exam skills and microscopic analysis  are tools we'll be learning and sharing  in the months to come. (Skill-sharing  day for January is January 12.)  Resource People  Have you had cervical cancer?  chronic cystitis? P.I.D.?  a hysterectomy?  an abortion?  questions about estrogen  replacement therapy?  or (fill in the blank)?  Have you ever thought it would be useful  and comforting tc talk with another woman  who had similar i. .al''. concerns? Or...  could you offer rippc-i't and information  to a woman who is in :he midst of an  experience you know i  out?  We'd like to help pui you in touch with  each other! If you're interested in sharing your experience and information with  another woman, give us a call.  Resource Centre  Our resource centre library and files  are open to you as well. V/e are continually in the process of gathering information concerning women and health and  need help with the work of organizing,  gathering and passing it along.  Orientation  An 8-session orientation group begins  Wednesday, January 16, 7:30pm for  women who are interested in becoming  more involved with the Health Collective. Sessions will include politics  of health care, self-help skills,  constructive criticism. Please call  for more details.  We're at 1501 W. Broadway at Granville  (above the shoe store). Phone 736-6696.  Our hours are: Mon, Tues, Thurs, Fri  1:30-5:00pm; Sat, 12:00-4:00pm. Closed  Wed and Sun.  JUST OUT  TAKEN FOR GRANTED, a slide-tape presentation and collection of background material on farm and domestic workers,- by  the Labour Advocacy and Research Association. The show is available for purchase or individual showings. Speakers  from LARA are also available.  (Teachers: There is a 10-activity curriculum unit available on the same subject. ) Contact: LARA, c/o Rachel Epste.in,  2520 Triumph St, Vancouver V5K 1S8  (251-3872).  From CONDITIONS, a BLACK WOMEN'S ISSUE.  Conditions is a journal of women's  writing, with emphasis on writing by  lesbians. 208pp. Available for $3 from  P.O. Box 56, Van Brunt Stn., Brooklyn,  NY 11215. Subs, $8/4 issues. Free on  request to women in prisons and mental  institutions.  LA GAZETTE DES FEMMES is a new feminist  magazine from the Conseil du statut de  la femme, containing news about women's  activities across Quebec. Free. To  subscribe, write: Conseil du statut  de la femme, 700 est, Bd St-Cyrille,  I6e etage, Quebec G1R 5A9.  FIGHTING SEXUAL HARASSMENT: An Advocacy  Handbook, is a new publication by the  Alliance Against Sexual Coercion, compiled "to train people in all kinds of  social service work to recognize when  women seeking their assistance are experiencing sexual harassment and to  provide guidelines on how to deal with  this situation." The 76-page handbook  is available for $3.50 from The Alliance  Against Sexual Coercion, P.O. Box 1,  Cambridge, MA 02139.  THE ADVENTURES OF WUTZ FAIR AND B. JUSTICE,  a comic book by Sylvia Spring. "More  superheroes?! Well, B. (for Blind)  Justice nnd her assistant Wutz Fair,  disguised as an ordinary child, do fly  around at terrific speeds on B.J.'s  golden scales. But they don't solve  any puzzles themselves - instead they  find clues and weigh the evidence to  help kids like you find what's fair."  Available from Schools Legal Education  Project, Legal Services Commission,  Box 12120, 555 W. Hastings, Vancouver  (689-0741).  THE LUNAR CALENDAR: Dedicated to the Goddess  in Her Many Guises is now available. The  calendar is large-format, 12"xl8", 32pp,  including prose, poetry, graphics and  photography in addition to the 13 lunations for the year (phases of the moon,  moon-rise and -set times, transits of  the houses of zodiac, solstices, equinoxes and cross-quarter days).  $7.95 plus $1.25 postage and handling.  Order from: The Luna Press, Bpx 511,  Kenmore Station, Boston, MA 02215. Luna  Press will package and mail calendars as  gifts, complete with card.  Second Class,  ling Class  it it is like to join tho union in Mexic  take off the veil in Iran . . . strike  je a prostitute from  Thailand . . . have an abortion in Italy.  Oakland, CA 94609  Vol. 1 of ANCIENT MIRRORS OF WOMANHOOD,  Our Goddess and Heroine Heritage by  Merlin Stone. Special "just published"  offer - $5.50 on individual copies till  Feb. 1/80. Order from: New Sibylline  Books, Inc.-P, Box 266, Village Stn.,  New York, NY 10014.  1980 WOMEN & HEALTH WALL CALENDAR is yours  for $3.50 from Press Gang Publishers,  603 Powell St, Vancouver. Orders of 5 or  more, $2.80 each, 10 or more, $2.10 each.  Pre-pay orders and include 10# for postage and handling. The calendar is 11x17",  illustrated, with a pull-out sympto-  thermal chart for women who want to record  their menstrual cycle.  IN DUE SEASON, a novel by Christine van der  Mark, with a new Introduction by Dorothy  Livesay and an Afterword by Dorothy Wise,  the author's daughter.  $6.95pb, $14.95cloth, available from New  Star Books, 2504 York Ave, Vancouver B.C.  V6K 1E3.  "We only stock those products that haven't been  tested on live animals, don't exploit the Third World,  and of which the advertising doesn't degrade women,  men, children, or the dignity of the class struggle."  READ US BE RIGHTEOUS  Response to our sustainer appeal has been  tremendous. Since our first appeal in the  April-May issue of Kinesis, you have  pledged and donated more than $2050 to  the Kinesis sustainer fund.  Thank you,  sustainers.   Your contributions  give us a powerful feeling of community  support,  and make the continued existence  of Kinesis possible.  If you have not yet made a sustainer  donation or pledge, but have sufficient  income to do so, we ask you to think  about it. Sustainers make a personal  commitment to keep Kinesis alive.  Sustainers contribute $50 per year, in  a lump sum or in installments of $5 or  more. In return, you will receive your  own subscription, along with any number  of complimentary copies for your friends.  Why not fill out this sustainer form and  help Kinesis continue?  GAY TIDE IS BACK! The Gay Alliance Toward  Equality has decided to resume publication  on a bi-monthly basis starting December 1.  For a copy, contact: GATE, P.O. Box 1463,  Stn. A, Vancouver, B.C. V6C 2P7.  Postal Code  I enclose my monthly installment of    I enclose a lump sum of $50  Clip and mail to:  Kinesis, Vancouver  Status of Women  1090 West 7th Ave.,  Vancouver, V6H 1B3  KINESIS is published ten times a year by  Vancouver Status of Women. Its objectives  are to enhance understanding about the  changing position of women in society and  work actively towards achieving social  change.  VIEWS EXPRESSED IN KINESIS are those of  the writer and do not necessarily reflect  VSW policy. All unsigned material is the  responsibility of the Kinesis editorial  group.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status  of Women, 1090 West 7th Avenue, Vancouver  B.C. V6H 1B3.  MEMBERSHIP in Vancouver Status of Women  is by donation. Kinesis is mailed monthly  to all members. Individual subs to Kinesis  are $8 per year. We ask members to base  their donations on this and their own  financial situations.  SUBMISSIONS are welcome. We reserve the  right to edit, and submission does not  guarantee publication. Include a SASE if  you want your work returned.  DEADLINE: 15th of each month.  WORKERS ON THIS ISSUE: Sylvie Beauregard,  Janet Beebe, Jean Faguy, Portland Frank,  Morgan McGuigan, Laurie McNeil, Janice  Pentland-Smith, Gayla Reid, Ann Schaefer,  Diana Smith, Lezlie Wagman, Joan Woodward. 36   Kinesis December 79-January 1980  JUST OUT  Vol.#2 of the WOMEN'S WORK DIRECTORY is  now available by mail. If you are in  need of a product or service and would  prefer to deal with a woman, write to  us for your free copy. In it you will  find 56 listings of women who: repair  shoes, read palms, sell books, paint  houses and more. Send 50^ (to cover  postage and handling) to: Women's Work  Directory, c/o 1612 E. 8th Ave, Vancouver V5N IT5.  We are now accepting submissions for  Vol.#3. Deadline is March 21, 1980.  W.W.D. is produced oompletely by women.  ANTI-NUCLEAR MOVEMENT: For information  of the "how it works" variety, read  Vol. 1, No. 1 of Broadside. This issue  includes information on the Toronto  feminist anti-nuke group WANT (Women  Against Nuclear Technology), and a  list of films and books on the subject.  To subscribe, write: Broadside, P.O.  Box 494, Stn. P, Toronto M5S 2T1.  Subs are $8/year, 12 issues.  For information on the B.C. scene, we  recommend a sub to The Energy File.  $8/year, 12 issues. Write: The Energy-  File, #306, 402 W. Pender, Vancouver,  V6B 1T6.  NETWORK OF SASKATCHEWAN WOMEN  is published bi-monthly by the Saskatchewan  Action Committee, Status of Women. Subs are  $3.00 per year. Donations appreciated. Mail  to Shirley Clark, Treasurer, Box 293,  Frobisher, Sask. SOC 0Y0.  THE FORCES WHICH SHAPED THEM, A History of  the Education of Minority Group Children  in British Columbia, by Mary Ashworth with  an Introduction by Rosemary Brown.  Available for $6.50pb, $14.95cloth, from  New Star Books, 2504 York Ave, Vancouver  B.C. V6K 1E3. Catalog of other New Star  titles available on request.  Yet another study on poverty! WOMEN AND  POVERTY by the National Council of  Welfare details the considerable extent of women's poverty in Canada.  For a copy, write: National Council  of Welfare, Brooke Claxton Building,  Ottawa K1A 0K9.  STORY OF A WOMEN'S CENTRE, a "biography"  the Port Coquitlam Women's Centre, is  available at POCO Women's Centre, P.O.  Box 220, Port Coquitlam, B.C. V3C 3V7  for $3.00 plus 50^ handling & postage.  Proceeds from the book for the ongoing  work of the Centre.  AN ACCOUNT TO SETTLE, The Story of the  United Bankworkers, by Jackie Ainsworth  et al, published by Press Gang. $3.25  pb. The story of SORWUC's attempt to  unionize Canadian bank workers, why  they decided to take the struggle on,  and what happened when they did.  Manitoba feminists published the first  issue of "the newspaper" October 17.  To subscribe, write: "the newspaper",  447 Webb Place, Winnipeg R3B 2P2.   ART   Sad, frightened and depressed women  hung on the Helen Pitt walls  By Kinesis staff writers  Images of sad, frightened, tired and depressed women took most of the wall space  at the Helen Pitt gallery for the fourth  annual exhibition of the Women's Interart  Society, held recently.  Margaret Shore's startling and excellent  watercolour, Portrait of J,  was an example. Whatever the moment was for either J  or Margaret — anguish, panic, terror —  Margaret has captured it.  Elizabeth Fischer's oil pastel, Judy,   was  frightening.  Judy, in very dark blues and  mauves, exuded icy fear and sadness.  Another well-done portrait, Mother and  Daughter  (oil on canvas) by Janet Morgan  embodied hopelessness.  Such powerful sad  eyes!  But Patti Josin's surrealist woman in A  Pugh's Bag Lady Totem Pole  WOMEN BIKERS interested in meeting to discuss motorcycle mechanics and riding as  a prelude to some group rides next summer  call Gael (327-2935) or Janet (251-2593).  Recent titles at the women's bookstores:  VANCOUVER WOMEN'S BOOKSTORE, 804 Richards,  684-0523 -  Flight of Average Persons, Stories and  Other Writings, Helen Potrebenko,  $5.95  My Sister's Hand in Mine, Collected  Works of Jane Bowles, $8.00  Not Servants, Not Machines, Office  Workers Speak Out, $4.25  Conditions: Black Women's Issue, $3.50  Lesbian Primer, Liz Diamond, $4.55  Lesbian Health Matters!, Mary O'Donnell  et al, a Santa Cruz Women's Health  Collective publication, $4.30  ARIEL BOOKS, 2766 W. 4th Ave., 733-3511  (all hard-cover books) -  Eye to Eye, Portraits of Lesbians, JEB  Lunar Calendar, Luna Press, $9.00  Two Women, Doris Anderson, $9.95  Being and Caring, Victor Daniels and  Lawrence Horowitz, $11.20  Shedding, Vorena Stefan, $6.00  Menstruation and Menopause, Paula  Weideger, $12.50  The Vancouver Women's Bookstore is pleased  to announce EXTENDED STORE HOURS for the  month of December.  Starting December 6th, the store will be  open from noon to 8pm on Thursdays and  Fridays. Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and  Saturday, the store will keep its usual  hours of noon to 5pm.  Scream Through the Eyes of a Statue and  Whale Song  (pencil on paper) were sterile  Vogue beauty queens, too glamorous and  perfect, fragile women without depth or  strength.  The female figures in Portland Frank's  woodcuts, Anti-Psychiatry Prints,  document  with somber power a horror to which women  have been subjected for too many centuries.  Again, Meredith Feldmar's mottled Susanna  1  (watercolour) personified the alienation  and madness women know about.  There were exceptions to this heavy preoccupation with depressed and forlorn images of women. In This City,   1,   2,   3,  a  ceramic sculpture series by Persimmon  Blackbridge, hope overcame despair.  Persimmon's gutsy and powerful people deny  verbal description.  Valerie Pugh has put her superb skill and  vision into commenting upon our urban  landscape.  Her Frontroom,   Flowers Diar-  amas,   and 536 Cambie Street  (all ceramic  sculptures) are beautifully done, and  certainly added joy to the show.  A thought-provoking piece about food, politics and power was Jean Kamin's fabric  applique, The Sausage Factory.     Jeannie's  technique, politics, wit and humour combined to produce an extremely effective  piece of work.  A black-and-white photo collage, Untitled,  by Renee Rodin was a great arrangements of  kids from the waist down, hanging upside  down and right side up. Renee was playing  with photos the way kids play with each  other — enjoyable and fun.  Two pieces inspired hope for women. One  was Penny Arrand's Untitled black-and-  white photo of two women with their arms  around one another, feeling good about  being women and being together. Another  was a wonderful pair of red shoes called  Keep Struttin (silkscreen), a piece that  came close to celebrating feminism.  As a whole the show offered a range of  work from some very poor art, in technique  and content, to some thoughtful, mature  and satisfying work.  Much of the content,  medium and style lacked experimentation  and controversy.  Nobody really stuck her  neck out.  536 Cambie Street, ceramic sculpture by Valerie Pugh