 A   OCTOBER 1989  Forget it, at the Pharmasave price  KINESIS  ; Not In The Dallies  Special Collections Serial  f¬ß¬ß- Kinesis welcomes volunteers  to work on all aspects of  the paper. Call us at 255-  5499. Our next News Group  is Thurs. Oct 5, at 1:30 pm  at Kinesis, #301-1720 Grant  St. All women welcome even if  you don't have experience.  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE:  Marsha Arbour, Gwen Bird,  Jackie Brown, Linda Choquette, Donna Dykeman, Lu-  cette Hansen, Kim Irving,  Faith Jones, Nancy Pollak,  Winnifred Tovey, Bonnie Wa-  terstone, Trish Webb.  FRONT COVER: Protesting  the storming of the university of San Salvador, El  Salvador—July 1989. Photo  by Jean Kavanagh.  EDITORIAL BOARD: Marsha Arbour, Gwen Bird, Nancy Pollak, Noreen Shanahan,  Winnifred Tovey, Michele Valiquette.  CIRCULATION AND DISTRIBUTION: Gwen Bird, Esther  Shannon  ADVERTISING: Marsha Arbour  OFFICE: Esther Shannon  Kinesis Is published 10 times  a year by the Vancouver Status of Women. Its objectives  are to be a non-sectarian feminist voice for women and  to work actively for social  change, specifically combatting sexism, racism, homophobia and imperialism.  Views expressed in Kinesis  are those of the writer and  do not necessarily reflect VSW  policy. All unsigned material is  the responsibility of the Kinesis Editorial Board.  SUBSCRIPTIONS: Individual  subscriptions to Kinesis are  $17.50 per year or what you  can afford. Membership in the  Vancouver Status of Women  is $25.50 or what you can afford, includes subscription to  Kinesis.  SUBMISSIONS: All submissions are welcome. We reserve  the right to edit and submission does not guarantee publication. All submissions should  be typed double spaced and  must be signed and include  an address and phone number.  Please note Kinesis does not  accept poetry or fiction contributions. For material to be  returned, a SASE must be included. Editorial guidelines are  available on request.  ADVERTISING: For information about display advertising  rates, please contact Kinesis.  For information about classifieds, please see the classified  page in this issue.  DEADLINE: For features and  reviews the 10th of the month  preceding publication; news  copy, 15th; letters and Bulletin  Board listings 18th. Display  advertising: camera ready,  18th; design required, 12th.  Kinesis is a member of the  Canadian Periodical Publishers Association and is indexed  in the Alternative Press Index.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status of  Women, 301-1720 Grant St.,  Vancouver, B.C. V5L 2Y6  Kinesis - is .produced on an  IBM; PC using PC TeX and  an in-house laser printer. Additional laser, printing by East-  side Data Graphics. Camera  work by The Peak. Printing by  Web Press Graphics.  00^  ES  Bt9  ■KsSlmSB^I  r^ w  ^TLj  ^p|Qn  iwp\  &>/  7^2  HH^>!*  \ hx  In Canada, domestic work can be a form of indentured labour 7  Moms-and-kids are an endangered species on Vancouver's vicious  housing scene 12  In Visible Colours is bearing fruit 15  INSIDE  REtfOtM  ?  Family maintenance program challenged    3  Jo Arland: the advocate who never gives up...   4  Movement Matters....  ....2  Forget it, at the Pharmasave price    5  Women, disability and work    5  Taxing times under Tory tax attack    6  What's News?    8  by Linda Choquette  The trappings of domestic work    7  by Joni Miller  Delighting in the rough, long waters    9  Commentary   ..14  by Gwen Bird  by Jill Bend  Asian/Pacific Island lesbians gather   ...10  by C. Allyson Lee  El Salvador: where activists are captured   ....11  by Jean Kavanagh  Making Waves   by Lauri E. Nerman  ..18  In Visible Colours:  "we don't have to be passive"   ...15  by Lynne Jorgesen  In Other Worlds   ...20  Nancy Spero: images of rage   by Susan Leibik  ....16  by Melanie Conn  Pain, resistance in the prison maze   ...17  by Susan Stewart  Bronwen Wallace   ...19  Bulletin Board   ...21  by Erin Moure  compiled by Donna Dykeman  Second class mail #6426  ISSN 0317-9095  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status  Women, 301-1720 Grant St  Vancouver, B.C. V5L 2Y6  of  KINESIS Movement Matters  Movement  jmatters listings  Information  Movement Matters is designed to be a  network of news, updates and information of special interest to the women's  toovement. Submissions to Movement Matters should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double-spaced on eight and a half by  eleven paper. Submissions may be edited for  length. Deadline is the 18th of the month  preceding publication.  Unlearning  anti-Semitism  The Tikkun Olam (Repairers of the  World) Organizing Committee is a group  of Jewish women who have joined together  to organize a series of workshops dealing  with anti-semitism. These workshops will  be based on the principles of unlearning  racism: we all learn and internalize racism,  we are damaged by this information, and we  can unlearn these racist attitudes.  Thus, the workshops will be a way to unlearn the anti-semitic attitudes we have all  internalized.  The first workshop—the Tikkun Olam  workshop—is for Jewish women only and  will be held the weekend of November 10-  12 at Camp Alexandra in Crescent Beach.  Bria Chakofsky, chairperson of Kadima and  Maureen McEvoy ba ma (Cand.)  Counselling  Psychology  732-3227  Areas of expertise:  sexual abuse, relationships,  sexuality, depression, ACOA  f  Press Gang  Printers  603 Powell Street  Vancouver, B.C.  V6A 1H2  253-1224  SUPPORT YOUR LOCAL WOMEN'S PRESS  33      CARDSf  fHv/RECORDS  co-chairperson of the New Jewish Agenda,  will facilitate. The workshop will be based  on feminist and lesbian- positive principles.  The November workshop will cost from  $20-$200 on a shding scale, and registration opens October 16th. A May, 1990 workshop will be open to Jewish and non-Jewish  women. For more information call Karen at  875-9112 or Sandy at 274-4065.  DAWN papers  now available  The DisAbled Women's Network Canada  (DAWN) is happy to announce their set of  four position papers which investigate issues of concern to women with disabilities:  Who Do We Think We Are: Self-image  and Women With Disabilities; Beating  The 'Odds:' Violence and Women With  Disabilities; The Only Parent in the  Neighbourhood: Mothering and Women  With Disabilities; and Different Therefore Unequal? Disabled Women and  Employment Equity.  Each paper costs $5.50, or $20 for the set  (includes postage). Women with a disability who are unable to afford the suggested  cost may send whatever they can to help  cover shipping costs. DAWN does not have  the resources to do billings, so individuals  and groups are asked to include payment—  cheques or money orders—with their orders.  Send payment and orders to DAWN  Canada, 10401 Finlayson Drive, Richmond  B.C. V6X 1W8  Attention:  women in  trades  Surviving and Thriving: A Canadian  Perspective on Women in Trades and  Technology is a new book based on the National Conference on Women in Trades and  Technology held in Naramata, B.C. last October.  p-   FOR  |~EMINIST  THE0RY&  ITERATURE  parTacus  BOOKS  311 W. HASTINGS ST. VANCOUVER  V6B1H6 TEL. 688-6138  1146 Commercial ■;' 253-0913  CROSSLAND CONSULTING1  Personal Management  Services for Artists  Svlduate Resumes  ts Otganbatlons Career Counselling  ■m\t and Proposal Writing Bookkeeping Services  * FtRST CONSULTATION «?££*  Jackie Crossiand  By Appointment Only  Based on edited transcripts of the conference's most lively sessions, the book includes articles entitled "Overcoming Isolation," "Language Styles, Stress and Macho," "Court Orders—What Then?." Issues  and ideas for women and girls in science,  math and technology are explored in "The  Women Inventor's Project," "Overcoming  Math Anxiety," and "Strategies for Encouraging Young Girls in Math and Science."  This valuable and long overdue practical approach to the issues facing women today in implementing employment equity is  available for $10 from Kootenay Women in  Trades and Technology Association, R.R.  #1, Winlaw B.C. VOG 2J0.  Popular  culture  alliance forms  The Alliance for Popular Culture in B.C.  (APCBC) was officially formed September  10, 1989 to act as an umbrella for popular cultural workers of all disciplines in networking, skill sharing and encouraging the  creation of "people-based" culture that advocates social justice. The founding meeting attracted a broad spectrum of performers/artists, including representatives from  AYA, the Raging Grannies, the Euphoniously Feminist & Non- Performing Quintet, and Katari Taiko.  The meeting decided to publish a directory of popular culture workers' skills to be  distributed to the general public. A shding  scale APCBC membership fee was set at no  charge to $15.  For more information about the APCBC  and its future activities, contact #104 1955  W. 4th Avenue, Vancouver B.C. V6J 1M7.  Telephone (604) 738-2283.  Support for  access,  custody  problems  Munroe House transition house in North  Vancouver has started a support group for  women who are having problems with custody and access. Over many years, workers have observed the devastating effects of  court decisions on women and children in  these areas and have often felt helpless to  give adequate support and advocacy. In the  new group women will receive mutual support through any crisis, as well as information and coping strategies from other participants.  The goal of the group is not only self-  help, but information gathering to educate  the pubhc and legal system about the grave  difficulties that can arise from court ruhng.  The group will meet at the downtown  Vancouver YWCA; childcare and bus fare  are provided on request. For information  about meeting times, call Nancy or Ajax at  734-5722 (Munroe House).  Correction  The Women's Studies program at Simon Fraser University is sponsoring a pubhc discussion on "Working in the Union" on  November 21 in the evening, at the Robson  Square Media Centre. The discussion is part  of the "Women, Work and Unions" series.  Call 291-3593.  Inside^  Kinesis  H  September was the month the Editorial Board said goodbye to two longstanding members: Esther Shannon and Noreen  Shanahan. A recently retired editor of Kinesis, Esther's formal connection to the paper will continue through her capacity as  VSW administrator.  UPRISING  BREADS  BAKERY  Goodies like:  Maple nut cookies  (sweetened with  maple syrup), Santa  Fe cornbread with  jalapeno peppers,  whole-wheat ginger  apricot scones  and lots more...  1697 Venables Street  Vancouver 254-5635  A part of CRS Workers' Co-op  Noreen, our intrepid reporter and features writer, is merely taking a leave of absence. She'll be back in the new year.  The Editorial Board is the group of  women who oversee general pohcies and  practices of the paper (content, advertising, finances—to mention a few areas). The  board consists of paid workers—the editor and production coordinator—and Kinesis volunteers, and any woman who fulfills board membership criteria is eligible to  join. (In other words, the Editorial Board is  not an elected body). The criteria is available from the office: the main requirement is  a demonstrated commitment to the paper.  Please give us a call (255-5499) if you're interested in knowing more.  Gwen Bird, our typesetter since May  1988, is also moving on. Gwen was a newcomer to Kinesis when she landed the  typesetter's job and she proved a joy to  work with. Besides readily grasping the  eccentricities of our typesetting program,  Gwen handled the stresses of deadline mania with aplomb. Her overall interest in  feminist journalism led her to the Editorial  Board, and she has contributed a number  of feature stories (see page 9). Lucky for us,  Gwen will still be around, although not on  keyboards.  Replacing her is Joni Miller. Joni is a seasoned typesetter, a writer (page 7, for instance), designer and all-round newspaper  woman. We're very pleased to have her become such an integral part of the Kinesis  production team.  Colleen Penrowley has been hired for our  subscription renewal project and will be  bringing her considerable computer skills to  bear on that domain. Welcome to both Joni  and CoUeen.  Finally, we bid farewell to Etta, our  Bulletin Board cartoonist. Contributing  a monthly cartoon is a nail-biting, cliff-  hanging act of creation—and we're grateful  that Etta chewed and hung as long as she  did. Thanks, Etta   KINESIS //////////////////////^^^^  ////////////////////^^^^  NEWS  Taking a flawed  program to court  by Jackie Brown  and we did, September 15, 1989.  A Charter challenge  Two Vancouver lawyers plan a Charter challenge to the GAIN Amendment Act, which gives the province exclusive rights over maintenance orders for women on social assistance in B.C. (The FMEP—-see accompanying article).  Gwen Brodsky, of the Pubhc Interest Advocacy Centre, and Carolyn  McCool, of the Legal Services Society, will challenge the legislation under section 7 (security of person) and section 15 (equality rights) of the  Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  The action, to be filed sometime in October, will be brought on behalf  of parties which the lawyers cannot name at press time.  A Vancouver woman is taking legal action against the B.C.  government, claiming that current  spousal support pohcies for women  receiving income assistance discriminate against families with  more than one child.  Monica Rosenberg, who has two  children, launched her Supreme  Court action in August through  the Legal Assistance Society of  B.C.  Under current regulations, the  Ministry of Social Services and  Housing (MSSH) allows each family "unit" to keep up to $100  in spousal support payments in  addition to the monthly welfare  payment—regardless of the number of children.  Anything above the $100 exemption is deducted from the welfare cheque.  According to Rosenberg, the  pohcy is discriminatory because it  apphes only to the first child in  the family when each is entitled to  equal support.  Says Rosenberg, who has also  been involved in lengthy and  messy custody and maintenance  battles with her ex-husband, "The  ministry is discriminating against  each child and minimizing each  child. If there is more than one  child, then each has to share the  $100. That's not treating children  as equals."  She is also angry that the deductions are made even when the  recipient parent has received nothing in previous months. "It's a  bureaucracy dealing with these  things in their own way," says  Rosenberg, whose ex-husband is  apparently thousands of dollars in  arrears.  H a woman is entitled to a certain amount in support payments  per year, she says, it shouldn't  matter how or when she receives  the money.  For Rosenberg—a community  activist and member of the Society for Children's Rights to Adequate Support (SCRAPS)—the  court action is not just about  money. She sees it as part of her  responsibility to expose the feminization of poverty.  "There is a pohtical process involved with this and it can shift  with the stroke of a pohtician's  wand. I was an independent person and I have been put in this  position very abruptly by the way  the system deals with a parent's  wrongdoing. The children and I  are paying for it. It's a man-made  poverty and I'm not responsible  for it but I will be responsible for  trying to remedy it," Rosenberg  says.  Universality at risk  The Tories' minus-3% solution  by Nancy Pollak  The Conservatives are combining a new trick with an old one in a  move some analysts say signals the  end of universality in Canadian social programs.  The new trick—dubbed a "claw-  back" by its critics—threatens  universality by forcing people who  achieve a certain income level to  pay back all or a portion of their  family allowance benefits (or baby  bonus) and old-age pensions.  The old trick—"de-indexing"—  gradually lowers the income level  at which the clawback is triggered,  forcing more and more people to  pay back benefits.  Under de-indexing, programs  which formerly kept pace with the  annual rate of inflation are instead  allowed to lose ground. The Tories  favour a de-indexing figure of "minus 3 percent": inflation may increase by 5 percent annually, but  benefit or eligibility levels will only  be adjusted upwards by 2 percent.  Under the Tory budget announced last April, old-age pensions and the family allowance will  be subject to a de-indexed claw-  back mechanism. Pensioners and  families with children will forfeit  15 cents in benefits for every dollar  of net annual income over $50,000.  The number of people affected  will grow each year, because the  income ceding level will not increase as quickly as inflation. "In a  few years," says Jean Swanson of  End Legislative Poverty, "few people will be eligible [for benefits]."  Opposition to the clawback is  gathering steam. At a meeting in  mid-September, a national senior  citizens' group decided to pursue  a court challenge of the proposed  legislation.  The National Pensioners' and  Senior Citizens Federation beheves the clawback is "outright  age discrimination" and may violate the equahty provisions of the  Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  Equally significant is their fear  that the clawback represents a direct attack on universality, the cornerstone of Canadian social policy which dictates that all citizens  have a right to certain benefits, regardless of income.  Recent comments by the chairperson of the Commons finance  committee have given substance  to this fear. In August, Conservative Don Blenkarn informed a pensioner that, "We have decided to  eliminate universality and we do  that in a sense by the clawback in  both family allowance and the old-  age pension ...  "While the clawback may be  unfair and sneaky, it is there."  Swanson views the clawback as  a Tory strategy to trash universality and "raise the least pubhc outcry ... it's hard to explain "inflation minus 3 percent" in a 3 second  news chp, which is ah most people  C i  hear about it."  In 1985, the Tories backed  down from a scheme to de-index  old-age pensions after pensioners  launched massive protests. The  family allowance wasn't as lucky:  de-indexed at minus 3 percent  then, the baby bonus is already diminished.  $e.rWazk-0£ fafic  5S|/  $).mtf7.1wMirTJorel&,fr%^  t Oti/jQyiz em/tot dur^xM. ho^j^  %-Vhrty?  __ Ma, -tA&jfctut  \<mJL l/fo  \)&mn^  NstA/hj .  While Rosenberg awaits the  outcome of her court case, the enforcement of the maintenance order which could end her poverty  is now the responsibility of the  Family Maintenance Enforcement  Program (FMEP). She is not at  ah confident, however, that the  FMEP will come through for her.  For one, she says, her ex-  husband now hves in the U.S.  and the FMEP does not have  the resources to deal with out-of-  province jurisdictions. And, she  says, even if a hearing was held,  it is highly unlikely that he would  be made to pay anywhere near the  $1200 per month he has agreed to.  Monica Rosenberg is only one of  thousands of women forced to use  the FMEP thanks to the GAIN  Amendment Act introduced in  September, 1988. (See box) Under the amendment, ah maintenance orders for women on assistance are turned over to the  FMEP, which is responsible for enforcement and payment monitoring.  The mandatory aspect of the  program has been roundly criticized by numerous organizations  for stripping women of their right  to settle with their ex-spouses  they see fit.  Another criticism of the program is that it is severely back-  logged, due, some say, to privatization of the service.  In May, for example, NDP MLA  Darlene Marzari quoted statistics  showing that as of January, 1989,  only 500 out of 200 applications  had been processed.  The program is contracted out  by the Ministry of the Attorney  General to an organization called  Themis, which is staffed by two  managers, 80 employees and  lawyers.  Judy Reykdal, acting director  of maintenance enforcement for  the AG office, says the backlog of  apphcations (including the month  of September) currently stands at  3,800 with another 4600 processed  province wide.  According to Reykdal, the prob-  not privatization but,  rather, sheer numbers. "If you look  at other programs across Canada  and the U.S.—and they are ah  government-run programs—there  is a backlog of one and a half to  two years," says Reykdal.  "With a program hke this, with  so many outstanding cases, it's inevitable that when you open your  doors there going to be a lot of apphcations."  Reykdal also confirmed that,  because of the backlog, the program has not been able to deal  with arrears payments. "It is possible that they will have quite a bit  of a wait," she says.  "They've just begun to enrol  for regular payments and the arrears will be dealt with separately  so that at least we can get something happening with regular payments."  KINESIS Across B.C.  Jo Arland  The advocate who never gives up  by Eunice Brooks  In Surrey there is a woman with a" voice  hke a Cockney fishmonger and a platform  soul. Twice she has run for municipal office,  just to capture the audience at the candidates' meetings. When she talks people hsten.  She says fair housing is a right, housing  is a shelter issue and has httle to do with  investment, and tenants are entitled to feel  secure that rents won't rise drastically.  Arland Mews was named after her, in appreciation of her work to get affordable, accessible housing into suburbia.  Her friend and poverty activist Gus Long  says, "Jo Arland never shuts up, and she  never stays down."  "If you want to win your  appeal, get Jo on your  case."  Linda Marcotte, who runs The Poverty  Game says, "She's been my role model for  years. Jo not only has a clear picture of justice, but she also knows the common sense  steps toward it. She knows the procedures.  Few people are as generous with their time  as Jo. She's one of the most caring people I  know."  Jo's work in welfare advocacy comes easily. She began telhng people where to get off,  as a bus conductor in London, long ago. She  has been politically active for eleven years,  in Surrey. Before that it was New Westminster. Almost everyone who is, or has been  poor, knows the name.  What they told me was, "If you want to  win your appeal, get Jo on your case. She  knows the GAIN Act by heart, and is aware  of pohcy changes before the financial aid  workers (FAW)."  If your FAW denies you anything, call  Arland or an advocate close to your home.  They will walk you through the appeal, ah  the way to tribunal.  "If only people knew it—more people win  appeals than lose. An appeal kit is your  right," Arland says.  I asked her about issues and priorities.  She says more and more of her cases are  about discrimination—against women and  children.  "H a man sleeps about, MSSH doesn't  want to know, but if a woman has a sexual  partner, it is automatically assumed he will  support her and her children," says Arland.  MSSH expects women to be celibate, or  charge for sex. No FAW has the right to  ask for names of sexual partners. The only  question a woman has to answer is—are you  getting money from some source other than  GAIN?  Arland told me about the severe shortage  of affordable housing in Surrey. Managers  of apartment buUdings discriminate against  single mothers (see story page 12). Arland  knows this is true because she used to manage apartments. The owner fired her for allowing chddren into his investment. When  the vacancy rate is low, women and children  suffer most.  "A woman with several chUdren seldom  has the energy to fight this discrimination,"  says Arland. "So that's where the advocate  comes in. We can raise our voices, because  the system hasn't beat us to our knees."  The take-over of spousal maintenance  rights by the province—the FamUy Maintenance Enforcement Program—is another  blow to women. Women who won't or can't  co-operate could be denied welfare. Some  women are terrified of their husbands. Yet  the government persists in exposing women  by mandatory maintenance.  Arland says that welfare pohcy should  accommodate the sexuahty of the eighties.  The reality is that people have more than  one sexual partner, and women should not  bear ah the responsibihty. She's been up to  her scalp in feminism all her hfe.  In 1975, International Women's Year, Jo  was public relations person for the group  of women workers—Women's Independence  Necessary—who pulled a sit-in at what was  then called Canada Manpower. There is a  twinkle in her eyes as she talks of the direct  action capers she has been involved in. Yet  she's not violent.  "I'm for world peace," she says. "Every  peace march in Vancouver—I've been there.  I'll go untU I die. We make a statement  by our numbers that is noticed by those in  power."  Jo Arland is no lone wolf. At the recent  Naramata conference of the Federated Anti-  Poverty Groups, she was honoured with a  framed certificate for her years of community related work.  Her advice is, "Join groups, consolidate,  show government that your vote counts.  Don't let experts tell you what you need,  you tell them and get an advocate. Appeal  every rejection."  And her last word: "Never give up the  fight! Get people angry enough and they wUl  fight for their rights."  PID is a feminist issue  by The Canadian PID Society  PID is an important femimst issue, yet  many women have never heard of it.  PH) stands for pelvic inflammatory  disease, an infection or inflammation of  women's pelvic organs (the uterus, faUopian  tubes, or ovaries) and/or the surrounding  tissues. PID may be caused by any procedure which dilates a women's cervix (IUD,  D&C, chUdbirth or abortion) or by bacteria  transmitted during sex.  Epidemic in Canada and much of the  world, PID is a major issue for women. Its  long-term consequences are common and serious after only one episode, and diagnosis and treatment are difficult. After one  episode of PID, one in four women wUl experience infertility, chronic pain, recurring  or chronic infection, ectopic pregnancy (a  tubal pregnancy which is hfe- threatening),  or reduced mobility and disabihty.  Women who recover wUl have suffered a  frightening and isolating Ulness; women who  do not recover find their hves inexorably  changed.  Despite the fact that PH) is such a critical health matter for Canadian women,  there is httle or no public awareness. This  lack of awareness has concrete implications  for women: there is httle understanding or  support for women who have PID; no development of essential support services to  ensure that women recover and function—  such as homemaker care, chUd care or income assistance—and no effective prevention.  Prevention is the key, and successful prevention includes:  • care with any procedure which dUates  a woman's cervix or introduces bacteria into her vagina. No intercourse or  introduction of foreign objects into the  vagina untU after the cervix has completely closed (about six weeks).  • use of a barrier method of birth control;  avoidance of the IUD.  • careful vaginal health care.  • avoidance of bowel bacteria: wiping  should be from front to back; anal intercourse should never be foUowed by vaginal intercourse.  • prompt treatment of lower genital tract  infections.  • immediate treatment of any symptoms  of PLD and complete treatment of initial  episodes of PH).  The costs of the lack of prevention are  high: PID is the leading cause of infertility and hysterectomy in women. After one  episode a women has a 20 percent risk of developing chronic pain, a 20 percent rick of  recurring or chronic infection, a ten fold risk  of ectopic pregnancy, and a 15 percent risk  of becoming infertUe. After three episodes  of PID, her risk of infertility is over 50 percent.  If present trends continue, the Centre for  Disease Control estimates that by the year  2000, one in four North American women  wUl have or have had PH). In Canada, the  health care costs of PH) are over $140 million per year; the costs to women and society are incalculable.  See Bulletin Board for information  about the PID conference on October  28th or call the Canadian PID Society  at (604) 684- 5704.  KINESIS Forget it, at the Pharmasave price  by Terrie Hamazaki  For ten months, eleven women employees of a Surrey Pharmasave have walked a  picket hne in an attempt to win a fair working contract from their employer.  Their troubles began when ownership of  the Towncentre drugstore changed hands in  May 1987. Lori Peterson, who has worked at  the store for 17 years, describes how working conditions for the longstanding employees quickly deteriorated.  "AU of us were first put on 3 month probation. After that, our wages were cut, our  RRSPs were terminated, and profit-sharing  was cut ... and we could see that because  they were taking httle things away, that  eventuaUy they'd take our jobs away," Peterson says.  "Under management's  request of'open shop'..  By October the women had decided to  unionize, and on February 17, 1988, a  15-6 certification vote was entered with  the United Food and Commercial Workers  Union (UFCW), Local 1518. "We wanted it  bad," Peterson said.  The 10 months after certification were a  joke. According to Peterson, "...the owner  was mad at us—we had to ask to go to the  bathroom. I called the Industrial Relations  CouncU [IRC] and they told me he could do  that. Without a contract, we had no rights."  An unsuccessful first meeting in May  1988 resulted in a non-IRC approved strike  vote being taken in September. Rather than  risk losing their jobs, the women waited untU negotiations got underway.  In early November 1988, management finally revealed their contract offer which  called for, among other things, "open shop  [employees can choose whether or not to  join the union], seniority to be up to the  'opinion' of the employer, and anything  monetary to be further negotiated," says  Women, work  and disability  by Kinesis Staff Writer  Attention, women with disabilities.  The DisAbled Women's Network Canada  (DAWN) has started a project with the  B.C. Coalition of the Disabled focusing  on the issue of employment for disabled  women.  One segment of the project will help disabled workers upgrade their job skiUs by  training them in the use of appropriate technology. In order to accommodate disabled  workers' special needs, funding for workplace adaptations will be provided to their  employers.  Besides the issues of technology and  workplace adaptation, the project wUl focus  on awareness of disabihty.  Many women do not talk about their  disabihty or identify themselves as disabled. Women with hidden disabilities—  such as epUepsy or an emotional or learning  disabihty—may be wary of the sensitivity of  bosses and co-workers, with good cause.  Women with multiple sclerosis or glaucoma may fear that disclosure of a debU-  itating condition may hinder advancement  or even cost them their jobs.  A 1989 survey by DAWN CANADA  (Different Therefore Unequal: Employment and Women With Disabilities) indicates that 45 percent of women with a disabihty work full-time. These women have  been able to create an appropriate and supportive environment in their workplaces.  Those who weren't working cited as a  barrier the difficulty of finding jobs that  could accommodate their special needs.  "Women with disabilities have added  complications when entering or re-entering  the workforce," says Joan Meister, chairperson of DAWN Canada.  Finding chUdcare is difficult for ah single moms. "A disabled mother has to find  chUdcare that's accessible to her, that she  can afford," says Meister.  "A lot of our ability to enter the work  force has to do with scheduling. The flex  hours that would suit us aren't avaUable...  many changes we need would involve quite  small accommodations."  Meister stresses how many difficulties  are shared by women—able-bodied and  disabled—in the workforce. The use of tech-  /2/L.3W-  nology to assist disabled employees at work  may very well run into general, sexist attitudes. "We know that boys have greater  access to technological doo-dads than girls,  and are encouraged to use them," says Meister.  Similarly, the behef that males wUl "naturally" work for a hving and females don't  necessarUy need to—hurts disabled women.  "A young woman, recently disabled and institutionalized, is not as hkely to be encouraged to enter the workforce [as a young  man]," says Meister.  Technology has great potential to help  accommodate people with a disabihty. For  example, someone who can not write may  be able to use a computer. Someone who  cannot do physical layout and paste-up may  be able to use desk-top publishing.  Women with disabilities and employers with disabled workers who want  more information about this project  should contact the BCCD at #211 456  W. Broadway, Vancouver B.C. V5Y  IRS. Telephone (604) 875-0188.  A decertification vote would be inevitable  in a year's time unless the women won the  right to a closed shop—compulsory union  membership for aU employees— since management would undoubtedly hire anti-union  workers.  "Under management's request of 'open  shop', everything we'd fought for would  then be lost. The issue of open shop/union  shop was the catalyst...money was never an  issue. So on November 26, 1988, we went  out," she said.  With the Pharmasave now operating  with scab labour, they've been on the picket  hne ever since.  Pharmasave stores are aU independently  owned and operated. But according to  Towncentre store owner Godfriet KeUer,  who in a phone interview immediately denied "anything that the women may have  told the media," a parent company, Pharmasave Drugs Limited, owns 50 percent of  his store and acts as an advisory councU.  Said Angela Schira, newly-elected Secretary-Treasurer to the B.C. Federation of  Labour, "We know that the rest of Pharmasave is involved in this. It's not just that  one store."  everything we'd fought  for would be lost"  Added Peterson, "They [the parent company] don't want any unions and so whUe  they've got this opportunity, they want to  make an example of us so that no other  Pharmasave employees—mostly women—  attempt something hke this again."  Although negotiations broke down in  January, the morale of the striking workers is strong. Community support was evident at a weU-attended rally in September,  at which concerns about the store's postal  sub-station were expressed.  Said Peterson, "We do have a problem  ... some people do cross the picket hne to  use the post office."  Canada Post's plan of franchising and  contracting-out services has forced situations hke this, according to Ron Kucey,  President of the Fraser VaUey local of  the Canadian Union of Postal Workers  (CUPW).  "Some of our members who are part-time  term employees were put on this run by  management ... and told that they'd face  disciplinary actions if they refused [to cross  the Pharmasave picket hne]," he said.  Honouring picket hnes is not mentioned  in the CUPW constitution and it's a matter  of individual conscience, said Ken Doubt,  Director of the B.C./Yukon Letter Carriers  Union. Said Kucey, "It's put us ah in an extremely awkward situation."  Peterson, watching a scab worker enter  the store, asks: "What else can I do legaUy  to ensure myself protection against a bad  employer? Our store can offer us a contract.  We want to send a message to Pharmasave  that we won't be intimidated."  MeanwhUe, as the union boycotts BUl  19, B.C.'s Industrial Relations Reform Act,  Pharmasave continues to play hardball with  these women, said Schira  And as Kinesis goes to press, the women  walk into the eleventh month of their strike.  KINESIS Across Canada  Taxing times under Tory tax attack  by Shelagh Johnston  The existing federal sales tax (FST), an  antiquated patchwork of varying tax rates  and 22,000 special arrangements and administrative interpretations, is inequitable  in its apphcation, invisible to consumers  and unpredictable in its revenue generation. Nearly everyone agrees it should be replaced.  Finance Minister Michael Wilson says  the new goods and services tax (GST) is the  solution. He claims the GST will make the  Canadian economy more competitive. Since  goods for export wUl pay no tax, Canadian  exports wiU be able to compete more effectively abroad; and since the prices of Canadian goods sold in Canada wUl not include  a hidden sales tax, they wUl be more able  to compete with imported goods.  This new competitive edge wUl help the  Canadian economy to expand, producing  new jobs and enhanced tax revenue to deal  with the deficit.  Wilson claims lower income regions and  citizens wUl benefit under the GST. Resource and export based economies hke the  Atlantic and Prairie regions wUl gain the  most from enhanced competitiveness. To  protect the poor, basic goods wiU be exempt from taxation, and tax that lower income consumers pay on goods and services  wUl be returned to them in the form of tax  credits and lower income tax—in advance.  Although the government wUl coUect more  taxes under the new system—$5.5 billion,  in fact—aU of this extra revenue wUl be returned to the Canadian taxpayer.  Sounds good, doesn't it? WeU, yes, there  are a few catches ...  None of the advantages Michael Wilson  predicts are guaranteed and some are pure  wishful thinking. Let's examine those claims  in detaU.  Economic Benefits?  The government claims that as a result of  the GST, Canada wUl be more competitive  in international trade, leading to growth in  output and employment and a reduction in  the deficit.  WiU this happen? It depends on the reaction of the economy. WUson's predictions  are based on an optimistic and unlikely scenario.  To explain this, we must go back and  look at what wiU happen to prices when the  GST of 9 percent is imposed at the same  time the FST, averaging 13.5 percent, is removed. WhUe variations in the FST make  this calculation less simple than it looks, for  many goods the cost of the item to the seller  could go down. At the same time, however,  a wider range of goods are being taxed. The  government calculates that, averaging gains  and losses, there wUl be a one-time overall  price rise of 2.25 percent.  The benefits the government claims wiU  foUow the introduction of the tax depend  cruciaUy on how seUers and buyers react to  these changes.  First, the government is assuming that  the seUers of goods on which less tax is being charged wiU pass on aU of the savings  to the consumer. The 2.25 percent rise that  Wilson predicts is based on the assumption  that producers who end up paying less tax  wUl drop the price of their product. H seUers  pocket the difference instead, then the overall price rise wiU be significantly steeper.  For example, government economists  have predicted that since 2 percent of the  price of groceries now is due to the FST,  and basic groceries wiU be tax-free under the GST, the price of groceries should  fall by 2 percent. But the president of the  Grocery Products Manufacturers Association describes any such suggestion as "farfetched." The only defense WUson proposes  for the consumer against price-gouging is a  special office set up to hear complaints, but  with no power to enforce roUbacks.  The other assumption on which WUson's  confident scenario is based is that wage-  earners faced with this increase in their cost  of hving, wiU not demand or receive any  corresponding increase in their wages, but  wUl accept a 2.25 percent cut in purchasing  power. This seems unhkely.  It is far more probable that a wage-price  spiral wUl begin, in which workers wUl demand higher wages to cope with increased  prices and producers wUl seU at higher  prices to cover the cost of higher wages. This  is a recipe for inflation. And when inflation  increases, the Bank of Canada raises interest rates, producers invest less, people buy  less and jobs disappear. Less tax revenue is  collected and the cost of paying the interest  on the national debt goes up, leading to an  increase in the deficit.  This is not the rosy picture painted by  the government.  Protecting Lower Income Canadians?  Although the government predicts that re-  Please see Tax page 8  Coming out for the Gay Games  by Donna Lea Hawley  The biggest gay and lesbian event in Vancouver's history wiU be Celebration '90, the  Gay Games, scheduled for August 1990.  "This wUl be a significant event if it's hke  the first two in San Francisco, because they  shattered a lot of images about what being  gay and lesbian is," says Sandra, a Vancouver teacher who attended the first games.  Despite the pubhc importance of the  event, many lesbians have personal concerns  about participating. Homophobia is real  and it affects everyone. Many lesbians fear  that if they "come out" they wUl lose their  jobs or will lose their famUy and friends.  Some see this cycle starting with their participation in the Gay Games, forcing them  to come out because of the pubhc nature of  the event and the resulting media coverage.  Is this a real concern?  For some it is. Kris, a Deputy Sheriff,  wUl be instantly out to her co-workers when  she enters B.C. Place for the opening ceremonies because about half the stadium security people work at the Sheriff's department. "My only concern is, wUl I be held  back because of [this exposure]?" says Kris.  "It makes me a bit nervous, but if they hked  me before, they wUl hke me after."  THE Cr*   SEN   FAMILY  jr  vJork\*q at|  ^e9roup home  .for several motfttis  »m>w...  ■•-Hne boys hoid asked about  her mari+al s-iatus ••  ...buf-they'd, hev/er co  fight Ovr and Sa.\c{ .-..•  YOU MAMEP  OR WHAT?  ...OKWHATl  /  ..they ha4 made Speculative wsyl"^S-  G01oWtWI\!!      i!Ke,  r-rKertone night, whife f$nnetrt-fAft\l  JWOS waiting to (\rWe Adrian r»o**ie  ^-NOne |tjd seeded, -f0 -figure if out--  I A& p 6Af ? ;0^, / you w* What too guysuook ua?  Trie WAV VOW Pftg*5M> ACT  iwe corps  ?eoriei!  No one knows what type or amount of  media coverage there wUl be. "We are trying to be sensitive to that issue," says  Heather WiUiams, volunteer coordinator for  the games.  Media coverage may not be a real issue  for lesbians. Sandra was an athlete at the  first games held in San Francisco. "It was a  very high profile thing," says Sandra of the  San Francisco games. "The media, however,  tended to take pictures of the good looking guys with their arms around each other.  Women in jock outfits wasn't news."  No one can say if athletes or volunteers  wUl be exposed to media coverage that wUl  bring them out. The games are requiring  all athletes to sign a consent form that  acknowledges that, because it is a pubhc  event, participants may be photographed or  taped by the media. Each person must decide on her own comfort level, whether she  is facing a real risk of loss, and just how  pubhc her event may be.  In some ways, the possibility of an individual being "noticed" at the games is  smaU. The present estimates are that up to  300,000 people will be attending, 200,000  from other countries. Even if television cameras take crowd scenes, there wiU be both  heterosexual and gay people in attendance.  The main risk that seems to be on lesbians' minds is losing a job. Betty Baxter,  a member of the games' Board of Directors,  was fired from her coaching job for being a  lesbian. "There are lots of bigots who have  administration positions and who wiU fire  teachers who are gay," says Baxter. "This  is a real reaction that some can expect."  Teachers are in a most vulnerable position. "The biggest issue for me is being  in teaching, and the games being such an  Please see Games page 8 Across Canada,*  The trappings of  domestic work  Fely Villasin  by Joni Miller  The practice of indentured labour in  Canada is being sponsored by the federal  government, says Fely ViUasin, a Fihpina-  Canadian writer and activist.  The Foreign Domestics Program (FDP),  a federal government arrangement, has resulted in the intake of 31,000 domestic workers since 1982, 99.5 percent of whom are  women, most from Third World countries.  They labour long hours at minimum wage  and, under B.C. laws, are not entitled to  overtime pay. A woman who attempts to  change employers may end up with a deportation order.  "There are several aspects of this program that actually encourage the exploitation of domestic workers," ViUasin says.  "The state should be providing accessible  universal chUdcare, but instead they are  putting this burden on domestic workers."  ViUasin, who works with the domestic workers' rights group INTERCEDE in  Toronto, was in Vancouver this September with Inay Kung Alam Mo Lang (If  My Mother Could See Me Now), a play  about Fihpina domestic workers. She is the  writer and co- director.  "The play is a collection of stories that  Toronto domestic workers have told. It's an  educational tool for people to realize there  is a problem out there. It talks about their  difficulties in getting landed [as immigrants]  and about the isolation of the workplace,"  says ViUasin.  ViUasin became interested in theatre  whUe   working  in   the   Fihpina  commu  nion," ViUasin says. "We guess there is more  happening than what we hear about, but  much of it is ignored."  Live-in domestic workers are entitled to a  private room, but many are cheated out of  this basic right. "We have cases of domestic  "We have a monthly newsletter and  monthly meetings," she says. "We've also  opened a helpline. We get calls every day  from nannies who are having difficulties. It's  a bad job—it's hard physicaUy and emotionaUy. It's difficult to hve with the fam-  Domestics are also expected to upgrade  themselves..."as if they have all that time to take  courses," Villasin points out.  workers who share the basement with the  dog."  Domestics are also expected to upgrade  themselves—which usually translates into  taking courses. "As if they have aU that  time to take courses," ViUasin points out.  Volunteer work is another expectation, and  despite their minimum wage earnings, they  must prove that they are "financially stable" by saving money.  "We find under the FDP that there seems  to be a bias in favour of younger single  women with httle education. Women who  are desperate to better their hves from the  poorer countries are forced to he about their  real marital status and their real dependent  status." The majority of foreign domestics  are married and have chUdren in their home  countries.  Although there is now a program of leniency around what is called "misrepresentation," when it comes time to bring the  "This is a signal to domestic workers not to  change employers...even if the employer is  very abusive."  nity against the Marcos dictatorship. "We  worked against the dictatorship and one of  the means of education we used was theatre," she says. "You don't need much talent when you are full of the issue."  Foreign workers who come to Canada under the FDP must meet stringent requirements if they want to gain landed immigrant  status. A "satisfactory employment record"  is considered paramount.  Abuses Are Common  "This is a signal to domestic workers not to  change employers," ViUasin explains, "even  if the employer is very abusive." Common  abuses are long working hours, split shifts  and pressure to work during days off. "It  may be considered that they're not working  if they're in the house and the baby is sleeping. But if the baby cries, then they have to  go-"  Sexual harassment is also "very com-  famUy to Canada, women who have hed to  get in are at a disadvantage.  Being able to apply for landed status  from within Canada is a relatively new option. Prior to 1981, domestics could stay for  three years and then were sent home.  Jobless, Homeless, Friendless  The FDP also requires that domestics "live-  in" for the first two years—a situation which  increases their vulnerabUity. As Mary Be-  nasen of the Coalition for Domestic Workers' Rights (CDWR) puts it, "H something goes wrong, you end up jobless and  homeless—and usuaUy friendless."  The coalition is a Vancouver organization  working to better the condition of domestics. They have a signed-up membership of  200 and are in contact with many others.  Benasen, a native of the Phihppines and  a domestic worker, became involved in the  CDWR because of a difficulty with her employer. Now she works to help others.  Uy and be strong enough to say "this is my  bed time."'  When a domestic worker who does not  have immigrant status wishes to leave an  employer, they must go to Canada Immigration and get permission. They may also  be required to get a release letter from the  employer they are trying to leave.  "We have one case of a nanny who has  been ordered to leave the country. She was  threatened by her employer. We know an  other women who went to work for free-  just for room and board because she wanted  so badly to get away from her first employer.  She said she just wanted to be happy with  the family. They ready took advantage of  her."  The coalition has been in existence for  three years. On September 17, 1989, they  sponsored their largest event to date—a  public forum in conjunction with Fely Villasin, and representatives from Canada Immigration, the Phihppine consul and the  Westcoast Domestic Workers Association.  Recently, the CDWR was contacted by  the Phihppine consulate. The consulate was  preparing a warm welcome for Cory Aquino,  president of the Phihppines, who is expected in Vancouver in the next year. "We  want to be there to greet her," Benasen says  "but maybe not as nicely as they would hke.  Back in the Phihppines they think we're  ah having a great time over here. We want  Aquino to know the truth."  Contact the Coalition for Domestic  Workers' Rights at 196-B E. 21st A  Vancouver, B.C. V5V 1P8. Telephone  (604) 875-8431.  KINESIS Across Canada  by Linda Choquette  Gaylene Russell  Tax from page 6  source and export based economies hke the  Atlantic and Prairie regions wUl gain the  most from enhanced competitiveness, other  observers, including discontented Tory  backbenchers, are concerned that taxing  transportation wiU increase costs for regions  far from the markets of central Canada.  The lower income citizen may also lose  out. Any tax levied against consumption  hurts the poor more than the rich. It  merely reduces the disposable income of the  wealthy, but renders the poor less able to  buy basic necessities.  Michael WUson plans to protect lower income Canadians by providing tax credits,  by reducing the income tax rate for middle  income earners and by leaving certain goods  tax-free or tax exempt. This protection is  less of a shield than it appears.  Both the amounts of the tax credits and  the income thresholds at which they are  paid are indexed to increases in the Consumer Price Index in excess of S percent.  This means that prices can rise by 3 percent with no corresponding increase of credits. Over time, the value of the credit wiU  shrink and the income level at which a famUy or individual is qualified to receive the  credit wUl faU, making the 'protection' flimsier as the years pass.  The consumer wUl not pay tax directly on  tax exempt goods—such as municipal transit, day care, education, or dental care—but  wUl stUl pay the tax indirectly. The seUer,  who must pay tax on the items purchased  to produce the good or service, wUl pass on  their costs to the buyer in the form of a  higher price, whenever possible. The tax is  most easUy passed on to the buyer when the  item is a necessity, since the buyer cannot  simply refuse to purchase it at the increased  price.  Lower income Canadians are not truly  protected by the government's measures  and wiU be even worse off if the GST leads  to higher inflation, higher interest rates and  more unemployment.  By the time you read this, the rising tide  of pubhc protest may have forced the Tories  to reconsider the GST. But be warned—  things coald get worse if they do. H the government reduces the tax rate to 7.5 percent,  as the financiers at Wood Gundy recently  recommended, many Canadians would be  lulled into believing this was an improvement. But to maintain revenue, the Tories  would have to Mow the rest of the Wood  Gundy program. They would have to cut  the tax credit program in half, drop the plan  to reduce the middle income tax rate and  ehminate the new housing subsidy.  The fuU force of the regressive GST  would end up squarely on the backs of those  who can least afford it.  Roughing up  the messenger  She didn't have an appointment. She  wanted to see the premier. She said she'd  wait for him or arrange an appointment. Instead, she was arrested, handcuffed, charged  and removed from the Alberta Legislature.  Gaylene RusseU wanted to talk to Alberta Premier Don Getty about the lack  of funding for programs for adults sexuaUy  abused as chUdren. Security guards were  caUed whUe RusseU waited in the premier's  office to make an appointment. RusseU, an  Edmonton nurse, was charged with assault  by trespass and causing a disturbance after  the mid-September incident.  The legislature security chief said RusseU, when told to leave, refused and "made a  complete fuss". RusseU says security guards  "manhandled" her and left her wrists red  and swoUen, her arms bruised.  Battered  and blamed  A decision last year by the Alberta Crime  Compensation Board found a women 25  percent responsible for the beating she got  from her violent former boyfriend.  The board ruled the victim partiaUy responsible for the 1987 beating because she  knew he had terrible temper but went to his  home to collect money owed to her. "When  she asked for the money he struck her. She  persisted...and on the third occasion she was  beaten", the board said.  Defending the board's ruhng, the Alberta  Attorney-General said, "I wouldn't question  their judgement." Others don't hesitate.  Marie Laing, an NDP MLA said she was  appahed by the decision, and caUed it "a  failure to address the seriousness of violence  against women."  "Having a bad temper doesn't give anyone the right to assault anyone else," said  Jane Karstaedt, executive director of the  Sexual Assault Centre of Edmonton. She  compared the ruhng to finding pohce partly  to blame if they go to an armed robbery and  get shot.  SheUey Williams, executive director of  the Edmonton Women's Shelters, said: "It's  easier to blame the women than to accept  the reality that abuse is unacceptable in any  situation."  The controversial decision was made pubhc when the board's 1988 annual report was  summarized in the Alberta Legislature in  August. No names were given.  Laying off  the women  A recent Ottawa report reveals 406 of  the 866 federal Pubhc Service Commission  jobs chopped from 1984 to 1988 were held  by women. Across the board, from professional to laundry worker, the figures show  that women are more hkely than men to lose  their jobs.  The ratio of jobs held to jobs lost is  alarming. Women hold 43 percent of aU  pubhc service jobs, but in the reported period, 47 percent of laid off employees were  women. They hold 14 percent of technical jobs, but got 40 percent of the layoffs.  Women hold 25 percent of scientific and  professional jobs; cuts in this category were  46 percent. In some categories, women were  laid off four times as often as men.  The Mulroney government plans to ehminate a total of 15,000 civU service jobs. WUl  women continue to bear a disproportionate  job loss share?  Sask. gov't stalls  on payments  In June 1988, the Saskatchewan Court of  Appeal ruled that the Department of Social  Services had violated the province's Human  Rights Code by discriminating against welfare recipients on the basis of marital status. An estimated 9,000 Saskatchewan recipients, labeUed "single employable," had  their payments drasticaUy cut during the  period May 1984 through December 1987.  Former and current recipients are eligible for reimbursement of UlegaUy withheld  funds, but welfare rights activist MUdred  Kerr is critical of the way government is  handling the repayment process.  Kerr, of Equal Justice for AU, the group  which assisted the welfare recipient who initiated the complaint in 1984, says Social  Services is stalling. The onus is on the individual who was discriminated against to apply for reimbursement. Kerr thinks the process could be more efficiently handled by the  Department using their own records.  "AU qualifying people should be notified  by the department, rather than people applying and being told they don't qualify"  said Kerr.  Social Services sent out notices with welfare cheques in July and August this year,  but only reached current recipients. Former  chents are eligible for back payments but, as  Kerr explained, they won't find out about  the process from Social Services.  "They [the government] really are in contempt of court," Kerr said. "Every day people are coming in here suffering as a result  of collection of overpayment by the Department; even though it means they go hungry,  they stiU have to pay back immediately. But  when it's the other way around, there's aU  this stalling."  A little less  stress at Ma Bell  Job stress wUl be lessened for some Quebec and Ontario BeU Canada employees.  Electronic monitoring of telephone operators has been suspended in some offices on  a test basis foUowing recommendations of a  joint union-management study. The study,  negotiated in bargaining by the Communication Workers of Canada, was done jointly  with the Health and Safety Institute of Quebec. It revealed management surveUlance to  be one of the biggest causes of worker stress.  Telephone workers have always been  uniquely vulnerable to management eavesdropping, but new technology enabled management to measure and compare individual  workers. Speed in handling calls led to emphasis on "average work time"—and added  job stress.  The study recommended assessing group  production instead of individuals.  Sources: The Vancouver Sun, The  Globe and Mail, Briarpatch  Games from page 6  openly gay event," says Sandra. "One year  a couple of kids thought I was gay and harassed me on the phone, so I have a reaUy negative experience from the past that  I don't want to go through again."  Homophobic reactions arise in other jobs  as weU. "One woman at our office was found  out and then given shit jobs, made to work  with people almost impossible to deal with,  and written up for minor things blown out  of proportion," says Kris. Even if yon aren't  fired a homophobic boss can make working  conditions so intolerable you have to quit.  This doesn't happen everywhere, however. "I worked in a very large office, and  whUe I didn't announce it, I didn't hide  the fact that I was gay," says Robin, who  now owns a Desktop Publishing business.  "I talked openly about my hfe and activities and whoever heard heard. I never got a  negative reaction. I heard there was homophobia in the company but it never affected  me."  Women who are self-employed have concerns about their chents finding out. "I keep  changing my mind," says Linda, a business  consultant. "I sit in my office and think no  one wiU find out, and if they do they won't  care. Then I go to see a chent and look  at him and think, 'would he want me here  telling him how to change his business if  he knew that I'm gay?' I came out recently  to one good chent and since then our relationship has improved, I hope everyone wiU  be as enlightened as him, but I'm not quite  ready to test that yet."  The other major concern of lesbians is  rejection by family and friends. Everyone  knows or has heard about lesbians who were  totaUy rejected by their families when they  came out. We see lesbians lose custody of  and access to their chUdren. We hear about  lesbians being avoided by old friends and  shunned by neighbours who find out about  their sexuahty. Things seem to be changing, however, and many lesbians are having  positive experiences in coming out to their  families.  "We don't give our famUy and friends  enough credit," says Baxter. "There are lots  of families who are willing to continue to  love and accept you as a lesbian. Coming  out to them opens new levels of trust. Some  people lose everything, but not everyone  does. Give your family and friends credit  that they can handle this information."  Parents react differently. "My parents  can handle me being gay," says HaU, "but  they change the subject every time I try to  talk about it."  Heather Williams' parents are different.  "When I told my parents I was going to  work for the Gay Games they were thrilled  for me," she says. "If I get a medal they wUl  be so proud of me. I am much closer to my  parents because we have no hidden issues."  Some women teU their husbands when  they leave the marriage. "When I told  my husband that I was leaving him because I realized that I'm a lesbian he was  very understanding and supportive of me,"  says Kathee, publications coordinator of the  games. "He did everything you could want  a spouse to do to be supportive of me in  making the transition in my hfe."  "My husband knows," says Kris, "but I  want to be the one to teU my two kids before the games. I don't want them to hear  it from someone else or to see me on television if they don't know. I think they are  old enough now to understand and wUl be  accepting of it. I know they reaUy hke my  lover and there won't be a problem there."  No one can say what the risk of coming  out ready is. No one can say how homophobic your workplace is, or what the reaction  of your famUy wUl be. If the women here  are representative, the risks don't appear to  be that bad, and in fact their hves have become freer by being able to be accepted as  fuU human beings.  KINESIS sssssss/ss/sssssss/s/s/sss/ssssss/ss/sss/sssssssss/sssssssssssssss*  //////////////////^^^^^  ////////////////////^^^^^  Sports  by Gwen Bird  Anne Meraw talks about swimming on a scale that makes it difficult for most people to imagine.  "For the first five or six mUes," she  says, "you're working up a pace  you'U keep for the rest of the swim.  Then you hit your pace."  Five or six miles. That's farther  than most recreational swimmers  cover in a week. Meraw has held  seven world records in long distance open water swimming. Now,  at age 72, Meraw stiU chooses open  water over a pool. "In a tank you  break your stroke every time you  hit the waU," she says.  For Meraw and others hke her—  either not yet or not stiU in the  league of Vicki Keith—the open  water of lakes and oceans holds a  strong appeal, one that keeps them  training for the marathon events  of this female-dominated sport.  Women's bodies are weU-suited  to the open water. With an average 8-10 percent more body fat,  women have a distinct advantage  over men. That body fat helps  with floatation and also acts as  an important layer of insulation  against the cold.  Take the extreme case of American swimmer Lynne Cox who  in August 1987 capped a lifetime career of open water swims  and channel crossings to swim the  Berring Strait from Alaska to the  Soviet Union. The average water  temperature for the five mile swim  was 38 degrees Fahrenheit. She entered the water without wetsuit or  lanolin—the grease swimmers often use to act as an insulator but  which, in those waters, might attract sharks—and stepped out 2  hours and 6 minutes later.  At 5 feet 6 inches, 180 pounds,  Cox had enough body fat to protect herself ... any less, and she  hkely couldn't have done it.  Besides insulating against cold  water, body fat plays an important  role in thermoregulation and gives  women an edge in other endurance  sports. It's not uncommon, for example, for women to win overaU  in mixed-sex events of ultrama-  rathon running. These are races  beyond the marathon—50 mUes,  100 miles, or 24 hours of running.  Another advantage of female  physiology hes in the ceUular  makeup of muscles. Human muscles are composed of long thin cells  called fibers, classified by biologists based on speed and force of  contraction. Slow twitch fibers are  better suited to endurance activities; fast twitch to quick, high-  intensity exercise.  WhUe men generaUy have larger  muscle fibers than women overaU,  women's slow twitch fibres tend to  be larger than their fast twitchers.  Delighting  in the rough,  long waters  Endurance athletes of both sexes  generaUy have a high percentage  of slow twitch fibers, but women  before training have the right size  ratio to make it work over longer  distances.  In any extremely long sporting  event, dehydration due to perspiration puts stress on the body. Because women often sweat less than  men, they enjoy a further biological advantage.  There's no doubt that many  women athletes play a variety  of sports in female leagues and  never want to—or think about—  competing with men. However,  some female open water swimmers  take great pleasure in crossing finish hnes first. Unhke shorter, indoor swimming events, open water  races are usuaUy mixed-sex, and as  often as not, a woman wUl get out  of the water first on the far shore.  Open Water Fascinates  Coquitlam swimmer Anne Barnes  says she hkes "knowing that we're  aU on the same level, or that perhaps this is something that women  are better at than men."  Although Barnes considers herself first and foremost a triathe-  lete—and therefore runs and bicycles as part of her training—she  has dabbled successfuUy in Swim  B.C.'s Open Water Swim series  for the past two years. This year,  the seven race series encompassed  races from 2 to 11.8 km, in various  locations throughout the province.  Barnes competed in six of them,  finishing first in the 30-39 year age  group.  She admits, "I have a leaner  body type—I suffer from the cold  really easUy." But Barnes says  she hkes training for long distance swimming anyway, because  "it isn't as time-consuming as  triathalons. It's something you can  do and stiU have a home hfe."  With three chUdren and two part-  time jobs, she swims on her own,  or with one or two others, finding  the schedule of a swim club too difficult to fit into her hfe.  Although Barnes trains mostly  in pools because of her suscepti-  bUity to cold, she finds the open  water fascinating. "It's never boring," she says. "Each swim is different, the water is either salty or  fresh—there's no black hne [on the  bottom of the pool] to watch."  She has her eye on an annual 42 km race from New York  state to Magog, Quebec, that offers "good prize money," but says  she wUl need to find a sponsor to  get her there. Although she would  be a contender, it's not easy to  find sponsorship money for a sport  dominated by women.  Andrea Dobrik of Penticton is  one woman who has reaped the  benefits of what corporate sponsorship does exist in the sport.  As the female winner of Swim  B.C.'s "Sprint Series"—a subdivision within the open water races—  she was sent to Hawah last month,  care of Canadian Airlines, to swim  in an international 4 km roughwa-  ter race that attracted 1200 competitors. Dobrik finished second in  her age group, seventh among the  women.  At 18 years old, Dobrik is new  to the sport. Those who have been  around the swimming scene for  longer predict she wiU really excel  at it.  The 4 km race in Hawau is probably shorter than what Dobrik is  best at. She captured headlines  earlier this summer by swimming  a 57.3 km course from Kelowna to  Penticton in Lake Okanagan. Dobrik said the 15 hour, 47 minute  swim was "easier than I thought it  would be." She broke it up men-  taUy into 10 km segments, not  thinking of the whole distance at  once. When the going got lonely,  her sister jumped out of the support boat and swam alongside her.  Although most swimmers wear  wetsuits in training, triathalon  swimming and friendly competition, Dobrik completed the Okanagan swim without one. (This is  the only way for a swimmer to  have her records recognized by  the World Professional Federation of Marathon Swimmers.) She  said she was cold "only at first,"  adding, "I have a lot of body fat."  Dobrik's eye to the future is  on a longer swim down that same  stretch of open water, but next  time, the entire length of the lake  from Vernon to Penticton. She  says it'll hkely be three years before she attempts it, as she wants  to concentrate on graduating from  high school and training for her  first triathalon in the next couple  of years.  "I Like Beating Men"  Part of the attraction of distance  swimming for her hes in the competition. "I hke beating men," Dobrik says. "I don't think women  hke coming second to men." When  she participated in her first open  water race in 1986, she was thrilled  to outdistance men who were  much faster in shorter events in  the pool. Now she sets her standards higher: "I hke to come in the  top 5," she says.  Anne Meraw was disappointed  to see Dobrik's Lake Okanagan  swim of this summer compared in  the news to her own 1958 record-  making swim. She describes that  one as her greatest accomplishment in swimming.  It too was a swim from Kelowna  to Penticton, but her course  zigzagged across the lake four  times, and measured 55 miles in  ah. Her time of 32 hours, 12 minutes has yet to be bettered, and  she says it's the one of her records  she would most hke to see broken.  Contrary to Dobrik, Meraw said  she never got lonely or bored during a long swim. She explained  that her concentration was focussed at aU times on her stroke,  body position and rhythm. "It  takes about 15-20 minutes to  go through aU your body parts,  to make sure they're aU doing  what they're supposed to be," she  said. "It's a real working period—  there's no time to think about  other things."  During swims over about four  hours in length, swimmers have to  eat whUe in the water to replenish their energy, as weU as drinking to prevent dehydration. Even  in extremely low water temperatures, perspiration in the water accounts for a surprising amount of  fluid loss.  Meraw said during her swims  she would stop for a maximum of  10-15 seconds at a time to drink.  "Twenty seconds is too long," she  said, "or you'U lose your timing  and it'll be hard work to start your  arms again. Your swim wUl become a real chore."  She added that the high carbohydrate diet she ate for six or  seven days before a race gave her  body the reserves it needed to keep  going.  Meraw's hst of accomplishments in swimming extends over  49 years, and goes beyond long distance records. In 1941 she became  Canada's first woman lifeguard,  patrolling Second Beach in Vancouver. She worked for the Parks  Board after that, introducing the  Waterbabies, and Moms and Tots  programs, and teaching an array of  classes from Senior women's Keep  Fit, to scuba diving for firefighters.  She's not sure exactly when she of-  ficiaUy became involved in swimming.  "I swam before I walked, they  teU me," she said, adding that  nowadays wherever she goes, she'U  stiU usuaUy take a bathing suit  with her.  Retired from the world of professional swimming since 1980,  Meraw stiU swims regularly, but  now "only when I feel hke it"  which is about twice a week. She  usuaUy swims for an hour at a  time, so she can recapture the  thing she enjoys most about swimming: "It has a perfect rhythm, it's  hke dancing to me."  KINESIS  Oct. 89 International  XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  Philippines  "We don't tell women how to think"  as told to Wendy Bancroft  The majority of Fihpina women, hke  most other Third World women, hve in  conditions of poverty and marginalization.  However, the presence of American military  bases and the Aquino government's pohcy  of "total war" against the insurgents and  nationalist movement has meant that Fihpina women also face increased prostitution  and pornography, pohtical arrests, torture,  rape and disappearances.  This reality is faced daily by GABRIELA,  a coalition of 115 Phihppine women's organizations totalling some 45,000 women who  come from a variety of backgrounds including peasants, the urban poor, workers, professionals, and indigenous people.  As weU as addressing fundamental community needs hke health, chUdcare, and education, GABRIELA women help women  on the road to empowerment.  In September, Petite Peredo, the secretary-general of GABRIELA, visited Van-  Wendy: Do the women who join  GABRIELA already possess a strong  feminist orientation ?  Petite: No, their identification comes  through our process of organizing. First  there is recognition of their oppression  through education, and then we give them  further pohtical education, always in the  context of how the issues affect women.  So with the [military] bases, we would  talk about prostitution, AIDS, chUd pros-  Historic conference  titution, drugs and the dehumanization of  women.  On the debt repayment, our women are  affected because low wages and unemployment mean many women, sometimes weU-  educated, are forced to work overseas as entertainers or domestic workers.  Once overseas, they often receive inhuman treatment—for instance, in the Middle  East and in Japan—where they are forced  to become prostitutes. We have thousands  of reports of women being abused in many  countries, including Canada (see page 7).  We don't teU the women how to think.  We answer their questions and when they  talk about their own situations, we just ask  them, "Why?". Just that simple question.  And they wiU say, "It's hke this." And we  wUl ask, "Why?". Little by httle they themselves wUl be finding out the answer.  Wendy: And what do their husbands  think of this?  Petite: In the Phihppines the husbands  are not viewed as the enemy, but as a copartner in the struggle. We aU want to  change the structure of the government but  along the way it is necessary to address  the special oppression of women, because if  women remain oppressed, they wUl not participate, they will not speak out.  The woman in the community cannot  even give her opinion, especially on pohtical  issues, because men always say, "What do  you know?" Even my husband used to tell  me who to vote for. Men too must be educated. Men must realize that the patriarchal system is not part of our cultural heritage, it is a system imposed on us through  colonialism.  In the nationalist movement now aU our  major sectors include a women's component. So when KMU, the labour sector, presented a hst of demands to the government,  one of those five demands came from the  women's sector.  Wendy: Last November, GABRIELA  was labelled a communist front by the  government. What has happened since?  Petite: WeU, carrying this label means  you may be picked up at any time, or kUled,  so we have to be always on the lookout for  our security. We have doubled our efforts to  insist on our legality to the government and  we have been publicly very vocal about explaining that we are not a communist front.  Nevertheless, the military insists on calling us communists. When I have encounters with the military in meetings or pubhc forums, I say, "Why are you going after  us? We are just doing the things that the  government should be doing for the people  hke providing health services and education.  You should be grateful."  Wendy: Do you personally feel threatened?  Petite: Of course, everybody feels threatened. But that's part of the package.  Wendy: How do you get women to  join   GABRIELA   knowing  their  lives  '?  are then placed in danger? b3 |B  \  Petite: Earlier I talked about the educa-  "^ ■  tion process. Being able to analyze their op-  3  pression gives them an emotional and intellectual commitment. Then we bring them  5 |  to the rallies and they see they are actually •  part of a much larger community, it is not  just their own httle barrio. This gives them  power to overcome the fear. Petite Peredo  :  Asian/Pacific Island lesbians gather  by C. Allyson Lee  In early September, about 175 lesbians of  Asian heritage gathered at the Santa Cruz  university campus for the first Asian/Pacific  Island Lesbian Network National Retreat,  "Coming Together, Moving Forward."  We met women from the Phihppines, Fiji  and South Pacific Islands, India, Pakistan,  Bangladesh, Singapore, Sri Lanka, England,  Japan, China, Viet Nam, the U.S. and  Canada. There were so many strong, powerful and articulate Asian lesbians, all in one  setting. I was happUy one of the Canadians  who were able to attend this unique event.  We were treated to shde shows by  June Chan (Asian Lesbianism: Past and  Present) and Trinity Ordona (.Asian Pacific Lesbians: Coming Out, Coming  Together), readings by Canyon Sam, a photography exhibit by Julie Potratz, a performance of original piano music by Barbara Lee, video presentations, singing, martial arts and a dance.  For some of us, it was a dehghtful surprise  to find ourselves in culture shock. Most of  us had never seen so many lesbians of Asian  descent at one time, meeting to challenge  racism, classism and heterosexism. Up untU  this gathering, many of us thought we were  the "only one."  We shared stories of growing up as  tomboys, fighting the images and hfestyles  our parents expected us to emulate, hving under conflict with our families' strict,  unyielding cultures and traditions. For me,  born and raised in an aU-white neighbourhood in the Canadian prairies, I was colourless. I did not identify myself as being Chinese. All of my friends were white, yet my  father demanded that I adopt and conform  to his rigid ideals of behaviour and customs  from China.  When I was in high school, I was caUed  Chinese-Canadian by whites. When I moved  to Vancouver, I was labeUed Woman of  Colour. At Santa Cruz, I found out I could  be known as an Asian Pacific Lesbian.  I stiU have trouble with the use of labels.  But I found myself looking for affiliation and  commonality with my Asian lesbian sisters,  rather than denying it.  Camaraderie, Tenderness  KeUy, a Chinese-Canadian who grew up in  B.C., didn't have any role models to foUow.  For her, it was wonderful to see so many  women in leadership roles at the Retreat.  Women with a lot of skiUs and talent—one  couldn't help but become inspired.  Most of us had never  seen so many lesbians  of Asian descent at one  time...  During the weekend many contacts were  made, camaraderie was established, tenderness was shared. Most of us felt safe in this  isolated, insular httle environment where we  could discuss racism, attitude, abuse, fears,  sexuahty, exclusivity. We knew we wouldn't  be stared at for being nonwhite. GriseUe was  appreciative of the inclusion of bisexuals in  the workshop hneup, the wheelchair acces-  sibUity of the facUities and the no-smoking  pohcy in the meeting rooms and the doorways.  However, the retreat was not without its  share of uncomfortable, awkward moments.  The plenary sessions, assembhes and workshops unleashed an interesting array of conflicts, altercations and chaUenges. At one  point, representatives from South Asia cited  lack of representation at the shde shows and  plenaries.  Chris found it to be exciting to meet  other South Asians who were pohtical lesbians and to exchange information and  ideas with them. During a workshop, they  found a word in their culture which means  gay—khush.  As one of the 14 Canadians there (9 from  Vancouver, 4 from Toronto, one from Montreal), I felt it necessary to establish ourselves as a geographicaUy recognizable unit,  so as not to disappear into American oblivion. Thus, the Canadian caucus was born.  I can't remember when I have felt more  mihtantly patriotic and nationalistic. I felt  strong, empowered, vitalized and intrepid.  One American woman asked to join with us,  as her heart was ready in Vancouver. We  welcomed her with open arms.  We also extended an invitation to the  general assembly to attend the Gay Games  in August 1990, with a word of caution  about the carrying of controversial material  (with the word "lesbian" on books, papers,  T-shirts, etc.) through Canadian customs.  A women traveUing from HoUand was denied entry to the U.S. after customs officials  discovered she was going to the Asian Pacific Lesbian Retreat. Over the phone, she  told us how they confiscated her papers,  translated her diary, threatened her with  detention and sent her back home to Holland.  She suffered humUiation, intimidation  and harassment. This was a grim reminder  to us aU, that homophobia still runs rampant in the minds of those who would abuse  their power to victimize lesbian and gay  people, and people of colour.  A lot of material was presented in that  httle weekend in Santa Cruz. A lot of  ground was covered, but I was left with the  feehng the retreat has opened many doors  for self-exploration and discovery. So much  more could have been discussed, but there  was so httle time. KeUy felt it would have  been useful to schedule workshops for incest  and sexual abuse survivors and emotional  support-building and caucusing.  The organizers of the APLN Retreat  worked so hard to produce a weU-organized,  creditable and ambitious event. The kindness and generosity of so many of the  San Franciscan women who offered bUlet-  ing, hospitality and transportation to aU of  those out-of-town strangers wUl be appreciated and remembered for a long time.  Our Canadian caucus wUl serve to network with our other sisters who couldn't attend the conference and provide outreach  information to those who don't even know  we exist.  The Asian Lesbians of Vancouver are  planning a benefit featuring a slide show  Asian Pacific Lesbians: Coming Out, Coming Together by Trinity Ordona on Sunday, October 8, 1989 at 8:00 pm at  Langara College, Student Union Building. Admission will be by sliding scale.  For information about this show or our  Vancouver group, please call Chris at  255-2004.  KINESIS International  * tiki  by Jean Kavanagh  Dora Milagro Chavez de Carranza was already deeply affected by the brutal repression of her homeland—El Salvador—but the  terror and loss of May 31 wUl be with her  forever.  Milagro, a mother of three, and a famUy friend sat reading the paper and discussing the country's problems when armed  soldiers stormed her home in Barrio St. Jacinto, near the capital San Salvador. The uniformed men violently searched the modest  home and accused her male friend of being  a guerrdla in the Farabundo Marti National  Liberation Front (FMLN).  Without waiting for a response, the soldiers opened fire and kUled the young man  in front of Milagro and her chUdren, aged  seven months, four and seven years. Petrified for her chUdren's safety, she pleaded  with the soldiers to let her move them to  the rear of the house, and when they didn't  object she took four-year old Erick by the  hand and turned from the intruders.  Again buUets rang out, this time leaving  Milagro and Erick in a pool of blood whUe  Sandra and baby Arlen watched in horror.  The dead man and the Carranza family  were taken to the national pohce and military hospital where Milagro was treated and  her son later died. Her daughters spent a  week in a juvenUe detention centre before  being released to their grandmother and  aunt.  Recuperating in a San Salvador safe-  house, Milagro recently told her story to  two Canadian journalists with the translating aid of U.S. anthropologist Leshe Fleming. Fleming fiUed in parts of the haunting  incident which Milagro found too painful to  repeat again.  Milagro almost died after an operation in  which two buUets were removed. A third remains lodged in her right hip. Because her  doctor thought she was too fragde, Milagro wasn't told of her son's death untU she  reached the safe-house.  Too fragUe and weak to hft her head, the  day after her operation Milagro was moved  to the Hospital Rosalies where the very poor  are treated. While she stiU couldn't move  on her own, two men appeared at her bedside and told her that it was her friend who  kUled her son and that she would sign papers declaring the fact.  "They said if I said no I wouldn't see my  daughters again. But I refused to sign," said  Milagro.  Shaded-Window Jeeps  The next day, a sympathetic doctor moved  Milagro to another ward. When the men returned he told them she'd been taken to  a private clinic but he didn't know where.  StiU in extreme pain and hardly able to  walk, MUagro then told her brutal story to  the non-governmental human rights com  mission which keeps detaUed accounts of numerous violations by the three branches of  the military: the regular pohce force, the  hacienda (treasury) pohce and the army,  including its notorious death squads which  travel the streets of San Salvador in shaded-  window jeeps and cars.  Human rights commission member Ceha  Medrano, who spoke in Vancouver earlier  this year, said the recent increased campaign of terror against trade unionists, leaders of popular groups and especially rural  peasants has resulted in nearly equal the  number of arrests, disappearances and murders by the military that marked the country's worst era of repression in 1980-81.  Statistics show a sharp increase in abuses  for the first six months of the year. A comparison of January to June 1989 with the  same period last year shows that arbitrary  captures of opposition activists have more  than doubled—from 316 to 645. MiUtary  In September, the FMLN commenced negotiations with ARENA leaders in Mexico  towards a peace settlement in the nine-year  civU war.  At the end of July, Milagro Chavez de  Carranza didn't know whether she'd ever  return to her destroyed home.  "It's locked up and I'm afraid to go  back," she said as she awaited word to see if  she could visit her young husband at Gotera  prison in Morazon, several hours drive from  San Salvador. Milagro's husband, a member  of a popular group and jaUed for over a year,  learned of his son's death and wife's injury,  in the prison where numerous pohtical prisoners are held. With other solidarity workers and Salvadoran popular groups, Leshe  Fleming was working to secure a visit.  "She very much needs to see him. She's  been alone through all this and it's been torture for her," Fleming said.  Transito appealed for  Canadian help to stop  the arbitrary capture  and torture of  opposition activists.  murders of civilians have almost doubled  from 698 to 1,253 whUe "disappearances"  (when a person vanishes and is either never  heard from again or is found dead, often in  a public place) remain static.  "They just don't disappear them as  much anymore. They kill them right away,"  Medrano said.  The intensified repression since the  far-right Nationahstic Repubhcan Alliance  (ARENA) government took power in June  has forced the first talks in nine years between union, popular and church groups  with the former Christian Democratic government. Representatives of such groups,  including leftist Democratic Convergence  pohtical party, said ARENA'S hard hne is  creating new alliances.  In another part of San Salvador, a sprawling city fiUed with disturbing sights of dirt  poor barrios where electricity and running  water are dreams at the foot of verdant lulls  dotted with mansions, people hne up for the  daily visits to Uopango women's jaU.  We're accompanied by a legal aid lawyer  and a Salvadoran trade unionist who translates for us. We're here to see three women  who were arrested after a July 18 attack on  the UNADES office, a group working with  66 communities of people displaced by the  war and the 1987 earthquake.  Sitting on a grass mat on the expansive,  overgrown grounds, groups of women talk,  make simple crafts or just stare intently at  the hUls beyond the wire fence and armed  guards. Transito del Carmen Lopez thanked  us for coming and painfuUy recounted her  ordeal and that of her coUeagues Ana  Arasly Lopez and Lucia Ramerez Tortez. A  sixteen-year-old girl was also jaUed after the  common 72 hours of interrogation and torture, but she was held in an adjoining compound for juvenUes and the women couldn't  speak to her.  After 150 armed guards stormed the UNADES office on July 18, seizing $1.5 miUion  (U.S.) in Canadian and American aid and  arresting 14 workers, these women were brutally tortured and interrogated for the three  days people can be held without charge.  Blindfolded and forced to strip, naked,  the women were denied food and water and  made to stand for up to 12 hours at a  time whUe armed men drUled them about  their activities. Their crime in ARENA'  eyes was organizing and distributing the  medicine and clothing to UNADES members. ARENA views such work as subversive and charges the activists and recipients  are FMLN sympathizers.  A week after her torture, Transito's ears  stiU rang from repeated blows to her head  and she held her chest when she took a deep  breath, a painful movement after numerous  lengthy beatings. Her torturers charged her  with being an urban guerrdla in a newly  formed rebel ceU.  "It's aU untrue. The only thing I accept is I'm a member of UNADES," she  said, adding the office raid was strategicaUy  planned as the group was just beginning to  distribute the supphes.  "The pohce say it doesn't matter if help  comes from Europe or the United States because it's aU to help the guerriUas," she said.  "It's not true. We work to organize communities so they wiU have a better hfe with  food and water and electricity."  Long before her arrest, Transito had already suffered the heavy hand of government repression. Her eyes fiUed with tears  as she recounted her husband's disappearance in July, 1988. His disappearance and  her work with UNADES have also forced  her three sons underground as the government beheves they are aU urban guerriUas.  "They can't work or study. It's just not  safe for them," she said surrounded by the  12 other pohtical prisoners held here, including three students arrested in a July attack on the National University of El Salvador.  A warm, thoughtful woman, Transito appealed for Canadian help to stop the arbitrary capture and torture of opposition activists.  "It is very important that people know  what is happening here. The repression, arrests without charge and torture," she said.  Opposition groups also fear a proposed  legal reform biU that would make virtuaUy  aU their pubhc activities, marches, postering and organizing, Ulegal. Medrano said the  "legislative agenda is to justify these human  rights abuses."  KINESIS by Noreen Shanahan  icouver watches as women are forced to pack up their chUdren, vacate their  homes, and look for another place to live. In their search, however, they often find  landlords standing on the other side of an 'Adult Only' sign, barring their entrance.  'Ѣ The city's current housing crisis translates into greater discrimination against wo-  i'v* men and chddren. Considered undesirable tenants, families increasingly have no  other option than to cram into a hotel room, most often in Vancouver's downtown  eastside.  "Women teU us they're forced into hotels,  forced into raising kids in one stinking httle room," says Karen GaUagher of the Vancouver Housing Registry.  "It's a landlord's market these days, and  they get to 'skim the cream' as far as who  they'll rent to. With scores of people on  waiting hsts, tenants have to jump through  hoops just to be considered."  And women trailing kids behind them  don't often make it through these hoops.  Margo MacGuire, for instance, is hving in  a hotel with her two teenage chUdren. Since  arriving from Toronto a year ago, she has  already watched one east end home be demolished and another burn to the ground  due to bad wiring. She's now searching for  a third.  "Last week I phoned 49 places from the  paper, and was allowed to see only seven of  them. They never say it's rented untU after  I say I have kids ... H my kids were smaUer  I'd hide them, and wouldn't say anything  till after we move in and then watch them  try to kick us out."  MacGuire's famUy is sharing a room with  one bed, one pull-out couch "and the mom  on the floor... mind you, it takes me a long  time to get up off that floor in the morning!"  The Ministry of Social Services and  Housing (MSSH) first tried to book them  into a women's shelter, she said, but shelter waiting Usts closed off this option. Instead, MacGuire considers herself privUeged  to be hving outside the downtown eastside  (although she uses the area's services) in a  South GranviUe hotel.  "Welfare wanted me to move into the Patricia but I said no, it's a junkie haven, I  wouldn't put my kids there ... but I heard  of this place through a girlfriend, and it  costs just the same, so they said okay."  Another woman frequently seen at the  Downtown Eastside Women's Centre clutch-  12 KINESIS A  ing the day's 'suites to rent' ads is Tracy  (not her real name), the mother of four girls  aged 9, 10, 11 and 12.  Tracy moved her family into the area  early last summer, after being forced out of  their decrepit Mount Pleasant suite, where  the landlord continuaUy refused to do necessary repairs.  In her search for a new home, she most  commonly hears landlords say 'you have too  many chUdren'.  "I know other women with kids who are  waiting five months to find a home, hving in  shelters or hotels or with relatives; sharing  anything with a roof over their heads. You  have no choice when you have chUdren, as  long as it's a roof."  iccording to Kim Nightingale, coordinator of the Downtown Eastside Women's  Centre, women are moving into the area at  a disturbing rate.  "We get calls from transition houses,  DERA (Downtown Eastside Residents Association), St. James, MSSH, aU saying 'we  have women with kids who can't find housing' and we say 'sure, send them aU down.'  "And these single mothers aren't stupid;  they know this is a lousy area to raise kids,  and they wouldn't do it if they had any  other choice."  She described two women who hved in  the area recently with their chUdren, after  escaping abusive marriages in Ontario. The  difficulties here convinced them to go back  to their husbands.  The women's and chUdren's physical  safety is a particular concern in the community. According to Betty MacPhee at Crab-  tree Corner Daycare, assaults on women  in the area are increasing at an alarming  rate. "Minor assaults aren't reported, but  a growing number of aggravated assaults—  when ambulances are caUed—are being documented."  Hotel security is frighteningly faulty, she  said, leaving the family vulnerable to attack. Two women were recently raped in  their rooms.  "Hotel room doors can be opened so eas-  Uy, which also leave the chUdren at risk,"  says McPhee. "What often happens is on  (welfare) cheque day someone gets into the  room, takes a look around to see if anything  new was bought, and then takes aU the fam-  Uy's possessions.  "This leaves the famUy homeless and on  the street. We try to get them into transition shelters, but they're already overbooked."  Furthermore, hotel toUets are located  down the haU; using one is a risky option  for most women. According to a Community Health Nurse in the area (who requests  anonymity), a patient of hers recently used  the toUet late at night and upon returning  to her room found a strange man with her  chUd.  Many beheve raising chddren in a hotel is  a last option, but, according to Nightingale,  hotels are also turning single mothers away,  in effect implementing their own 'adult only'  restriction.  According to John Shayler of the Tenants  Rights CoaUtion, a recent trend by management in cheaper hotels is to raise the rent.  This not only deters the most economicaUy  desperate from hving there, but it also effectively wipes out any legal tenant protections.  "Recent amendments to the Residential  Tenancy Branch cover hotel residents, providing they're 'permanent' [have no other  address] and don't pay over $450 per  month."  Nightingale says one downtown eastside  hotel recently shot it's monthly rate up from  $450 to $700.  These restrictions leave women with even  fewer housing choices, and dreams of 'security' become httle more than fantasy.  Discrimination in rental housing is, unfortunately, as old as rental housing itself.  Nor is it the first time Vancouver has been  confronted with homelessness. The contemporary twist, however—leaving more families homeless—is compounded by many factors.  Secondary Suite Closures  Single mothers are traditionaUy given rental  market dregs partly because it's aU they can  afford, but also because the old maxim 'chUdren are to seen and not heard' apphes in  housing. Many landlords also require they  be pretty weU hidden away—in basements,  or above garages—so other tenants aren't  'bothered' by them.  Vancouver's present vacancy rate of .04  percent translates into 282 suites avaUable  at any one time.  Shortly after this statistic was released by  the Canadian Mortgage and Housing Corporation (CMHC), Vancouver City CouncU  threatened closure of 280 secondary suites,  housing mostly single mothers on welfare. A  total of 26,000 secondary suites are threatened.  Women hving in these suites face tremendous uncertainty in their future: when wUl  they be forced out, and what wiU they be  forced into? The Tenants Rights Coalition  receives several calls a month from anxious  and confused tenants; the calls usuaUy come  from a woman saying, "I'm hving in an Ulegal suite ..."  Demolitions  Since January, over a thousand people in  Vancouver have lost their homes to the  wrecking baU—most of them women, many  of them with chUdren.  Roneen Marcoux, a researcher hired by  the City who compded this data, was  shocked at the extent of affordable housing  being destroyed and the effect it was having  on women she interviewed.  "Single women with chUdren were turned  away time and time again," says Marcoux.  "One woman tried to find a place for herself, her teenaged daughter and her mother  but the landlords would reject her, saying  'and what about your husband?'  "They equate single parent families with  total poverty; there was a great deal of economic discrimination happening."  Decline of Rental Subsidies  Subsidized social housing units have declined to the lowest levels in this decade,  falling from 1,405 in 1985 to 425 in 1988,  according to David Hulchanski at the Centre for Human Settlements.  Furthermore, B.C. Housing Management  regulations deny subsidy to women under 45 years. Gad Meredith, director at  the downtown eastside's Mavis McMuUen  House said their buUding—containing 34  units—fought to convince B.C. Housing to  include younger women in their mandate.  "We managed to change it to age 35, arguing that hving in the area ages women.  "A lot of women with kids have a bag of  clothes for the kid and a bag of pampers and  that's aU they move in with," says Meredith.  Renovations: Condo-Style  With the mighty swipe of the buUdozer affordable 'homes' are being replaced by luxury 'condos.' Throughout the city, women  and chUdren are being evicted to make way  for "extensive renovations."  As Kinesis goes to press, the landlord  of a West End buUding containing 86 units,  and between 70 and 100 chUdren, has sent  everyone an eviction notice.  In two months, renovations begin and  predictions are that within a year manage  ment wUl demand out-of-reach rents, and  chUdren wUl not be aUowed to Uve there.  The West End is already out of reach for  most parents. In fact, this buUding is one of  few remaining where chUdren are aUowed.  After a determined search, Sarah Mar-  chant and her husband gave up on the West  End. Although they fit the biU of 'famUy'  which many landlords require, there simply  weren't any buUdings which aUowed chUdren.  "We must have looked at 50 places when  finally a woman let us in and showed  us around some reaUy nice suites," says  Marchaat. "Then she asked us, 'Is this your  chUd?' I said yes, and she said 'we don't take  kids here.'  "It was almost as though she couldn't beheve we had the nerve to come and look at  the place, with a Hd!"  Marchant is outraged at this attitude,  which she calls hatred. "It feels as though  people want to hide kids under the rug ...  it wasn't just 'we don't want kids' but, No  kids! No way! Get them out of here!"  Rejection and discrimination—certainly  as weU as homelessness or hving in substandard conditions—can be seriously harmful  to a chUd. After being repeatedly turned  away, Marchant was thankful her chUd was  too young to realize what was happening.  "H he was five years old, he'd know we  were being turned away because of him; how  would that make him feel?"  It's Ulegal to evict a woman simply because she's a mother. Instead, landlords are  'cleaning up their tenancies' by harassing  women out. And although the Residential  Tenancy Act protects people from harassment, this protection is rarely enforced.  Efforts to change into an adult only  buUding—in other words, to weed out the  troublesome children—is therefore common  practice with today's landlords.  Karen Fletcher has hved with her four  chUdren, for the past seven years, in a  two bedroom basement suite. A couple of  months ago, she called the landlord in to repair the toUet. In September, he finaUy got  the plumbing bUl.  "He said that either I pay half the biU  ($250) or he'U raise my rent $200 a month,"  says Fletcher.  This is clear harassment, she says, intended to get her out. Her chUdren are  the only ones left renting, not only in the  buUding, but on that entire Mount Pleasant  block.  Wanda Janovich, is facing simUar anti-  chUd harassment in Surrey where she hves  with her husband and one year old son.  First, they lost the privUege of using the  apartment's swimming pool (a sign was put  up saying only adults could use it). Later,  when she became pregnant and tried to  switch into a larger suite, they were turned  down.  "The landlord said we'd be staying too  long, and he wanted to turn the buUding  into 'adult only.' Famines with kids weren't  given outright eviction notices, but he made  1   ^tf^8  \an<  hfe so miserable for us we were forced to  move."  Age Discrimination Allowed  Just  as  a  developer's  dream  of 'adult  only' buUdings translates into discrimina  tion against women and chUdren, so too  does this particular discrimination translate  into age preference.  Under the B.C. Human Rights Act, age  discrimination in tenancies is aUowed, although it is specificaUy prohibited in aU  other sections of the Act.  Section 5 (b) reads: No person shall  discriminate ... because of the race,  colour, ancestry, place of origin, religion, marital status, physical or mental  disability or sex of that person or class  of persons, or of any other person or  class of persons.  "The reason for the exclusion in tenancies," says Suzi KUgour of the Tenants  Rights CoaUtion, "boils down to feudal  property rights of man [sic]; that a man has  the right to dictate what happens to his  property... and the behef that people with  chUdren wUl ruin his property more than  people without chUdren."  However, she says, this age (liscrimina-  tion contradicts protections in Section 15 of  the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, which apphes equaUy to chddren as  members of Canadian society.  Legal steps necessary to end child discrimination in B.C. require a Charter challenge, says Carolyn McCool, a lawyer with  Gastown Legal Services. And the legal argument would be made on the basis of 'sex  discrimination' as weU as 'age discrimination,' since the impact of this form of housing discrimination is invariably on single,  low-income women.  "We need to find a chent, a woman, who's  looking for a place to hve and gets turned  away at the door; who is facing actual discrimination," says McCool.  Why aren't women coming forward to  fight this extremely crucial legal chaUenge?  To answer this question, one need only  think back to when you were last threatened  , with eviction; when you last searched desperately for a home, a roof over your chUdren's heads ...  When confronted with so basic and essential a need, one has scant energy left to  fight for anything more.  Once, and if, the legal battle is won, wUl  it truly be able to protect women and their  chUdren when a landlord greets 'more desirable' people standing in hne waiting to view  the suite?  In Ontario, where human rights legislation prohibits tenancy discrimination on the  \ basis of "famdy status" and "receipt of pubhc assistance [welfare]," landlords continue  \ to operate with a freehand in a 'free mar-  \  kef  Bruce Porter of Ontario's CERA (Centre for Equahty Rights in Accommodation)  says, out of 334 discrimination cases they  dealt with last year, 40 percent were famUy  status complaints.  They're presently faced with a legal challenge, where the owner of a condo turned a  woman away because of the age of her chUd.  "Therefore adult only buUdings argue  discrimination isn't based on famUy status  but it's based on age of occupant; they say  'we don't care if it's your child or not, we  care about how old the Hd is'."  And so, for mothers from one end of the  country to another, the fight to find the secure roof for themselves and their chUdren  continues.  KINESIS Commentary  VXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXNXXXXN\XXXN\X\X\XX\\X\\X\X^^  ^^xxx^^xx^x^^^  ^^xxx^^^xx^^^x^^xx^x^^  Libya  A sense of power> rootedness, freedom  by Jill Bend  Busload after busload made slow progress  along the roads of Libya and the city streets  of Tripoli ... carrying thousands of young  Libyan women hanging out of the windows,  proudly displaying their sHUs with Kalash-  nikov rifles and showering us with the strong  smUes and fists of sisterhood.  An image burned into my eyes and memory, never to be forgotten. A sense of power,  rootedness, and freedom that I craved to  know myself.  It was Al-Fatah, Sept. 1st, 1989 and we  were in the streets with the Libyan people celebrating the 20th anniversary of their  revolution. A wisdom of the contradictions  inherent in any hberation struggle tells me  that the arming of the women does not  necessarUy prove their emancipation. But  based on an intuitive sense and a poUtical  sense, I lean towards beheving that a society  in which aU women have the right to learn  and implement their self-defense is one in  which they ultimately have more power.  Representing the Native Prisoner Support Group in Vancouver, I and another  woman were invited to be part of a Cana- g  dian delegation hving a very concentrated ^  week with 500 European and North Amer- §  ican revolutionaries aboard a boat in the £  TripoU harbour. At least that many again o  had arrived in the city from Third World ^  Nations.  As international delegates, we had been  brought from across Africa, Asia, Europe,  the Middle East, North America, Central  America, the Caribbean and South America to witness and show solidarity for the  Libyan people's struggle.  The presence of pohticaUy militant and  spiritual Native Indian and African American leaders, already long famihar with and  connected to Libya, taught me that most  white European and North American activists have been out in the cold as far as  being aware of this anti-imperialist internationalist movement. Many pieces of a puzzle feU together.  On a tour of Qaddafi's home, preserved  as a museum to show the truth of the  American bombings of civUian targets in  April 1986, we aU feU into a deathly silence, understanding first-hand the vicious  weight of the U.S.'s determination to anni-  lulate Qaddafi and Libya's example of hberation. The hes of the Western government/media disinformation campaign that  have poisoned most people's minds against  Libya were fuUy exposed to us then.  Why is Libya so dangerous a threat to  the imperialist powers? Because their freedom is stiU young and they continue work-  in Tripoli  ing at the process of hberation. Because, as  an oU-rich nation, Libya has been able to  empower, with both financial and military  aid, other international hberation movements. Because Libya is a socialist Arab  Nation and consciously strives to see the  same for the rest of the Middle East. Palestine is their first priority now and everyone's hearts, especiaUy in the Arab World,  are bleeding.  tions. "The veU" does not define or confine Arab women's position in their societies, just as "the bikini" does not define  or confine western women's position. The  question of our equahty and freedom goes  much deeper. But, as much as the veiling  of women is symbolic, Libyan women now  have freedom of choice.  Many older women who had to be veUed  prior to the revolution stUl continue that re-  The veil does not define...the Arab women's  position in their society, just as the bikini does  not define...western women's position.  Because Libya has been crucial in developing an African-wide consciousness and  supporting, over the last 10-15 years, the  great changes on the African continent as  nation after nation overcomes their coloniz-  Many activists are stiU ethnocentric,  propping up the Christian west as the model  for hberation—of women and social rela-  ligious tradition. The majority of younger  women choose not to veU at aU.  Qaddafi's poUtical text of the Libyan revolution, The Green Book, rails against aU  forms of oppression and exploitation: "It  is an undisputed fact that both man and  woman are human beings. It foUows, as  a self-evident fact, that woman and man  are equal as human beings. Discrimination  against woman by man is a flagrant act of  oppression without justification ..."  Simple, and true. The seeds of Uberation. Their rights regarding pohtical, legal  and societal matters such as marriage, chddren, housing, health care and education  are weU protected. Unfortunately, the treatise on women goes on to basicaUy confine  women, with aU due respect, to a biological  role. But free human nature wiU not choose  to be confined, even in a most-honoured  role.  Our time there was frustratingly short.  Yet, in discussions with other women delegates including the American "Women  Against MiUtary Madness," there grew  the idea to work towards an international  women's conference in Libya. I left with a  commitment to learn more deeply the situation of women in Libya and the Middle East  and, also, with a realization of the need for  a new introspection into the direction of our  women's movement here in the beUy of the  There is, of course, stiU a long way to  go—but I have faith.  €t^hJfr*M*°i*** ituB^^^^^^^:  KINESIS Arts  n Visible Colours  "We don't have to be passive viewers  55  by Lynne Jorgesen  Two years ago, Zainub Verjee and Lorraine Chan were talHng about the invisibU-  ity of women of colour in the media.  "We both work in the distribution of  women's cinema and women's media, and  we noted the absence of recognition of work  by women of colour and the Third World,"  said Chan, who works at the National Film  Board as a distributor of women's films.  But the seeds of that conversation are  coming to fruition this November, and the  pair have become the proud co-directors  of In Visible Colours, an international  film/ video festival celebrating the cinema of  women of colour and the Third World.  Running from November 15 to 19 at the  Robson Square Media Centre, Vancouver  East Cinema and Simon Fraser University's  Harbourside campus, the festival is bringing together up to 60 international delegates  from every corner of the globe.  From its modest beginnings, the festival  has grown to impressive proportions. Over  100 works, reflecting an incredible diversity  of cultural, social, pohtical and economic  perspectives, are to be screened during the  festival. Not only that, a three-day series of  panels and workshops wUl explore the joys  and frustrations of women film and video  makers worHng outside the industry mainstream.  "The festival wiU be really important and  exciting," added Verjee, distribution manager for Women in Focus, which is sponsoring the festival in cooperation with NFB.  "The participation of so many Third World  women (12 are expected from Africa alone)  is very positive. It wiU be exciting for  women of colour hving in the First World  or developed countries to share visions and  expertise with their Third World sisters."  Verjee beheves Third World women have  much to offer, including self-acceptance and  more positive self-images. Although they  have better access to technology and financing, women of colour hving in developed  countries tend to be angrier and negative  about their place in the world.  The Vancouver Society on Immigrant  Women has also been a key supporter since  the beginning.  "That's how we got our core staff," Verjee  said. Early in the growing pains of the festival, the VSIW's support and behef in the  project was crucial to obtaining a $60,000  Canada Employment grant.  "We wanted to hire women of colour so  they can get the training and access d they  want to find work in the field of film and  video," Verjee said. "This is a strong mandate for us. We have been able to hire good  women, and they've learned a lot."  The festival's success at raising funds is  also in part due to the talents of proposal-  writer extraordinaire Loretta Todd, a Native Indian independent film maker based  in Vancouver, who began sending a flurry  of applications to every potential group and  agency in August, 1988.  "We waited a long time to get confirmation of funding," Chan recaUed. "It was very  iffy that the festival would actually happen, but we had to proceed as if it would."  Finally, the breakthrough came in spring  1989, and In Visible Colours was on its way.  In fact, there is only one obvious absence in  the hst of funding agencies and supporters.  "It's unfortunate the Federal Department of Communications didn't contribute,  given how they fund a number of other festivals," Verjee said. "We've received such  wide support from places hke the government of Norway [which is sponsoring travel  and accommodations for six delegates from  India and Africa]. CIDA was quick to respond, as was Partnership Africa Canada,  and we just got the British CouncU to sponsor two women from Britain."  "Confirmations are now coming in from  the corporate sector," Chan said. "Vancouver businesses are now showing an interest,  and they'U be the main focus of our fund-  raising efforts from now untU the festival."  Both women emphasize that contributions  and volunteers are stiU very much in demand to work before and during the festival.  Another aspect of In Visible Colours is  the sensitivity it has shown to the Native  Indian community and its inclusion of local chiefs and elders in the welcoming ceremonies on festival opening night.  The presence on the festival advisory  board of Joy HaU—another Native Indian  film maker—and Loretta Todd helped sensitize women from other cultural groups to  Native issues and concerns.  "Loretta and Joy made strong contributions in obtaining the work of Native women  film and video makers," Chan said. "They  were a good sounding board, and able to tell  us if a particular film or video made sense  in the native context."  OveraU, Chan and Verjee are satisfied  that In Visible Colours wUl fulfill its two-  part mandate to expose the cinematic work  of women of colour to a wider audience, and  to address common issues of race, class, gender and sexuahty.  "Making something come true and realizing a vision is in itself maHng a statement," Verjee said. "Our cinema reflects  our history, our realities, our perspectives.  We also hve here, but we've had no voice,  we've been invisible. That's changing, however. The idea is for women to look at these  productions and be inspired to teU their own  stories. We don't have to be passive viewers.  We can make our own films and videos."  "It's been an immense pleasure worHng  with women of colour," Chan concludes.  "There have been moments when we've  been under a tremendous amount of pressure, but we aU start from a point of commonality." She pauses to find the right expression. "It's been empowering."  In Visible Colours can be contacted at  849 Beatty Street, Vancouver B.C. V6B  2M6. Telephone (604) 685-1137  From Surname Viet, Given Name Nam,  by Trinh T. Minh-Ha.  CCEC Credit Union  The credit union for co-ops, community business  and the non-profit sector  is  2250 Commercial Drive  2 blocks north of Broadway, effective October 2, 1989  New Services Available  • The Advance Card: Cash machine, withdrawals  and deposits for members who qualify.  • Saturday Hours: 10 am -1 pm; in addition to  Mon. & Wed. 11 am - 5 pm and  Fri. 1 -7 pm.  • Night Deposit Machine: A  secure and convenient  way to deposit after  hours.  Call 876-2123  New telephone number to be confirmed Oct. 2  I'm British, But..by Gurinder Chadha  KINESIS ;ssssk*****ss*sssss^^  ARTS  Nancy Spero  Images full of rebellion, rage  by Susan Leibik  Artist Nancy Spero's career spans over 30  years and although she has long had an 'underground' reputation, it is only in the last  decade that the mainstream art world took  note of her.  Based in New York, Spero has been involved in art activism as a member of  W.A.R., Women Artists in Revolution, a  group who chaUenged museums and galleries to increase the number of works shown  by women artists. The Contemporary Art  GaUery in Vancouver is showing her work  untU October 7th.  OriginaUy trained as a painter, Spero  abandoned the traditional canvas in the late  )'s: her best known works are large collages, incorporating hand-printing and text.  Using images from ancient sources to the  present, her emphasis is on woman as protagonist. She has created celebratory visions of female strength and action, as weU  as works protesting the destructive realities  women face.  The pieces on display at the CAG were  done in the early and mid-80's and focus  on violence against women, as victims of  war, rape and torture. Eight scroUs present  collage combinations of figures and words.  There is an urgency and immediacy here: a  roughness in the handling of the paper and  ink—the images have a telegraphic, rapid-  fire quahty emphasized through repetition.  The scroll format suggests language and  documentation and, even when text is absent, there is a sense of gesture in the figures that has its own raw speech.  Elegy IV, Victims depicts a faUing,  moving, crawhng figure printed in faint  white ink, as though in the iridescent x-ray  of a bombflash. The barely discernable form  also suggests the invisibihty of women victims in a historical sense; the ghost traces  of atrocities.  Mourners shows a chorus of women,  Egyptian-style figures expressive of a coUective grief. Although the visual source is ancient, the emotional impact is immediate.  Spero consistently presents historical and  contemporary imagery side-by-side, linHng  past and present in one field of action.  There is an intense  sense of message...  A horizontal panel, Artemis and Fleeing Women, counterposes a running women with an infant—a war victim—with  that of the strong defiant figure of Artemis,  a woman warrior. A cinematic frieze-frame  technique of repeated figures in motion create an open-ended narrative quahty. Another series deals with first hand accounts  of torture in Mexico, ChUe and Argentina  Text in buUetin type and images of wounded  women are coUaged together under a mythic  multibreasted figure.  A single panel, Fire and Water I, juxtaposes a scene of violence and a red-inked  female demon surging with rage and anguish. Spero's use of colour is in keeping  with the angry, painful and mournful tone  of her subject. In El Salvador, black, ochre  and sienna impart a feehng of charring. Purple and gold figures emblematic of mourning are highlighted in Elegy Diptych. Although aU the pieces are raw and unde-  taUed, what emerges is an emotional presentation of suffering, struggle and resistance.  This is not a comprehensive show of  Spero's work but it offers a view of her distinctive visual language. There is an intense  sense of message in these pieces, though  they are not overburdened by heavyhand-  edness; their impact is on a more immediate, visceral level. Although Spero's art ad  dresses victimization, the images have a rebellious quahty, one that refuses sUence and  aUows the voices of rage and grief to speak  powerfuUy.  The CAG is located at 555 Hamilton  Street.  Fleeing Woman, (irridated), detail  Checking out the Fringe Festival  by Cyndi Mellon  Vancouver's Mount Pleasant neighbourhood was the scene of the fifth annual Fringe  Festival, September 8-17. This year's festival was held in 12 venues and covered 16  square blocks: the outdoor decorations and  hoards of people at peak viewing times gave  the Fringe a real festival feel.  The Kinesis reviewer was there and soon  discovered she would have had to clone herself to even begin to do justice to the many  presentations involving fine women actors,  writers, directors and dancers. With this  in mind—and with our sincere apologies to  those we missed—the foUowing is look at  just a few of the shows.  Spit It Out, by the Sensible Footwear  Theatre Company from England, featured  gutsy—though primary-level-feminism in  cabaret show form. The London threesome,  dressed in costumes somewhere between  Irish jig dancers and tea-room waitresses,  sang and mugged their way through material dealing with women's mags (male-  owned), coming out to Mom ("You mean  hke Boy George, Dear?") and the ambiguity a woman might feel ("A Naughty Girl  Goes Down to HeU") when she confesses to  having worn a short sHrt on her nineteenth  attempt at the Driver's Test.  Sensible Footwear is angry, and their  anger comes out most in fine, strong singing  voices and strident lyrics. In fact, their  voices are so strong, one wonders why they  chose to stick so closely to the microphones.  Before the show began, the stage was set  with intriguing-looHng props, which somehow never got the workout they deserved.  A conversation with Sensible Footwear  revealed that their more usual format is  workshop-type presentations foUowed by  discussion. Their rather broad anti-male humour, they feel, simply reverses the kind of  material that is standard fare for stand-up  comics in England.  The play has the feel of someone's real-  life experience and was weU worth seeing.  Filler-Up!, written and performed by  Deborah Filler, is a one-woman set of comedy vignettes that was funny, amusing and  short on content. However, Filler is so good  at what she does you can forgive her a lot.  Sensible Footwear is angry, and their anger  comes out most in fine, strong singing voices..  These women have talent and some good  ideas, and one wonders what a bit of outside artistic direction might do for them.  The Occupation of Heather Rose  was written by Wendy LiU, performed by  Tamsin Kelsey and directed by Catherine  Cairnes.  This good script, about a young white  women grapphng with a posting as a nurse  on an isolated northern Native Indian reserve, featured some exceUent solo work by  Kelsey. Without back-up or proper preparation, 21-year-old Heather Rose arrives at  her first job, wide-eyed and shghtly spinny.  She begins by handing out pamphlets on the  Four Food Groups and ends up being sent  home in a rum-soaked haze. No apology is  made for any of the characters and no solution is offered.  The longest piece, which features a food-  obsessed women from middle-America who  unwittingly does in some plane hijackers  with a jeUo salad was ... weU, in questionable taste, but also quite perfect in terms of  its main character.  FUler is a talented women and her show  was over aU too quicHy. One wonders what  she could do with stronger material.  Sally and Marsha, was written by  SybiUe Pearson. After a somewhat lurching start, the play's two actors—who appeared to be novices—settled into riding  on a richly-written, funny script that just  didn't quit. Set in a two-room, roach-  infested apartment, two women of very dif-  ferent temperament meet and change together over a period of months. Trapped by  marriage and poverty, the women graduaUy  come to trust and support each other, even  as they engage in pursuits that are completely opposite.  Sally and Marsha is bUled as a play  about friendship, and that's what it is.  Although some issues about sexuahty are  raised, the play ready didn't take this very  far.  This reviewer found herself rooting for  the housefrau character to take over her  husband's selling job, since she was obviously better at it than him. I was puUed  back to earth by the realization that she is  nine months pregnant and in no condition  to do any such thing. These are real people  with real limits to their hves, self-imposed  or otherwise.  Despite the frustration of not quite going far enough, the play remained interesting right to the end, and the performances  picked up as weU. The star of this show was  its author. Let's hope she gives us more.  Postcards From Hawaii was written by  JacHe Crossland and performed by Nora  D. RandaU. In this second collaboration by  Crossland and RandaU, we see a middle-  aged woman who has given up her job and  headed off for a vacation in HawaU. Under the guise of postcards and letters to a  friend, RandaU's character reminisces and  ruminates about everything from early B.C.  union organizers to the abuse of her chUdhood. She takes us to HawaU, but in fact  gives us far more.  Postcards from Hawaii is a beautdul,  sensitive piece of writing. Randall's consistent and weU-paced performance was enhanced by iufty props (I loved those giant  postcards) and a beautiful, simple set.  KINESIS Arts  ////////////////////^^^^^  by Susan Stewart  Doing Time is a sculptural instaUation  by artist Persimmon Blackbridge, and Geri  Ferguson, MicheUe Kanashiro-Christensen,  Lyn MacDonald and Bea Walkus, whose  writings describe their experiences in and  out of prison. The huge instaUation consists  of 168 linear feet of 7 ^ foot walls arranged  in a maze with 25 life-size cast paper figures  affixed to the walls. The figures—of Ferguson, Kanashiro-Christensen, MacDonald  and Walkus—are surrounded by text.  Their stories are of abuse, poverty and  survival. W Idle the words teU of painful, difficult hves, the body language and faces of  the women suggest resistance and strength.  These figures are realistic yet aU the process  marHngs are left intact; raw edges of paper  and fabric, naU holes and random notations.  Blackbridge has painted, marked and  scratched an expressionistic record across  the standing figures and walls. Using materials and methods as diverse as furnace cement, oU stick and air brush, colours and  gestures punctuate and underscore the tension and emotion present in the writings.  Blackbridge's work has always been po-  hticaUy and sociaUy placed within a critical matrix which included issues of feminism, sexuahty, capitalism, racism and  the relationship of the individual women  to the institutions. Earlier work, such as  Canada/Chile(\m) or On The Ward  (1978) offered generalized statements of critique about specific issues. Unsatisfied by  the intellectual detachment she perceived in  her work, Blackbridge sought a means to  bring a more immediate, intense and heartfelt reference point to her ideas.  Her solution was direct collaborations  with her subjects. In this way the work  could begin to come out of actual people's  experience rather than the artist's concept  of that experience.  It is very clear to Blackbridge that the  power of her collaborator's words and stories belongs to them. Distinct personalities emerge as Doing Time is "read". Ferguson is sarcastic and angry. Kanashiro-  Christensen offers passionate analysis and  ironic humour. MacDonald is both outrageous and vulnerable, and Walkus comes  across as gentle and determined.  These very different women touch on simUar experiences in their writing. Kanashiro-  Christensen and Ferguson teU about going  to jaU at seventeen. Walkus and Kanashiro-  Christensen discuss pohce harassment. The  difficulties of Ufe after prison, love for their  friends and chUdren, humour in the face  of appalling oppression—these themes echo  back and forth from woman to woman.  It is these women that provide the insight whUe Blackbridge provides the artistic means to amphfy them.  Inside The Issues  Women in institutions are made invisible  within mainstream culture. Doing Time  provides a multi-leveled comprehension of  this situation. Looking at the faces and  hearing the voices of these women within  the ever-present wads is as close as many  of us are likely to get to the experience of  prison.  There is a sensation of being inside the  issues raised. These excruciating accounts  happened to these very real women in real  time and to experience this closely is gut-  wrenching. Moving from one story to another, a pattern begins to emerge which describes a set of conditions of which prison is  only one factor:  Why a lot of women go to jail is because of poverty. I mean let's face it,  how many choices do you have when  you 're poor. You don't have the education, you can't get the jobs. You can  maybe get a job sewing in some sweatshop. Or be a fast food waitress, or  clean toilets. Or you can learn to steal  or sell drugs or sell your body. That  pays a lot better, for sure.  —MicheUe Kanashiro-Christensen  Pain, resistance  in the prison maze  Add to poverty a hfe of chUd abuse, sexism and racism and the stage is set for conflict with the law. In women's prison only  a tiny fraction of the inmates are "dangerous criminals." Overwhelmingly the population consists of the disenfranchised: young  women, poor women and women of colour.  Once inside prison, the very conditions  that force women into conflict with the law  are magnified ten-fold. In Doing Time,  the women talk about having their chUdren taken away, the appropriation of their  labour, the emotional and mental abuse of  soUtary confinement and the meaningless-  ness of hfe when responsibility and decisionmaking are removed:  J was in solitary because i tried to  sneak in some prescription sleeping  pills when i first got there. When i  had to strip for the search, i saw how  closely the guard was watching me, so  i handed the pills to her, but she had  me charged with smuggling anyway.  In solitary, there was nothing to do,  no one to talk to. The guards would go  by and i would ask them what time it  was and they would say, "Why do you  want to know, you 're not going anywhere. " They never told me how many  days I'd have to do in the hold. The  only thing that made it at all bearable  was knowing that my entire sentence  was only 14 days. It turned out i was  in solitary for the entire 14 days.  —Lyn MacDonald  Upon leaving prison ex-inmates are immediately faced with enormous problems:  no money, social stigma and the disastrous  effects of having been separated from their  chUdren and families for extended periods  of time. The cycle continues:  After surviving the longest days in  Prison, I now am faced with making  decisions for my basic needs outside  of prison walls. The hardest things to  cope with are making the transition  from being confined to a small space to  a bigger space and population. It's very  hard to find support, I'm not sure if  prison has deteriorated all my senses...  It's stressful coming from what felt  like being empty headed to having  my head filled, with what decisions to  make. I'm not feeling too confident  with myself especially since i 've again  been stereotyped as a useless, unproductive human being. I can't seem to  stop the cycle of low self esteem, drugs  and prison.  —Geri Ferguson  Across A Wide Gap  Doing Time makes audible the voices of a  disenfranchised minority, yet there are major hurdles to be crossed in this type of  consensual representation. Schisms of race,  class and privilege separate the artist from  the inmates of Doing Time.  Blackbridge says, "Sometimes the chasms  can be crossed but often we can only wave  at each other across a wide gap." What enables the makers of Doing Time to cross  some of theses barriers is friendship, community and the experiences and goals they  have in common. Everyday life has a pohtical subtext and forming bonds between  disenfranchised groups becomes an organic  and commonplace process.  "AU of us have had drug or alcohol problems," Blackbridge says, "but mine aren't  written on the walls. What we share exists simultaneously with our differences—  neither one wipes out the other."  Sensitivity at each step of the collaborative process—with careful attention ot  feehngs—creates a safety net which is essential as stories of mistreatment and pain  emerge. This is one of the great strengths of  feminist practice. From this place, the artist  and coUaborator share aspects of each others hves and co-analyze not only the content/context of the project but also the nature of art-maHng itselt Decisions which  have bearing on the subject's representation are discussed and amended. Within this  process the coUaborator inform each other  and in turn inform the artwork.  It is this consent which gives Doing  Time its tremendous integrity. It is also the  point at which Blackbridge is most unresolved.  "One thing Fve learned from doing this  show is just how stable my hfe is," says  Blackbridge. Some of you might not thing  so 'cause I'm a lesbian and I don't always  do my dishes. I know that's chaos in some  people's books.  "But I think in terms of years, not right  now, I think in terms of 'caU her in the  morning, not right now.' People don't just  disappear out of my hfe, I plan things, I  start an art project knowing it'll take me  years to finish. I work for days on smaU details. It's slow. It used to drive Geri crazy  before she disappeared.  "I which I had learned a worHng style  that fit with Geri and MicheUe's Uves better, but I never did. I learned to loosen up  and let the paint rage across the walls, but  I never learned to let go of this rigid sense  of how-you-do-things, my armoured world  view. I didn't know how to, even when it was  clear that my way of worHng wasn't working, when Geri was in and out of jaU. She'd  be here and gone, here and gone, freaked  out but quiet about it, not knowing how to  be outside of jaU, or inside either. And I'd  be labouring over details.  "There's got to be a way to work that accommodates right now as weU as years. But  I never quite got there."  It is to the credit of the creator of Doing  Time that the levels of trust necessary to  complete this project were achieved. It takes  enormous courage for women who have suffered such abuses to aUow themselves to  be represented and scrutinized by a pubhc  seemingly oblivious to their condition.  There is also the contradiction of the context. To women in prison, institutions come  to represent many things. On the one hand  there is the institution they face everyday,  a place of authority and punishment. Then  there are the schools, social agencies and the  common institutions of hfe on the outside.  For the majority of inmates this is an inaccessible terrain of class and privUege.  Cultural institutions—art galleries—are  no different and contain the added hurdle of  a perceived inteUectual elitism. Within tHs  context, Doing Time operates as a bridge  spanning a social and psychological gulf of  class, gender and race. It asks the viewer  to think, to feel, and to experience a reality that may be very foreign and unfamiliar,  and to finaUy acknowledge, 'yes, this exists.'  As Persimmon puts it: "So how come I'm  even doing this Doing Time thing, d I've  never been in prison, d it's not my world?  Am I some kind of voyeur artist doing it  for those among you who keep your noses  clean and swim the mainstream, showing  you a view of this other world, this strange  dangerous, ever so exotic world. Am I your  tour guide, ripping off their pain for your  aesthetic titUlation? I don't want to be a  tour guide. I want to be a megaphone, that  MicheUe's words come through so loud, you  can hear it under water, in the mainstream.  "That's how I want it. But can we control it? If someone wants to look at Bea, at  Lyn, like they're some bizarre form of underworld animal life, can we stop them? Can  we make this art so pointed and exceUent  that it pierces their armoured world view?  Probably not, eh?  "H their armour's starting to chafe a bit,  maybe we can open things up somewhat.  But Fve had to accept the fact that art isn't  going to transform the world. SmaU change  is aU we can hope for.  "A nickel here, a dime there. It does add  up, hke slow rain on concrete. Maybe someone wdl think twice. Maybe someone wdl  see their hfe validated in MicheUe's. We're  counting pennies here, and we're hoping for  a lot of smaU change."  Doing Time is on display in various  lower mainland locations. See Bulletin  Board for details. The above essay was  excerpted from the Surrey Art Gallery's  catalogue.  KINESIS $SSSSKSSSS*SS5S*S^^  Arts  Festival complaint  Less has never been acceptable  by Lauri Nerman  Concerts and music festivals are an integral part of the women's music scene. Often women artists use these venues to showcase fresh material. A "new" musician is  able to reach an audience that would have  no other opportunity to hear her. Recording contracts are so tenuous; the hve performance is accessible and immediate.  This summer I had the opportunity to attend (and in one case chose not to attend) a  number of concerts and festivals. With few  exceptions, each event lacked adequate female representation.  I find it impossible to ignore or condone  the fact that so few women are given the  opportunity to perform. I find it difficult to  enjoy the overall experience of a music festival under these circumstances. Organizers could be doing things differently d they  wanted to, as there are many fine women  musicians to choose from.  I know a lot of women who consider the  Vancouver Folk Music Festival to be the  yearly oasis in their Uves. In past years  YOU'RE INVITED TO MEET  CALIFORNIA JEWELRY DESIGNER/SCULPTOR  Jane Sipe  at ARIEL BOOKS FOR WOMEN  2766 West 4th Avenue, Vancouver  Saturday, October 26,1989 2-4 p.m.  Jane Sipe of Jane Iris Designs, Inc., will present  her collection of Goddess Imagery:  ■ JEWELRY of sterling silver,  14k gold and bronze with semiprecious gemstones. Rings,  earrings and pendants.  ■ BRONZE GODDESS  SCULPTURES/ALTAR PIECES  in a choice of patinas.  Call 733-3511 for more information  I have dreaded the Folk Festival weekend, wondering if I had a minor character flaw because I was not engaging in pre-  festival countdown or mapping my strategy  for getting off Vancouver Island, my home.  I stopped going over seven years ago.  This summer, in a somewhat official capacity, I attended most of the festival and  realized that not much has changed. As an  "alternative" venue, the Folk Festival is stiU  very traditional when it comes to women's  representation. The figures speak for themselves: out of 225 performers this year, 52  were women—less than 25 percent of aU  performers.  A lot of women support the Folk Festival year 'round by attending concerts.  These women also comprise at least 50 percent of the audience during the actual concert weekend. In a local interview, organizer  Gary Cristall talked about his preference  for choosing a female performer over a male  performer. I wish his words would translate  into action.  In addition to the large female audience,  the lesbian community has also been a huge  supporter of the festival. One lonely workshop was designed with lesbians in mind,  and there was a total of five lesbian musicians at the festival.  I think women must consider what they  are really getting for their hard-earned  money. Less has never been acceptable to  me. UntU women embody at least 50 percent of the performers, PU be waiting in another ferry Une-up next summer.  One festival I chose not to attend this  summer, for similar reasons, was the Stein  festival. Titled Voices From the WUderness,  I prefer to call it Male Voices from the  WUderness Plus Three Women. It is perplexing to me that so few women were included in a Une-up that addressed the vital  issue of the survival of the Stein.  Let's face it. Patriarchy has been responsible for the destruction of our environment.  It is an affront to exclude women (in visible roles) from this Hnd of event and celebration. This exclusion means women's spiritual, creative and healing voices remain  glaringly invisible and therefore discounted.  BECKWOMAN'S  1314 Commercial Dr.  (New Location)  • Greeting Cards   • Incense  • Crafts   • Helium Balloons  • Political Posters & Buttons  • Earrings   • Ethnic Clothes  100% Cotton   £  Draw String     Jp  Pants & Shirts  For Large/Tall  People Too!  Open Tues. - Sat., 10 a.m,  25  • 6 p.m.  Something Magical  The opposite was true at a rare outdoor  concert this summer in Victoria, This free  concert featured the legendary blues artist  Etta James. The setting was fitting, a pubUc park surrounded by the ocean. The stage  was nestled in trees and varieties of wUd  flowers.  I first heard of Etta James in Montreal,  at a Janis Jophn concert in the late sixties.  Janis dedicated her set to Etta James: as  a teenager in Texas, she used to sneak into  bars to watch Etta perform.  Over the years, Etta James struggled  with an alcohol and heroin addiction which  she has now conquered. She has had httle broad public acclaim untU recently, although she has countless records to her  name. With the release of Seven Year Itch,  Etta James is finally receiving long overdue  recognition and acknowledgment by a wider  hstening audience.  For over an hour, Etta wooed the Victoria audience with her classics such as "TeU  Mama" and "Dance with me Henry." Her  newer material was upbeat and soulful as  she danced around the stage, captivating  everyone. At one point she sang a song  tilted "I'd rather be blind than see you walk  away from me." With her great energy and  strength, I wished she had chosen to sing  a song with a more positive message about  love and relationships.  Etta and her hot back-up band fiUed the  night with memories and new sounds of  blues and rock. She reminded us what legends are made of, adding something very  magical for thousands to take away.  Canadian Sara MacLaughlin has had a  fast-moving career since the release of her  debut album Touch last year. She signed an  unprecedented five record contract with the  Vancouver-based Netwerrk label—not bad  for a woman not yet in her twenties.  MacLaughlin performed in Victoria recently, in a short concert that left me disappointed and frustrated with her sound and  performance. The solo concert was less than  an hour. MacLaughlin performed most of  the material from her album, plus a new  song and two covers. If an artist doesn't  have enough material for a concert of decent length, then it's quite simple—don't  tour untU you do.  Length of concert aside, I found the  evening to be quite boring and uninspiring.  MacLaughlin has a stunning voice, yet there  is httle beyond that. I kept waiting for an  edge or some passion: instead, I heard very  pretty and safe music. The only times she  let loose were with a Peter Gabriel song and  her own unrecorded song with its wonderful  country edge. Her music is cerebral and relies on obscure images. I kept hoping for the  soul and guts of her sound. It's unfortunate  that such a strong voice is being streamlined  into what I consider nothing more than safe,  "elevated" muzak.  Finally, some comments on an upcoming concert in Vancouver. Louise Rose, jazz,  blues and gospel singer, wUl be performing  at the Sheraton Landmark, October 25-28.  I'm told that the program wUl be primarUy  gospel material. Her recently released cassette Gospel Rose is exceUent and I'm hoping she'U perform some of that material.  Born in Pennsylvania, Louise now makes  her home in Victoria where she is a vital  member of the music and women's community. In addition to performing, she teaches  and leads music workshops. Says Rose,  "Success is best measured by the sense of  satisfaction derived from doing a job from  heart-to-heart."  I know it's going to be pretty difficult  to stay in your seats d you go to hear her  later this month. That's the way good music should be.  KINESIS Arts  ////////////////////^^^^^  by Erin Moure  Bronwen Wallace died of cancer  on August 25, 1989 in her home in  Kingston. Her books of poetry are Marrying into the FamUy (Oberon, 1980),  Signs of the Former Tenant (Oberon,  1983), Common Magic (Oberon, 1985)  and The Stubborn Particulars of Grace  (M&S, 1987). A book of her short stories will appear from M&S in 1990. As  well, a book of her selected and new poems is in preparation.  Erin Moure is a poet who has known  Bronwen Wallace since the late '70s.  Bronwen WaUace is gone and I don't even  want to say those words. I don't want to say  the word "gone" and the name "Bronwen  WaUace" in the same sentence, because as  soon as I've said it, it doesn't make sense, I  can hear her voice, stiU the circuitry in my  head can present it to me, fidly conscious I  can hear her saying, What do you think  of THAT?  On my desk beside me, her books, her  poems, when I open the pages, her voice  is there. It could hardly be more present.  It's just that somewhere out there, Bronwen isn't. Her voice goes on.  Bronwen WaUace was the one, probably  more than anyone among our generation of  women writers, who always brought people  together. Who, I wonder, is going to do this,  now?  Because the people she brought together  were different. Bronwen brought together  people in the world in the same way she did  in her poems, to honour them. All in the  same poem, raveUed, unraveUed. A remarkable consistency.  She wrote poems of women and women's  hves and the confusion of our desires and  longings, the "apparent" confusion that is  really our linHng to and correspondence  with each other. And she wrote these poems stubbornly, even in the face of early  criticism of her style (too prosey, they said)  or the subject matter (only of interest to  women, they said).  The criticism she received often made her  question her own approach and determination to focus on story, on women and story,  but she didn't falter. And the community of  women writing alongside her told her, don't  falter.  In the past few years, especiaUy with the  pubhcation of her last book of poems, The  Stubborn Particulars of Grace, with the  mainstream publishers McCleUand & Stewart, she did get the criticism and recognition her work deserved. It was a beginning.  We aU have our individual stories to teU  of Bronwen that her death and even the  passing of time wUl not erase. Many of us  stayed in her house and felt that space of  Bronwen Wallace  The passing of  a generous poet  calm and interest, busyness and inquiry, felt  attracted to it, wished our own Uves could  be just that generous and full.  There's a whole generation of women,  many of them writers, others active in the  struggles for support for battered women,  for abortion rights, others students from  Queens or the Kingston School of Writing,  who can whisper "West Street" or say softly  "Gibson Avenue," and just by those words  create a map of the world and of ourselves as  women, as writers, as human tentative entities, that any one of us can recognize and reenter, and find ourselves on this map, just  at the whisper of those words.  Although Bronwen was centred in southeastern Ontario, she admitted that Ontario  wasn't the centre of the world or the centre of perception in the universe. She always  reached outward, sometimes in recognition,  sometimes in puzzlement, to what was different from herself.  This reaching ranged from her continuous  clipping of incredible National Enquirer  articles (with their own perception of the  human condition), to her arguing with contemporary French theory and her insistence  on the story.  Always she was aware that her approach  existed in a community of approaches and  that part of its value was not as an approach  isolated or valorized on its own (oh, the soul  of the poet! We often talk of it as dit existed  in a garret but it doesn't, it doesn't), but as  a contribution to a community of thought  and caring about words and what they can  convey.  Bronwen the person. U only I could  evoke the way the parts of the body, the  linkages with the body are in her poems,  and with remarkable consistency (again!)  in her Ufe as weU. I remember sitting in a  League of Poets meeting beside her a few  years ago, and the buUding air bothering  my asthma. I realized after a bit of shuffling that I'd forgotten my Ventolin inhaler,  an event that usuaUy causes me complete  panic.  Bronwen noticed, and when I whispered  what was wrong, whispered back: Take  your shoe off and give me your foot.  Shghtly taken aback (she hkes me this  much?) I asked: Which foot? Any foot, she  rephed.  StiU paying attention to the meeting. I  took off my right shoe and stuck my foot on  her knee, awkwardly. She took my foot and  held it and squeezed somewhere behind the  inside bone of the ankle. It hurt! She said it  should hurt, that this was the reflex for the  lungs and d my lungs hurt, it would hurt.  She told me the reflex was on my hands  too (I wondered briefly d it wouldn't have  been easier for her to hold my hand than  my foot...but it was easier on the foot, she  told me later).  My asthma diminished. I could feel my  bronchials opening up. Bronwen was holding my foot and still paying attention to the  meeting and my asthma was easing off. I  made it through the morning hke that, with  Bronwen holding my foot. Afterward, she  taught me how to hold my own foot.  Bronwen the poet. Bronwen and the  problem of recognition, not recognition-  famous, but the problem of how an individual, an individual women, can be recognized by anyone, on the page or in the  room. Defined by herself in her terms, in  terms that are interwoven with the terms of  other women, their stories. How aU our stories connect.  How the metal pin from the hip of a taxi  driver's mother appears in a poem of Bron-  wen's and became a metal pin I too can use  for courage in my own hfe, just by evoking the poem ("Bones, for Barb," from The  Stubborn Particulars of Grace).  Bronwen searched for the cadence of the  voice without the rhetorical authority of the  "author." Tried to decentre the voice by  combining it with others, making the author's voice quizzical, reverential, evocative  of a kind of grace not descended from some  metaphor of heaven but simple fronj our hstening to, and hearing each other. Recognition is, somehow, this listening.  Even now, having been taught this by  Bronwen's poetry, I learn it again in meet-  ings, in the corporation, in the search  for participatory management which I see  somehow grabs its terms of reference from  the women's movement, the gathering together of voices, the tremulous particular  strength of that.  How hstening itself makes others present,  and how we have a responsibility to honour the presence of others. (Where I work  it makes most male managers very i  vous!) How it's finaUy not true, as I feared  in a poem I wrote for Bronwen, that "we  are only recognized from our passports/ for  five minutes at any border."  Which is not to forget the talk we had,  the disagreements even, the burning discussions and arguments about the structure of  narrative itself, and how by its famihar luU  it might, in spite of this hstening, co-opt  the writer and reader to a status quo that  erases women, erases them except as the  "other," the complement in a heterosexual  (or hommo-sexual, as Irigaray caUed it)  discourse. Our shared concern and two dif-  ferent approaches. Always we appreciated  them as necessary.  Bronwen, yes, elicited the sense of community and diversity that women feel, so  that we can at the same time hsten, and finish the ends of each other's sentences, without interrupting. And still feel recognized.  In Bronwen's poems, we can recognize  ourselves and our connections as women of  history and place. That's why I think it essential that her publisher bring out a selected poems, keep the best and most urgent of her work in print for us. We need  her poems.  We need them to keep bringing us together, to grab us and teach us to hold ourselves by the feet in meetings, on street-  corners, riding through the train in Ontario,  or anywhere.  Bronwen's voice is alive. Sometimes I  hear it outside the window in the trees when  the train passes Kingston, because I'm often  enough on the train passing Kingston, and I  salute, as I always have, those trees. Bronwen's trees! Bron, you've ready got me this  time. I have to hold my own feet now.  KINESIS  19 SS*S>SS*S**S*SSiSSS*^^  ARTS  Worried now and worried long  by Melanie Conn  Whenever I try to analyze the appeal  of science fiction I'm struck by how worried many of the writers obviously are  about what the future could hold for us—  as women and as members of the human  species. Of course, some SF books I hke  are the hghter type of reading, with wisecracking heroines who romp from one adventure to another triumphing over various foes, ahen or human (usually Human).  Mostly, though, the books that stay with  me are disturbing and fiUed with a tension  that is never completely resolved. Despite  the (often) bizarre settings and characters,  I can identify with the books' message that  there are no simple solutions to most human struggles whether they are about inter-  galactic power or sexual pohtics.  The books for review this month are aU  in the disturbing category and they are aU  worth reading.  DREAMS OF AN UNSEEN PLANET  by Teresa Plowright  Arbor House Publishing, 1986  This book was exciting to find on the  public library shelf because the author is  a Vancouver writer. The lead character,  /N^0>VK*  tors. It soon emerges that she is aboard an  enormous space ship which has been orbiting around Earth since the ultimate nuclear  catastrophe occurred several hundred years  earlier. She has been kept in suspended  animation by the grotesque, Medusa-like  Oankali, extra-terrestrials who have rescued  her along with a handful of other human  Miera, is a 34-year-old woman whose biological clock is ticking away: she "has entered the maze of calculations, poring over  probabilities of age and time."  But Miera is not alone in her troubled  preoccupation with procreation. She is a  member of a colony of Earth refugees encased in a plastic bubble on Gaea, a distant planet. Somehow, although Gaea was  predicted by Earth scientists to be hospitable, miscarriage and infertUity are rampant. Could it be that the hormonal contraception used initiaUy by the colonists has  contributed to the problem?  One of the most intriguing aspects of  Dreams is the description of Estros, a fer-  VVOKLt^  tility ritual instituted by the colony's governors to force reproductive activity. The Estros ritual is preceded by hormonal stimulation of both women and men in mandatory milkshakes at every meal. In response  to the threat of species extinction, colonists  go to extremes to seduce one another with  sUk clothes that have "foldovers hiding secret openings or loose legs with slits that  shde open and closed."  My favourite accessories were the "sen-  susHns," sHn-tight garments incorporating inserts at erotogenic areas that vibrate  when the shghtest pressure is exerted on  them.  But even the frenzied Estros preparations  are not enough to counteract the mysterious  force that prevents conception. The colony's  governors, including Miera's therapist, are  reluctant to acknowledge the seriousness of  the problem. But information about the status of various hfe-forms is classified secret  and monitoring has been stepped up—even  dreams must be recorded.  Much of the book involves Lilith's struggle to acknowledge and ultimately embrace  the strangeness of the Oankali who are experts in mental genetic manipulation. Lilith  is a classic Butler heroine: honest, open,  courageous and faUible. Although her resistance to the Oankali goes right to the marrow of her bones, her experience with them  aUows her to create a whole new set of responses. At the same time, she never loses  her identity or sense of herself as an ordinary woman caught in extraordinary circumstances.  CROWN OF STARS  by James Tiptree, Jr.  Tom Doherty Associates, 1988  This is the last collection of short fiction  by Alice Sheldon who used the pseudonym  James Tiptree, Jr. for most of her writing.  Sheldon died recently. Her wonderful short  stories have been published in several anthologies. Crown of Stars contains several  uncoUected gems as weU as some new items.  One of the characteristics of Sheldon's  work is a sense of irony that buUds into  powerfuUy expressed anger. "Yanqui Doodle," the first story in the coUection, is a  good example of what I mean. Set in 1998 in  Bodegua, a generic Latin American country  in the midst of a civU war between the Gue-  Although Gaea was predictecL.to be hospitable,  miscarriage and infertility are rampant.  mmnmmrmm  Miera becomes involved in a dangerous  search for the truth about Gaea and the  colony's problems, propeUed by her own  desperate unhappiness: a broken love affair,  mysterious hostility from coUeagues at work  and dreams of a pervasive red presence that  frighten her awake every night.  Plowright's writing is extraordinarily  vivid whether she is describing the rusthng  of silk as Estros celebrators cruise the corridors or a glimpse through the colony's porthole of Gaea's "flat circular rolls of spongy  ground running endlessly red to the distant  foothUls where more red surged up to cover  the sky."  Miera, too, is a weU-drawn, down-to-  earth character whose story totaUy absorbed me. You'U have to read it yoursed,  though, to find out d the birth control pills  were to blame for the colony's problems.  DAWN: XENOGENESIS  by Octavia Butler  Popular Library, 1987  Octavia Butler's books are always gripping, and wonderfuUy strange. She is without peer when it comes to the depiction of  ahen races, forcing her readers to transcend  the visual barriers imposed by head-to-toe  fur, tentacles and other repelling characteristics.  She is also fascinated with aU aspects of  mind control, buUding on the phenomenon  of telepathy and taking it far beyond  mind-to-mind communication. In her Pat-  ternmaster series, for example, characters  achieve immortality by UteraUy taking over  the bodies of other people.  In Dawn, the author once again takes  the theme of mind control to the extreme.  The book opens with Lilith awakening in a  tiny ceU, the captive of invisible interroga-  varistas and the Libras, it has two paraUel  plots. One foUows the route of an American  pohtician traveUing through Bodegua on a  kind of victory tour, almost completely insulated by his racism and imperialism from  perceiving the people or the country. Counterpoised to the politician's experience, the  second plot describes an American soldier  whose awareness of the consequences of his  own brutal behaviour is only too vivid. Reality is ultimately confronted in an apocalyptic climax that took my breath away.  "Morality Meat" takes on a different battle. Incredibly bitter and full of rage, the  story is an ominous snapshot of a near-  future world where abortion is "forbidden  forever." The Right-To-Lde Adoption Centre staggers under the weight of babies "inexorably being born, unrelentingly flooding  down."  For every kind of reason, women come to  the Centre with their infants: the woman  whose "revolutionary" boyfriend put pinholes in her diaphragm, the older, poor  woman whose child has multiple deformities, the young ex-K-Mart worker who explains  I couldn't feed us both ... when you get  good and are due for your fidl salary, they  fire you and hire other trainees because  it's cheaper and the new girls are almost  as good because they try so hard.  One young mother, Maylan, thinks the  pain of relinquishing her baby would be reduced d she could see the adoptive parents.  MercduUy, Sheldon does not aUow Maylan  to accompany the reader to the chUd's gruesome destination.  Not aU the stories in Crown of Stars are  dramatic warnings hke those I've described,  but each has its own powerful impact. Alice Sheldon has been described as SF's best  short story writer. This coUection supports  that claim.  KINESIS ////////////////^^^^^  //////////////////////^^^^^  bulletin Board  Read this  AU hstings must be received no later than  the 18th of the month preceding publicar  tion. Listings are limited to 75 words and  should include a contact name and telephone number for any clarification that may  be required. Listings should be typed or  neatly handwritten, double-spaced on 8 \  by 11 paper. Listings wdl not be accepted  over the telephone. Groups, organizations  and individuals eligible for free space in the  BuUetin Board must be, or have, non-profit  objectives. Other free notices wUl be items  of general pubhc interest and wiU appear at  the discretion of Kinesis.  Classified are $6 for the first 75 words or  portion thereof, $2 for each additional 25  words or portion thereof. Deadline for classifieds is the 18th of the month preceding  pubhcation. Kinesis wiU not accept classifieds over the telephone. AU classifieds must  be prepaid.  For Bulletin Board submissions send  copy to Kinesis Attn: Bulletin Board, 301-  1720 Grant Street, Vancouver, B.C. V5L  2Y6. For more information caU 255-5499.  \EV E N  T.S  COMMUNITY HOUSING  The Tenants' Rights Coalition reminds  you that a Community Housing meeting  will be held the 1st Wed. of every month  at 7:30 pm, #203-2250 Commercial Dr.  For more info call 255-3099.  EVENT SIE VENT SIE VENTS  ART EXHIBIT  "Would You Put This on Your Bed?"  draws on conventions of quiltmaking to  express concerns about contemporary society. Paintings by Debbie Bryant, Quilts  by Wendy Lewington-Coulter. Women in  Focus Arts and Media Ctr., 849 Beatty  St., noon-5 pm, Wed.-Sun., Sept 28-  Oct. 22. Opening Wed. Sept 27, 7:30  pm. Artists' talks Wed. Oct. 4, 7:30 pm.  Call 682-5848 for more info.  PID CONFERENCE  "PID: The Costs." Speakers, panels, discussion groups on prevention and social,  infertility, and health care cost of Pelvic  Inflammatory Disease. Sat., Oct. 28, 9  am-4 pm; Segal Conference Ctr., SFU  Harbour Centre, 515 W. Hastings. Everyone welcome. Registration free. Lunch  provided, childcare available. For info call  Cdn. PID Society, 684-5704.  WOMEN'S DROP-IN BASKETBALL  Runs from Sept. 16-Dec. 9 (except Nov.  11) Saturdays, 10:30 am to 12:30 pm. at  Britannia Gym B, (opposite the parking  lot), 1661 Napier St. Emphasis on participation and fun. Cost for ten sessions $10.,  or $2 per drop-in visit. For further info call  Britannia, 253-4391 or Esther, 255-6554.  IN VISIBLE COLOURS  Tix on sale in Oct. for Int'l Women of  Colour and Third World Women Film and  Video Festival and Symposium. Volunteers are needed for this event which will  run Nov. 15-19 at Robson Square Media  Ctr., SFU Harbour Ctr. and the Van East  Cinema. Sponsors: NFB, Women in Focus, Van. Society on Immigrant Women.  For more info call 685-1137.  FREE LAW CLASS  "Women and the Law" will look at legal issues affecting women—in the workplace, in relationships, in crisis. Tues.  Oct. 3 from 7-9 pm at the Killar-  ney Community Ctr., 6260 Killarney St.  Wheelchair accessible. Please pre-register  at 434-9167  RACE RELATIONS CONFERENCE  "Beyond the Komagata Maru: Race Relations Today." What has changed in the  75 years since this incident? Exploring  new directions for Canada's multi-racial  future. Sat., Oct. 7, 8 am-5 pm, New  World Harbourside Hotel, 1133 W. Hastings St. Keynote speaker: George Watts.  Panel discussions, workshops. Tix $20-  $30 (incl. banquet). Childcare available.  To register call 594-3833. Sponsored by  the Progressive Indo-Canadian Community Services Society.  NEW THEATRE  Vancouver Little Theatre and Pink Ink  present "Element of Fire," a play by  Sharon Butala. A story of a mother and  daughter who struggle to sustain the human spirit in the face of daily suffering.  Runs Oct. 10-Nov. 4, 8:30 pm, Tues.  through Sat. at 3102 Main St. Tix $10.  Call 876-4165 for info  "AL-FATEH" REVOLUTION  Slide show presentation and overview of  Libyan politics and 20th Anniversary celebrations, by delegates of Van. Native prisoner support group Thurs. Oct. 5, 8 pm  at La Quena, 1111 Commercial Dr.  FROM SAN FRANCISCO  Asian Lesbians of Vancouver (ALOV)  present Trinity Ordona and her slideshow,  "Coming Out, Coming Together," as part  of a benefit to take place Sun. Oct. 8  at 8 pm, in the Langara Student Union  Bldg., 100 W. 49th Ave. Come support  this new Vancouver group and experience  a moving evening on Asian/Pacific Lesbians. Wheelchair accessible. Tix at door:  $3-7 sliding scale. Women only! For more  info on ALOV, contact Chris (255-2004)  or Marlene (253-4137)  FILM SERIES  Langara Women's Studies presents "Visions: Women of the World," a film  and panel discussion series. All showings  Thurs. 12:30-2:30, Room A327, Langara  Campus. Call 324-5379 for info. Oct. 12:  "Doctor, Lawyer, Indian Chief"—Native  Women in Canada tell of their struggles  and achievements. Oct. 19: "Displaced  View"—Three generations of Japanese-  Canadian women. Oct. 26: "Creating  Bridges"—Latin American women make  theatre their route into life in Canada.  Nov. 2: "Asian Heart"—The reality of  "mail order" brides  DOING TIME  Sculpture by Persimmon Blackbridge.  Text by Michelle Kanashiro-Christensen,  Geri Ferguson, Lynn MacDonald and Bea  Walkus. Oct. 14-Nov. 4: Carnegie Ctr.  Gallery, 401 Main St., 3rd Fir., 10 am-  midnight daily; Pitt Int'l Galleries, 36  Powell St., noon-5 pm Tues.-Sun.; and  various East Side community groups.  Opening Fri. Oct. 13, 8 pm, at Pitt and  Carnegie Galleries  SINGLE MOTHERS' CONFERENCE  The 11th Annual Single Mothers' Weekend Conference will be held at the  YWCA, 580 Burrard St., Oct. 14-15.  Produced by and for single mothers  to "Network-Nurture-Empower." Registration $35 (childcare included). Call 683-  2531 for subsidy, workshop, childcare or  registration details  WOMEN'S JAM NIGHT  Nite Moves magazine/Women in Music  presents a Women's Jam Night at the  Railway Club, 579 Dunsmuir upstairs, the  1st Tues. of every month  HALLOWEEN DYKE DANCE  VLC's annual bash at the Capri Hall, Fri.  Oct. 27 at 8 pm. Sliding scale $4-$6;  childcare is provided. Wheelchair accessible. 3925 Fraser St.  FROM SOUTH AFRICA  Lawyer Shehnaz Meer from the Cape  Town Legal Resources Centre will visit  Vancouver from Oct. 20-23rd. For details of her trip, contact OXFAM at 736-  7678  POSTER ART  Fear of Others/Art Against Racism  presents courtesy of CUSO: "Too Many  People Suffering," an exhibit of Resistance Poster Art from South Africa. At  the VECC Gallery, 1895 Venables St., until Oct. 29, noon-6 pm daily  TRANSFORMING TOMORROW  "Women's Studies in the Secondary  Schools" conference will be held Nov. 2-  4 at SFU Harbour Ctr., 515 W. Hastings  St. Sponsored by the Women's Studies  Program and the Ruth Wynn Woodward  Endowed chair at SFU. Call 291-3593 for  program info or 291-3649 to register  ^SANCTUARY?  The Headlines Theatre presentation will  appear at the VECC Nov. 3-4 at 8:30  pm. A forum theatre event sharing immigrant and refugee experience. Ticket info  at 254-9578  DEAF-BLIND FORUM  A forum for sharing information and advocacy techniques for Deaf-Blind persons  will be held Oct. 14, 8:30 am-4:30 pm, at  the King Edward Campus of VCC, 1155  E. Broadway. For more info call Shari Lyle  at 875-6111,local 448  PRO-CHOICE BENEFIT  A music and poetry benefit to celebrate  the first anniversary of Everywoman's  Health Centre. Sat. Nov. 4 at 8 pm at the  Western Front, 303 E. 8th, Van. All welcome. Tix $5. Call R2B2 Books for info:  732-5087  WALK FOR CHOICE  TAKE PART IN A NATIONAL  STATEMENT  WE ARE CANADA'S  MAJORITY  OCT. 14,1989  11 a.m.: Meet:  Queen Elizabeth  Theatre Plaza  (corner of Hamilton & Georgia)  Noon:    Walk: West Georgia to  Howe to Beach  lp.m.:   Rally: Sunset Beach  Sponsored by the B.C. Coalition for  Abortion Clinics  PROTEST SHELL  A demonstration to protest Shell's support of apartheid will be held at the corner  of Victoria Dr. and E. Hastings on Wed.  Oct 11 at 4:30 pm. Sponsored by the  Anti-Apartheid Network. Call 737-0041  for info  GROUPS  REDEYE WANTS YOU  The Sat. morning arts and public affairs  show on Co-op Radio needs your help,  whether it's once a week or once a month.  For more info, call Jane at 255-8173  LA QUENA  Volunteers urgently needed by La Quena,  a non-profit Coffee House at 1111 Commercial Dr. Only 4 hrs. a week time commitment. Please contact Erika at 251-  6626 or 251-5580  SINGLE MOTHERS' SURVIVAL  Runs Oct. 4th-Nov. 8th, Wed. evenings,  6:30-8:30 pm. Childcare provided. Cost  on sliding scale to $20. The course includes evenings on welfare rights, self esteem and relationships and is held at Van.  Status of Women, #301-1720 Grant St.  Call the YWCA: 683-2531 or VSW: 255-  5511 to register  SEE NEXT PAGE  The Partners of Conned Stowe  are pleased to announce that  Megan Rehill Ellis  is affiliated with the firm as  Associate Counsel  CQNNELL STOWE  Barristers & Solicitors  Suite 201  111 Water Street  Vancouver, B.C.  V6B 1A7  Telephone (604) 683-1321  Kinesis  Position  Available  Ad Saleswoman  This is a part-time commission  position maintaining Kinesis  advertising accounts and  soliciting new advertisers. No  direct advertising sales  experience is required. We are  seeking a woman who is  well-organized, self-motivating  and creative, and possesses good  communication skills.  For more information about this position,  please call Nancy at 255-5499.  Send applications to Kinesis, #3011720  Grant Street, Vancouver, BC V5L1Y6  Vs J  KINESIS Bulletin Board  From previous page  WORKSHOPSISUBMISSIONSISUBMISSIONS  GROUPS  AIDS VANCOUVER  Volunteers needed to work on the hotline.  If you have a fixed availability one day a  week, please call 687-AIDS  CUSTODY/ACCESS SUPPORT  Munroe House Second Stage Housing for  Battered Women has begun a support  group for women having problems with  custody and access. Meetings this month  are Oct. 11, 10 am-noon and Oct. 25,  7-9 pm in Room 207. YWCA. Call Ajax  at 734-5722 for info  KINESIS NEWS GROUP  The Kinesis news group meets monthly to  plan for the upcoming issue. Next meeting is Thurs Oct. 5, 1:30 pm at the Kinesis office, 301-1720 Grant St. If you  are interested in writing for Kinesis, come  to the news group meeting. If you can't  make the meeting, call 255-5499 to find  out how you^an get involved. No experience is necessary.  UNLEARNING RACISM  For women and men will be held Nov.  24-26. Facilitated by Alliance of Women  Against Racism Etc. (AWARE). The  workshop is to be half people of colour  and half white people. Location: Camp  Alexandra in White Rock (wheelchair accessible). Sliding scale $20-$150. Register  from Nov. 1st. For info and registration  call Celeste George at 251-2635 or Janet  Hirakida at 734-8165  FOR JEWISH WOMEN  Tikkun   Olam—weekend   workshop   for  Jewish women on issues of anti-Semitism,  Nov. 10-12. See Movement Matters for  details  PAINTING WORKSHOP  by Phyllis Serota. This wonderful painter  from Victoria will lead 4 sessions on  colour in painting, starting Oct. 8 from  12 to 5 pm at Britannia for $100. She  will speak and show her slides Oct. 29 at  Britannia Ctr. For more info call Janet at  253-7624 or Ellen at 253-3395  ASSERTIVENESS TRAINING  An Assertiveness Training group will run  at VSW, #301-1720 Grant St., free of  charge. Starting Oct. 17th, it will take  place Tues. mornings, 10 am-noon, for 6  weeks. Pleas pre-register by calling Trisha  at 255-5511 (after 1 pm). Childcare subsidy available  SUBMISSIONS  BLACK STAGE WOMEN  Call for nation-wide submissions from  Black Women Playwrights. One Acts,  Full Lengths, Dramatised Prose/Poetry  to be included in anthology. New and  already-produced scripts and works-in-  progress will be considered. Send submissions to: "Black Stage Women," c/o Sister Vision Press, P.O. Box 217, Stn. E,  Toronto, Ont. M6H 4E2  WOMEN AND HOUSING  Canadian Women Studies/les cahiers de  la femme invites contributions for a special issue on Women and Housing. Possible topics are housing rights, causes of  homelessness, Native women and housing, women's initiatives in housing etc.  Deadline: Dec. 10. 1989. For submission details contact: Canadian Women  Studies, 212 Founders College, York University, 4700 Keele St., Downsview, Ont.  M3J 1P3. (416) 736-5356  DISABLED WOMEN  Short stories, essays, poems, quotations,  graphics and B&W photos are sought  from women with physical (hidden or visible), mental or emotional disabilities. Object: a book which displays the courage  and desires of women with disabilities.  To send a contribution or request more  info, write to Kelly at Disabled Women's  Anthology, 15165-88th Ave., Surrey, B.C.  V3S 2S6  BIRTH CONTROL  The Montreal Health Press needs B&W  photos for an updated book on birth control. Invited are images of couples, singles and groups from teens to 40's—  talking, working, playing etc. Honourar-  ium for each image used. Deadline: Nov.  1 to Les Presses de la Sante de Montreal/  Montreal Health Press, C.P. 1000, Stn.  Place du Pare, Montreal, P.Q. H2W 2N1  BLACK LESBIAN ANTHOLOGY  Literary anthology for, by and about  Black Lesbians seeks poetry (any form  or length) and short fiction (25 pp.  max.) Send unpublished submissions and  queries with SASE to: Terri Jewell, 211  W. Saginaw—#2, Lansing, Michigan,  USA 48933. Deadline April 1990  DREADLOCKS  Black Feminist writer seeks women with  dreadlocks for anthology. Wants photos  and women's own words on the experience of locking their hair. If you are a  Dreadwoman or know of any, please contact Terri Jewell at above address. Full  info on request  MOTHERS' WRITING  Wanted for radio show: diaries, journals,  poetry, essays, stories, tips etc. Please  send copy (not original) to: Dragu (Editor), Van. Main Post Office, Box 4618,  Vancouver, B.C. V6B 4A1  EROTIC CONDITIONS  Lesbian feminist magazine seeks poetry,  short fiction, novel excerpts, drama and  esp. non-fiction prose for "Conditions:  17, The Erotic." Only writings previously  unpublished in the U.S. will be considered. Photos and visual art also welcomed. Deadline: Feb. 1. 1990. Send  submissions and   SASE  to:  Conditions,  Box 159046, Brooklyn, N.Y., USA 11215-  9046. (716) 788-8654  Women In Focus and the National Film Board  with support from Vancouver Society on Immigrant Women  present  A   Inyisible   '  Colours  An International Film/Video j  Festival & Symposium  Celebrating the cinema of Women of Colour  and Third World Women  November 15 - 19, 1989  • SFU Harbour Centre  • Robson Square Media Centre  • Vancouver East Cinema  For more information and registration, call:  (604)685-1137  849 Beatty St.,      Vancouver,   BC  V6B 2M6 FAX:   (604)666-1569  E  KINESIS ///////////////////^^^^^  //////////////////^^^  bulletin Board  asEHBDME mtahijh*] «g3aaiai=i»]  SOMF OTrtER  NEW T}1IN6S ABouT  \  •NewNose       ^^ fuplNJECTlOHS,)  "   (H0S570B) K CAPPED IteTfi J  mew sk£fr£rs   £He <tl$°  I pftDOtA/b  J  m FACT,   tl£f<£  &   TM£  High school y£ar$ook»*  uves ?  CLASS FED  HOME CARE HELP  Excellent housecleaning, cooking, shopping, errands—Thorough, reliable, experienced, references. Call Linda at 879-  1018  ASTROLOGY AND TAROT  Astrology, tarot, and crystal ball readings.  Feminist. Reasonable rates. Phone Cleo  at 255-9189  CITY VIEW CO-OP  Vacancies Oct. 1st & Nov. 1st in Spanish/English co-op. Rent $470/580/700  for 1/2/3 BR units, plus share purchase  (financing can be arranged). Write membership ctee., 108-1885 E. Pender St.,  Vancouver V5L 1W6  CHARLES SQUARE CO-OP  Charles Square, a 36 unit housing co-op  in East Van has an open waiting list for 1,  2, and 3 BR units. Rents are $460, $570  and $705 with $1,000 share purchase (financing can be arranged). Near park and  community centre; meetings run by consensus. To get on waiting list, send SASE  to Membership Ctee., 1555 Charles St.,  Van. V5L 2T2  VILLA DE HERMANAS  Our All Women's Caribbean Beachfront  Guesthouse awaits you. Beautiful, LF  owned Spanish style villa on long, secluded beach in the Dominican Republic. Small tropical gardens, oceanside  pool, spacious comfortable common areas with large balconies and magnificent ocean view. Private, large, airy guestrooms, sumptuous meals and drinks, relaxing massages and healing crystal readings. Room rates: $300 single; $400 double per week. For reservations call our  Toronto friend, Suzi, at (416) 462-0046,  9 am to 10 pm.  PEACEFUL RETREAT  Bed and Breakfast located on Salt Spring  Island. Close to Fulford Harbour and  Ruckle Park. Cozy rooms with private entrances. A comfortable setting for \  in a feminist home. Phone Maure  653-4345 for info and reservations.  SEEKING ACCOMMODATION  Fifty year-old lesbian N/S N/D moving  from interior of B.C. to Vancouver area,  would like shared or other accommodation for Nov. '89. Responsible and mature. 2620 P.V. Rd. S., C #2, RR #1,  Armstrong B.C.  HOUSEMATES WANTED  N/S sociable, working lesbian with cat  wants to share house with same. Vancouver for Nov. 1st. $300 (approx.) Call  Penny 877-0025  GOLDEN THREADS  A contact publication for lesbians over  50 and women who love older women.  Canada and U.S. Confidential, warm, reliable. For free info send self-addressed envelope (U.S. residents please stamp it). -  Sample copy mailed discreetly. $5 (U.S.) .  Golden Threads, PO Box 3177, Burlington VT, 05401.  WELLS BOOK GROUP  Autobiographies, biographies, books by  and about women. Adams, Barrett-  Browning, Brontes, Carr, Dinesen, Davis,  Farraro, Earhart, Freidan, Gonne, Greene,  Hickok, Joplin, Laurence, Mandela, Mil-  lett, Roosevelt, Rhys, Roy, Sackviile-  West, Stein, Suyin, Steineim, Wilson,  Wolfe ... are just a few of the books  for sale. We also sell Arctic and Sea materials. To order write: Diane Wells, The  Wells Book Group, 958 Page Ave., Victoria. B.C. V9B 2M6. Women Booksellers  TRIVIA  A special 2-part series inspired by the  3rd Int'l Feminist Book Fair in Montreal.  "Trivia 13—Memory/Transgression: Women Writing in Quebec" includes Nicole  Brossard and Gail Scott—language as  irreducibly political. "Trivia 14—Language/Difference: Writing in Tongues"  includes Gloria Anzaldua and Lee Maracle—cultural traditions and histories  shaping women's use of language. Both  for $10 from: TRIVIA, P.O. Box 606-A,  N. Amherst, MA, USA 01059  SHIATSU REIKI LABOUR  ASSISTANCE  For every woman's greater self and body  awareness! Tender yet thorough, specifically tailored to each woman's own very  personal state of balance. I use special  body manipulation to promote full body  relaxation and enhance one's own intuition towards self healing. In my specialized sessions with expectant mothers we  create a warm, nurturing space promoting a healthy attitude towards pregnancy,  birth and the post-partum period. Peggi  Francis 737-7930 sliding scale fee. Two  sessions for $35 with ref. to this ad  LOCAL BODYWORKER PREDICTS  ... the crisis of the 90's! Interviewed in  her home last week, Shiatsu practitioner  Astarte Sands predicted the 1990's would  see a Tension Crisis. "What with all these  folks running around hoarding their tension in their necks and shoulders, I think  we may soon see a tension shortage."  Astarte claims that tension, like money,  must be continuously circulating to serve  all members of society. "Held tension  goes nowhere," she observed. "As people begin to hoard their tension, we will  soon experience a shortage and without  tension everything will simply fall apart."  The solution according to Astarte is to  recycle your tension. "I see tension composts as being key to our survival. We  need to establish community sites where  people can drop off their tension. Heaps  of composted tension everywhere. Then  we can put it to good use." Astarte has  started a tension compost and offers this  as part of her service. 251-5409  RESOURCE DIRECTORY  Evergreen Transition House has compiled  a Lower Mainland/Fraser Valley directory of services specifically for women  in abusive situations. For copies of this  free manual, please forward request by  mail to: Surrey Community Resource Society, 15164 Fraser Hwy., Surrey, B.C.  V3R 2P1, attention Maggie at Evergreen.  Include cheque for postage (payable to  SCRS): 1 copy: $1.90, 2 copies: $2.55. 3-  5 copies: $2.65  FALL WORKSHOPS  Choices Unlimited Counselling Group.  In our fall workshops we use the following techniques: Family Reconstruction, Reality Therapy, Control Theory,  Family Systems, Experiential work including Play, Art and Humour. Workshop titles: Shame using Family Reconstruction; Relationships—Reruns or  Recycling?; Family of Origin Workshop; Work—Are you really working or  are you re-enacting dysfunctional family patterns?; Parenting—Breaking the  ACOA Cycle (mother/daughter facilitators); Christmas—Oh no, Not Again! Call  for dates and fees: 733-4888. Individual  and family counselling also offered  HOUSEHOLD GOODS FOR SALE  Complete single bed, three shelves and  bricks, kitchen shelf-table, small ladder,  foot stool, night table, long plush couch,  iron and ironing board. Call 255-2766  Shani Mootoo is a Vancouver painter whose series on child sexual abuse This is Our  Little Secret, is on display at the Surrey Art Gallery until October 17th. Call 596-7461  for gallery hours.  SELF-AWARENESS/DEFENSE  There will be a Women's Self-Awareness,  Self-Defense 2-day workshop (based on  Wenlido), Sun. Oct. 15 and Sun. Oct.  22, 10 am-5:30 pm, both days inclusive.  Cost is $40 each, with some fee reduction  possible, with 14 women maximum. Gitta  Ridder, an experienced, qualified teacher  will be instructing. Call 879-1018 for info  and registration  L  VANCOUVER  WOMEN'S  BOOKSTORE  315 Cambie Street  Vancouver, B.C. V6B 2N4  (604) 684-0523  Hours: Monday - Saturday  7\  11:00-5:30 pm  J  WI9Dorv\.   CHOOSE  VRON\  WlDB  CR©« VBC-TloM TYPtFMN©  HCR   MYRIAD FORMS-   FROM  many cuu-rorate anc aoes.  Send$/.oo For current  CATALOGUE  TO    LINPA, Nl ACFARLANE,  */o«f Vancouver st. .victoria  B-C-      V8V   3T4 , CANAPA.  KINESIS LIBRARY PROCESSING CENTRE - SERIALS  2206 EAST MALL, U.B.C.  VANCOUVER , B.C.  V6T 1Z8       INV-E 9004  What's  Why not Kinesis?  Published 10 times a year  by Vancouver Status of Women  #301-1720 Grant St., Vancouver, B.C. V5L 2Y6  □ VSW Membership-$25.50 (or what you can afford)-includes Kinesis subscriptionj  □ Kinesis subscription only - $17.50 □ Sustainers - $75  □ Institutions - $45 □ New  □ Here's my cheque □ Renewal  D BUl me D Gift subscription for a friend