 VANCOUVER STATUS OF WOMEN  1090 West 7th Ave  Vancouver V6H 1B3  KINESIS  50c  INSIDE  VSW moves to 1090 West 7th/ and no word yet from  the Provincial Secretary's Department    1  Women workers might upset the crew's wives    3  AUCE: the struggle for a living wage ■  6  7  8  12  MUCKAMUCK: It's been a long time    Betsy Wood and Gay Hoon are not guilty    MARCH 8 CELEBRATIONS. We go marching in the beauty of the day  CENTRE FEATURE  ......  Confronting Sexism in the CBC: Sylvia Spring takes on her  old bosses, and they promise to smarten up    18  23  .  gov: o  OWB  SUBSCRIBE TO KINESIS!  Published By Vancouver Status of Women  1090 West 7th Ave, Vancouver. V6H 1B3  Subscriber Only _  Member/Subscriber  AMOUNT ENCLOSED:  Subs are $8/year Individual (or what you can afford), $15/year Institutions.  VSW membership is by donation. Please remember that VSW operates on  inadequate funding — we need member support!  1 CP \ V  lg§  Vancouver Status of Women  vol 8 no i Old days at 2029,  Final Days at 2029 West 4th. . .  City Council  Rejects Us  Vancouver City Council railroaded community grants through on Tuesday March  6. Vancouver Status of Women was among  groups, including DERA, whose proposals  were summarily dismissed.  Neither Council nor the Community Services Committee bothered to inform us  that our grant was being considered.  Information provided to Council about  our budget misrepresented our actual  position. A figure of some $190,000  was presented as being our projected  budget for the coming year.  However, we had made it clear in an  interview with a representative of  city hall, and in our application,  that there is NO possibility that we  will in fact receive this level of  funding.  We are, in reality, on the verge of  either drastically cutting back on our  services or of totally eliminating them  if some commitment for ongoing support  is not received this month.  Council's hasty dismissal of our grant,  and of other community grants, is an  indication that the welfare of the people in this city is indeed a low priority for the majority of city councillors^I  After five years at 2029 West 4th. Ave.,  Vancouver Status of Women is packing its  bags. We are moving to a new location at  7th and Spruce (one block west of Oak).  The NEW ADDRESS OF VSW : Vancouver Status  of Women, 1090 West 7th Ave., Vancouver  B.C. V6H 1B3.  We will keep our old phone number: 736  1313.  VSW will be closed for the week of  March 19 - 23, as we sort out and  move five years of feminist herstory.  If you can drop by for a few hours  and help us move, we would be very  happy to see you.  About VSW's Funding  As yet, no word from the Provincial  Secretary^  Our New Address  1090 West 7th  Vancouver  March 31:   Day of Action for Abortion Rights  March 31, 1979 has been designated as  an International day of action for  abortion rights.  Activities are being planned for  that day in B.C., Alberta, Saskatchewan, Ontario and Quebec as well as  in the U.S. and Europe.  In Vancouver, Concerned Citizens for  Choice on Abortion (CCCA) is organizing a demonstration and rally  on abortion rights for March 31.  The restrictive laws in the federal  Criminal Code do not require hospitals  to perform abortions.  Indeed, the  Badgeley Report of 1977 showed that  fewer than half the public general  hospitals in B.C. have set up abortion committees.  Although women in the Lower Mainland  are still able to obtain safe, hospital abortions, we are among the  most privileged in Canada.  This is why CCCA has added the goal  of repeal of the anti-abortion laws  from the Criminal Code to our list  of aims.  More than 40 organizations endorsed  CCCA last summer, during our campaign to preserve the open abortion  policy at Vancouver General Hospital. '  We now seek other endorsement of our  aims, as follows:  l)Defense of each woman's right to  freedom of choice on abortion.  2)That the decision on abortion  should be made by the woman concerned in consultation with her doctor.  3)Defense of the right to choose a-  gainst those who attempt to prohibit  access to abortion as a hospital procedure.  4)Repeal of the anti-abortion laws  from the Criminal Code of Canada.  We know that we must fight to defend  the availability of abortions as well  as for repeal.  Government cutbacks  against social services are increasing and are increasingly aimed at  health care. At the same time, anti-  abortionists continue to mobilize.  For example 60,000 "Right-to-Lifers"  marched in Washington, D.C. in Jan.  We want to build a massive abortion  rights movement in B.C. and in Canada.  PARADE: March 31 at 1 p.m.   From the  Queen Elizabeth Plaza down Georgia  to Robson Square Auditorium for the  RALLY.  Speakers at the Rally include  Mercia Stickney, Astrid Davidson  and Debra Rooney% Women's Studies  Conference  The Women's Studies Association of  B.C. is holding its spring conference March 23 and 24 at Capilano  College, North Vancouver.  On Friday night there will be a panel and forum discussion led by Helga  Jacobson and on Saturday there will  be a series of workshops including:  Androgyne, Union Women in B.C., Women in the 'Marginal' Work World,  Women in Non-Traditional Occupations,  and Canadian Women Poets, Music and  Social Change.  The conference is open to all women  with a self-proclaimed interest in  Women's Studies, staff, faculty and  students.  For more information call Sheila  Perret at 684-2457 between 10 a.m.  and noon§  Labour Rallies to Defend Rights  BCFW Meeting  The B.C. Federal of Women is inviting all women to attend a two-day  regional conference, April 28 and  29 in Vancouver.  Focus: Who are we,  where are we and what are we doing?  There will be workshops in constructive criticism, community organizing  and on alienated and/or burnt out  feminists.  Pre-registration is necessary for  meals and childcare.  Location will  be announced at a later date.  For more information or if you wish  to display an art form call Connie,  738-0926, Marg, 251-2302, Miriam,  876-8283 or Lyn, 294-0565#  VSW  holding workshops  On March 24 and 24, Vancouver Status  of Women will be holding a two-day  workshop on:  Communications Skills  Assertiveness Training  Legal Research  This two day workshop is FREE.  Location: Mount Pleasant Family Place,  10 am to 4 pm. Call VSW 736 1313  for more details. Ask for Debra or  SusanO  Need Help  With That Child  Tax Credit?  Call Vancouver Status of Women at  736 1313, from Monday through Friday for an appointment.  VSW will be scheduling workshops  on the Child Tax Credit as soon  as we get settled in at our new  location at 1090 West 7th.  Cat is the person to ask for#  7LKS  More than 3,500 trade unionists and  supporters rallied at the Orpheum on  March 17 to defend free collective  bargaining rights.  They demonstrated labour's opposition  to recently introduced amendments to  the Essential Services Disputes Act.  The amendments to the Act were tacked  on to Bill 46, introduced by the government to end the West Kootenay school dispute, as Section 11 and proclaim-  . ed on January 5, 1979.  With the proclamation of Section 11,  the Essential Services Disputes Act  •now effectively removes free collective  bargaining rights from more than 34,000  public employees in B.C.  We're being used by the government,  trade union leaders told the rally.  'Bill 46 is- just the latest in a series  of attacks. Bill after bill, they said,  has legislated away the rights of individual workers in B.C. to negotiate  things like pension plans (e.g. B.C.  Hydro and B.C.Rail) and in one case  a union was simply legislated out of  existence and the workers' collective,  agreement nullified (Notre Dame University) .  B.C.Federation of Labour president  Jim Kinnaird produced a letter at the  rally which Labour Minister Allan Williams had written to Missouri, asking  for detials of that state's recent  referendum on "right to work."#  Body Politic Acquitted  Publishers of the Body Politic, Canada's national gay newspaper, were a-  cquitted on Valentine's Day on charges of using the mails for the purposes of distributing "immoral, indecent, or scurrilous" material.  In acquitting the three officers of  the corporation Judge Sidney Harris  said I am satisfied that The Body Politic is a serious journal of news  and opinion.  Parliament has failed to provide the  court with sufficiently percise guidelines to enable the court to come to  any conclusion.  Harris also took a swipe at the legal  establishment, strongly criticizing  the Crown for presenting what he called shoddy legal arguments.  Charges against Pink Triangle Press  were laid Jan. 5, 1978 after The Body  Politic (published by Pink Triangle)  printed an article entitled "Men Loving Boys Loving Men" which dealt with  child-adult sexual relationships.  Possession of obscene material for the  purpose of distribution was also laid  because the press had been selling  Loving Man, a gay male sex manual a-  vailable in most book stores.  These  second charges were dropped immediately after Harris' decision on the  first charge.  Judge Harris said that he had considered each of the three categories  specified in the law: immoral, indecent and scurrilous.  Regarding 'immoral' he said: I find it impossible  to determine as a matter of law, what  is moral or immoral.  In discussing 'indecent' he pointed  out that the subject matter of the article may or may not be indecent, what  is at issue is the way it was handled.  Harris did not feel the article was  'scurrilous' either.  Scurrilous, he  said, implied a direct attack on someone identifiable and in the absence  of any evidence as to the existence of  any person,  group or entity allegedly  abused or insulted,  I cannot find this  issue scurrilous.  The arrests and trial have already received widespread media coverage.  Judge Harris' controversial decision  is likely to receive even more0 Women Workers Might Upset
Okanagan-based Richard Chapman & Associates Ltd. refused to employ Jane
Gawne as a chainperson for survey
work because she is a woman. Hiring
a woman, says the company, creates
problems: first, the cost to the company of obtaining an extra room for
out of town trips and second, the
fact that hiring a woman might upset \"
the wives of other crew members.
Job interviewer Richard Chapman told
applicant Jane Gawne that, it is too
impractical to hire her to go out of
town.     Chapman was also quoted as
saying he had hired a woman before
and there had been problems - it had
not worked out.
Undaunted, Gawne took the matter to
the human rights branch. Last month
a one-woman board of inquiry ordered
Chapman and boys to pay Gawne almost
$800 in lost wages and expenses as a
result of their refusal to hire her.
Chapman's defence before the board
was that he did not hire Gawne because
there was no job as chainperson for
anyone - male or female - on Nov. 30,
the day she was interviewed. He said
this despite the fact that the local
Canada Manpower office had posted a
listing for a vacancy at Chapman's
firm.
In handing down a judgment the board
pointed out that Chapman, made no attempt to cancel the notice showing a
position for a chainperson with his
firm after learning of it on Nov. 30,
as one might have expected had there
been no opening.
The view that Chapman regarded the.
position as open is also supported by
the fact that he took time on an admittedly busy day to interview (her).
It is also of significance that Chapman found it necessary in the course
of the interview to go into detail as
to why he did not wish to hire a woman for the position of chainperson.
If his explanation were accepted
(that no job was available),  there
would have been no need to say more
than that he had a chainman already
and that he didn't know how the listing came to be placed at Canada Manpower.
*'Fictitious Reservations."
Chapman later tried to cover up by
saying that his observations about the
suitability of women for the position
were really only fictitious reservations.
He had no answer for why he raised the
factor of the additional cost involved in employing a woman in this position but stated, it just came out.
Despite the blatant discrimination
and sexism practised by Chapman the
board concluded that< Mr.   Chapman has
maintained that he acted with the best
of personal intentions and as a fair-
minded person.    He impressed the board
as a person who acted throughout in a
manner which he considered to be fair.
Fortunately for women, a person who
purports to have the best of personal
intentions can nevertheless contravene the Human Rights Code; the board
ruled that Chapman had discriminated
against Gawne and told him to pay up.
WOMEN, we are the victims of
fictitious reservations^
Crew's Wives
-4-
Human Rights is B.S.
to Company Man
Joey Thompson
A Canada Manpower counsellor told
Kathleen Graff that Sechelt Building Supplies had a job opening for
a general laborer.  Graff quickly
paid the company a visit.  She told
the man at the counter that she had
done some general outside work and
was desperately looking for a job.
The company representative, later
identified as Hayden Killam, took
one swift look at the 21-year-old
Simon Fraser University student and
told her: Don't hold your breath a-
bout getting a job here.
Graff, testifying before a human rights board of inquiry into a charge
of sex discrimination against the
supply company, said the men in the
front office laughed and guffawed
when they heard that she was applying
for a job.
She told the board: They asked me
how much I weighed and if I could
lift chip rock off a truck.
I told them I was willing to give it
ans/lns
a try.    I said I was desperate for
a job.
They laughed and said I shouldn't
make that kind of comment around here.
Graff told the one-women board of inquiry that she was humiliated, embar-
assed and angry at the shoddy treatment accorded her.
After leaving her name and phone number with company officials, Graff
headed back to the manpower office
and told the counsellor what had happened.  He phoned Killam and then
turned to Graff and said: I'll have
to agree with you,   they don't want
any girls applying.
The manpower official said he had"
understood that the government-subsidized summer job was open to both
men and women.
Customers Would Object
to Women Labourers
Graff then appealed to the B.C. Human Rights Branch.  Investigator Ajit
Mehat interviewed Killam and testified that the man was very reluctant
to disclose information on the company's hiring practices. However,
Killam did say only women of large
size  could handle the j ob, Mehat
said. He also told me that customers
may object if he hired a woman.   They
would say   'we can't have a woman doing this job. '
Mehat procured a copy of Graff's application form.  He told the board
that Bitch reported us to Human Rights
was smeared across the paper.
Killam was reported to have said to
the HR officer; I am against fucking
human rights.    I don't want to have
anything to do with this human rights
bullshit.    I'm paying for your wages
and I take offence to you being here
wasting my time,
J.J. Camp, lawyer for the human rights
branch, told the inquiry that Killam
shows contempt for this hearing.    The
spirit of the Human Rights Code is
demolished by Killam's lack of respect for the HR officer as well as
his absence from the hearing.
Company Reps.
Didn't Show Up
Killam, nor any other company representative appeared at the inquiry,
despite evidence showing that they
were clearly informed of the purpose
and time of the hearing.
Camp asked chairperson Beverly Mc-
Lachlin to issue an order that the
company and its officials refrain
from committing same or similar violations of the code.
He also requested compensation for
Graff; lost opportunity of employment
@ the hourly rate of $4 in addition
to compensation because of wanton
disregard for Graff's rights as well
as a loss of self respect she suffered as a result of Killam's ridicule.
Camp also asked that the company be
ordered to pay court costs.
This case has the element of aggravation damages,  he concluded. Some
modest sum should be awarded here to
show the respondent and others that
discriminatory hiring practices are
not condoned.
The board's ruling will be handed
down within,a couple of weeksA Changing the Chain Gang  Sawmill Accused of Sexism  Janice Foster and the B.C. Human Rights Branch have taken on B.C. Forest  Products' Cowichan Sawmill.  The 24-year-old Vancouver Island woman laid a charge of discrimination  against the company after she applied  for a job at the sawmill.  She was told by personnel officer  Wayne Ostrum that he felt she was  10  times as  likely to get injured as huskier employees because of her size.  Foster is five feet tall, 115 pounds.  She said she disagreed with the likelihood of injury.  She had seen many  men injured while working on the green chain, usually when they were making use of their full height and  "Brute strength" to move boards instead of applying some scientific principles such as leverage.  Leverage vs.  Brute Strength  She said a worker usually pivoted a  board and was seldom required to pick  one up.  Foster had previously wuj.kw.1  i a green chain at Tahsis and as a deckhand  on a commercial fishboat.  Human Rights worker Alan Andison, during a board of inquiry, said that he  had interviewed industrial relations  supervisor Michael Mergens.  Mergens said the major deterrent to  hiring Foster had been her size.  Of  the 590 employees, 23 laborers are  women.  Andison had also been allowed to check  files and found that of 66 people hired since Foster's application, 21 are  men with little or no experience in  general laboring type of work.  Mergens is reported to have told Andison that he thought bigger people  are more suitable for the job.  During the inquiry, William Connery,  vice-president in charge of wood products production for B.C. Forest Products testified that planks weighing  up to 330 poinds come off the green-  chain, but that no one was expected  to lift that amount, and would in  fact be told not to try to life the  boards.  Connery, listing hiring criteria, said  a prospective employee had to be capable of carrying out the work, and have  the intelligence and ability to develop over the years as they would be  key operators in the mill in the future.  He also said that because the work at  Cowichan and the Victoria plant involved bigger lumber than most other  mills, employees would need greater  physical strength, although the mills  were hoping to bring in mechanical  sorters to cut down on work injuries.  He said there was no information  available on ideal height and weight  and no tests had been devised to measure physical fitness, strength or  stamina. He said he would apply the  same physical requirements to women  as to men.  The board of inquiry will be handing  down a decision in the near future.  Get Your Own Licence Plates!  The last straw for secretary Brenda  Miskimmin came when her boss insisted  that she stand in a long lineup to  purchase licence plates for him and  some friends.  She stood firm and said NO  he said  then go!  Miskimmin cleaned out her desk and  left - and landed three job offers  within as many days.  Latest reports confirm that her boss,  lawyer Franz Bowman from Burt, Burt,  Wolfe and Bowman, is still looking,  searching for a legal secretary.  Miskimmin said she had worked with  Bowman for more than a year and had  enjoyed a good working relationship  with him.  She occasionally ran personal errands  —such as taking his court robes to  the cleaners — but it bothered me  deep down.    I resented it.  Finally, he asked her to pick up car  licence stickers for himself and some  other people.  She refused.  I Won't Go  I said  'I'm sorry,  that's a personal  errand and I have work to do that's  business and I'm not going to go.  Bowman said go or you're out of a job.^  He doesn't like to be crossed,   she  said. I guess he was a boss and I'm  a secretary and I'm to do whatever  I'm told.    He didn't want me to have  an upper hand and I didn't want to  back down because I felt I was right.  Bowman eschewed reporters: He 's been  avoiding the media like he 's been a-  voiding the plague,   said receptionist  Linda Pegg, when contacted at her  Toronto office.  I've had 20 calls today from men and  women and they 're pro Brenda without  tion.  The Birth  of a Conference  BIRTHING  :  THE CONCEPT OF CHOICE  a one day conference  TUESDAY    MARCH 27,   1979  Sheraton Plaza 500 - 500 West 12  Three Vancouver birthing organizations  are holding a day conference entitled  Birthing: The Concept of Choice.  Childbirth With Confidence, Vancouver  Childbirth Association and the Maternal Health Committee are jointly sponsoring a host of speakers including  Suzanne Arms, author of Immaculate Deception, Helen Marieskind, editor of  Women and Health, Valmai Elkins, au  thor of the Rights of Pregnant Parents  and Vicki Walton, author of Have it  Your Way.  Says a conference spokesperson, CWC,  VCA and the Maternal Health Committee  invite you to join us for our first  conference, and to share with us a  group of internationally known speakers on the subject of birth.    In addition to general sessions featuring  our guest speakers, we will view two  films and participate in workshop discussions.    Although the day will be a  busy one,   there will be time for informal visiting and the exchange of  ideas so necessary to each of us in  our commitment to the childbearing  experience.  We hope that you can be with us for  learning, enjoying and a huge infusion of energy.  Workshops include: Postpartum Counselling, Meeting Family Needs in Child-  bearing, The Future of Midwifery in  B.C., Motivating Parents for Active  Participation in Birth and Sex and  the Childbirth Educator.  If you need a place to stay while you  are in Vancouver, a conference participant will be pleased to share his or  her home with you.  Please write as soon as possible outlining your specific needs to:  Billeting Coordinator  Gloria Lemay  c/o 923 Lamey's Mill Rd. ,  Vancouver, B.C.  V6H 3P4  Childcare available if you register  early.  Pre-registration $35, expectant couples $35 for two.  Registration  at the door $45, same for expectant  couples.  For more information call 291-7427. Anti Choicers Choose: Fetology  Nova Scotia  Haven Opens  The Calgary Birth Control Association is being hassled by a few city  aldermen/women who are insisting  that the group include a study of  fetology  with their abortion counselling.  Fetology  for those who have not heard the term before is not to be  found in most dictionaries.  However,  it is popular among prolifers such  as Aid. Ann Blough, a member of Coalition for Life and a vehement op-  poser to public funds going to an organization providing abortion counselling.  She voiced her opposition at a recent  council meeting where the CBCA, with  support from the Community Social  Services Committee, is asking council  for $18,312, an increase of nine per  cent over last year's funding.  Blough blasted the birth control counselling group for not telling young  pregnant women about fetology.   She  likened abortion counselling to suicide prevention counselling, explaining that the goal of a fetology  discussion would be to prevent an abortion, and that fetology  should also  be discussed in schools during birth  control presentations in an effort  to dissuade young girls from considering abortions as an alternative to  unwanted pregnancies.  It boggles my mind that the two issues would be considered separate,  she says. Shouldn't you make these  girls aware of the development of the  fetus?  I have met young girls who have had  an abortion and they just don't know  what they are doing.     They, weren't  told about fetal development and it  is a very tragic situation,  Aid Blough said.  The only motive for a discussion on  fetology would be to influence.. .the  client. . .away from an abortion.  CBCA president Donna Arvidson told  the committee that if the client  sought specific information, counsellors would make every attempt to answer all questions, but that members  Ins women 's graphics  :&AL  of the association didn't believe  we have the right to withold information from women until they have  listened to a lecture on fetal development.  We must assume that the client is a-  ware of what she wants and that if  she heeds additional information,  she  will ask for it.     Counsellors make  no attempt to influence a client's  decision.  Arvidson also said that the full information  demanded by critics of the  CBCA isn't full information.  It's  selective information and if we are  to discuss fetology  then we must discuss the global picture, including  pregnancy, labor, delivery and raising a child.  City council will be voting on the  funding recommendations shortly#  Calgary Women's Newsletter info  The first Nova Scotia haven for battered women opened in Halifax this  September.  Bryony House (named after  a bruise-healing herb) was purchased  with assistance from CHMC and will  house 24 persons.  It will be funded  jointly by the province and the city.   Karen Richardson/NAC news  Toronto  Puretex Women Strike  Workers oppression is alive and well at  a textile factory in Toronto.  Employers at the Puretex Knitting Company  have set up about nine surveillance  cameras to keep vigilant over 200 women workers.  The cameras, which moniter women at  their cutting tables, sewing machines  and pressing machines, prevent the women from stealing, say company officials.  To protest the inhumane treatment of  its workers, the predominately foreign  born women and 20 men went on strike  late last year.  Besides objecting to  what they consider a basic infraction  of their human rights, the women also  want equal wages with the male employees in the plant.  The Ontario Human Rights Commission  took more than a year to respond to  their grievance.  And the reply was  less than beneficial; the commission  decided that the use of cameras was  not a violation under the law.  Workers have now taken the matter into their own hands and are rallying  support from women's organizations,  other unions and individuals through  out the province.  Groups are leaflet-  f.ng outside Marks and Spencers, en-  :ouraging shoppers to boycott Puretex  products for sale in the store.  The  women are also asking supporters to  call MP's and send telegrams to the  Minister of Labor, Robert Elgee, in an  all out attempt to bring the employer  back to the bargaining table.  Puretex brand name products include:  Four-wheel drive, Jaguar, Saint  Julien, Seaforth and Saint Michael#  Upstream Info  Human Rights to Include Sexual Orientation  Alberta School Trustees Panic  Alberta school trustees, teachers  and the human rights commission are  embroiled in a bitter dispute over  the issue of homosexuality.  Trustees want the autonomous right  to deal with proven instances of homosexuality among any of its paid employees, elected officials or students.  The campaign, headed by trustee Wil-  lard Brooks, a devout Mormon, has  reached the provincial government level.  Trustees have asked the Conservative government to stay away from  human rights protection of gays while  the Alberta Human Rights Commission  has countered with a request that discrimination based on sexual orientation be prohibited.  Trustree Brooks panicked when he learned that teachers, had participated  in a demonstration against Anita Bryant during a speaking tour of Canada  CgttJtfcu^¬©78l-NS  last spring.  Says Brooks, we hate to say all Human  Rights Commission staff are gay,  but  with the vigor with which they defend  them we figure they are.  The president of the Alberta Teachers'  Association protested the trustees'  action and the Edmonton Journal condemned the trustees' action as out-  regeous and unwarranted.  In B.C., Education Minister Pat McGeer has voiced his opinion on several  moral issues concerning teachers. But  he has yet to comment on gay teachers.  Judging by his attitude toward teachers who smoke pot (fire them quickly)  we can safely surmise his attitude  toward gay teachers in our public  schools#       OOB/Body Politic AUCE:Strike for a Living Wage  Clerical workers have hit Simon Fraser University with a full scale strike and attack on the administration's  meagre wage offering.  About 500 union members launched an  all out strike on the university following three months of rotating job  action which failed to prompt officials to offer any more than a six  per cent increase over two years.  The Association of University and  College Employees, Local 2, (AUCE)  is organizing a trip to Victoria to  press their demands on the provincial  government.  Union officials fear AUCE may be tagged an essential service  following labor legislation passed  earlier this year.  Workers have already felt the heavy hand of the government - ministers have warned government employees not to expect more  than four per cent increase.  B.C. Government Employees Union (BC-  GEU), the province's largest union,  donated $20,000 to the AUCE strike a-  long with a full time media coordinator.  BCGEU spokesperson Robbie Robinson  speculates that the Social Credit gov  ernment will use the essential services legislation to force AUCE members back to work.  If the government uses the essential  services legislation it will be used  to pick off a small weak union like  AUCE.     The government is also backing the university administrations  hard line attitude to AUCE.  Pat McGeer (education minister) has  publicly said he doesn't want to see  more than a four per cent increase  for public employees;  this has encouraged the university to be unreasonable,  Robinson said#  STRIKE       QN  '^STRIKF  This is overpaid?!  AUCE member Chris Herrod, prompted by  management's meagre wage offer to  herself and union colleagues, wrote  a pointed letter to SFU administration  detailing how she spends her income:  I am writing to you in regard to the  recent AUCE (Association of University and College Employees) "positive"  strike vote taken here at SFU.  Also  to bring to your attention a recent  article from McLeans Magazine in which  it states that 60 per cent of the women, alone in Canada and supporting  children, are living below the poverty  level.  Your comments that the wages  earned by AUCE members are well above  average and should be kept at a standstill until others catch up, has prompted me to make an attempt at "opening your eyes" to a working mother's  position.  Enclosed please find an itemized account of my budget.... then perhaps you  can tell me why, if I am "overpaid"  tbat I am pretty close to poverty.  I  am a single mother with a 10^ year  old son.  There is no support whatsoever as I've never married.  Herewith is my budget:  Daycare  10.00  Hydro  12.00  Phone  10.00  Underground parking  10.00  Life Insurance  8.00  Car expenses  50.00  Sears  30.00  Chargex  30.00  Groceries  150.00  TOTAL:  676.29  Apartment insurance (yr.)    50.00  Car insurance (approx.)     360.00  SFU parking (yr.) 30.00  440.00  $36.60 (not in  Monthly average:  budget)  Wage  Take Home  Expenses  Remainder  Family Allowance  $449.12 bi-weekly  $730.00  676.29  53.71  25.88  79.59  Rent  Bank Payment  $252.29  114.00  Simpson Sears and Chargex are used exclusively for clothing - $1,000 a  year.  Blue jeans for a 10^ year old  boy are between $15 and $17 each, running shoes are $15 minimum, winter  jacket $25, boots $18 etc. etc   Now I have received word that I must  go into human resources with an item  ized list and receipts if I want continued coverage for day care.  Vander  Zalm thinks if you make over $700 a  month you should pay a percentage, if  not all, of your day care.  Out of  school care is $60 per month (government subsidy now pays $50) and  summer care is $120 per month.  Furthermore, the above summary of my  budget does not include the following  miscellaneous expenses:  babysitter when son is ill @ $6 per  day  dentist  prescriptions & vitamins  birthdays  yearly soccer expenses  yearly baseball expenses  school activities ie., hot dog day  twice a month, ice-skating, field  trips, swimming  snow tires (presently without)  Christmas  Summer vacations, entertainment etc.  I cannot afford to upgrade my education  or to take job-related courses that  would enable me to move up to a higher  income bracket.  Though underground  parking may seem frivolous, it is in-  deed necessary as my car wouldn't run  in the winter otherwise (1970 Maverick  64,000 miles).  I cannot understand how you figure that  I could possibly be overpaid.  Nor  can I see that working mothers who  make up a great percentage of the cler^  ical staff at SFU should tolerate  statements that are unjust and unfair.  Also, women who receive family allow- 'ñ†  ances and support from ex-husbands pay  income tax on those amounts.  An ex-  husband , may I add, may claim the  support he pays on his income tax.  Is  this fair?????  If Vander Zalm has his way...we're  either forced to go on welfare, or  leave our children unattended.  Great  solution for the problems we face and  quite possibly a future uprise in  juvenile delinquency.  I wonder what  the university would say if, in order  to save money, we brought our children  to work with us...it seems that working  mothers are not only being penalized  for not wanting to be dependents of  the government, but for wanting to  have our children cared for in our absence from the home.  We are being told to accept wages as  they may be, in spite of the cost of  living and what improvements the university could make in the 'wage department' ....not to sit back and wait  for others to 'catch up' but  to follow in the footsteps of.  Is there a possibility that you and I  could exchange wages for a month or  two?????I'm sure I'd have a good time,  but I wonder how you would manage.... .0  "Every dollar I have I owe to my  faithful employees. Now the turncoats have joined a union to try  to collect some of them!" Pro-Lifers" Planning Radio Campaign  Lucy Lindsay  And you thought nothing could get worse after Mr. Muscle and the Kotex  Light Days commercials!  Kinesis has  just learned that Canada's anti-choice  crusaders are entering Stage Two of a  high-powered campaign to have abortions made illegal.  So what's new? Well, Stage Two involves intensive radio advertising.  Word on the ad project was leaked by  an active member of B.C.'s Pro-Life  Society in the course of what later  became a heated exchange with Kinesis.  A letter sent to local Pro Life Society members corroborated her statements.  But first - a word from our sponsor:  STAGE ONE in the anti-choice campaign  took place last year. That was when  some nominations for federal election  candidacy were said to be rigged by  pro-lifers.  One apparent goal of the 'rigging'  efforts was to ensure that vocal pro-  choice candidates didn't get a chance  to run for election this year.  As  well, some constituencies have been  made 'safe' by ensuring that both Liberal and Conservative candidates are  anti-choice.  Local documentation of the 'rigging'  strategy was made last fall in a Georgia Straight article by Jeannine Mitchell.  Mitchell documented the following elements as substantiation of  the 'election-rigging' charge:  * door to door smear camapigns against pro-choice nomination candidates.  * infiltration of party executives  to pressure pro-choice candidates.  * use of two-party membership (joining with both the Liberal and Conservative parties) to pack nomination  meetings.  Stage One went rather well. At least  two pro-choice (and female) candidates  for nomination got the boot despite  strong support from within party ranks.  One such candidate was Joan Wallace,  who ran for Liberal candidacy last  summer. Wallace was beaten by strongly anti-choice Tony Schmand after  his supporters allegedly smeared her .  and packed nominations.  As well, at least two successful pro-  choice (and female) candidates have  met with attempts by their party executive to muffle them on the abortion issue.  $25,000 for ads. against us  This demonstrated muscle of anti-  choicers will no doubt cause many politicians to run a little scared in  future.  Back to STAGE TWO.  Under the overall  direction of the anti-choicers' national arm (Coalition for Life), provincial groups will mount an intensive  advertising campaign during the last  two weeks of this year's federal election campaign.  In B.C., at least $25,000 will be poured into radio commercials that will  blanket the province during that two-  week period.  The ads have been prepared by an unnamed public relations firm.  In an  uncharacteristic breach of anti-choice secrecy, an active member of B.C. -  Pro-Life Society disclosed the following to Kinesis:  * The radio ads are designed to reach  90 per cent of B.C.'s adult population.  *A1though the B.C. Pro Life membership is being asked to raise $25,000  for the ad campaign, "other sources"  may carry any financial slack and even  enlarge the budget by an unspecified  amount.  Anti-abortionists have been researching  for some time now in order to develop a  powerful marketing strategy, says a  spokesperson who refused to have her  name mentioned.  We have decided that radio ads will  have the most impact at this point.  It's especially important when the  election will be a close one.    Radio  ads are direct.     We 're fed up with media cynicism,   she said, adding that  the ads would also be used to support  more traditional propaganda outlets.  We'll be very busy,  especially as the  time for the ads draws near.     Volunteers will be writing letters to the  editor and newspaper opinion pieces,  as well as lining up appearances on  talk shows.  Asked about a rumor that anti-choic-  At the IWD Parade, March 8  ers would also be seeking publicity  through unspecified "forums set up  for the election," the woman declined  to comment.  She also terminated the  conversation.  However, it is known that anti-choicers will be attempting to get full  use of the new blood they received  last year (in Stage One) when they  opened numerous new offices across  the country.  Door-to-door campaigns and intensive  leafletting will be handled by the  enlarged ranks of suburban footsold-  iers.  In the expected cliffhanger federal  election this year, such all-out effort on the part of the anti-choice  movement may pay very heavy dividends.  Extra Body Blows?  The Conservatives will be receiving  virtually all the anti-choice support,  and as the polls stand now, they need  whatever friends they can get. So at  least some of the new Tory MP's would  likely feel obliged to return the favor.  Multiply $25,000 by 10 provinces. Add  x amount of 'other sources' funds. Combine that with the single-minded focus and war-like strategizing of the  anti-choice movement.  Throw in a few  'rigged' nominations in a close election, and it looks like the Canadian  women's movement may be in for a few  extra body blows this year.  Anyone with a head for strategy (or a  quarter-million bucks) is hereby invited to join in the fray!A more reasonable terms of the contract,  Mrs.  Paul said:   'We haven't seen any  reasonable ones.    Management doesn't  want a union.    They can handle it  At the Muckamuck Walk,   last summer.  MUCKAMUCK: What Is  Happening Now?  Employees of Muckamuck first approached the union early in February of  1978.     Between Feb.   9 and Feb.   21,  1978,  18 of the 21 employees in the  bargaining unit joined the union.     On  Feb.   21 the union applied for certification.     The union was certified on  March 20,   1978.  In spite of the fact that seven union members were fired or forced to  quit following the application for  certification,   the majority of employees voted in favor of strike on May  28,   1978.     During the period from  February 1978 to June 1,   1978,   26  employees of Muckamuck joined the union.  There has been no significant change  in the union's support among employees who voted in that strike vote.  Only one of the employees who originally participated in the strike has  returned to work.    In a strike situation,   this is a much more significant measure of the support for the  union than is a petition or a vote.  There is no evidence the union  has lost majority support  There is no evidence that the union  has lost majority support since the  government-supervised strike vote.  '.This employer has refused to negotiate seriously with the union, has  harassed and intimidated employees,  dismissed employees, and generally  attempted to find alternatives to  collective bargaining.  Between the date of the application  for certification and the date of  the strike vote, eight union members  were either fired or forced to quit.  A petition against the union was circulated on the premises during working hours on April 11, 1978.  At compulsory staff meetings management attacked the union to employees.  Wage  increases were granted to some employees during this period.  One union  member was given a disciplinary letter and then offered a management  position and urged to dissociate herself from the actions of the union.  Employees who crossed the picket  line on the first day of the strike  were paid wages for more than four  months while the restaurant was closed.  In November, employees were  encouraged, during their working  hours, to participate in a counter  picket line.  They walked back and  forth in front of the restaurant alongside the strikers and their supporters, carrying signs saying "Muckamuck doesn't support SORWUC."  On Oct. 7, 1978, the employer opened "Chilcotin Bar 7", with a cowboy  motif, upstairs from the Muckamuck.  The message to the employees was that  the employer was prepared to change  the character of the restaurant rather than recognize the union as the  representative of the employees.  The counter picket lines against the  strike were organized by Ben and Evelyn Paul.  Evelyn Paul led employees  out of the restaurant, and instructed  them on how to picket.  There were a  series of meetings in the restaurant  before and during the period of counter picket lines which were attended  by one or both of Ben and Evelyn Paul  the employees, management personnel  and Jane Erickson, one of the owners.  Ben and Evelyn Paul have no interest  in this dispute. Yet they organized  the counter picketing by employees,  attended numerous meetings with employees and management, organized  media publicity against the strike,  publically represented management and  attempted to organize strikebreakers  to work behind the picket line. We  submit that these actions satisfy  the definition of "professional  strikebreaker" in the (Labor Relations) Code....  In an article in the November issue  of The Indian Voice, Evelyn Paul presented herself as a representative of  management:  Asked...if management would consider  unofficial compromise on some of the  She went on to make it clear that her  object was to organize people to  work behind the legal picket line.  There is continual discussion between  management and owners and the employees who are crossing the picket line,  regarding the union.  The opportunities for employer influence are practically unlimited since the picket  line has been effective in cutting  business and employees spend most of  their working hours discussing with  ^ each other, management and owners.  ^ Management personnel encourage em-  ¬ß ployees to come with them out of the  03 restaurant to argue with picketers  ^ about the merits of the strike and  ^ the union.  In the presence of union  picketers and employees who are crossing the picket line, management personnel have argued that the employees  joined the wrong union, that SORWUC  is not an officially recognized union,  and that SORWUC is a dying union.  We submit that this...shows a pattern  of unfair labor practices by the employer which has continued up to the  present. Neither a petition nor a  vote would reflect the true wishes of  .  the employees under these circum-  1 stances.  The picket line has reduced business  by approximately 90 per cent.  The  employees spend most of their working hours talking to each other, the  owners and management.  Yet the number of employees apparently is not  much different from the number at the  time of the strike vote.  There is no  restriction in the law on the number  of replacement employees an employer  can hire during a strike.  In a period  of high unemployment, an employer  wanting to expand the payroll for purposes of decertification would have  little difficulty.  The employees  hired for this purpose would be easily  convinced that their employment depended on the defeat of the strike  and of the union.  During the strike, the union repeatedly requested that the employer return to the bargaining table .the  employer refused to meet.  In correspondence, the employer has stated  that they will not meet until the union modifies its position on the major issues. We have still not received^  ^MUCKAMUCK,  IWORKERSON STRIKE  1PLEASE SUPPORT U5|  R    BOYCOTT THEl  fti MUCKAMUCK!  ^ TIL WE 3ETTLE|  MUCKAN  WORKERS ON STRIKE!  IPLEASE SUPPORT US  ON STRIKE  FOR A FIRST.  [CONTRACT1  ISORWUCa a wage proposal.  Throughout this period, the union has]  made every effort to make the strike  effective.  Strikers are receiving  strike pay, which was increased in  December because pf the length of thel  strike.  Members and officers of the  union regularly walk the picket line  in support of the striking employees.  The union has asked and received support from many other unions.  To entertain an application for decertification during a legal strike  is in contradiction to the general  policies of the Code: (a) it means  that it is in the employer's interest  to refuse to negotiate and prolong  strikes until the time requirements  in Section 52 (2) are met.  This  could lead to longer strikes and encourage greater bitterness between  employers and employees, and between  groups of employees,  (b) It allows employers to rely on  decertification as an alternative to  collective bargaining, thereby weakening the collective bargaining system itself.  It also detracts from  the provisions of the Code under which  employees freely choose trade unions  as their representatives and authorize them to act on their behalf.  To  allow decertification in this instance  is to detract from the seriousness  of the majority decision made by the  employees when the application for  certification was made, and again in  the government-supervised strike vote  on May 28, 1978.  We submit that the intent of the Code  is that strikes should be resolved  through collective bargaining between  the parties and not through decertification.  To entertain an application for decertification during a legal strike  ....would place a new limitation on  the use of the strike as a part of  the collective bargaining process.  It would encourage employers, especially in the restaurant industry, to  see decertification as an alternative to negotiations.  The restaurant industry is overwhelmingly unorganized.  It is subject to  high unemployment and high turnover  which enhance the employer's ability  to withstand a strike.  It's a long and difficult battle  The strike at Muckamuck is already a  long and difficult battle for the  strikers and the union as a whole.  We had hoped to settle last summer,  recognizing that the employer might  well be prepared to wait out the winter months when business is slower.  In spite of the difficulties, the  union is conducting a successful legal strike against this employer. As  we point out elsewhere in this submission, only one of the original  strikers has returned to work. The  picket line is effective in turning  away customers and putting economic  pressure on the employer. We expect  that our bargaining power will increase as the tourist season approaches .  We are confident that we will ultimately reach an agreement with this  employer if the economic struggle is  allowed to run its course. ^  This above article was taken from  SORWUC's presentation to the LRB.  Watch for an update on the fate  of the decertification bid  SORWUC  Local One  Signs New Contract  The Service, Office and Retail Workers of Canada (SORWUC) Local 1 and  the Electrical Trades Credit Union  in Burnaby have signed their third  collective agreement.  The one year contact gives the employees an 11 per cent wage increase  retroactive to Jan. 1, 1979. These  employees will now be earning $1088  per month.  We feel an 11 per cent increase is a  major gain towards recognition for  our skills and responsibilities and  encourages other office workers to  unionize and bargain collectively  for wages and working conditions,  said Moray McLean, Electrical Trades  Credit Union Employee, who is also the  shop steward and member of the union  negotiating committee.  Other provisions of the collective  agreement already intact include a 33  hour week, voluntary overtime paid at  double time, three weeks plus two  days annual vacation, one day floating holiday, the right to hold union  meetings once a month during office  time and an unlimited sick leave provision. #  National Convention  Condemns CLRB  Delegates attending SORWUC's seventh  annual convention in Vancouver Feb.  10 and 11 passed a resolution condemning the Canadian Labor Relations  Board (CLRB) for upholding the right  of the banks to freeze the wages of  members in unionized bank branches.  This ruling allowed the banks to increase the wages in non-union branches by almost 12 per cent in early  1978.  By summer of the same year  the banks were still drafting out  negotiations with unionized branches  so the B.C. section of the United  Bank Workers, SORWUC - decided to  withdraw from negotiations and had  their certifications rescinded.  In Saskatchewan, UBW members reported that they had continued negotiations after B.C. pulled out and had  been offered a wage increase equal  to the wages presently received by  the non-union bank employees.  The Saskatchewan delegate reported  that her section had decided to withdraw from negotiations and requested  their certifications be rescinded too.  Sheree Butt, President of the B.C.  section of bank workers said: Now  that it is clear that bank workers  cannot expect too much from the Canadian Labor Relations Board,  our  next campaign in the banks will be a  bit different.  The thirty delegates blasted federal  and B.C. labor relations board for  their actions in holding back the  organization of unorganized workers.  They also passed resolutions criticizing the same governments for their  actions against the Canadian Union of  Postal Workers and public sector employees in B.C.  The executive of the CLC came under  some criticism for its part during  the CUPW strike.  The B.C. Labor Relations Board also  came under attack by delegates.  SORWUC was decertified at Bimini Pub after a long str ike and before the  contract (signed during the strike)  had run its full year as specified  by the law. That same board is now  considering whether it will accept an  application for decertification at  Muckamuck.  Convention delegates were unanimous  in calling on the LRB to dismiss the  decertification application and calling on the board not to interfere in  a successful strike.  Convention goers decided to intensify the union's educational program,  pursue job security and the union shop  as priorities in negotiating and organization efforts and to continue  to support and co-operate with the  efforts of other working people whose  living and working conditions are  being eroded by employers and the  various levels of government.  The convention elected the following  officers: Jacqueline Ainsworth, National president, Pat Barter, Nat.  Secretary, Charliane Avery-Girard,.  1st Vice Pres., Linda Read, 2nd Vice  Pres., and Jean Rands, National  Treasurer.%  rw- African  Sisters  What is happening among women in Mozambique today? In Zambia? In Angola?  In Vancouver, we'll have an opportunity  to find out.    An Oxfam-Canada worker,  Susan Hurlich,  has just returned from  a four-month tour of Zambia, Angola  and Mozambique.  On Monday, April 9.   she will be speaking at the YWCA,     580 Burrard St.  She will be showing slides from her  recent tour.  There will be booktables,  too.   Time to be there:   7.30 p.m.  This event is being co-sponsored by  Working Women Unite, SORWUC, Oxfam  and BCFW.  'Ģ 10  INTERNATIONAL  Wanrow Faces  Another Trial  Yvonne Wanrow, a Native American woman from Spokane, Washington who was  acquitted on charges of fatally shooting a known child molester and wounding his drinking companion, is about  to stand trial again for the same  charges.  For over a year, lawyers for Wanrow  have sought to avoid a retrial by  challenging the Washington state felony statute under which Wanrow was  charged on the grounds that it relieved  the state of its fundamental responsibility to prove the defendant intended to kill.  In early January,  this effort failed.  I am disappointed in the decision,  Wanrow stated. But I'm not surprised  because of what I've learned about  this system.    It's ironic though because we're back to where we started  and we 're going to have to go through  the whole process  (trial) again.  Wanrow's first conviction was overturned in 1977 in what has since come  to be known as a landmark ruling in  the struggle for women's rights to  defend themselves against male attackers.  The court opinion in that  ruling stated that in our society  women suffer from a conspicuous lack  of access to training and to means of  developing those skills necessary to  effectively repel a male assailant  without resorting to the use of a deadly weapon.  Based on that the court declared that  Wanrow was entitled to a jury that  considered her actions in light of her  perceptions of the situation including those perceptions which are the  product of our nation's long and unfortunate history of sex discrimination.  A mistrial was declared and Wanrow  was released but the D.A. moved immediately to retry the case.  In the legal world today there 's such  a thing as the Wanrow instructions,  Wanrow concluded, and that makes me  feel good for all women who suffer oppression because they are women...I  just want people to know that I still  need as much support as possible. ■  was contaminated at her apartment  with toxic plutonium.  Silkwood discovered plutonium on her skin, in her  lungs, and in her apartment after she  began investigating plant conditions,  documenting safety violations, and  accompanying contaminated workers to  the health physicist to be sure they  were given adequate treatment.  Silkwood was on*her way to pass this information on to an Oil Chemical and  Atomic Workers Union representative  and a New York Times reporter when  she was killed in a mysterious car  accident.  The lawsuit, which seeks $11.5 million  in actual and punitive damages, charges Kerr-McGee, the country's largest uranium producer, with willful  negligence in failing to keep plutonium under its control, as required  by law.  A favorable ruling would establish an important precedent in  holding a corporation responsible for  off-site contamination.  Two other suits filed in connection  with the case were dismissed in September 1978.  One, brought under the  Civil Rights Act, charged the board  of directors of Kerr-McGee and managers with conspiring to violate Silk-  wood's civil rights as a worker and  union organizer through wiretapping,  surveillance, harassment and violence.  The other charged FBI agents with covering up this conspiracy, ■  Win/LNS  Silkwood Case  Coming Up  Four years after the death of Karen  Silkwood, and more than two after her  father filed a lawsuit against the  Kerr-McGee Corporation, the Silkwood  case will finally come to trial March  6 in Oklahoma.  The lawsuit alleges that Silkwood, a  laboratory technician at the Kerr-  McGee Plant in Crescent, Oklahoma,  Assata Shakur  Fighting Transfer  Black activist Assata Shakur is facing another battle in what appears to  be a never ending Federal-State vand-  etta against her.  Imprisoned at the Federal Correctional  Institution for Women in Alderson, West Virginia, Shakur is now fighting against another transfer to avoid even  greater repressive confinement.  This time, New Jersey prison officials  are claiming that she should be put  into another maximum security prison  rather than be released into general  population—to halt interaction with  other prisoners.  The maximum security unit (MSU) at  Alderson, which opened less than two  years ago with much fanfare about the  increase of crimes by women, closed  early this year after a storm of  public protest.  Prison activists had  charged that selection for the MSU  has always been arbitary and often directed at politically active women: Alderson has also housed Lolita Lebron,  one of the four Puerto Rican Nationalists who shot at members of the U.S.  Congress in the 1950's and Rita D.  Brown, a member of the Seattle-based  George Jackson Brigade which allegedly  robbed several banks in the northwest region.  While most of the other women in the  maximum security unit have been released into the prison's general population, Shakur along with three others have been placed in administrative segregation.  One of the primary targets of a well-  planned attack on the Black movement  Shakur was arrested in 1973 in a  'shoot-first-and-ask-questions-later'  attack by New Jersey State Troopers  which killed New York Black Panther  Party leader Zayd Shakur and a state  trooper. Assata Shakur has spent most  of the five years since her arrest  behind bars locked in solitary confinement .  Although she had been sought by police under six indictments before the  shooting, Shakur has never been convicted of anything except being present at her own arrest and the gunfire that accompanied it.  Government officials have failed to  j obtain a conviction on any of the other charges. ■  Italy  Gunmen Attack  Masked gunmen burst into a leftist  radio station in Rome, Jan. 9, and  wounded four women taking part in a  discussion on birth control.  Three  were wounded in the legs, one was reported to be in critical condition  with a stomach wound, and another woman from the station suffered burns  from a firebomb thrown at her.  Two different groups claimed responsibility for the attack—an anonymous fascist group and an extreme .  right-wing organization called Armed  Revolutionary Cells—which said it was  commemorating the death of two of its  members, one year earlier.  Those deaths came after a long period  of savage attacks by fascist squads  on isolated people whose clothes or  hair style were taken as proof that  they were left-wing dissident youth.  The question of birth control and a  woman's right to abortion has been a  controversial one in Italy for many  years. The Italian Senate passed a  bill legalizing abortion for the first  time since 1930 only last May. ■ Anti-CHOICE Bomb  A mysterious fire destroyed a large  portion of the offices of CHOICE, a  Philadelphia abortion referral group,  last month.  Three days earlier the group received  an anonymous bomb threat.  CHOICE  workers received a taped message at  their offices warning that a bomb  was hidden there and advising everyone to leave the building.  No bomb  was found.  The fire that broke out the morning  of Jan. 22 was unrelated to the bomb  scare incident, fire department officials claim.  They said the blaze  was started by a "faulty coffee-  maker that had been plugged in and  left unattended for 15 minutes."  Local abortion rights activists,  however, said it seemed more than  coincidental that the two incidents  occurred so close to the anniversary  of the Supreme Court decision legalizing abortion.  Other abortion clinics and referral  services nationwide have reported  a sharp rise in bombings and other  destructive attacks in the last year#  Excerpt from the Guardian,  Feb.   7/79  " Note the aaoke g-n+tou.  APpi^oAc^ in THE  CURRENT AD."  Nestle Boycott:  It's Working  Organizations across the United States  are boycotting Nestle's products because of the company's advertising  and sales of infant formula in underdeveloped nations.  Groups report that the nation-wide  boycott is working: Nestle officials  have begun meeting with the Infant  Formula Action Coalition (INFACT) in  an attempt to negotiate a settlement.  Recently Nestle announced that it has  suspended all mass media advertising  of infant formula in underdeveloped  nations.  But the company continues to advertise  formula by posters, calendars, and  printed material in hospitals, clinics  and doctors' offices.  Officials still  give out free samples of formula.  They still use Milk Nurses to promote  bottle feeding. And company officials  have started visiting colleges and  committees in the U.S. to give the  company side of the controversy.  The latest group to join the protest  is the National Council of Churches,  an umbrella group for several hundred  churches across the U.S.  Nestle products to boycott are:  Nestle's Quik, Nescafe, Pero, Berr-  inger Wines (in Calif.) Stouffer's  Foods, Libby's food and Sunrise coffee©  20,000  Iranian Women  On March 8, International Women's  Day, and for four days after, more  than 20,000 women demonstrated in  the streets of Tehran, Iran.  The women are protesting against  the reinstatement of Islamic customs. If Ayatollha Khomainy de-  ■ clares Iran to be an Islamic republic, women will be forced to return to wearing chadors, the traditional head to ankle black dress. Women's rights in the area of marriage  and divorce will also be severly restricted.  The massive protest demonstrations  have been fired upon by army troops,  and have been attacked by Muslim  fanatics, wielding knives and stones.  Kate Millett, who was in Iran for the  March 8 series of demonstrations, has  been expelled from the country#  Virginity Tests  Author Amrita Wilson when researching  her book "Finding a Voice - Asian Women in Britain, found that at Heathrow Airport and the British High Commission offices in India women are  being examined to determine whether  or not they are virgins.  A large number of Indian women immigrants told author Wilson, a writer  of Indian origin settled in Britian,  that "sexual examination is a routine  part of the entry-certificate procedure at British diplomatic missions  in the Indian subcontinent."  The book lists several cases where women from India and Pakistan were'subjected to the same humiliating experience on numerous pretexts, including determining the age of the would-  be immigrants.  The book cites the case of a 16-year-  old girl who entered Britain in March  1977 to get married.  Her parents had  sent her dressed up in her bridal  clothes and jewellery. She was held up  at the London airport, questioned again  and again and then subjected to an internal examination by two men - one  white and one Asian.  At the end of the examination, which  turned out to be a horrifying experience, including humiliating and taunting remarks, it was declared that she  was not yet 16 and was sent back by  the next available flight#  Michigan  Lesbian Mother  Wins Custody  An important victory for lesbian mothers was won last month when the  Michigan Supreme Court restored custody of 12-year-old Jillian Miller  to her mother.  Margaret Miller, a lesbian, was awarded custody of her child after her  1973 divorce.  But in 1976 Jillian's  father filed for custody and won;  the court battle continued up to the  state high court ruling this year.  The significance of the case for  other lesbian custody battles lies  in the lower court's contention that  Margaret Miller's lesbianism represented "sexual ambivalence" and that  therefore her husband could provide  a more "stable" environment for the  child.  The supreme court reversal  thus establishes an important precedent in holding that lesbianism a-  lone is not grounds for refusing custody 0  Raped Woman Jailed  About 50 demonstrators gathered at  the Albermarle County Courthouse in  Charlottesville, Va., Jan. 27 to protest the imprisonment of a rape victim.  The young woman, who asked to remain  unidentified, was sentenced to 30  days for "contempt of court" when she  objected to the jury verdict acquitting her accused rapist.  I was raped and they put me in jail,  she said after the sentence.  I was under a lot of stress.    I've  been brave for months,  and I guess I  just cracked.    I just said it wasn't  fair.  The woman was released after 46 hours  in jail, when the judge suspended  the remainder of the contempt sen-  tence# Betsy Wood and Gay Hoon Found Not Guilty  Betsy Wood and Gay Hoon are not guilty  of attempted prison break and public  mischief. That's what the jury found  March 2.  The prison system of this country is  guilty  said Betsy Wood, in her closing statement. It will remain guilty  as long as prisoners are held year  after year after year, for 23 and a  half hours a day in a concrete box  with a steel door.  Wood and Hoon's trial turned out to  be what activists said it was all  along: a trial of B.C. Pen, and a  stringent indictment of the corruptions of our prison system.  It was the second time that Wood and  Hoon had been completely cleared of  all charges relating to an escape  attempt at the B.C. Pen in January 78.  A preliminary inquiry in June of  that year had found no sufficient  case...to put either of the accused  on trial.  Despite no sufficient case  the Attorney General persisted in putting  the accused on trial again. He proceeded to direct indictment, an historically rare move. That lead to  the five and half week trial at  the B.C.Supreme Court, with Wood conducting her own defence.  When it comes to prison activists  said Wood, they have their minds  made up.  A Political Trial  Among the people who were locked into the Visiting and Correspondence  building that day by the guards,   explained Wood in her opening statement., Gay and I were the only ones  who were activists,  visible people,  who could be used to make a theatrical  case against the prisoners ' rights  movement...So regardless of facts  o$ evidence to the contrary,   the crown  has proceeded against us.  As Wood developed her defence, prisoners described their experience of  being in solitary.  Ammong the witnesses she called was  Andy Bruce. Bruce's testimony alleged  March 3 Victory Rally.   Gay Hoon is the  one in the hood (above).  Betsy Wood  is speaking (right).  that a Pen guard had played an active  role in the escape attempt.  The guard, said Bruce, had brought in  a gun, for a fee. He had also mailed  Bruce a postcard as a signal that details for the escape had been taken  care of. Bruce produced that postcard  in court. Later, a handwriting expert  confirmed that the writing the card  appeared to match the guard's.  The guard, who in court denied any  knowledge of the escape plans, may  now face perjury charges.  In his closing statement, Hoon's lawyer James Vilvang accused the Crown  of have purchased information. The  only direct link made between Hoon  and the escape attempt came from  one prisoner whose version, said  Vilvang, conflicted with all other  accounts.  At a rally following the acquittal,  on Saturday March 3, Hoon and Wood  told the crowd of 150 that they were  anxious to get back to their work:  opposition to the crime of solitary  confinement.  Cops Harass Hoon  Seems like they can't bring themselves  to leave Hoon alone.  On Thursday, March 16, Prime Minister  Trudeau was in town for a $150 a plate  dinner at the Vancouver Hotel.  Eight people went to the hotel that  night to pass out leaflets protesting  solitary confinement, and citing the  incident at Millhaven Penitentiary,  where a would-be escaper gouged out  his own eyes. He had hoped that a  friend would intercept the ambulance  taking him to hospital. His screams,  as he gouged his eyes, brought  guards running to his solitary confinement cell, said a newspaper  account.  Eight people passed out the leaflets.  Only one was arrested for trespassing.  Guess who? Gay Hoon. Trial day for  this one is April 9.  In the March 8 parade, a protest  against women locked away.  Centre Threatened  There is only one half-way house for  women prisoners in Vancouver.  And they're closing that one down.  The LYNDA WILLIAMS CORRECTION CENTRE is threatened with closure at  the end of this month.  The women at the centre do not want  this to happen. It means that they  will be forced to return to Oakalla  Prison.  Write today to :  Maurice Egan, Director of social  planning  City Hall, 12 and Cambie,  Vancouver, B.C.  Demand that the Centre remain open.  For more information, contact the  Solitary. Confinement Abolition Project, Box 758, Station A, Vancouver. Our IWD  March 8 is a day of world wide solidarity and action among women.  This year, the theme for March 8 in  Vancouver was Women in Isolation and  Solidarity.  Through a variety of public events,  we drew attention to women's isolation in the home, on the job, in the  streets and locked away. We emphasized  that our solidarity can overcome that  isolation.  Our parade down Georgia to the Queen  Elizabeth plaza on the day of March  8 itself featured more than 500 feminists and friends. Floats, balloons, a  dragon, drummers, banners and women  marching and dancing - the parade was  a lovely, high-energy celebration.  We gathered at the Queen Elizabeth  plaza after the parade for songs, some  speechs and solidarity.  Kinesis includes some excerpts from  those speeches in this feature.  On Sunday, March 10, an International  Women's Day INFORMATION DAY took place  at Britannia High School. Films, workshops, music, displays and speakers  again focussed on the themes of isolation and solidarity.  Some highlights  of that day:  * A discussion of Women in the Home,  and a panel discussion about Immigrant  Women in the Home and in the Work Place.  * Workshops on Women in Prison, Black  Women in Canada, and Poverty is a Women's Problem.  * Presentations on Abortion, Pornography, Women in Unions, and Organizing the Unorganized.  * Videos including "Rule of Thumb" (on  battered women); "Take Her, She's Mad",  (on women in a psychiatric hospital);  "Rape - the Reality".  * Films, "Chile - the Most Painful  Hour"(followed by a discussion led  by the Canada-Chile Action Coalition);  "A Question of Rape"; "Mental Patients'  Association,(followed by a discussion  led by the narrator, of the film). ,  S\___^&1*^^_%_\  lf\\  "  •**Bia|          m •im~~._____\.             \,      i  t         (  k  h   ,  m.     t *                     m^  Shula and her dragon waiting for the parade to  International Women's Day—March 8, 1979  i  Islo  L  IAITII  lo  Nl        SOLIDARITY  There was something for everyone at Information Day  Represented in the parade and at information day was a wide range of  groups: feminists, trade unionists,  prisoners' rights advocates, gay  rights activists all took part. Part-  icapting groups ranged from Amnesty  International, Ariel Books and AUCE  through the Federated Anti-Poverty  Groups, Feminist Karate Association  and In Struggle to the Women's Resources Centre, Working Women Unite  ,and the YWCA. 14  15  March 8 Events  Theme for March 8,1979:  Women In Isolation  and Solidarity  • Megan Ellis Addressing the Rally  At the rally after the parade,  speakers outlined the significance of our  IWD theme: Women in Isolation and Solidarity.  Megan Ellis of Rape Relief spoke of  how women are moving in solidarity  against that isolation we experience  when violence is directed against us:  in the home,  on the streets,  on the  job, and locked away.  I don't have to tell you that violence against women happens in the  steets.  - it happens when we are sexually  harassed and physically attacked.  - it happens when we are insulted by  offensive, degrading advertising.  - when we are bought and sold.  - when we are afraid to show affection for each other.  - when we experience fear.  It happens in the homes  - when wives are battered and-young  girls are sexually abused.  - when there is no childcare.  - when welfare rates are below poverty level.  - when we have compulsory pregnancy.  It happens in institutions  - when we are raped by authority, by  prison guards, physiotherapists and  opticians  - when we are drugged by force as a  'cure'.  - when madness is socially defined.  It happens on the job  - again when we are sexually harassed  and again raped by authority, by supervisors and employers.  - when we are only given low-paying,  low-status jobs and are the last hired and first fired.  We have been waiting for decades for  those who pay lip-service to goals of  equality and justice to stop our oppression.  We are not losing our patience, WE  HAVE LOST IT.  We are no longer asking politely to be  given what Is* our own, WE ARE TAKING  IT.  We no longer anticipate the evolution  of a world that is fair and just for  women, WE ARE CREATING IT.  We no longer will suffer the bruising  of our bodies and our minds, WE ARE  FIGHTING IT.  We no longer wait for a them, a male  them, to do it for us, WE ARE DOING  IT.  The issue of women in the streets is  no longer one of women attacked, harassed, bought, and insulted, but one  of women taking to the streets to tak  back our pride, our dignity, and our  sisterhood.  **!■  Ces Rosalis,  of the International Association of Filipino Patriots,  expressed our solidarity with the women of all third world countries:  . On this 71st anniversary of International Women's Day, I would like to  commemorate the memory of Maria Lorena  Barros. Lorrie, as her friends called her, was one of the founding members of the first revolutionary women's organization in the Philippines  called MAKIBAKA - an acronym which  stands for FIGHT - STRUGGLE ON.  Along with other revolutionary mass  organizations which sprouted out during the first quarter storm of the  early '70's MAKIBAKA carried the demand of the Filipino for national democracy.  National because it calls  for- an end to US imperialist control  of the country, and democratic because it calls for the equal distribution of land to the peasants as well  as the restoration of full democratic  rights of freedom of speech, religion  and assembly.  Likewise, MAKIBAKA carried the specific demand of Filipina women whose  position is doubly oppressive in a  semi-feudal, semi-colonial society  as the Philippines is.  The Philippines was under Spanish  rule for 400 years until the American colonialists came in 1898 whose  presence can be felt up to this very  day.  The country is exotic in its  beauty and very rich in natural resources.  Unfortunately, multinational corporations, largely American,  are having a heyday in exploiting  the country as well as its people.  These corporations take out $7 for  every dollar they put in - leaving a  trail of hunger, poverty, disease,  and death in the country.  Multinational corporations like Dole,  Del Monte, United Fruit, Firestone,  Mobil Oil, Nestle's Dow Chemical,  and many more, have managed to control  the lives of thousands of Filipino  people and fostered the isolation of  women at home, in the factories, and  in the community by the very structure they have created.  When martial law was declared in Sept.  22, 1972 thousands of Filipino people, including Lorrie Barros, decided to go to the countryside to take  up arms, join the New People's Army  and fight against the fascist dictatorship.  Unfortunately, Lorrie's bravery and  courage was shortlived.  In August,  1975, at the age of 26, she died a  heroine's death when the house she  and other NPA fighters was staying  at was attacked by a whole company of  soliders specifically assigned to  track her down.  Being the leader of  the group, Lorrie ordered her comrades  to escape while she tried to fight off  the soliders herself.  Her comrades escaped, but Lorrie died.  Comrades, sisters and friends - Lorrie Barros was but one woman.  However  she is the epitome of women in the  Third World whose struggle for basic  freedom could mean the shedding of  blood. Neither is Lorrie alone.  Thousands of women in the Phillipp-  ines and abroad, are today, actively  involved in the different sectors of  the revolutionary movement.  Whether in Chile, in Argentina, in  Nicaragua, in India, in Jamaica, in  Indonesia, in Africa, in Vietnam,  in Iran, in the Philippines or in  other Third World countries - women  have to contend with not only the  overall economic control of the country by a handful of people in the  helm of multinational conglomerates,  but also with the social, cultural  and moral norms imposed by this very  existing economic structure - a structure that we know permeates and corrodes the life and sanity of women  both in or outside Canada.  As I known Lorrie would say to you  today - MAKIBAKA.'  HUWAG MATAKOT'.  STRUGGLE ON!  FEAR NOT!  LONG LIVE THE SOLIDARITY OF THE WOMEN IN THE THIRD WORLD AND THE WOMEN  IN CANADA!  ON THE JOB  Speaking about women's isolation and  solidarity on the job was Shirley  Hawes.  She is one out of 35 women  among the 11, 700 workers at Inco in  Sudbury,  and a member of the United  Steelworkers of America Local 6500.  Inco is the 11th biggest company in  Canada.  Profit-wise,  it's the 3rd.  Reid  Hawes spoke about the strike at Inco,  which is now six months old.  She described the ways in which women are  organizing to support the strike.  Wives Supporting the Strike have become involved in group action to meet  the material needs of a community  which has been without pay for half  a year. 16  MARCH 8!  AT HOME  LOCKED AWA^  Gay Hoon,  of the Solitary Confinement  Abolition Project,   spoke of ways in  which we can break down the isolation  of women locked away in prisons.  Women prisoners, Hoon told the crowd,  tend to be forgotten. This is largely due to their numbers as compared  to incarcerated men. In BC at any  one time there are less than 100 women in prison. The figure at Kingston Penitentiary in Ontario varies from 123 - 140.  Native women are grossly over-represented in prison, usually for drug  or alcohol related offenses.  The poor are also over-represented.  Many stay in jail prior to sentencing  because they don't have, or can't  raise, as little as $100 bail money.  Women are locked away when they won't  conform the demands of society to  be a "good mother", a "nice girl",  or a "good secretary," Hoon added.  Some are in prisons. Some are in  mental institutions.  Crimes against women in prison, she  went on, include the fact of imprisonment itself. The majority of women  in prison are there for non-violent,  victimless crimes related to-drugs,  alcohol, shoplifting and prostitution.  Hoon continued with an indictment of  conditions in prison, concentrating  on the realities of life inside  Oakalla. There are no meaningful  training programmes; there is no  meaningful work. In the winter,  there's no outside exercise. Gym is  at best irregular. If anyone "slashed up", they were tossed into solitary.  Hoon quoted from Assata Shakur's  poem: ¬a  After the bars and the gates and  the degradation  What is  left?  After the lock-ins and the lockouts and the lock-ups  What is  left?  What is left, said Hoon, is solidarity.  We on the outside can express-  that solidarity, she concluded, by writing to prisoners,  by visiting prisoners, by demanding  that innovative programmes be introduced , and by taking an active  part in prison justice issues#  Susan Hoeppner of Vancouver Status  of Women, spoke of women's isolation the home, and how that isolation can be broken down.  Hoeppner said:  "There is a poster which came into  VSW recently. The top part has a  dreamy romantic woman saying, "When  I fall in love, it will be forever.  Two kids: a boy, a girl, and maybe  a part-time job in an office." Below this is a photograph of a woman  in her home with two children. It is  a home disclosing abject poverty.  The following statistics are included with the photograph:  30% of mothers of 3 year olds have  depression in any one year - over  one half the women at home suffer  from severe to moderate depression.  Over 25% of all reported crimes are  from wives beaten by their husbands.  (And think how many wives don't report this violence!)  One in every three marriages ends in  divorce.  What happened to the dream?  The bottom of the poster simply says:  Join the fight for - Safe birth control; right to abortion, equal job  opportunities, childcare, and alternatives to marriage and family.  I chose this poster to talk about  because it reflects very clearly the  three stages I went through as a woman  in the home to gain my feminist consciousness.  The need of the state to have us perform a particular role is so strong  that millions of women in this country  start out in adulthood believing in  princes.  And we end up in situations where we are  battered, r^ped in the name of love,  poverty-stricken and humiliated." -  In a society such as ours in which  money determines value, Hoeppner  said, women in the home are a group  who work outside the money economy.  Their work is not worth money, and  therefore it is considered not to  be real work.  The following facts are conveniently  overlooked by the state:  The five million Canadian women who  work in the home produce services  equal to 27 per cent of the GNP.  Our work is worth at least $26 bil  lion a year in the economy, or $6,000  for each household in the country.  There is so little time for those of  us who work in the home, Hoeppner  pointed out. "We are expected to be  up at 7 to feed our family and still  to get up in the midde of the night  with a sick child. The number of  women who talk of the pain of trying  to quiet a screaming baby in the  night with a husband who yells:  'Shut that kid up; I have to work in  the morning!' It's Catch 22."  There are some of us who choose home-  making as a life."We need support to  do so: support from the society we  live in and recognition for the work  we do," Hoeppner said.  nNo, she's not busy, Grandma."  "How do we move from isolation to  solidarity?" she asked. "Many of us  start in the kitchen: 'Come for  tea.' 'I'll go crazy if I don't  talk to a grown-up. The woman next  door; two doors down.' We start to  trade off time. 'I'll take your kids  today if you'll take mine tomorrow.'  Our first recognition comes from each  other. And we are forced to start  seeing ourselves in each other. We  start to recognize our powerlessness  as being political as well as personal.  For most of us in the women's movement,  this is the beginning of feminism. "# Pornography: Fighting Back  What are the implications of a feminist response to pornography?  This issue was discussed in a daylong forum February 17, sponsored by  the BCFW Women Against Violence subcommittee.  The purpose of the session was to begin formulating tactics which might  be used to combat the increasing exploitation of women in culture and  media.  Gene Errington initiated the discussion with an outline of how women are  controlled in a variety of ways by  the state - through the family, and  in virtually every aspect of our lives.  She pointed out that freedom of speech  in a society which is controlled by  the interests of corporate industry  is, in fact, a myth.  Megan Ellis of Rape Relief continued  with an analysis of the connections  between all forms of pornography and  other forms of violence against women.  The initial presentations were concluded by Debra Lewis, outlining the  arguments against a traditional civil  libertarian approach to pornography,  and suggesting possible means which  might be used by the women's movement  to fight the issue.  The rest of the day was spent in a  general discussion of issues raised  in the presentations and in suggestions  for strategy to be developed.  Five main areas were identified as  potentially fruitful for our involve  ment - pressure for legal change, consciousness raising, direct action against producers and distributors of  pornography, direct action against consumers, and economic action.  The ideas  brought forward will be further developed by the BCFW subcommittee and distributed to interested persons.  Some of the specific areas identified  for action were:  1. Production-of a slide-tape show on  pornography for educational use, particularly withwomen's groups.  2. Organizing a telephone tree, so that  particularly objectionable advertising  and media can be quickly responded to  with a deluge of complaints.  3. Continued work to make the feminist  response to pornography more widely  known.  The Women Against Violence Subcommitte  will be continuing work in this area  and developing specific tactics that,  they hope, other women will tie into.  You Can Join  BCFW  Women Against Violence  The committee meets on the first arid  third Thursdays of every month. Anyone interested in the committee or in  helping with a specific issue (they  particularly need women to participate  in the telephone tree) should contact  Debra at VSW, 736 1313.  Valentine's,  Massacre  Florist Thomas Hobbs has a hobby.  He  appears to enjoy degrading and demeaning women with slanderous window displays.  The worst appeared on Valentine's day.  Hobbs had a woman slumped over a bed,  an empty bottle of sleeping pills by  her side,  the caption read; you don't  send me flowers anymore.  The display suggests that women are  dependent upon receiving flowers and  other signs of affection.  It makes  the statement that women want material goods and if we don't receive  them our lives are empty, meaningless  and of no value to ourselves or anyone.  We (VSW) wrote to Hobbs to hear what  he had to say.  VSW vice-president  Jillian Ridington concluded her letter  by saying:  We would like to bring your attention to the fact that women are purchasers of flowers.    They buy them  for friends and relatives and for  themselves.     Unless an apology to  the women of Vancouver is made public, we will urge our members and  friends to boycott Thomas Hobbs Florist,  and make their floral purchases  elsewhere.  That letter was sent Feb. 26. To date  no word from Hobbs.  Pressing and Persistent Harassment of Prostitutes  On February 28, the Liberal government  proposed amendments to the Criminal  Code which would make it easier to obtain convictions for soliciting.  Due to NDP moves in the House of Commons , the amendments have been returned to committee for further review.  The Bill would clarify the definition  of soliciting so that behaviour need  not be "pressing and persistent" to  constitute this offence and for the  purposes of the section, "any means  of transportation located in or on  a public place" would be deemed to  be a "public place."  These changes follow in the wake of  a recent court decision where a judge  ruled that a car was not a public  place and that a woman, in order to  be convicted of prostitution must be  known to have been pushy and pressing  her services upon a customer.  The Code states "Every person who  solicits any person in a public  place for the purpose of prostitution  is guilty of an offence punishable  on summary conviction."  VSW Critique  The proposed Criminal Code amendments  relating to prostitution, designed to  "plug up the loopholes" created by  last year's Supreme Court decision,  can only lead to increased harassment  and potential entrapment of women and  do nothing to solve the problems which  lead to the existence of prostitution.  Many women enter prostitution for reasons that are economic and social. In  dividual women cannot be held responsible for the fact that the demand for  prostitution exists, or for the circumstances leading to their decision to  make a living through prostitution.  A brief prepared for VSW last fall  made the following recommendations in  this area:  1. Decriminalize prostitution,  using  funds traditionally channelled into  enforcement in this area for providing  alternatives   (shelter,- training programmes,  etc.) for women who choose to  leave prostitution.  2. Support laws directed towards pimps.  3. Control all forms of "pressing and  persistent" harassment - not only of  prostitutes to clients but also of men  to women in general    - a far more frequent occurrence.  /M^Fho/^  ^ I CAN DO     M  WOUCH'  ^  WHAT   1   WANT  1  YOU'RE A WHORE!)  WsiApnk  W BANG!   1  IZ7  f PUNCH!A  09  m Confronting Sexism in the CBC  Sylvia Spring  The following article is the substance  of a brief presented to the CBC management in Ottawa on February 22.   It  outlines a feminist response to the  CBC.  Sylvia Spring,  who presented the brief  on behalf of VSW and the Media Collective, was the only representative of  the women's movement from western Canada.  Sylvia Spring has herself worked inside the CBC as a producer and a director.  This enabled her to speak from  personal experience to the difficulties  of being a feminist within that organization.  It also prevented the CBC management from mystifying the internal  workings of the CBC in their  The Vancouver Status of Women is an  organization representing over a  thousand members in B.C. as well as  many thousands more reached through  its various community services.  We  produce a monthly newspaper, Kineses  which is widely read and respected  throughout the province.  We are  members of the B.C. Federation of  Women, an umbrella organization  which represents 57 diverse provincial women's groups. We are also  members of the National Action Committee on the Status of Women, represented here today.  One major area of concern for the VSW  is the role that the media plays in  the daily lives of women generally  and particularly the role the various  media have played in reporting events  and issues that directly affect our  membership and constituency.  Several VSW members, myself included,  have created the Women's Media Collective in order to focus on and develop an analysis of the Canadian  media vis a vis women.  We all work  in some capacity in the media.  I am  therefore here as a representative  of both groups.  Judith Burke of the VSW executive  sent an intervention on our behalf  to the CRTC hearings of 1978. We  would like to endorse again all the  points she made as well as those  made in the recent N.A.C. intervention.  We do not think it would be  constructive to merely reiterate  what other interventions have stated  very effectively.  It is our observation that not much has changed  since submission of the very comprehensive and incisive brief to the  CRTC in 1974 by the Women for Political Action and the Ontario Committee on the Status of Women.  We  must assume that the CBC representatives here today are familiar with  all of these documents. However,  the most significant effect we can  see these briefs having to date is  the initiation of this seminar.  This is the first step.  We have chosen to focus on a few issues which we feel need expanding u-  pon since they are of key importance  to this whole seminar.  They are as  follows:  1) The CBC's failure to live up to  its mandate.  2) Sexism and how it works on the  CBC in a) the sins of omission  b) the use of language (ver  bal and visual)  c) the myth of the CBC's  "Socially Responsible  Journalism".  3) Programs: The worst offenders on  TV and radio.  The most shocking and disappointing  discovery we made, upon reading The  CBC - A Perspective, the CBC report  to the CRTC (1978), was the total  absence of any reference to the specific issue of women.  Despite our detailed report of 1974, despite CBC  women's internal criticisms, despite  all the public attention given to  women's roles within society, even  despite the lip service given us  during 1975, International Women's  Year, the Perspective is totally devoid of reference to our perspective.  So concerned was this voluminous document about the questions of national unity, regionalism and Canadian  content that we did not even rate a  mention.  This makes it abundantly  clear to us that CBC management has  not been sensitized, despite our  efforts, to the nature of our much  acclaimed "Canadian mosaic." While  claiming to embrace and support diversity, the CBC is unable or unwilling to see the most basic of all divisions. No, the CBC is not yet an  expression of our Canadian identity  since it doesn't mirror half the  nation except in stereotypical and/  or demeaning ways.  As far as the CBC being an 'open and  responsive service' we can only say  that four-year lapses between criticism and response is not fast enough!  If it is acknowledged at this  long overdue seminar that in fact  the CBC has a duty to half the population that it has not really carr-^  The CBC Report to the CRTC (1978) contained  no reference to the specific issue of women...  Sylvia Spring ied out, we expect the response to  be much, much quicker.  The CBC's  response to criticism of internal  inequalities was considerably faster  but the creation of the Office of  Equal Opportunities did not necessarily solve all the problems mentioned by the 1975 Task Force on Women  in the CBC. A 1977 update report  shows very little progress made on  any level. We realize that change  takes time but we also see that it is  given a low priority on your list.  Although women may not be barred from  applying for any job now, we have e-  nough evidence to suggest that it is  still very difficult for women to  get beyond some men's personal biases.  It is even sadder to hear an Equal  Opportunities Officer state that some  women get along just fine in male-  dominated jobs while those who complain of sexist attitudes are "having  personal problems in relating to men."  We suspect this kind of attitude makes  women afraid to speak up for fear of  not being believed or being labelled  a trouble maker.  Although it is virtually impossible  to describe all the various faces of  sexism and how they show themselves  on radio and TV, it is important for  CBC management to develop an understanding of its various guises so that  they can be more sensitive to it in  daily programing.  This understanding is key to any real change on or  within the CBC.  The more blatant forms have, for the  most part, disappeared from public  broadcasting (although we take exception to most commercials, 'sit corns'  and variety shows, which all reinforce sexist stereotypes).  We are  not called 'broads' or 'chicks' any  more, we sometimes get to host a  show or read the news, and from time  to time turn up in the 'man' on the  street interviews.  But this is where  the consciousness stops. We must note here that the mere fact of being a  woman does not mean one has an automatic sensitivity to sexism.  Femaleness  is Considered  Unprofessional  Unfortunately, many women did suppress  their identification with other women  in order to get ahead in the traditionally male career world since any  trace of 'femaleness' is considered  'unprofessional'.  Many 'career women' therefore become male identified.  Thus a woman in CBC management might not necessarily see the  sexism implicit in much of the programing or even in CBC's hiring practices.  So maligned has the issue of  sexism become that it is often easier  and less threatening for a man to  point it out.  He has no fear of being labelled and dismissed.  In other  words, the consciousness of sexism  must be developed and encouraged in  everyone.  The Sins of Omission  One of the worst forms of sexism is  that of omission.  We often just  aren't there in the programs or we're  used as decoration or support material.  In screening CBC TV shows re-  List Two Reasons Why She Won't Be Heard.  It is Important that CBC Personnel  Understand the Difference  between Girls and Ladies  cently, many of us were beginning to  feel, 'ah, CBC's not bad, I don't  feel put down or ridiculed at least'.  But after a moment's pause we realized it was because we weren't there.  Between sports, political events,  world events, The Great Detective,  the great musical 'masters' and the  Ombudsman, we are often invisible.  That is not to say that we have no  interest or input into these areas  but merely, there was no one conscious enough on any of those programs  to wonder how women contributed to  or felt about an event.  Is it not  obvious that women viewers will surmise from this, consciously or unconsciously, that they have no part to  play in certain areas of life and will  it not reinforce the limited life  roles they see and often must live?  Just telling a woman she can do anything, after years of socialization  to the contrary, is not enough.  One  show or even one series can not change  her limited self image or men's of  her.  She must see over and over a-  gain that women are present and able.  This is especially true for children  and young women who are just forming  their self images.  We would like to suggest a little  exercise for you.  Ask of each program you see or hear, 'What role do  women play in this? Where are they?  If not, why not?' You might be surprised at what you discover.  Also,  we suggest you do not assume that  everyone understands 'he' to mean  'she' or 'cameraman' to mean 'camera-  woman' .  Which brings us to our next  very important point which is about  language.'  It is our observation as well as  that of experts in linguistics that  the words we use play a critical role  in forming our perceptions of the  world. An extremely ..important book  on the subject is Words and Women by  Casey Miller and Kate Swift (N.Y.,  Anchor Books, 1977).  Both are linguists, writers and editors.  Since  the issue of language has become critical to women's rights, and since  many people have tried to trivalize  the concern as unimportant or petty,  it is of key importance that it be  spoken to. We will quote a couple  of passages from the book that show  how untrivial is a concern for language usage.  In 1928, anthropologist and linguist  Edward Sapir wrote:  Language is a guide to   'social reality' .. .It powerfully conditions all  our thinking about social problems  and processes.    Human beings do not  live in the objective world of social  activity as ordinarily understood,  but are very much at the mercy of the  particular language which has become  the medium of expression for their  society.     It is quite an illusion to  imagine that one adjusts to reality  essentially without the use of language and that language is merely an  incidental means of solving specific  problems of communication or reflections.    The fact of the matter is that^- 2(r  the   'real world' is to a large extent  unconsciously built up on the  language habits of the group. . .We see and  hear and otherwise experience very  largely as we do because the language  habits of our community predispose  certain choices of interpretation.  Keeping Mr. Sapir's analysis in mind,  let me present you with a recent example of both verbal and visual language bias on CBC/TV.  The show is  People Talking Back and it is being  promoted by Gordon Pinsent.  The images are of two or three interviews  with men-in-the-street who are giving their points of view.  Pinsent  then says, "It's for the little guy.  ii  He Can Talk Back"  He can talk back." Ironically, the  intent of this show is to give all  Canadians the impression that they  have real and equal accessibility to  their publicly-owned media.  But the  message that comes across clearly is  that men are the only people with anything worth saying or worth listening  to. We're sure this wans't the intention of the producers but what we  insist is that they become conscious  of the messages they are projecting.  At issue here is not intent but effect.  If you are as yet unconvinced of the  male bias of our language and how it  affects people's perceptions, perhaps  this quote from Words and Women will  help you appreciate the problem, (p. 19)  In 1972 two sociologists at Drake University,  Joseph Schneider and Sally  Hacker,  decided to test the hypothesis  that   'man' is generally understood to  embrace   'woman'.    Some 300 college  students were asked to select from magazines or newspapers a variety of pictures that would appropriately illustrate the different chapters in a  sociology textbook being prepared for  publication.    Half of the students  were assigned chapter headings  like  'Social Man',   'Industrial Man', and  'Political Man'.     The other half were  given different but corresponding  headings like   'Society ',   'Industrial  Life', and  'Political Behavior'.  Analysis of the pictures selected revealed that in the minds of students  of both sexes use of the word man e-  voked,  to a statistically significant  degree, images of males only - filtering out recognition of women's  participation in these major areas of  life - whereas the corresponding  headings without man evoked images of  both males and females.    In some instances the differences reached magnitudes of 30 to 40 per cent.    The  authors concluded,   "This is rather  convincing evidence that when you use  the word man generically, people do  tend to think male, and tend not to  think female. "  Although we can not legislate away  the often patronizing tone of male  interviewers we can at least insist  that words be used advisedly. A final note: it is important that CBC personnel understand the difference in  meaning between 'girls', 'ladies',  and 'women'. We will happily advise.  Socially Responsible  Journalism?  The Myth of CBC's "Socially Responsible Journalism" - Again the depth  and breadth of this subject is too  vast to do justice to here. Instead,  -we will put forward a couple of quotes from Susan Sontag's recent book,  On Photography:  A disavowal of empathy,  a disdain  for message mongering,  a claim to be  invisible,   these are the strategies  endorsed by most professional photographers.  But Sontag goes on to show how in  every case one's partisanship is exposed by the very images we record.  By refusing to take sides one fabricates a new parallel reality which  underscores journalistic effectiveness.  The camera makes everyone a tourist  in other people 's reality.  We in the VSW and Media Collective  have seen many examples of CBC journalistic partisanship and how it has  worked against women. We prefer to  deal with an outfront bigot who at  least owns up to his prejudice than  the journalists who hide their biases  behind so-called 'professional objectivity. '  To quote again from the  CBC Perspective: "Like all of us,  journalists have opinions and biases  of their own." We agree and see the  "battle of the sexes" frought with  unresolved hostilities, confusion  and bias. 'Ģ  It will not be remedied by not acknowledging the conflict or by insisting that journalists suppress their  feelings.  That only makes it only  come out in more insidious forms.  A-  gain, you state: "It is easier to be  fair to the powerful than the weak.  It is easier to be fair to someone  who can not hit you back.  It is eas  ier to be fair to someone you like."  This too has been our observation.  Perspective explains that the CBC  "must do more than simply report events.We must examine the underlying  trends in society - underlying issues of complexity and difficulty  that too often get crowded out or  are excessively simplified in our reportage." That is why you are hiring  journalistic specialists in areas  like science, medicine, law, economics, business, labor and politics.  We would suggest that you hire specialists on women's issues as well so  that there can be some intelligent,  indepth discussion of events and issues rather than the generally combative approach taken so far. And may  we suggest that your first indepth  women's issue be an examination of  how and why in times of economic uncertainty and depression, women suffer the most - on the job, in social  services and at home? We guarantee  that this program would touch 100  per cent of your female audience.  Since there is no time to elaborate  on all the sexism on TV and radio,  we have made a list of the worst offenders, with quickie comments on why.  I can elaborate our reasons later if  you wish.  Meet the Worst Offenders  Radio  Morningside and Danny Finkleman: because Don and Danny are consistently  solicitous and patronizing in tone  with and about women, with Don's great  need to make everything either so hilariously funny or dramatically sad  that he continually gives inappropriate if not insulting responses.  And  Danny for his generally 'jock'ular approach.  Gilmour's Albums, Eclectic Circus and  Off the Record: These old boys must  have gone to the same school.  Johnny Chase, Royal Canadian Air Farce and Dr. Bondolo's Pandemonium Medicine Show: All sexist in the stereotyping of the token women on their  shows and the cheap laughs they get  from these demeaning images.  Dr. B's  'living bra' ads are one of the most  offensive examples.  Sound of Sports, 90 Minutes with the  Bullet and Country Road: at best for  their sins of omission, at worst for  their stereotyping of women (whom  they always call 'girls').  Television  Man Alive: for its name alone. The  content is usually good.  Nice Show: wins the prize for the latest example of bad taste, lowest denominator appeaf, sexist, racist and  anti-labor jokes...all in the name of  humor.  Housed in Vancouver's most  famous ex-brothel, it carries on the  old tradition.  On one show; Linda  Lovelace choking, Dolly Parton's breasts, Guy Lafleur's scoring, Marg  Tradeau's bum and the token black man  playing Uncle Tom with his school of  "Shuck and Jive". A  People Talking Back: for 'its unequal,  undemocratic style all in the name of  same.  Rene Simard: for using its female performers as glitter and its female audience as pawns and Rene as sex object.  Three's Company: For its caricatures  of women and men in the name of humor.  Sunday Sports, Canadian Superstars  and Sports Specials: for assuming  that everyone is interested in 'jock  talk' not covering many women's events, calling women 'girls' and for  pre-empting other more relevant shows,  especially in the afternoons.  Bonkers.' wins the prize for the most  mindless, insulting import. A survey of kids found it 'dumb.'  That's not all,  for now.  but enough to chew on PrOmiseS, PrOmiseS According to CBC Pres. Al Johnson  by Sylvia Spring  On February 22 and 23 the CBC held  a seminar in Ottawa on The Portrayal  of Women in CBC Programs.  Representatives of seven Canadian women's organizations were invited to give briefs on the subject.  The seven groups represented were those that had  in October of 1978 presented interventions to the CRTC public hearings  on the renewal of CBC's broadcast  licence.  All had complained of various offensive sexist practices on  the public network.  At that time  the president of CBC, Al Johnson, had  committed himself to meeting with  women to hear their complaints.  The groups represented and their  spokesperson were as follows: Reseau  d'action et d'information pour les  femmes, Cecile Ugeusj National Action  Committee on the Status of Women;  Lynn McDonald* Vancouver Status of  Women; Sylvia Spring; Canadian Advisory Council on the Status of Women, Sue Findlayj La federation des  femmes du Quebec, Stella Baudot; National Council of Women of Canada,  Ruth Hinkley; Federated Women's Institutes of Canada, Martha Bielish.  As well as the above women, five other special women speakers were invited to speak to various aspects  of the issues of sexism and the media.  The 12 women met for two intense days  and two 'cocktailing' evenings with  the mostly male representatives from  the top CBC management echelons.  There were 15 senior management men  and three management women as well  as several assorted CBC observers  present.  The seminar was held very  quietly with no public announcements  or press releases.  Women's Critiques  Indicate Solidarity  Although the women's organizations  represented were extremely varied in  their political perspectives and  membership, there was a surprisingly  strong solidarity in their critiques  of CBC's programing and their suggestions of what must be done to remedy the situation.  French/English, East/West, Feminist/  non-feminist, old/young, single/  married, all agreed that the CBC had  to clean up their act and set an example for the rest of Canada's media  to follow on how women should be represented and seen.  The following  ten points are the actions that Pres.  Al Johnson has proposed that the CBC  should follow in response to the  criticisms and the women's suggestions. Although Johnson made these  commitments to the group assembled,  they will not be confirmed and made  'law' until they are approved by the  CBC Board of Directors at the end of  March (all of whom are men). At  that time the CBC will issue an official press release outlining all  the points in detail.  Thus the following list is quite 'unofficial'  but important to note.  It would be  good to compare this list to the one  that finally is released at the end  of March.  1) To develop concrete policies or  guidelines concerning programing as  it relates to women.  The deadline  for these will be Sept. or Oct. of  1979.  2) Develop guidelines for language  usage so that it doesn't reflect a  sexist bias.  Deadline: June 1, 1979.  3) Develop a process where regular  evaluations of the CBC's progress  can be assessed vis a vis the implementation of the above standards.  This will be done by area heads,  vice-presidents and the president  on a national and regional basis on  a regular basis (not specified how  often).  4) News: "Social Affairs Specialists"  will' be hired, starting in TV (one  for French, English and National  News).  They will be responsible  for the reporting of issues and  questions that are of concern to women.  This will not be called 'women's affairs' per se but will represent women's perspective in specific areas as well as where their  concerns join and give another dimension to the male point of view.  Johnson calls this a "comprehensive  point of view."  More Women  Should Be Hired  5)On the representation of Women in  the Programming Staff: CBC reaffirms  its desire to get more women employed at every level.  The Office of  Equal Opportunities will still work  hard towards this goal but also  Area Heads and producers will be  told to make every effort to increase the number of women in their  ranks as well as "those sensitive to  women's issues." The 0E0 will monitor their progress as well as setting up speical developmental programs for women in the CBC...as soon  as possible, except it costs money.  6) Sensitization: a group within  the CBC will be responsible for  setting up sensitivity training sessions for CBC personnel (not specified who).  Women's Community  Should Be Consulted  7) On Advisory Committees: periodic,  informal consultations with representatives of the women's community  will be set up. CBC makes a commitment to meet again with women in  one year. Doesn't want too structured an approach or to even call  it an official Advisory Committee.  Johnson fears setting up another  bureaucracy.  8) Complaints Commission: In the future there may be a way of electronically registering the public's complaints through the Press Council  for Electronic Media.  But for now  letter writing to the president or  vice-presidents in charge of programming is most effective.  9) The CBC will encourage the CRTC  to hold a seminar (of which they've  begun preliminary discussion) to discuss the problem of sexism in ads.  They hope to develop some kind of  standard to which all commercials  will have to conform.  10) The CBC will "look into" cleaning up their own promos right away.  Johnson added that if women did not  like the all-male make up of the CBC  board of directors they should complain to the Secretary of State  since he is responsible for appointing them.  Write to CBC President Al Johnston,  1500 Bronson Ave.,  Ottawa,  K19 3J5,  giving your support for the 10  point proposal to remedy sexism in  the CBC.  We are waiting to ,  action.  it come into 22  Feminist Affinity Group Forming  PATRICIA PARTINGTON  The Trident submarine is an offensive  weapon.  For years the American Military Industrial Complex has been excusing  itself by claiming to be merely defensive. It has tried to explain its  massive arms build up as just a deterrent to aggression.  But the Trident nuclear submarine and the 408  nuclear warheads it is capable of  carrying and delivering are clearly  aggressive weapons.  They are designed for a first strike capability.  That means that they are not designed  to protect from but to initiate attack. -The danger of nuclear war is  imminent.   It hasn't decreased in  the last ten years.  In fact since  the Pentagon is no longer allowed to  play death and destruction in southeast Asia it has intensified its arms  research and buildup. The first of  the 30 Trident submarines will be  finished and launched this March.  The Pacific Life Community, a Canadian anti-nuke group, is planning  another demonstration this year, at  the Trident base in Bangor, Washington at the end of May.  This demonstration will use the affinity group  structure to facilitate action.  Each  affinity group of seven to 12 people  forms before the demonstration and  is asked to take non-violent training together.  The affinity groups are the primary  decision making unit of the demonstration.  Each group sends a spokesperson to the general meeting as  their representative, a job which  is usually rotated within the group.  In the past many demonstrators have  decided to commit acts of civil disobedience as a form of protest.  The affinity group structure is very  useful in that case because each  WOMEN UNITE!  I    /SMASH  ff,/,      , THE--.'  ,rtJLITARy-  /-} INDUSTRIAL  ■■COMPLEX  Nfe  '4    Join TRt M«ttH    'Jj^Y^1  f        "j"       Mi ,j  j       LATE. HAY Iffi |f  Nan Greggory  individual has her/his own support  group.  The members know what to  do with their things and know who to  contact in case they are arrested.  If you would like to get more information attend one of the Monday meetings at Metro Media 3255 Heather, Van.  If you don't live near Vancouver,  write Pacific Life Community, 3275,  West 5, Vancouver.  This demonstration is tentatively set  for the end of May so you have time  to form an affinity group.  If you  want more information on the nonviolence training - it includes  techniques to use in situations when  you are being provoked that will help  avoid a violent confrontation - or  would like to join an affinity group  without having to form one, call Jennifer at 731-1707 or Tim at 738-0027  or David at 585-1124.  If you are  interested in going with a feminist  affinity group contact Patricia at  732-6932.  The Trident issue is an international  issue of atomic proportions.  It is  an issue that will determine the very  possibility of all our other struggles.  It is an issue which elicits  a coalition of support from a wide  ranged constituency.  It is a women's  issue.  It is a feminist issue.  Large demonstrations have historically  been very effective means of electing  change.  The boys in the power structure have  found it to their advantage to downplay that effectiveness.  An obvious  attempt to discourage mass protests.  Large gatherings of protesters not  only focus public attention on that  particular offensive issue, they are  also unequalled learning experiences  for the participants.  From the first day you can see the  consciousness raise in quantum leaps  over political, social and sexist  issues.  A large group, last year it  was nearly 5,000, gathered together  for a common purpose is very inspiring.  Not to mention that it can be  great fun.  There is space for all kinds of activity, theatre, workshops .  ftpUNriFUL- J...TH i »&=,  Where There's Smoke •«  There are two types of smoke detectors; the photo-electric (or photocel)  and the ionization type.  The photo-  electrics have no potential radioactivity problem as they contain no radioactive source.  The ionizing types however contain a  small piece of Americium 241.  This  material comes from the core of a  nuclear reactor and is radioactive.  The area of greatest immediate concern is the possibility of inhalation  or ingestion of the Americium source  by an inquisitive child. Since Am 241  has a half-life of 458 years, this remains a possibility long after the use  ful life of the detector.  Another less apparent but nonetheless  real concern is unaccounted radiation  emitted.  If you're shopping for a smoke detector SPEC (Scientific Pollution & Environmental Control Society advises you  to purchase on the photo-electric  type as much for its detection capabilities as its lack of radiation. 23  Where Are Women in the Landscape?  As one sifts through the literature  in forestry, resource management,  planning and land classification, one  is impressed with how many articles  and reports open with warnings about  man's  activities and how he will perhaps destroy his own habitat through  careless neglect of environmental  relationships.  The question emerges: what is woman's  role in changing the face of the  earth? What is woman's relationship to the landscape?  Has woman become a consumer, woman-object, also  manipulated by experts of production?  Also, where does woman fit into the  environmental decision-making pro-  'Ģcess?  Each of these questions could  generate a volume, because, despite  the use of the term man  to incorporate both the male and female condition  woman's role has been biologically  and sociologically significantly different from that of man's from primitive to modern times.  What is woman's role in changing the  face of the earth?.In East Africa,  women bear on their backs daily the  wood supply for cooking meals: Are  they changing their landscapes? Most  assuredly.  Most "underdeveloped"  countries are experiencing a different kind of development, a shrinking  of the fertile land base due to increasing numbers of people using the  land.  Woman as childbearer is perhaps the most significant role of all  in effecting landscape changes, as  she not only bears the child she  socializes her (him).  In most primitive cultures woman has little choice about becoming a child bearer.  A recent book on the history of contraception pitifully underlines the  dilemma of the uneducated, immobile  woman who does, even despite heavy  sanctions against such behavior, want  to control her birth rate.  What of  women in "modern" nations? Their  role in affecting landscape change  is two-fold: woman the consumer and  woman the unaware.  In "Economics  and the Public Purpose", John Kenneth  Galbraith discussed women as consumers , and high-lighted their unmeasured impact on the economy for services rendered outside the market.  But he did not make the connection  between woman as consumer and her  necessary impacts on environmental  resources.  He did not project woman as unaware,  uneducated.  In fact, lower income  women in general did not receive  much consideration in his discussion.  By the process of socialization, women are either educated very differently from men or not educated at  all.  In B.C. studies have been done  that emphasize the different levels  of encouragement women receive in  trying to attain higher education  (Women's Action Group, UBC, 1974).  As a result few women venture into  areas concerned with engineering,  forestry, soils, land use planning,  land classification or conservation  of natural resources.  Few articles  appear in women's magazines even discussing what goes on in these fields.  Very few women read the Journal of  Forestry, Forestry Chronicle or other possible sources of information  about these study areas.  Forestry,  land classification, wildlife management are fields largely directed by  men in Canada; few women understand  the basic procedures that go into  mapping of resources and economic  analysis that underlies decisionmaking in these fields.  As a result  most land use planning is performed  by an anonymous force, predominately  male, government and industrial workers, with negligible input from women.  So woman, even "modern" woman is largely unaware of and non-*  participatory in the land use planning process.  What is woman's relationship to the  landscape?  This is definitely a sparsely studied area, perhaps better reflected by art than science.  B.C.  in the landscape as reflected by  Rachel Carson's writings or a recently popularized "Diary of an Edwardian  Lady"?  The questions re-emerge.  What is woman's role in changing the face of  the earth? What is woman's relationship to the landscape? Will woman's  viewpoint ever be reflected in the  fields of natural resource management  and land use planning?  Or will women remain largely unaware, uneducated, even in the most technologically advanced cultures?  Michel Jurdant stated:  Is it not shocking and unjust that a  so-called modern society cannot succeed in freeing hundreds of millions  of human beings from the degradation  of disease, illiteracy and hunger,  those denied the essential dignity of  man.    (woman)?  Man can achieve no more than he allows woman to achieve.  The degrad-  and all of Canada experienced the  relationship of one woman as artist,  Emily Carr, to the landscape.  But  surely more research into women artists' work throughout the world would  bring to light a fascinating evolution  of thought, feeling and response by  women to landscape through the ages.  The study might show that woman's  landscape is more likely to be a  city-scape, that she has grown away  from close association and dependence  on the land in many parts of the world.  She may view land as something  totally alien, whether she lives in  a city of an "underdeveloped" country or haunts the underground shopping malls of Vancouver.  Or does she  feel a close association with changes  Nancy Stiefel/LNS  ation of woman ensures the degradation of man.  Woman is not told the  truth; she is not allowed access to  education; she is not allowed to learn to think; she is not even allowed  to engage in honest, equable conversation with men; as a child she may  not be allowed to develop team and  competitive skills through games glorified by various cultures.  She is  only encouraged to play the sometimes  hazardous game of childbirth.  Perhaps  our ecologists need to be equally  concerned with the dignity of woman  and understand thoroughly her influ*-  ence on the landscape if we are to  come to grips with the social and environmental problems that beset us  all today. 24  TSY^fcO  CATH«Y WINTER  ... A FEMINIST TWO-PERSON FIVE-PIECE BAND  Bonanza Jellybean brought two very  special feminist entertainers to  Vancouver for an all-woman concert  March 17.  Betsy Rose and Cathy Winter, a feminist two-person five piece band,  are well known across Canada and the  U.S. for their provocative, sometimes  funny and always talented music and  lyrics.  Both songwriters have a distinctly feminist perspective, they  sing of working women, union women,  mothers, daughters and all the experiences that women share.  The two  accompany themselves on acoustic guitar, violin and piano.  Here's what they say about music.  And women...  Music is a special magical  language;  through music women have been reclaiming lost parts of ourselves,   telling stories long held, silent,  singing  out love, anger and hopes we never  dared express aloud,  ■•'ew things travel as widely and rapidly as a song; few messages capture  the heart and set free the spirit  more readily than a song, and it is  in the heart and in the spirit that  all revolutions begin.  Our commitment is primarily that of  spreading women's culture to the widest possible audience.    Our belief  is that a significant women's political and cultural revolution in this  country depends on conscious and conscientious outreach,  grass roots organizing in rural,  as well as urban  areas, and a refusal on the part of  cultural and political workers to  isolate ourselves on islands of safety and support within the existing  women's community.  Women's cultural events are a chance  to celebrate women's strengths and  diversity, and to gain sustenance  and courage from one another.   But  our belief is that the most important cultural/political work takes  place elsewhere,  in far riskier,  and  often less immediately rewarding  settings.  The content of our music reflects  our commitment to articulating the  many facets of women's life stories,  and to making the recounting of these  stories accessible to women who may  be encountering for the first time  through music the amazing and wonderful reality that women share a common story that has seldom been heard.  Women's lifes have  long been invisible and therefore considered unreai  and unimportant by the dominant culture.     Women's music is one way in  which we can make our experience  real and begin to actualize our dreams  by expressing them.  Their music speaks for itself and  every woman.-+  Kay Gardner  Was Wonderful  Patricia Partington  What a wonderful spell to have woven  so gently.  Kay Gardner and Mo Jo gave us an unequalled evening beautiful and brilliant music.  It was special in many  ways not the least of which was the  fact that it was an all-women's event. That, coupled with the realization that it was women's music  we were listening to, created an atmosphere rarefied with feminist magic.  Magic which permeated our consciousness, soothed and healed.  Bringing us ever closer to our sisters  and ourselves. We were inspired to  look, at. .our. .own. lifestyles and find  creative ways of approach.  Is that  not what ART should bring to the community?  The only jarring note was that we  were all sitting in stiff rows of  folding chairs.  Several women mentioned to me that they'd wished we  were able to move, sit on the floor,  perhaps dance.  I agree with that  perspective and think it needs consideration.  Ms. Gardner is a good teacher as  well as a fine musician.  She explained the elements of improvisation and  then demonstrated those elements through out her work.  The audience was  also encouraged to join in the music  making which we did to the great benefit of all.  It was a totally different experience  than would have been possible if men  had also attended the concert. The  uniquely feminine flow of energy  could not have existed in a mixed  group. This is not necessarily advocacy of a totally separatist approach, rather I am reminded of my  childhood anthropological studies  where I was curious as to why so many  cultures forbade sexual mix in so  many of their ceremonial activities.  Often there was a men's house and a  women's house within which certain  rituals were performed and used as  a sexually-segregated gathering  place.  Now that I am grown and have experienced many all women events as well  as many mixed ones I still don't  know exactly what elements are present in one situation and not in the  other but I am sure they are there,  and that they strongly affect the nature of the event.  It certainly was one more positive  aspect of the concert.  That evening was such a good thing  to have happen for/with/because of  the feminist community in Vancouver.  Thank you Jellybean collective for  arranging it.  Thank you women garment workers in  1908 for marching out on the streets  on March 8 and giving us a date to  celebrate.  Thank you women at the  concert for letting the energy flow.  Thank you Nan Greggory for doing the  beautiful drawing which has inspired  me to write this.  And thank you, me, for having sense  enough to go to the concert in the  first place. +- 25  Lesbian Sense and Sensibility  Connie Smith  It's called lesbian sensibility. When  we saw it between men and women we  called it sexist. We cried out "end  sexism", we wore buttons.  Lesbian sensibility.  We can buy it  at the book store and hang it on the  wall. It's a poster called The Kiss.  Two women sit side by side on a couch.  One woman, obviously 'the lesbian'  wears pants, has short brushed hair  and holds the other woman limp in her  arms.  The woman she holds has long  hair decorated by a scarf, wears a  long skirt, has one leg draped over  'the lesbian's' leg, and has her  hand placed inside 'the lesbian's'  thigh.  Certainly this does not portray a relationship between equals.  Some women say this turns them on...  like a rape fantasy.  If you still  don't catch my drift, check it out  and compare.  Lesbian sensibility. We can read  about it in Jane Rule's Desert of The  Heart in a conversation between Silver  (a woman) and Ann.  Silver took hold of Ann's trouser  legs and pulled.  How smart is she?  Very  How good is she in bed?  Well...  If you want a woman,  have a woman.  But remember you are a woman.    You  need some man-handling.    How many women do you know who can...  One...Ann said, letting her body go,  desire answering skill. (Silver's  feelings about man-handling are so  strong that she eventually marries  one.)  Lesbian sensibility.  Marge Piercy,  author of Woman on The Edge of Time  and Small Changes, defends her use  of it in her new book, The High Cost  of Living.  She says, I had a discussion with Joanna Russ about the absence of open,  sensuous,  fully detailed  sexual scenes between women in fiction  I was determined to vanquish that inner censor.    I was determined that  Leslie would be a lesbian like she is  a graduate student.  Harriet Lerner, staff psychologist  at the Menninger Foundation states in  a letter to Chrysalis her reaction  to Piercy's book:  Still I read Piercy with a kind of  perplexed disbelief.    True enough,  her central character,  Leslie, reads  mathematics, does Karate, and loves  another woman. ..all in the first few  paragraphs.    But this hardly saves  her from being a prototype if not a  caricature,  of the woman in love,  as  patriarchal mythology has created her.  As an opener, our heroine is reduced  to mindlessness by her lover's high,  sweet voice on the telephone.  She  remains, on the pages following, tormented by jealousy, paralyzed by anxiety, and electric with sexual desire... for a woman who treats her  poorly and seems hardly worthy of respect , no less passion.  Val (the  object of Leslie's desire) is clearly the man in the story.  Cool, casual, insensitive, and in love with  another woman, Val defines the terms  of the relationship.  She listens  poorly, sheds no tears and ends up  exasperated with Leslie's possessive  demandingness.  Neither woman emerges as substantive  or real, but Leslie is singularly pathetic. When Val is late for an arranged meeting, Leslie vibrates nervously, becomes nauseated with anxiety, and seems to be on the verge of a  seizure.  Significantly, she meets  patriarchy's most stringent measure  of true female passion: she ignores  her women friends.  She stays with  them to be near Val, but they are mere  distractions. As Piercy writes...  Clearly she had not come to be with  them.  Indeed, from the author's description, she would hardly have noticed if  they had dropped dead before her eyes.  Leslie is too busy alternating between paroxysms of anxiety and passion  for her lover with her glossy black  hair, an upturned, delicate nose, and  a compact tightly made body with firm  breasts and large nipples like dark  purple tulips.  (Will the women in  lesbian literature all have perfect  bodies too?)  It's an all too familiar story.  Changing the names from John and Mary  to Val and Leslie hardly makes it  more palatable.  Lesbian sensibility.  Perhaps it should be called lesbian exploitation  by lesbians. We find it daily: in  our art, in our literature and in our  lives. Watch for it near you.  Women's  Studies  at Langara:  COMMUNITY EDUCATION WOMEN'S STUDIES  at Vancouver Community College, Langara Campus, is presenting an exciting  spring event:  Speakers'  Series  E.L.  ara David  iMarge Piercy  iFudy Chicago  ' .Tift?"  Gene Errington  May 17: Sara David, feminist therapist  May 24: Gene Errington, of the Women's  Research Centre  May 31: Marge Piercy,  novelist and poet,  In addition to her Thursday evening  reading, Marge Piercy will be holding  a workshop.  Please register for this  as soon as  June  7: Judy Chicago,  artist. -Chicago  may also be holding a workshop, in  addition to her Thursday evening talk.  The location for the speakers ' series  is still being planned.   The fee for  the whole series is $6.00,  with a fee  of $2.00 for each event.  MERCIA STICKNEY will coordinate the  speakers' series. For more details,  please call her at 934 5080  Teresa Trull  WOMANKIND productions presents Teresa  Trull at the Vancouver Indian Centre,  1855 Vine, 8.30 p.m. March 31, '79.  Tickets at the door : $4.00 rae  From You to Us  Words of Support  Just a few words of support for your  really excellent newspaper. The amount of valuable information you pack  into it is really helpful to me - it  lets me know that we are strong, powerful and making changes and encourages me to keep my focus that change  is possible and that I can make some  of those changes.  I was particularly inspired to write  (although I think about doing it every time a new copy of Kinesis comes  out) by your editorial comment with  regard to concerns about lesbian and  and abortion news/information.  I  want to add my support to your response.  Because of the heavy layers  of oppression all humans have experienced these topics may make some of  us uncomfortable - but who said we  could change the world without a little discomfort! It's about time we  all recognized that every human is  delightful and that in order to be  free as women we have to support the  freedom of all oppressed groups, Lesbian women are not just oppressed as  women but as lesbians as well and  they are owed as much space in our  literature as it takes to stop the oppression.  Similarly abortion, while  possibly not the ideal of a rational  world, is a necessary reality in a  world where children are used as tools  to keep women oppressed. We have to  talk about it in order to make changes.  I also support your focus on wage workers and Third World people, I'd like  to see even more concern for the latter as well as Native people. My only  suggestion would be that you might  consider a policy of making at least  50 per cent of the paper success oriented.  It's important for me to  hear about ways women have successfully made changes, interrupted oppression and accomplished goals.  Thank you for your hard work and concern. Yours truly,  Samantha Sanderson  We Shouldn't Identify  with Gays?  Yes - I honestly don't think Status  of Women will gain broad support in  the community as long as it is identified with the gay movement.  This  worries me, as I feel Status of Women is a very important issue and I  fear it will die without the support  of the ordinary housewife and office  worker. Here in West Van. I don't  know anyone who doesn't think we are  all gay!  That's obviously an exaggeration but  not too much of one.  Frankly at this  stage I think a strongly supported  Status of Women is more important than the liberation of a minority (when  our support gives us a black eye with  the woman/man in the street).  First  women in general need a strong voice  then we can show our support of free  sexual choice.  This has bothered me  for a long time, and I'm not Anita  Bryant!  Turkey  The Turkey-of-the-Month award goes to  Richmond Review folks who held a special Valentine's Day contest open to  "young ladies 16 and over, including  the young at heart."  Seems the RR, a Richmond tri-weekly  newspaper, was looking for the young  lady with the most kissable  lips in  Richmond.   Say the folks at the Review:  In honor of Valentine's Day and all  the lovely ladies out there in Richmond,  the Review and several Valentine-minded merchants are running a  contest to find the most Kissable  Lips in Richmond.  In fact, it's fair to say all  who enter will make  "a big impression"  and the winner will literally smack  those  "kissable" lips at the terrific  UrtS -__i^iiS_W8  prizes to be collected.  One suggestion  (to applicants) use a  good amount of lipstick for best impression.  Mo  readers, the above RR excerpt was  not pulled from a 1940s issue, but  from a Feb. 7, 1979  paper. Have they  come a long way?  Are Feminists Overlooking Homemakers  and Office Workers?  I am writing to you to express my concern about the direction in which I  see the Vancouver Status of Women and  Kinesis taking.  Over recent months I  have grown concerned about the emphasis of some special interest groups  in Kinesis. Although I am sympathetic to many of the concerns expressed  by unions and strikers, by lesbian and  gay groups and the generally 'left'  political viewpoints, I am deeply concerned that a broader viewpoint is not  represented.  It is vital to the life of the women's  movement (and of course to the Vancouver Status of Women) that more effort be made to reach a wider population within the community.  By representing heavily the concerns of a more  radical group, or groups, there is little doubt that a significant amount of  support in the community is lost.  This  is not to say the concerns these groups  (ie. unions, gays, 'left' political  groups) aren't valid.  Rather, my main point is that the women's movement  must address itself to a more average  or general population group.  In particular, I believe we, as feminists  are overlooking the potential for support in more traditional groups (ie  females as homemakers or office workers etc) as well as continuing to provide support for the interest groups  already cited.  Without the support of a broader community group, the feminist movement is  not reaching its full potential.  We  need to give more recognition to the  more traditional females rather than  providing an open or implied criticism  of their role or position.  It is true that women experience many  inequalities but these won't be changed through criticism alone.  Instead  we need to give them public recognition and praise as well as support for  efforts to change.  Credit Union  Chequing...Savings...Loans  Retirement Savings Plans  YOU NEVER HAVE TO BE USED  BY THE BANKS AGAIN.  Address  205 East 6th avenue  Vancouver, B.C.  V5T1J7   Hours  Phone  876-09>K>  Sincerely,  Linda Bolding Jones  Mon. & Wed., 11 am to 4 pm   j  Fridays, 2 to 7 pm.     ^y 27  POCO Pulls Out  The Port Coquitlam Area Women's Centre voted this month to pull out of  the B.C. Federation of Women.  In their March newsletter the centre  outlines its position and why it dropped its membership;  The advantage of an umbrella group is  acknowledged by all - that it is important to many women.     (But) it is  also a source of disillusionment for  others.  The main reason for this feeling is  the lack of united action.    A secondary reason is the angry hard line stance of many BCFW members along with  an over-emphasis of lesbian issues.  The emphasis on the issue of lifestyle for a particular group,  rather  than emphasis and action on issues  common to all women,  such as rape and  discrimination in employment,  appears  to undermine united action.  It alienates women outside the movement.  Again and again women from Port Coquitlam Area Women's Centre have ask-  themselves how they could in good  conscience support a group that did  not truly represent them,  or for that  matter many other feminists in B. C.  At this same meeting International  Women's Day posters were discussed.  For two years women at the centre  have rejected the BCFW posters.     They  do not like the angry tone or the issue of lesbian rights on every poster.  They have not been comfortable with  the public image of BCFW,  yet they  want to work with other feminists.  They were very active,  very involved  and committed to the BC Women Rally  for Action.    They do not want ip loose  their contact,  however slight, with  other women groups or undermine the  positive aspects of BCFW.    The network that it provides is important  and could produce effective action.  The conflict is enormous and there is  pain in making such a choice.  However,  right now the feeling is that the interests of the centre are  not represented by BCFW,  that the  needs for a credible united voice are  not being met.  This issue has not been taken lightly.  It has been discussed and discussed  for years.     When delegates came back  from Vernon in 1976 two out of three  recommended we withdraw.    They did  not do so.  Members at the centre regret this unfortunate conflict for themselves and  other women.  From Woman Today, PoCo Women's newsletter, March, 1979 By Helga Enns.#  Dinner For Legals  The second annual women's only dinner to commemorate Clara Brett Martin's acceptance at the bar is scheduled Friday, March 23 at UBC's faculty club.  Martin was the first woman lawyer  in the British Empire.  She was called to the bar around the turn of  the century.  All women law students, lawyers, legal secretaries and para legals are  invited to attend the dinner.  $10  for students, $15 for working people.  Cocktails at 6:30, dinner around 7.  Guest speaker: Judge Nancy Morrison#  Pappajohn  The Supreme Court of Canada has granted Vancouver businessman George Pappajohn leave to appeal a three-year rape  conviction.  The court granted the  appeal based on the argument of whether the victim consented  to being  raped.  Pappajohn was found guilty of raping  a real estate woman and was sentenced  to three years by a B.C. Supreme  Court.  He appealed the sentence at  a B.C. Appeal Court - and lost.  Then  he turned to the Supreme Court of  Canada, his last legal route to avoid  a jail, term#  A Directory of WOMEN'S WORK  Do you do or sell something to supplement your income but find commercial  advertising too expensive?  On March 30 of this year Women's Work  will be distributing a directory of  women's products and services. With  this directory we will be able to hire  and be hired by each other.  If you want to be included in the directory, fill out the form below and  send it in as soon as possible.  Other copies of the form can be picked up at Ariel Books, the Women's  Bookstore, Makara, Press Gang, Vanguard Books, the Pine Street Clinic,  Co-Op Radio, Spartacus Books, Rape  Relief and Women in Focus.  Copies of the directory will be distributed free from all these places.  Women's Work Directory is produced  entirely by women, for women.  TO BE LISTED IN THE WOMEN'S WORK DIRECTORY COMPLETE THIS FORM AND SEND IT  WITH A CHEQUE OR MONEY ORDER FOR $5  (PAYABLE TO WOMEN'S WORK) TO:  Women's Work c/o 1612 East 8th Ave.,  Vancouver, B.C. V5N 1T5  PRODUCT □  SERVICE □  (maximum 3 words)  (maximum 15 words)  (maximum 6 words)  Available to:  Name   women only □  anyone  Address or Area nhone .  MARCH 3, /9O0: PBMOMSTKAr/OM fir  WOMEN OH/<tEIA/ YO&CS ICHVEX EAST S/PE.  LEAPS TO CEtEBKAT/ON OF /NTEGWAr/ONAL.  WOMEN'S DAY.  KINESIS  KINESIS is published monthly by the  Vancouver Status of Women. Its objectives are to enhance understanding about the changing position of  women in society and to work actively towards achieving social change.  Views expressed in KINESIS are those  of the writer and DO NOT necessarily  reflect VSW policy. All unsigned  material is the responsibility of  the KINESIS editorial and production  crew.  CORRESPONDENCE: KINESIS, Vancouver  Status of Women, 1090 West 7th Ave.,  Vancouver, B.C. V6H 1B3  Membership in Vancouver Status of  Women is by donation. KINESIS is  mailed monthly to all members.  Individual subscriptions to KINESIS  are $8.00 per year. We ask members  to base their donations on this and  their own individual financial  position.  SUBMISSIONS: VSW welcomes submissions to KINESIS from the feminist  community and in particular from VSW  members. We reserve the right to  edit. Submission does not guarantee  publication. Include a SASE if you  want your work returned.  DEADLINE: The 15th of each month.  CHARITABLE STATUS: As we now have the  status of a charitable organization  and as we are unable to pay for KINESIS from these funds due to government regulations, we will be issuing  tax-deductible receipts for the balance of all donations over $8.00/  WORKERS ON THIS ISSUE WERE: Janet Beebe, Jean Faguy, Lucy Lindsay, Gerda Osterneck, Joey Thompson, Gayla Reid and Joan Woodward.  Start Chart  THE START CHART, the chart for community organizing, is NOW AVAILABLE.  The chart is 17" by 23 and half inches, in two colours. It is produced  by COMMUNITY ALTERNATIVES, 2125 West  7th. Ave, Vancouver. Single copies  of chart (plus brochure) cost :$4.00  For 10 or more, it's $3.00