 SNECtfl COLLECTIONS  Vancouver Status of Women  2029 W 4th Avenue  Vancouver, B.C. V6J1N3  KINGSIS  50c  MAY 78  Vol 7 no/3  Vancouver Status of Women  •The New Rape Laws  •Anita Bryant  & Renaissance  •Women and  Unemployment  •Our Grannies and the Law  •Fragments oj Vancouver Herstory step toward but just a beginning  Rape Laws   "We applaud the new proposals for  amendments to the Criminal Code related to rape and other sexual assaults.  We recognize,  however,  that  they are merely the beginning of  changes needed for an equitable  treatment of victims of sexual assault in the criminal justice system. "  - Spokesperson,  Vancouver Rape Relief  On Monday May 1st, Justice Minister  Ron Basford introduced proposed amendments to the Criminal Code concerning, among other areas, the  crime of rape.  Rape is to be re-defined as indecent assault, or aggravated indecent assault.   The difference between  the two will depend upon the nature  and degree of the risk created: the  use of a weapon, the nature and extent of injuries created, the psychological trauma upon the victim.  There will no longer be differentiation on the basis of gender: men. ,  as well as women, can be victims of  indecent assault, or aggravated  indecent assault.  This is a step forward, in that the  crime loses its old definition of  being penetration of the vagina by  a penis. It thus moves away from  seeing rape as a crime of property -  when a man's wife or daughter has  her reproductive organs (one of his  valuable possessions) damaged.  In addition, there is now a possibility that a husband can be charged  with indecently assaulting his wife  ...as long as they are living apart!  Having recognized indecent assault  as a crime of violence, the proposals  suggest that such violent crimes are  still o.k. within marriage.  NOTHING HAS BEEN DONE.to improve the  situation where the victim is on  trial for her/his sexual life. Evidence as to the past history of the  complainant's sexual activities  can still be introduced.  The amendments still place the onus  on the prosecutor to prove that the  victim had not consented  to the attack.  There is a danger that the assault  charge may leave room for a new  twist to the myth of "she was asking  for it." Within assault charges generally, there is a principle of voluntary assumption of risk. That is,  if a person is knocked unconscious  while playing competition ice hockey,  it's not viewed in exactly the same  way as if a person is knocked unconscious while walking home from work.  This principle could be used against  women who are, for example, alone in  a bar or out hitch-hiking.  SORWUC in Gibsons  The Canada Labour Relations Board  ruled early in April that the layoffs of the union organizers was  not illegal.  "If the banks can feel free to lay  off union organizers without any  penalty,  the union must find  other ways of forcing banks to accept unionization.  We have to  the banks that the cost of anti-  labour action is greater than the  cost of fair collective bargaining,"  commented Jean Rands, National President of SORWUC.  SORWUC (Service, Office and Retail  Workers' Union of Canada) is involved in an on-going campaign to convince the Canadian Imperial Bank  of Commerce to re-instate two employees at its Gibsons Branch. Two  union activists have been laid off  from the bank branch since the union was certified last August.  Members and supporters of SORWUC  have been demonstrating in front  of the Bank of Commerce in Gibsons.  Approximately 100 people demonstrated in front of the Bank on April 15 and April 29. The next demonstration is planned for May 13, 27.  Sechelt Peninsula residents have  been asked not to deal with the  branch because of its anti-union  activities.  "This is a campaign in defense of  basic union rights. Many members  of other unions have been joining  us at the demonstrations and participating in the campaign, "  concluded Rands.  Contrary to some media comments, the  proposed amendments do not make the  penalties for sexual assault stiffer.  "It must be understood that the maximum penalty for rape is already life  imprisonment and that the new proposals do not change this, "  comments  Megan Ellis, of Vancouver Rape Relief.  The newly defined category of indecent assault is still within Part IV  of the Canada Criminal Code, entitled  "Sexual Offenses, Public Morals and  Disorderly Conduct."  For years, Rape Relief centres across  Canada have been advocating that sexual assault be removed entirely from  Part IV.  The ill-chosen word "indecent" still  carries connotations of the victim's  guilt, and still looks at the crime  in the context of sexual sin.  "It is time we recognized that in  fact rape is an act of violence and  that the law must reflect this, "  commented Ellis of Rape Relief.  The new proposals, which the government has introduced only after pressure from women's groups, especially  'Ģ those working in the area of sexual  assault, are a small step forward.  But they don't go nearly far enough.  more changes  needed  The National Association of Sexual  Assault Crisis Centres held its  fourth annual conference in Victoria  over the Mayday weekend. Some of the  demands for legal reform endorsed  by the conference are met by the  Basford proposals.  Others need to be taken up as issues  by feminists at this time in order  to push for further necessary changes.  For example:  Sexual assault must be removed from  section IV of the Criminal Code and  re-classified under Section VI, which  deals with assault against persons.  The inter-spousal exemption from prosecution for rape should be removed.  Husbands must not be allowed to sexually assault their wives.  The principle that women are as credible as men should be firmly entrenched. All evidence as to the past  sexual history of the complainant  should be inadmissible, without exception.  A definition section to the proposed new assault offenses should be  included to make explicit that the  concept of consent relevant to this  section is no different than that  used for other assaultive offenses.  The amendments are only in their  first reading: they have a long way  to go before they become law. Now  is the time to let the Justice Minister and your local MP know your  views on indecent assault. Write  to Justice Minister Ron Basford,  House of Commons, Ottawa, Ont. No  stamp is necessary. Do it today. April 27,  1970.  The Abortion Cavalcade sets out from Vancouver,  bound for Ottawa to raise the issue  of abortion on demand. Eight years later, we are in real danger of losing our right to abortion at  Vancouver General Hospital. The CONCERNED CITIZENS FOR CHOICE ON ABORTION are organizing in preparation for the VGH annual general meeting this fall.  We're going to need everybody for this one!  Concerned Citizens for CHOICE on ABORTION  Anti-abortion groups are threatening  to stop therapeutic abortions at  Vancouver General Hospital.  We need  your help to keep this service available.  INTRODUCTION:  Most of the therapeutic abortions done  in the lower mainland of B.C. are  performed at Vancouver General Hospital.  This is because the policy of  the present Board of Trustees of V.G.  H. (one of the hospital's governing  bodies) supports the availablity of  therapeutic abortions as permitted  under the Criminal Code of Canada.  Every year V.G.H. has an annual  general meeting at which several new  trustees are elected to the Board.  This year's meeting will be held in  September, 1978.  For the last three  years, anti-abortion groups have  packed the annual general meeting in  attempts to elect their own trustees.  This would enable them to change  Board policy in order to stop therapeutic abortions at V.G.H., thus  severely limiting the rights of  women in the Vancouver area to have  this service.  WHO WE ARE:  The Concerned Citizens for Choice on  Abortion is an autonomous group of  concerned individuals whose purpose  is to mobilize people to ensure the  continued availability of abortion.  We believe strongly that abortion  should be a decision made by a  woman in consultation with her doctor, and that no one group should  have the right to restrict access to  a hospital procedure.  WHAT WE'RE DOING:  To combat anti-abortionist strength  at this year's annual general meeting,;  we of the CCCA are organizing a V.G.H.  membership campaign.  It is imperative  that those who support the "freedom  of choice" policy of the present  Board join the Corporation of V.G.H.  and vote at the annual general meeting in September.  If the majority  of members at the annual general  meeting support anti-abortion candidates, the abortions will stop being  available as an alternative at V.G.H.  THE ANTI-ABORTION CAMPAIGN IS VERY  STRONG,  APPLYING FOP. V.G.H. MEMBERSHIP  The by-laws of V.G.H. state that anyone who is 19 years old or over and  who is not employed by V.G.H. may  apply for membership in the Corporation.  For you to vote at the  annual meeting, your application and  $2.00 must be received by the  President's office of V.G.H. at  least one month before the meeting.  (For this year, this probably means  by August 1st, 1978.)  You will be  accepted for memberhsip at the annual  general meeting by a vote of old  members, and may then vote for the  trustees for the coming year.  HOW TO HELP CCCA:  Our main concern now is to sell  applications for membership and later  to phone applicants to remind them  to attend the meeting.  The more  applications we sell, the better are  our chances to outnumber the anti-  abortionists at the annual general  meeting.  We need your membership  and we need your help in selling  applications.  TO SEE APPLICATIONS:  1. Obtain application forms from  Cathy Dullege,secretary in the  President's office in Centennial  Pavilion at V.G.H. (876-3211,  local 2201).  The limit is 200  forms per request.  2. Make sure that prospective app  licants understand the issue,  support our position, and will  attend the annual general  meeting when it is announced.  Please don't sell to anti-abortionists.  Make sure that prospective applicants fulfill the criteria for  membership (ie. are 18 or over and  don't work for V.G.H.) and then  encourage them immediately to  fill out the application and give  you the $2.00 (in cash, or a  cheque made payable to V.G.H.).  The advantage of this is that you  can make sure that the application  is delivered and so that you can:  Make a legible list of names,  addresses and phone numbers of  everyone to whom you sell applications.  These lists are our only  way to contact people to give  them specific information before  the meeting.  We at CCCA will  phone everyone on our lists to  remind them of the meeting and  to answer any questions they may  have.  Please mail or deliver your lists  and applications (with fees) to  CCCA c/o 1824 West 11th Avenue,  Vancouver, B.C.  We will deliver  your applications and fees to the  hospital and collate your lists  with ours.  For more information please call:  Jacqueline at 736-6232(days)  or  Karen at 736-6079  Last year a special motion was  proposed and passed at the annual  general meeting to accept only  Vancouver residents as members.  This affected only last year's  meeting.  We don't know whether  such a motion will be made this  year VSW has recently decided that  community organizing is a priority.  As a result Kinesis interviewed one  of VSW's thriving community  organizations.  Vancouver South has  been an active community group since  Susan Hoeppner and colleagues held  their first meeting in South over  12 months ago.  Initially Susan sent letters to all  VSW members living in South telling  them that there would be a meeting  and encouraging them to attend and  bring a friend.  Meetings have  continuted, with a break in the  summer, during the past 12 months.  They have attracted a diverse group  of women representing different age  groups, life experiences, and varying  degrees of familiarity with feminist  ideas.  Many of the groups were  discussion groups and included films.  Between meetings members became  active in a variety of community  actions.  Kinesis talked to four members who  have been active since the beginning  of the group.  Darlin, Dawn, Pat  and Bonita.  They talked about the  formation of the group, the activities,  successes and failures, the future  possibilities for the group, and  gave an interesting account of their  view of VSW.  group chose  own priorities  The first few meetings were spent  attempting to define and focus on an  issue which the group might work on.  Initial suggestions were to take some  action on family court, daycare, and  the problems with school lunches at  one of the neighbourhood schools.  These were not followed up, however  two group members later joined the  Board of a local daycare centre.  The first action of the group resulted  from viewing a slide presentation on  sex role stereotyping for high school  students.  With little, and in some  cases no previous experience, women  from the group took the presentation  to guidance classes at Killarney  High School.  Pat gives an account of  student reation:  "The most vocal of the group  were looking forward to a career. They didn't feel that  they would fall into their  parent's roles and yet they  accepted the sexist division of  labour in their own homes.  They did not see the contradictions in this. Many students  felt that they didn't have any  problems related to sex stereotyping."  Later the group attempted to get  Killarney High School to offer a  Women's Studies course for credit  as an option.  The parents' committee opposed this as they felt it  was not important in these times of  economic restraint.  Women's studies  is not a university prerequisite -  the criteria used by the parents'  committee to decide on useful courses.  Pat felt they would have been  quite enthusiastic about additional  math classes.  Interview i  Janice Pentland-Smith  Representatives of the Van South  group went to community meetings at  Champlain Community School to discuss  educating students about child  molestation and rape.  They saw  the now infamous Storaska film and  complained to VSW, asking it to  protest.  This was done and the  combined efforts of VSW and Rape  Relief before the School Board had  the film removed from the schools.  Nadine, Education person for VSW,  comments: "This kind of grass roots  action is the only way to go with  education issues. If you are a parent, and you scream, sooner or later  they have to acknowledge that you  exist. But if you're an outsider  (me, for example, dropping in from  VSW to complain) they think you're  a crazy and they just wait for you  to get lost...  Several women in the VSW group have  become active in Vancouver South  Family Place and vice versa.  They  have also attended other VSW programmes such as CR and assertiveness  training and were well represented  on the Grace McCarthy information  picket.  When VSW first came to Vancouver  South they were viewed by most with  apprehension.  "I came to the meeting to see  for myself but I expected the  worst." ..."I expected very  loud, radical and angry women.  I thought they would be unfeminine and man-hating"   "It was scary thing but  I was curious... I thought  they'd be tough.."  And what did they find?  "Their knowledge is amazing"  ...They do important work...  The most caring, supportive  people...It was the total  reversal of what I expected."  People expressed admiration for the  work of VSW and its support of SORWUC  during the Bimini strike.  They felt  that membership in the group had  contributed to personal change.  "Before I was always in the   LNS  background.  I was intimidated by people with more education than me but none of  the people from VSW make me  feel this. They are totally  accepting. I'm more likely  to say what I feel like now.  I would carry a banner for  something I believed in".  "The biggest personal change  for me came as a result of  the C.R. group. I have a  new feeling of personal  strength - not all the time  but it's often there. Also  I've internalized a lot of  things that were only ideas  but now I can integrate them  into my experience."  "I've never had so much fun  in my life."  The Vancouver South Group is still  small, not reaching sigificantly  into the community, but the members  are aware of this and would like to  see the group expand and reach out  to community women.  Dawn:  "South Vancouver is an area  that's usually forgotten,  you hear about the West End,  North Van, East End, etc.,  but no one knows about South  Vancouver. We have to make  ourselves known. We are  beginning to. I hope we can  make some noise in a constructive way."  Darlin:  "I would like to see us help  in the integration of cultures  in our community. If you  look at the image we had of  VSW before we became involved,  imagine what the image must be  like that immigrant women have  of us. We get a few women  from other ethnic groups but  I'd like to see more".  Pat:  I'd like to see some real  political input at the community level. We should be involved in local politics. We  need to expand our membership  and become a political force in  the community." ANITA & RENAISSANCE  Anita Bryant is denouncing gay people  and praising the lord throughout  western Canada.  Bryant makes about $10,000 for each  city she visits on her apostolic  crusade.  On April 29 she visited Edmonton and  on April 30 she was in Winnipeg.  Her  trips were sponsored by Renaissance,  an anti-gay group.  In solidarity with sisters and  brothers in Edmonton and Winnipeg,  supporters of gay civil rights took  part in a demonstration in front of  the Holy Rosary Cathederal in  Vancouver on April 29.  The protest was sponsored by the Gay  Alliance Towards Equality (GATE).  Here GATE tells us something about  Renaissance:  "Renaissance originated in Toronto  four years ago to stop a gay liberation presentation to high school  students.     Their stated aim is   'to  reinforce Judaeo-Christian values back  into the education system'."  "Renaissance has branches in 20  Ontario cities,  and is organized in  seven out of ten provinces.     The  Fort Langley B.   C.   division hosts  the chairperson of Renaissance  Canada - Dr.  Robert N.   Thompson,  former leader of the national Social  Credit Party."  "Renaissance has become international.  Groups with similar aims have sprung  up through the U.S.  and Canada in  the past few years.    Anita's crusade  in Dade County,  Florida,   (to repeal  a local gay rights ordinance) makes  it clear what these groups intend:  to push gays back into the closet!"  GATE explained that they had chosen  the local Roman Catholic cathederal  for their protest because the church  has offered full support to the  Bryant crusade in Dade County and  has annually played a key role in  stopping passage of a New York  City gay rights bill.  "While Anita is touring Canada",  GATE  added, "her American counterparts in  Eugene,   Oregon;  Wichita,  Kansas; and  Minneapolis,  Minnesota are voting to  rescind gay rights ordiances already  won by gays.    Anti-gay Christian  groups throughout North America  have funnelled large sums of money  into these campaigns. "  MB  BRYANT MAY VISIT VANCOUVER  Depending upon the success of her  prairie visits, Anita Bryant may  bring the word to Vancouver.  June  29 and June 30 are possible dates.  Richmond teacher Mike Lapka, a  Renaissance supporter, told Province  reporter Joey Thompson that B. C.  is heading towards the same decay  as befell the lascivious Roman  Empire.  "It is ridiculous to call  Anita Bryant anti-homosexual", he  added.  BCR*/ PREPARING FOR BRYANT  A spokesperson for the BCFW Rights  of Lesbians Subcommittee commented:  "We should not underestimate the  effectiveness of Bryant's activities.     We are countering a well-  organized,  financially powerful  group.     Bryant and her followers  want to perpetuate those values  which oppress gays,  keep women  in traditional roles and ensure the  continuation of a classist society. "  "The Subcommittee will be organizing  against Bryant.     We can be contacted  through VSW at 736-1313.     Planning  meetings have already been taking  place and will continue."  BRYANT FAVOURS PRISON FOR GAYS IN  THIS WORLD  HELL FOR JEWS AND MOSLEMS IN THE NEXT  Bryant has recently been quoted as  claiming to favour felon status for  homosexuality. A single act of homosexuality, she thinks, should bring  up to 20 years in prison.  Just  because prisons don't have sufficient  spiritual emphasis, she says, doesn't  mean there shouldn't be strong punishment.  What will gay people do in prison?  "They'll have plenty of time to  think", Bryant replied.  In the same interview she is reported  to think that anyone who doesn't  accept Jesus Christ as the Saviour  is destined for Hell.  That includes  Moslems and Jews.  ANITA IN TORONTO  - LAVENDER CREAM PIE  On the night of January 14 in Toronto  more than 1,000 feminists, lesbians  and gay men walked over two miles  through sub-zero temperatures to  protest the arrival of Anita Bryant's  antiwoman, anti-homosexual travelling crusade for patriarchal  privilege.  Representatives from the following  organizations were among those who  spoke, s'ang or dramatized their  opposition to male heterosexual  hegemony:  WAVAW, LOOT (Lesbian  Organization of Toronto), Gay  Alliance Toward Equality, Gay  Youth Toronto, Wages Due Lesbians,  Metropolitan Community Church,  Women's Counselling, Referral and  Education Centre, BEAVER (Better  End All Vicious Erotic Repression)  and Body Politic.  A lesbian mother, hooded to preserve  her anonymity (necessary at present  lest her children be 'saved' from  her) spoke movingly of both her pain  and her determination and the audience rose as one in a loud sustained ovation for her.  The next day more than 500 brave  souls ventured into darkest North  York to further proclaim their opposition to Anita Bryant and her  sponsers who had gathered to cond-  duct their Sunday business.  Rev.  Paul Smith, minister of the People's  Church which had brought Ms. Bryant  to Toronto, received a lavender  cream pie in the face as one offering  at the service and this made the  CBC National News that night as the  "ain't life funny" sign-off item.  It's not funny and, as we all know,  it's nearly always damn hard.  Excerpts from an article by  Pat Daly in UPSTREAM.  /\nita BKYANT WARNS \..? a**«jzz*s& I This Film  lis about  Indecent Assault  A new film about rape, accompanied by  an extensive resource manual on rape  prevention, is now available. These  resources were produced by the B.C.  Rape Prevention Project. The project  involved members of the B.C. Coalition  of Rape Relief Centres, members of the  B.C. police forces and was carried out  under the auspices of the B.C. Police  Commission.  "This Film is About Rape", is a 28-  minute colour film directed by Bonnie  Kreps. The film focusses on interviews with women who have been raped,  and with men who have been raped.  It  also portrays women learning assertiveness techniques and self-defense.  Factual information is interspersed  throughout the movie in a low-key manner.  "This Film is About Rape" explores feelings about rape and some of  the ways women can resist.  It raises  questions rather than answering them -  the tone of the movie is descriptive  rather than polemic. The film is  meant to be shown in conjunction with  supporting literature, and discussion  led by qualified resource people.  resist ~ loudly  firmly  early  The orientation of the manual is  clearly feminist. It emphasizes the  importance and effectiveness of women  fighting back, and supports the statement: "Resist loudly, firmly, early".  A woman's best strategy is to refuse  to allow her attacker to intimidate  her, the manual advises. Basics of  prevention are enumerated clearly.  The manual also covers in excellent  detail important information about the  law, about medical and court procedures, about police attitudes, rape  prevention for children, and suggestions for treating rape victims.  In addition, there is a full commentary on the film "This Film is About  Rape", with suggested topics for discussion, and tips for a speaker preparing to discuss rape prevention.  Film and manual are available across  Canada. Every rape relief centre in  the country will be receiving the  complete package. To have the film  and discussion for your community  group, contact your local Rape Relief Centre.  PRESS GANG PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS  has moved to 603 Powell Street.  Kinesis took a bus downtown to  check out the new premises and to  speak with women at the Press.  PRESS GANG has, for five years,  been a feminist press at the heart  of the local women's movement.Publications include Women Look At  Psychiatry and the annual women's  calendar; they print Makara and,  of course, they published The Pedestal until its last issue in '75.  They have produced innumerable  posters and flyers for feminist  events, often donating their labour to the cause.  The Press is, in addition, an effective community press. If you have  read about unions, native peoples'  rights, liberation movements, there  is a good chance you've come across  materials printed by Press Gang.  "The materials we print are  which we believe need to be printed.  We try to get the books and pamphlets  out that need to be got out, " commented a member of the Press Gang collective.  Some of the future plans which Press  Gang women are thinking about include  a short story anthology, and a non-  fiction work linking racism, imperialism and women. When they can make  time, they will also be getting a  library together of their posters,  their previous publications and their  graphics.  Scheduled for publication this summer is The Anti-Psychiatry Bibliography, researched and written by  Portland Frank.And work on the '79  Vancouver Women's Calendar is already under way.  Press Gang are the west coast representatives for the Canadian Women's Educational Press, and you  can write to them for a catalogue  listing the publications of both  presses.  Press Gang has survived all this  time without government funding.  Any donation which you could afford  would help them hang in there. 6  FINE LEGAL  RESOURCE  You go for a job interview and the  boss wants to know if you're married. Can he do that, legally? You  get pregnant and they don't like  pregnant waitresses in the restaurant where you work. What are your  rights? The landlord gives you one  month's notice because he's pulling  the building down to re-develop  tacky townhouses on that site. What  can you do?  The law is a bit of a mystery to us  all. It's practised by folks in three-  piece suits who are fond of latinate  phrases. Trouble is, what they're  muttering about effects our lives.  Daily.  The only thing to do is to get wise  about our rights. And it's a nice  surprise to be able to have fun  while we're doing it. Which is what's  so attractive about WOMEN AND THE  LAW.  WOMEN AND THE LAW is a recently  completed resource kit consisting  of a comic book, a film strip and  a film. Produced under the auspices  of the B.C.Legal Services Commission, the kit is aimed at schools,  libraries, individuals and community groups: native groups, women's groups, community law offices. ..  Producer and writer for the WOMEN  AND THE LAW materials was Sylvia  Spring. Recently, Kinesis talked  with her and with Wanda Cassidy, of  the Schools Legal Education Project  of Legal Services Commission, to discover more about the resource kit.  "We wanted to touch on laws which  effect every woman 's life,  regardless of race or class",   explained  Spring. "When women have access to  legal information,  when the  law is  de-mystified,  women are no longer  victimized by that mystification. "  "I think we should all know what the  law has to say about women",  added  Wanda Cassidy. "Even when the laws  change for the better,  and we don't  know what those changes are, we  can be done in by our ignorance. "  Our  Grannies  Both the comic and the film strip  are titled Our Grannies and the  Law - both examine changes in  the laws effecting women's lives  since the grannies were young.  The characters of the comic book  are Granny Smith (a pioneer woman),  Granny Swallow (a Native Indian) and  Granny Enuffski (an immigrant from  Eastern Europe). They're visited by  their granddaughters, Alexandra, Susan and Emma in the senior citizen's  home, Hope Springs Eternal. As the  three old women tell their stories,  we learn about the law.  L to R: Ina Dennekamp  (Alex); Josephine Charlie  (Granny Swallow); Pepi  Auerbach (Granny Enuffski) and Helen  Reynolds  (Granny Smith)  The idea behind both the comic and  the film strip is that the law does  touch our lives, even when we aren't  aware of it. It follows from that,  of course, that we're better off if  we know what in fact is going on.  Granny Enuffski, for example, came  to Canada when she was ten and went  right to work in a cannery. The law  that touched her life in this instance was the Child Labour Law. So  we turn to the back of the comic  and read up on what those Labour  Laws meant at that time, and how  they have changed since then.  This information in the back is  presented as being the findings of  Granny Smith's daughter - she's  studying up on women and the law  for her women's studies class.  Granny Swallow's story is doubly  important, because she experiences  legal discrimination both as an  Indian and a woman.  Her daughter,  June, is afraid to marry Bill,  because he's white.  And so we  learn about the Indian Act, which  deprives a native woman of her  status as an Indian if she marries  a non-Indian.  The personae are fun, and well  sustained.  The drawings are  attractive and the dialogue entertaining.  It looks like a good  teaching tool.  The film strip continues the dialogue  between the three grannies and women's  studies student, granddaughter Alex.  Each granny gets to tell her story  over lovely old pictures of pioneer  women and early B. C. scenes.  Comic and film strip are designed  to be used together. Comics are  only 50 cents apiece and the film  strip can be rented from the Legal  Services Commission, along with  the film. A teacher's guide comes  with the kit.  The film dramatises current legal  dilemmas. "We wanted to make a film  about the areas of law which come up  over and over again in women's legal  Women and  the Law  clinics",   said Wanda Cassidy. "Who  owns what on separation,  change of  name,  employee rights - they're all  dealt with in the film and they're  all really common areas of concern. "  In one scenario, a native woman is  applying for a job.  She is being  asked all sorts of irrelevant questions  prohibited under the Human Rights  Code.  This leads into a discussion  of the law touching native women, and  of the Code.  A second scenario  depicts a draughtsperson being  sexually harassed on the job.  What  can a woman do in this situation?  What are her legal rights?  In another  short segment, two women are applying  for loans - one is married, one is  divorced.  Thus the issue is raised  - what are the regulations concerning  credit? Other scenarios dramatise  the issues of custody rights and  property laws upon separation.  Still  another takes a look at a waitress  who's been working without a lunch  break and who's complaining about it  to her boss.  What can she do about  it?  Many of the workers on this project  are local women's movement regulars.  Among the who's who:  Sylvia Spring  is responsible for the concept, the  writing, the direction and the  production.  Karen Muntean, who  invented the Makara beast, illustrated the comic.  Jane King, who  .teaches Women' s Studies at Burnaby  North, was educational consultant  for the teacher's guide.  Mo Simpson,  once of Isis, worked on the sound  for the film.  Ina Dennekamp, ex  Mom's Repairs and activist-piano-  tuner is the voice of Alex, the  granddaughter, on the slide/sound  presentation.  The whole kit has just been released,  and the Legal Services Commission  promises that the rental or purchase  of the film and film strip will be  very reasonable.  For details,  contact Wanda Cassidy, Project  Director, Schools Legal Education  Project, Legal Services Commission,  200 - 744 West Hastings, Vancouver,  V6C 1A5. In Times Like These...  They Get Rid O/Us  1918  To Women Workers  Are You Working for love  Or for Money?  Are you holding a job you do  not need?  Perhaps you have a husband well  able to support you and a comfortable home?  ...Ontario is faced by a serious  situation due to the number of  men unemployed.  This number is being increased  daily by returning soldiers.  They must have work. The pains  and dangers they have endured in  our defence give them the right  to expect it.  Do you feel justified in holding  a job which would be filled by  a man who has not only himself  to support, but a wife and family  as well?  Think it over.  (Propaganda from 1918, from the  Department of Labour Archives  of the Ontario Government. From  Women at Work, Women's Education-  al Press)  By Saying We're Takjng  Jobs Away From Men  when the crisis was over, they  would have to accept whatever  came...  (from "The Future of Women in  Employment", Report of Conference  held under the auspices of the  Women's School for Citizenship,  Man 20, 1945. From Urban Reader  Vol 4,#1)  1945  The large scale lay-offs of women  from war industries in B.C. in the  latter months of 1944, and the difficulties of these women in finding  other satisfactory employment, created a distinct feeling of uncertainty as to the future of women  in employment generally. This was  the reason for the Conference on  "The Future of Women in Employment"  held on January 20th 1945 in the  Hotel Vancouver by the Women's  School for Citizenship   Miss Elsie Silk, a former employee  of the Dominion Bridge Company,  spoke on behalf of girls no longer  needed in war plants. These girls  become highly trained and efficient - they could work to the  measurement of one-thousanth part  of an inch as easily as most women did sewing and knitting. It  was a loss to the nation not to  use this skill in the post-war period....  The general discussion brought out  the fact that there was no actual  planning for women's employment  after the war; that the general  attitude was that women could be  called upon in a crisis...and that  1978  There is much talk about unemployment, but to date no solution.  It is time for employers to refrain  from hiring married women unless  they can prove they are destitute  for the necessities of life. All  married women should be retired  ' from the workforce....  That would have the added benefit  of reducing, to a great extent,  juvenile delinquency, because  mother would be doing her job.  The working grannies could do charitable work, if the boredom they  suffer is so painful.  I firmly believe that married women  are holding too many jobs, which  the unemployed should have.  (Letter to the Vancouver Sun,  April 29, 1978)  They're Colling Us  Secondary  Wage-Earners  This term "secondary wage-earner" is  one which will be systematically used  against women as the unemployment situation grows worse. Watch out for it.  In government documents and elsewhere,  men between the ages of 25 and 55 are  referred to as the "primary" labour  force, while young men, older men and  all women are included in the so-  called "secondary" labour force. On  this basis, 38% of Canada's labour  force in 1977 was "primary" and 62%  'Ģwas "secondary". . Women accounted for  39% of the total labour force and for  61% of the so-called secondary labour  force.  Kinesis is grateful to H.L.Robinson  for this information and analysis.  Canadian Forum, March and October  1977 carry excellent articles by  Robinson on the hidden unemployed.  Of the 4,000,000 women in the labour  force in 1977 (excluding the hidden  unemployed), 300,000 were heads of  families and 585,000 were on their  own. 2,300,000 were wives in families  where the husband was listed as the  "head" and 840,000 were daughters or  other relatives. There were also  840,000 men who were sons or other  relatives.  UNEMPLOYMENT IN 1977  The Hidden Unemployed Add 50% to  the Rate of Unemployment  Unemployment Among Women is Higher  Than Among Men  More than 1 million Canadians are now  out of work - officially!  There were 862,000 unemployed in 1977,  compared with 736,000 in 1976. The  rate of unemployment was 8.1% of the  labour force, up from 7.1% in 1976.  These are the Statistics Canada figures of the acknowledged unemployed.  In addition there were 487,000 hidden  unemployed, people who at one time  worked, who lost or quit their jobs  and who stopped looking for work.  They are excluded from the official  figures, and they are not counted in  the labour force either.  Hidden Unemployed  If the hidden unemployed are added,  unemployment in 1977 was 12.2% of the  labour force, up from 11.1% in 1976.  The hidden unemployed thus increased  the rate by 50%; in 1976 the addition  of the hidden unemployed increased the  rate by 55%.  The number of unemployed and the rates  by age, sex and province are shown in  the accompanying table. The table  also shows what happens to the rates  when the hidden unemployed are added  to the acknowledged unemployed.  All unemployment rates were higher  last year than they were in 1976.  However the differences between the  rates, the way in which they compare  with each other, were about the same  in 1977 as in '76. 8  Unemployment among young people aged  15 to 24 was again far higher than  among adults. Unemployment among women was again higher than it was among  men. The figures of acknowledged unemployed continue to hide far more  unemployment among women than they do  among men.  Of the 862,000 acknowledged unemployed  in 1977, 48% were young people and 23%  were adult women, for a total of 71%;  only 29% were adult men. Of the  487,000 hidden unemployed, 38% were  young people and 41% were adult women,  for a total of 79%. Only 21% of the  hidden unemployed were adult men.  The official rate.of unemployment  among men last year was 7.3%. Adding  the hidden unemployed raises the rate  to 9.9% - an increase of 36%. But the  official rate of unemployment among  women was 9.5%. Adding the hidden  unemployed raises the rate to 15.6%,  which is an increase of 65%. According to the official figures, unemployment among women was "only" 30%  higher than it was among men. But  when the hidden unemployed are added,  the true rate of unemployment among  women turns out to be 58% higher than  it is among men!  Women's  Unemployment  51 7. Higher  The difference in unemployment among  adult men and women (25 years of age  and over) is even more striking. According to the official figures, unemployment among adult men in 1977 was  4.9%, whereas among adult women it was  7.4% - that is, 51% higher. When the  hidden unemployed are added, the rate  among men is increased 4:o 6.8%, whereas the rate among adult women is increased to 13.7%; the rate among adult  women is thus twice as high as the rate  among adult men.  9,754,000 people were employed in  1977. Adding the 862,000 acknowledged  unemployed and the 487,000 hidden unemployed makes a total labour force of  11,103,000 in 1977; 39% of all these  working people were women. Of the  people employed 37% were women; this  compares with 44% of the officially  acknowledged unemployed and 60% of the  hidden unemployed.  Number of Unemployed and  Unemployment Rates in 1977  Number of  Unemployed  Official Hidden  Unemployment Rates  (as Percent of Labour Force)  Official  Plus Hidden % Increase  All  862,000  487,000  8.1  12.2  50%  Men  482,000  192,000  7.3  9.9  36%  15 - 24  236,000  89,000  15.0  19.5  30%  25 plus  246,000  103,000  4.9  6.8  39%  Women  380,000  295,000  9.4  15.6  65%  15 - 24  178,000  95,000  13.8  19.8  43%  25 plus  202,000  200,000  7.4  13.7  85%  British  Columbia  100,000  51,000  8.6  12.4  44%  To be counted as unemployed according  to Statistics Canada's definition and  therefore to be included in the labour  force, a person must:  a) be without work, have actively  looked for work sometime during the  four weeks preceding the survey, and  be available for work, or  b) have been on lay-off for 26 weeks  or less, and be available for work, or  c) have a new job to go to in four  weeks or less, and be available for  work.  Of the 862,000 people officially  counted as unemployed in 1977, 777,000  were in the first category, 55,000 in  the second and 30,000 in the third.  The hidden unemployed are not included  in the labour force as defined by  Statistics Canada.  Greater Vancouver union  of the Unemployed  The Greater Vancouver Union of the  Unemployed has been formed to organize and provide a voice for the  tens of thousands of jobless in  the Greater Vancouver area.  The unemployed are past and future workers who are out of work  now - NOT because of laziness but  because there are very few available jobs.  The Greater Vancouver Union of the  Unemployed is a union for all the  unemployed - not just those few  acknowledged by government stats.  The unemployed, the underemployed,  the temporarily employed and young  people looking for summer jobs  can all join the GVUU.  The GVUU is a democratic organization run by its members.  Because  the jobless are so hard pressed for  money,  there are no membership dues.  GVUU will work closely with sisters  and brothers who still have jobs,  with the labour movement and community supporters.  The Greater Vancouver Union of the  Unemployed held its first educational May 5.  The subject :  Women and  Unemployment.   Watch for the report  on that in next month 's Kinesis.  Unemployment among women is a  #1 feminist issue. Support the  'ñ†GVUU. BANK NOTE WORKERS  In Ottawa recently, 25 members of  local 31 of the Steel Place Engraver's Union struck for equal pay.  The all-woman local said that their  male colleagues at the British American Banknote Company, with similar  training and experience, were earning four and five dollars an hour  more.  "After five years of talking to management about this issue, the women  have finally gotten fed up", said  Maureen McKenney, a union member on  the picket line. The women, who serve  an apprenticeship of two years, are  asking parity with the lowest-paid  male workers in the plant - janitors.  After nine weeks on strike, union and  management went to arbitration.  Arbitrator Owen Shime said in his  mid-April judgement that he could  find no evidence of discrimination.  FLECK STRIKE  140 workers from the Fleck manufacturing plant, who were certified with  a local of the United Auto Workers  last October, have been on strike  since March 6 '78. Attempts to negotiate their first contract with  management failed.  Fleck Manufacturing is a small auto  parts plant located in Centralia,  Ontario. The plant is 50% owned  by the family of James Fleck, the  Conservative government of Ontario's  deputy minister of industry, trade  and tourism. The premises in which  the company is operating belongs  to the Ontario Development Corporation, a branch of Fleck's ministry  - which makes Jim Fleck, in effect,  the company's landlord.  Starting rate of pay is $2.85 per  hour. After 10 years of service,the  top rate is $3.24. The workers, most  of whom are women and single parents,  are asking for a 75 cents an hour  increase along with a change in  health and safety conditions.  Working conditions in the plant  feature: rats; three toilets for  140 workers; high dust levels (which  trigger headaches and sinus conditions) ; and out-dated machinery.  Provincial police went into the plant  three days before the strike began  to lecture the women on proper conduct for picketting: baseballs bats,  knives ete. were not to be used...  To date the only offer the company  has made is a three year contract  providing for wage increases of  10 cents a year, with no improvement in any of the meagre benefits.  The company has been stalling, refusing to negotiate on union security, something a bargaining  unit cannot do without.  The Ontario Provincial Police have  reserved the use of violence for  themselves. They dragged one woman  from her car, ignoring the fact  that her seat-belt was fastened.  They have thrown strikers into snowbanks .  The company has been bussing scabs  into the plant daily.  Two disturbing facts about the Fleck  strike:  There are 140 workers in the plant  and they are all women except for  ten men.  All of the men are already certified with another local of the United Auto Workers. All of them crossed their sisters' picket line.  At the same time as the Ontario  Provincial Police were using scare  tactics against the women, they were  in the process of negotiating a new  contract themselves.  The women at Fleck are still out on  strike.  WOMEN  AGAINST  VIOLENCE  SINCE NOVEMBER 5, 1977  The present Toronto group, Women  Against Violence Against Women,  grew out of the original Day of  Protest against Violence Against  Women held on November 5, 1977.  The specific action which galvanized hundreds of women on that  day was a street demonstration  which culminated in a protest  against the movie SNUFF.  The  extent and intensity of that  protest demonstrated in concrete  form the anger women feel at our  victimization, in image and in  fact.  During the following week, direct  street action was combined with  attempts to draw attention to the  issue through established channels  such as presentations to Toronto,  Metro and City Councils, letters  to newspapers, etc.  These  established channels proved as  unresponsive to this as to other  demands and protests made by  women now and in the past.  Our  concerns were trivialized by the  media and others.  Some politicians  attempted to co-opt our energies  towards the hypocritical 'clean up  Yonge Street' which penalizes  working women and leaves the  profiteers unscathed.  The SNUFF OUT SNUFF action is an  object lesson, in case we need any,  in the realities of power in our.  society.  The women of WAVAW are  determined to challenge this miso-  gynistic power and the violence  perpetrated against women.  Since  November, WAVAW has become involved  in:  * work towards the decriminalization of prostitution  * inauguration of a Remembrance  Day ceremony - "For every  woman raped in every war".  * protests against the deportation  of immigrant women on clearly  sexist and racist grounds  * action against Renaissance  International's "Christian Liberation Crusade" which imported  Anita Bryant to Canada and  which promotes anti-feminism and  homophobia  * organizing with local women  against domestic and street  violence in the suburbs  Concurrently, WAVAW is organizing,  gathering women and resources,  working out its position on various  aspects of violence against women in  both theory and practice.  WAVAW is  committed to action against violence  against women from a feminist perspective .  Contact:  WAVAW  P.O. Box 928  Station Q  Toronto, Ontario 10  how to lose  your job  WIVES FIRST TO GO  There is increasing pressure on married women in Ontario to give up their  jobs in the elementary schools, or to  work part-time. As unemployment increases, male teachers are taking over  jobs in the schools.  This discrimination in hiring practices was exposed recently by the Federation of Women Teachers' Associations  of Ontario.  "As soon as there's a  surplus of teachers, all the old discriminatory attitudes towards working  women come to the surface", says Kay  Sigurjonsson, spokesperson for the  federation.  In a brief to the Commission on Declining Enrolment in Ontario this February, the Women's Teachers' Associations also charge that women teachers  have been subjected to illegal questions when looking for a job.  The  questions concern birth control, marital status, child care provisions.  The Commission was set up last August  to study problems arising from decreasing enrolment; the numbers of students in Ontario schools is expected  to drop by 10% in the next decade.  Marie Brown, a teacher in one of the  hardest-hit areas, North York, explains that of the 254 teachers laid  off last year, approximately three-  quarters were women.  As well as the dwindling number of  women teachers in elementary schools,  there is also an over-all decrease in  the number of women school principals:  the seniority rule works against women  who have taken time out to have children.  The job discrimination patterns emerging in Ontario represent a return to  the 1930's, the brief said. Massive  unemployment fell hardest on women,  particularly married women.  Poor Getting  WOMEN LOSE OUT IN ONTARIO  in property law reform  Bill 59, the Ontario Property Law  Reform Bill passed in mid-March.  The Bill's professed philosophy,  that responsibility for child-care,  housework and financial support  should be equally shared by both  spouses, is not achieved.  The feminist coalition, 50/50 or  Fight (composed of the Ontario  Committee on the Status of Women,  Ontario NDP Women's Committee,  Liberal Party of Canada [Ontario]  Standing Committee on Women, Ontario  Progressive Conservative Association  of Women and the Canadian Federation  of University Women - Status of Women  Committee) lists its criticims of the  Bill:  1. We deplore the narrow definition  of family assets which excludes  division of investments, insurance, savings and pensions.  On  marriage breakdown, the whole  pie must be shared for true  equality.  2. We still protest the inclusion  of an applicant's conduct as a  factor in awarding the amount  of support.  Maintenance must  be based on need - not on the  old concept of marital fidelity.  j.  In transfer of property between  spouses, it must be clear that-  a gift from husband to wife is  owned in all respects by her. It  is discriminatory to assume she  is holding property in trust for  him.  4. When a marriage is terminated by  death, the surviving spouse  should not have less property  rights than in the case of marriage breakdown.  5. Married women's rights must be  guaranteed in the new law rather  than depend upon judicial discretion.  Bill 59 makes women  supplicants petitioning the  courts for their fair share of  matrimonial property.  Spokesperson for 50/50 or Fight,  Karen Richardson, commented: "This  committee intends to monitor application of the new law which is only  an inadequate first step in recognizing women's contribution to the  economic partnership of marriage.  We shall continue to pressure for  further vitally needed progressive  to this Bill. "  MONTREAL—The poor are still getting  poorer despite income-redistribution  programs, says a study by economist  W. Irwin C-illespie called In Search  of Robin Hood.  The 65 page report says "the empirical evidence demonstrates that the  federal government has not improved  the economic position of the poor,  relative to the highest income  families" during the 1970s.  The study, sponsored by the Montreal  based CD. Howe Research Institute,  says that although most federal budget speeches from 1970 to 1977  referred to the objective of maintaining or increasing the real incomes of the poor, the statements  had nothing to do with reality.  Gillespie's analysis said:  * Tax reform "provided modest  benefits for lower-middle-  income families, relative to  the poor and the highest-  income families, but it did  not in any substantial way  alter the distribution of  income."  * The revised Unemployment  Insurance Act redistributed  income from the highest income  families to lower-middle-  income families, but it  provided virtually no benefit  to the poor.  * budgets aimed at protecting  the poor and the needy from  "the ravages of inflation"  and at maintaining the status  quo actually benefited the  highest-income and the lower-  middle-income families.  * The one federal proposal which  would have given the poor some  relief - the proposal calling  for an income support and supplementation reform of social  security - has not been put  in place.  * Budgetary instruments used extensively during the 1970's  provided no benefits to those too  poor to pay any income tax  (Province 20.4.78)  WANNA   TRY  TAMING   TH/S   LUNCH AS A  BUSINESS   EXPENSE   ON OUR //V'COME   TAX i Vancouver Feminist  Herstory  Here are some fragments of Vancouver's  feminist herstory.  We print them in  celebration of where we are coming  from, and in recognition that the  issues remain the same.  The struggle,  as they say, continues....  SO WHAT ELSE IS NEW?  "What are the issues? First of all,  repeal of the present Canadian abortion laws is necessary before woman  can control her reproductive life.  This fundamental prerequisite to a  woman's ability to achieve self-  actualization is of major importance right now   In addition to the campaign for  abortion law repeal, there are many  other areas of discrimination against  women that must not be lost sight  of:  lack of childcare facilities,  discrimination against working  women...sexist advertising, the  shocking under-representation of  women at all levels of government;  the media's slander campaign against  women's liberation movement; and the  double oppression of black and gay  women.  These are only some of the  areas what we must always keep in  the forefront of our struggle."  (Velvet Fist, Vol. 2, #3 1972 -  publication of Toronto's Women's  Caucus)  WOMEN S CAUCUS  Thursday July 22 the Vancouver Women's  Caucus held a general meeting at  which it was decided to disband the  organization and give up the office  (at 511 Carrall Street) to be turned  into a Women's Centre....Both the  Pedestal and the Working Women's  Workshop are continuing independently.  (Pedestal August/September 1971)  THE WOMEN S CENTRE  We tore down the office walls and  painted the ceiling and the walls.and  the floor and Lynn spilled paint on  the sidewalk but it's bright red which  WHERE HAVE WE BEEN/  is rather neat.  And we took 280 lbs.  of garbage to the dump.  The front part is going to be a  lounge/drop-in centre for women;  women shopping and needing a place  to sit down, drink tea or coffee,  bring kids, read, talk, sit quiet.  And if things go well, a women's art  and cultural centre for shows, poetry  readings, things like that....  (Pedestal Aug/Sept '71)  women's union  The working women's workshop of the  old Women's Caucus planned and held  a series of six discussions at noon  in the main branch of the public  library this summer.  We talked  about the history of working women  and of women's organizing, about  the conditions for women on the job,  the relationships between those  conditions and women's roles in our  society, and ways we could work  together to change those conditions.  Coming out of those noon meetings,'  and out of a parallel series of  evening meetings in different women's  homes, is a new organization of  working women in Vancouver.  Over one hundred women attended one  or more of the presentations.  The  sixth session was a discussion of a  proposal to set up a working women's  union for Vancouver.  (Pedestal Aug/Sept '71)  STATUS OF WOMEN  Status of Women Action Co-ordinating  Committee has a membership of 250.  The membership is made up of women  (and men) from all levels of society.  Their executive has representatives  from the three political parties, the  University Women's Club, Church and  poverty groups.  They meet once a month from the fall  to spring at the University Women's  Club.  Their first meeting of the  fall will be held at Christchurch  Cathedral at Georgia and Burrard on  Sept. 20th.  This meeting will be  concerned with child-care.  Pat  Jordan, MLA, will take part in panel  discussions along with a representative of the B. C. Government  Employees Union and Gladys Maycock,  who is on the licensing board of day  care centres in B. C.  SWACC has an ombudswoman, Rosemary  Brown, who works with several resource  people to help woman who feel that  they have been discriminated against  in employment. (Pedestal Aug/Sept '71)  WOMEN'S LIBERATION ALLIANCE  The Women's Liberation Alliance is  a non-exclusionist, action-oriented  group working for the equal rights  of women.  Our program includes such  demands as equal pay for equal work,  equality before the law, 24 hour  child-care, and free abortion on  demand.  A busy group, we carry  many activities.  At the moment, the Alliance is engaged in one of the biggest and most  important things the group has seen  since its formation.  We have  initiated a call to form a coalition  for repeal of all abortion laws.  A  planning meeting was held last Aug.  16 at the B.C. New Democratic Party  headquarters.  This meeting was  endorsed and financially supported  by over 50 women and women's groups.  (Pedestal Aug/Sept '71)  FEMINISTS PLUS  The Vancouver Feminists Plus came  into being about a month ago and  holds weekly rap groups.  It was  formed by a few women who have been  or still are involved in the women's'  liberation movement.  These women  wanted to get away from the larger  type of organization in favor of a  smaller, more intimate discussion  group. The response from other  women has been most encouraging.  It seems as though a lot of people  felt the need for a group such as  this. To some of the new women who came,  the thing that surprises them most  is the fact that they can spend an  enjoyable evening in the company of  other women; something some of them  have never done before.  It is too early to say what will  happen in the future.  Feminists  Plus hope to see a number of these  groups springing up all over the  city - in people's homes or in  community centers.  This would mean  that women in any part of town  would be able to take advantage of  a rather unique kind of experience.  (Pedestal Aug/Sept '71)  ABORTION  INTERNATIONAL ABORTION ACTION DAY  NOVEMBER 20  Despite foul weather, 100 people  marched through downtown Vancouver  for abortion law repeal.  In the  rally following at the Burrard  YWCA, Dr. Robert Makaroff, who was  ., imprisoned for several months for  performing abortions said:-  "Women are demonstrating for abortion  and they are going to get it regardless of the fancy theological footwork by a bunch of celibate old men  in the Roman Catholic hierarchy."  (Velvet Fist, Vol 1, #9 December '71)  SOLIDARITY  V1TH  INDOCHINGSC  "Women from North Vietnam, South  Vietnam and Laos are coming to Vancouver from April 1 to April 6 to  meet with what they called a broad  representation of women.  That means  women from women's liberation, gay  liberation, the youth culture, the  third world community and the workforce   As the daily press reports an  imminent invasion of North Vietnam,  the invasion of Laos, the possibility  of nuclear weapons it becomes more  imperative that we work toward the  goal of this conference as expressed  by the Indochinese - the build the  anti-war movement.  We can help stop the war only if we  come together, only if we understand  each other's struggles and work  together to stop American imperialism  The IndoChinese Conference should be  the first step.  As Canadians, and particularly those  of us in Vancouver, we have a tremendous responsibility to organize a  conference for as many as 500 women,  many of whom will be from out of  town   In Budapest last November, at an  international socialist women's  meeting,  three or four American and  Canadian women met some Indochinese  women who at that time expressed a  desire to visit Canada to meet their  old friends (the Voice of Women) and  their new friends (Women's Liberation) "(Pedestal, March 1971)  UBC  Women's Liberation at UBC will again  be sponsoring weekly Monday night  discussions on a variety of aspects  of Women's Liberation this fall.  These discussions are open to all  interested women.  For further  information about time and place and  the activities of the campus group  come to the new women's office,  Rm. 215 in SUB.  SOCRCD  STANDARDS  "The Victoria Voice of Women presented  a brief on job discrimination against  women in B.C. to Labour Minister  (James) Chabot in December.  The brief  had its impetus from a comment made  by Chabot in August.  'The Status  of Women Report was written for the  rest of Canada.  It does not apply  to B.C.'  To counter this statement,  a research group compiled statistics  from government departments and  private industry on variance of pay  scales between men and women . . .  "VOW's meeting with Chabot proved  disappointing.  He had not read the  brief....Chabot said the higher turnover rate of women was responsible for  their lower pay."  (Newsletter,  Status of Women Council of B. C.,  January 1972)  STATUS OFWOMCN  "The Executive met to inspect and  approve for office use the premises at  1045 West Broadway, and the verdict  was that the central location, coupled  with the reasonable rental price of  $90.00 per month, made it an attractive place for our first permanent  headquarters..." (Status of Women  Council Newsletter, January 1972)  A WOMAN'S PLACe  MCDICAL GROUP  woman's  PLACE MEDICAL GROUP  "Since January 5 a group of about  twenty women has been meeting on  Wednesday evenings to share our  experience and knowledge about our  bodies.  In our first meeting we  talked about female hormones.  The second was a discussion of  contraception   We have also been interested in  learning self-help gynaecology as  a group.  Last week...we took the  first step in this by examining  ourselves and each other with the  aid of plastic speculums, surgical  gloves and an illustrated gynaecology text "  (Pedestal, February 1972)  "There is much exciting activity at  A WOMAN'S PLACE.  The house at 1766  West Eroadway has come from a depressing, dirty skeleton-in-the-closet  type place to a comfortable, welcoming home.  The process of fixing-  up continues, so come help paint any  Saturday.  One activity at the house is Women's  Referral Bureau (formerly Abortion  Referral)....In the near future, the  phone will be a general health line  for persons who have questions about  their bodies, or want to be referred  to a sympathetic doctor..."  (Pedestal, May 1972)  SORWUC SURFACCS  "The Founding Convention of the  Service, Office and Retail Workers'  Union of Canada took place on Sunday,  October 23.  Twenty-five women signed  their names to a constitution which  committed them to organizing women  in all occupations included in the  union's name.  Activities which preceded the convention began with the union seminars  held for four weeks in September.  Painting the Vancouver Women's Bookstore.  By knowing who we have been  and what we have done,  we will know who we are  and what we must do.  MGDIGVAL  CONDITIONS  In late January, 15 waitresses  working as "wenches" at the Medieval  Inn in Gastown were told that the  Inn was renovating its premises and  were given a few days off.  When  they returned they were fired - no  reason given.  Apparently, the owners,  after having decided that the wage  of $4 per hour plus tips for working  banquets was too much, decided to  bring the wage down to $2 per hour.  This lower wage was working out in  their other Inn in Victoria.  The  owners, Robin Hughes and John Jones,  realizing that the waitresses would  complain if their wages were sliced  in half, decided that the only thing  to do was to fire all of them.  (Status of Woman Council Newsletter,  April 1972)  At these, friendly union heavies and  other people having experience with  unions talked about it, then there  was discussion.  As a result of these  seminars, a booklet is being prepared  by the Working Women's Association to  tell anyone who is interested in how  to form your own union, how to write  a constitution, how to conduct a  strike and other relevant information  like that   The staff at UBC held the founding  convention of the Association of  University and College Employees  Thursday, October 19.  With the  founding convention the new union is  now able to sign up members...."  (Pedestal, November 1972)  WARDAIR  "The stewardesses at Wardair have a  contract.  Their union, the Canadian  Air Line Flight Attendants (CALFA)  has won a first contract from Max  Ward, founder and head of Wardair...  There were 120 women who work as  Wardair stewardess.  99% of them  voted for strike action January 11,  after the company walked out of 14  months of negotiations.  Since the  strike began all flights going in  and out of Vancouver were leafletted  by the Working Women's Association...  Towards the end of the month(February)  the stewardesses came out to the  airport in uniform and distributed  leaflets to the passengers with the  WWA..." (Pedestal, April 1973.  WOMEN'S CCNTRC  SURVIVES  "Listen, the Women's Centre is going  to stay open or it's going to fold.  That is the fact of the matter.  Which  depends on you.  Right you are, women,  we do mean you...On September 1,. we  received an eviction notice..we  decided that moving, or folding, the  Centre was our only choices...If we  are to move (and not to fold) the  very least we need is:  women to  find a space.  Come to our next meeting, October 11,  1972,...at the Women-'s Centre, 511  Carrall Street." (Pedestal, October  1972)  "The Women's Centre has now moved to  the top floor of 130 West Hastings  across the street from Woodwards...  Enough new energy came out of the  last meeting to make the move possible  but we still need women to staff and/  or coordinate the office...."  (Pedestal, November 1972)  CHILDCARE  OCCUPATION  "On Saturday,- Feb. 11 at 3:00 p.m.  the childcare occupation force  vacated the Day Care Information  Centre on 45 West 8th, which they  had been occupying since February  1." (Pedestal, March 1973)  REPORT FROM. THE CHILD CARE OCCUPATION  FORCES/ FEB. 5,'73  "As we go to press, the occupation  is still in progress.  At this  time no one is caring to guess how  long it will continue.  The Childcare Occupation Forces invites all  interested people to join them.  You can put in as many hours as you  can afford.  Money, food, toilet  paper, plumbing skills, cleaning  equipment, etc. are also needed.  If you can help, go to 45 West 8th  Ave. (there's no phone)....  Whatever happens, this is a victory  that cannot be ignored.  It must  further the cause of the Women's  Ministry, it stands as a sharp  criticism of the NDP bureaucracy,  but most of all, it is an exper  ience of women working together,  and realizing their potential power,  and a victory of these women is a  victory for us all.  We are  learning that women can fight for  the freedom and opportunities that  are our right. WOMEN TOGETHER ARE  STRONG." (Pedestal, February 1973)  DCNNY'S  "On Monday, Feb 12, the dayshift of  Denny's on Broadway walked off the  job, after several unsuccessful  attempts to discuss their grievances  with management.  Employees from  the other shifts joined their fellow  workers on the picket line.  Some of the problems of the workers  were:  - they were required to evict  customers after 20 minutes  when they only ordered coffee.  - management banned all friends  and relatives of waitresses  from the restaurant.  - no pay for 3 hour compulsory  company-called staff meetings,  on the employees' own time.  - no jpb security. Employees  were often asked to work on  their days off, and might  lose their"jobs if they refused.  The picketing was effective.  It cut  their business by 60% - 70% (for  example, an average night shift  takes in $375.  On Tuesday, during  the picketing, their total till was  $84,751)  The employees are no longer picketing  —not because they don't want to but  because on Thursday, Feb. 15, Denny's  obtained an injunction against them.  The injunction was granted under Bill  43, one of the hated Socred anti-  labor laws that the NDP promised to  repeal, but hasn't.  Don't eat at Denny's until all the  employees have been rehired!  For further information, contact the  Working Women's Association, No. 3  45 Kingsway, Vancouver."  (Pedestal, March 1973)  THE BOOKSTORC  "On July 16 the bookstore opened.  We feel very good about everything  that has happened so far and even  the magic toilet in the back pit  that happens to be the Pedestal  space has failed to get us down.  Jeannine and Nora...got interviewed  on Judy La Marsh's morning show.  It  was not disappointing.  Jeannine  actually got there on time - 9:30 AM.  and Nora did too.  The part I liked  was when the open line thing happened  and women would ask questions like  "do you have 'survival' by Margaret  Atwood?" and Nora and Jeannine could  say "yes".  Very professional....  We've had people come in from Toyko,  a woman from the Hong Kong feminists,  women from all over the states and  Canada.  It's really neat to listen  to them ooh and ahh and tell us nice  things, because we certainly deserve  it..." (Pedestal, October 1973) . 14  URGENT  |»Vou MUST  Join UGH  the right  to chose  IS at  stake  JOIN VGH AS SOON AS POSSIBLE  If you live in the lower mainland,  this issue of Kinesis will include  a membership form for VGH. Send the  form, plus $2.00 to the Concerned  Citizens for Choice on Abortion  at 1824 West 11th Ave, Vancouver.  If you already are a member, don't  use the form. Just send the $2.00  renewal to the CCCA at the above  address. Don't send it to VGH  direct, as we need to build up a  list of contacts. Anybody over 19  and not employed by VGH may join.  At last year's meeting a motion  was passed restricting voting to  Vancouver residents. This applied  only to last year. We don't know  if such as motion will be proposed  again.  THOUSANDS of applications have been  distributed already. Pro-choicers  have NOT sold half of these.  WE WILL LOSE IF WE DON'T GET MOVING.  COME TO A MEETING AT VSW on Tuesday, May 23, 7.30 p.m. to discuss  the upcoming AGM at Vancouver General Hospital. Members of the Concerned Citizens for Choice on Abortion will be at this meeting to  share with you information about:  selling memberships in VGH, organizing publicity about the AGM,  phoning all your feminist friends  to get them to join the Hospital  in order to vote for choice on  abortion.  Update on VSW  The process of re-organization at  VSW is now complete. By the time  you read this, our funding application will have come up before  Vancouver City Council on May 16.  Sun columnist Doug Collins says  he hopes Council will tell us to  hold a bake sale...  Two important changes to note down  in your phone and date book: we  have a new telephone number at  VSW : 736 1313. We are open to the  public in the afternoons from 2.30  to 6.30. If you want to use the  office for research etc at any  other time, give us a call and we  can set the appointment up.  A mailing to our members asking  for volunteers with our office administration and research has had  an excellent response.  our AGM  The Annual General Meeting of the  Vancouver Status of Women has been  set for JUNE 20, 1978 at 7.30 p.m.  It will take place at Kitsilano  Library, MacDonald and 8th,in the  downtstairs meeting room. We are  urging members of the organization  to consider running for office.  To be eligible to stand for elections, you must be a member in good  standing and have joined VSW no  later than December 1977. There  are 10 positions on the Executive  open to members meeting the above  requisites.  This will be an exciting year at  VSW as we move out into the community to encourage the growth of  strong, preventative-oriented feminist groups throughout the city.  We invite you to participate in  this endeavour. In you are interested in running for office, call the  Nominating Committee at VSW - remember our new number : 736 1313.  WOMEN'S  GROUPS  VSW is no longer able to provide the  numerous groups in assertiveness and  consciousness raising, due to our inadequate funding.  However, we have been searching for  alternatives. Family Services, at  1616 West 7th Ave., now offers women's groups on a continuing basis.  A group for women of all ages begins  Tuesday, May 16 -7.30 - 9.30 p.m.  It is called "Women in Transition"  and it lasts for eight weeks. It is  an opportunity to take a look at  you right now, at what has meaning  for you in your life, and to explore  new possibilities. Phone Family Services at 731 4951 to register.  We are looking into the possibility  of running Assertiveness Training  through the Vancouver School Board.  It is looking hopeful, so watch for  an update in the June issue...  ASTAFOROFF  ASTAFOROFF FREED  Mary Astaforoff, the Freedomite Douk-  habor woman who was imprisoned in  Kingston (see p. 6, March Kinesis)  is home.  She was released by order  of the Governor General of Canada  on April 12, 1978.  Clarie Culhane, of the Prisoners'  Rights Group, which drew public  attention to Astaforoff's position,  received a letter from Mary's family  in Grand Forks, B.C. upon her return.  "We wish to share the happy event  of Mary's arrival yesterday", the  letter read, "she arrived just skin  and bone and that's no lie."  Astaforoff had been imprisoned for  her religious beliefs, and had spent  much of her time in Kingston in  segregation.  Culhane comments:  "The important fact here is  that Mary's release was obtained  by the work of a handful of  people.  Just think of what we  could do if we had 5,000 working  on an issue like this, not just  50 "  "It should be pointed out",  Culhane continued, "that the  inmates of the women's prison  in Kingston came out in support  of Mary.  The inmates committee  and the co-editor of Tightwire  (the prison newsletter) worked  to get Mary her 60 days good  time back.  The prisoners  started putting aside the vegetable part of their meal for  Mary (who, as a Freedomite, is  vegetarian).  It was a marvellous gesture of solidarity."  BUSINESS  The first meeting of the Association  of Independent Business Women (AIBW),  held at the Bayshore Inn on April 23,  was attended by 80 women.  Discussion  centred around purposes of the organization, and an executive was elected.  Audrey Paterson, originator of the  AIBW idea, was elected President.  Other members of the executive are:  Illana Holloway, Lee Cameron, Conchita  Furstenwald and VSW member Judith  Burke.  The next meeting will be held Sunday,  May 28, 1:00 p.m., at the Bayshore.  For further information, call Audrey  Paterson at 669-4312 or 988-1710 (res) .  RESIST ANITA  RESIST RENAISSANCE AND ANITA BRYANT  The BCFW Rights of Lesbians Subcommittee is mobilizing against the  anti-gay attacks. However, this is  an issue of civil rights and gay  women and men need the support of  the entire feminist community. Contact the Rights of Lesbians Sub-  Committee through VSW (736 1313)  to find out more about the broad  coalition of groups opposed to Renaissance and Anita. 15  if he can  pay,  it's ok.  If you can pay, it's o.k.   If you  need to get paid, it's soliciting.  The B.C. Court of Appeals ruled  Tuesday April 18 that a man who  accosts a woman for prostitution  does not solicit her.  It has to  be the other way around.  Justice  Robertson, who wrote the court's  decision, said that "a man who  offers to pay, or pays, a prostitute for her services does the  reverse of expecting or receiving  money."  'I'm sorry, but I don't rent to Bible-toting fanatics..  don't want my kids influenced by them.'  PROSTITUTE WINS ACQUITTAL FOR KNIFING  A 19 year old prostitute knifed a  200 pound football player in downtown Vancouver last fall.  He had  been kicking her after she had  approached him.  In an April 7 acquittal, Judge  Campbell commented on her action as  self-defence:  "The law is clear  that a defending person cannot be  expected to weight to a nicety the  exact measure of necessary defensive  action...although she may have  initiated the encounter, the situation turned around and she had a  genuive fear for her safety."  A Woman's Place  a job training centre  Over half of the F.L.I.P. budget for  women's programmes in the Federal  Government has ended up in B.C.  $220,000 under a Federal Labour Intensive Project (F.L.I.P.) directed  by Jo Mitchell, the Regional Women's  Employment Coordinator of the Canada  Employment and Immigration Commission has gone into setting up "A Woman's Place".  "A Woman's Place" provides work for  35 women for six months. The women  staff "A Women's Place" , a job  training centre to aid women in  their search for employment.  The project has several parts. The  centre has liaison with the Women's  Centre at UBC and with the new Canada Employment Centre at UBC to  aid in the development of resources  for women.  Another part of the project focuses on immigrant women, assessing  the employment needs of women in  specific ethnic groups, developing  links with community resources,  and working towards alleviating  barriers to employment experienced  by ethnic women.  Another part concentrates on work  adjustment for women. This section  of the programme has some resemblance to Employment Orientation  for Women and Basic Job Readiness  Training.  "But this programme  offers more", comments Shirley  Barnett, Project Coordinator at  "A Woman's Place". "We work with  women both individually and on a  group basis. We take the best  elements of the already-existing  job readiness training programmes.  We add to that our own individual  counselling skills and vocational testing tools.  "Workshops and group sessions are  also being held at local community  centres, colleges, agencies, etc.  "To a great extent, we developed  this programme around the people we  hired. We have a great range of job  backgrounds. Some of the women have  themselves been through job readiness training sessions; some have  worked in non-traditional jobs, some  are academic graduates. We have about eighteen different languages  amongst us in this group, and varied cultural backgrounds."  The project probably will expire  at the end of August. By that time,  however, several resources will have  been developed for use by women seeking work. One is an employment handbook, to be translated in various  different languages. Another is a  special training package for Employment and Immigration Counsellors.  Several audio-visual presentations  about women and work will be produced, as well as two films on the same  subject in association with the National Film Board.  The project's home base, "A Woman's  Place", is on the second floor of  the Post Office building at 125 East  10th Ave, Vancouver. Women are invited to drop in between 8.30 a.m. and  5.00 p.m. any week day.  The Regional Women's Employment Coordinator, Jo Mitchell, is most optimistic regarding the effects of the  project on employment for women in  the Vancouver area. She stated that  her position was established nearly  five years ago to develop equal opportunity of employment for women and  that this project will provide her  with the resources to work in a wider range of areas with greater effect.  GATE  G.A.T.E. vs. The Vancouver Sun  in the Supreme Court  The case between the Gay Alliance  Towards Equality (GATE) and the Vancouver Sun will be heard before the  Supreme Court of Canada in mid-June.  The dispute arose when the Vancouver  Sun refused to publish an ad mentioning the newsletter, Gay Tide and  giving its address.  Body Politic points out: "If the  Supreme Court of Canada allows the  appeal, it will be the first case in  Canada in which gays are recognized as  a minority entitled to rights and protection under Canadian law."  GATE is still $3,500 short of their  costs for legal and document fees,  lawyer's fees etc. You can help them  make this issue a victory for gay  civil rights by sending a donation to:  The Gay Tide Defense Fund  P.O. Box 1463, Station "A"  Vancouver, B.C. V6C 2P7  Gay Custody  For the first time in Canadian history, a gay male has won the battle  for custody of his children.  Judge Smith, of Ottawa, commented  that people should not assume, however, that the law is beginning to  recognize homosexuality as 'normal'  behaviour. He added that the gay  man, a 37 year old businessman, was  'not inclined towards militancy'.  (CP info, March 23/78)  PRG  The Prisoners' Rights Group, which  draws public attention to the escalating crisis within Canada's penitentiary system, has had visiting and correspondence rights with prisoners cut  off.  The group is mounting a petition  against the denial of their rights,  which they explain are "a negation of  freedom of speech and freedom of association, contrary to the spirit and  intent of the Canadian Bill of  Rights."  They have sought the support of numerous prominent Canadians concerned with  the prison system's "march toward a  Canadian Attica", as Culhane puts it.  Vancouver Status of Women has some  copies of the petition. You can come  by in our new office hours: 2.30 -  6.30 and sign it. 16  INTERNATIONAL    NEWS  JUDGC IMMUNE  Washington, D. C. In 1971, an Indiana  woman named Ora Spitler McFarlin decided that her daughter would never be  able to care for children.  "She can't  care for herself," Ms. McFarlin told  one report.  "How can she care for a  child?"  So she had her lawyer draw up papers  "petitioning" the DeKalb County  Circuit Court to approve a sterilization operation on 15-year-old Linda  Kay Spitler.  Judge Harold D. Stump  approved the operation and the young  women, told that she was having an  appendectomy, was sterilized.  Two years later, she married and she  and her husband soon discovered the  real reason for the operation.  She  sued her mother, her mother's  attorney, the judge, the doctors  and the hospital, alleging a half-  dozen constitutional violations.  The suit against the judge went all  the way to the U.S. Supreme Court.  On March 28, the court voted 5 to 3  that Judge Stump was immune to any  legal action even if "the action he  took was in error, was done maliciously or was in excess of his  authority."  The ruling was drafted  by Associate Justice Bryon White.  But the minority in the vote wrote  a sharply worded condemnation of  the judge's action and the Court's  ruling.  What Judge Stump did in  1971 was, according to the opinion,  "in no way an act 'normally performed by a judge'.  Indeed there  is no reason to believe that such  an act has ever been performed by  any other Indiana judge before  or since."  The argument turned on the fact  that Judge Stump had gone beyond  his rightful jurisdiction and power  in ordering the sterilization.  Ms.  McFarlin believed that he had the  power but, under the law, he did not.  Civil libertarians were especially  shocked at the ruling.  "Now,"  said Bruce Ennis of the American  Civil Liberities Union, "judges  can violate citizens' constitutional  rights and get away with it."  Other legal experts agreed that the  ruling was the broadest carte blanche  ever given to a judge to take any  action from the bench without  possible penalty. (Seven Days,  April 21, 1978)  DEFEAT BAKKE  Nearly 20,000 people marched in Washington D.C. April 15 to demand the  defeat of the Bakke "reverse discrimination" case. Bakke, a white Cali-  fornian student, claimed that he was  being discriminated against in his  application to medical school because  California campuses practise affirmative action. The case, one of the  most important civil rights issues in  years, will be decided by the U.S.  supreme court within the next few  weeks.  If upheld, the Bakke decision could  get affirmative action programs  throughout the country: the rights of  all minority groups are at stake.  Demonstrators march outside Nestle headquarters in White  Plains, New York on April 13 1978,  to protest the company 's baby formula product 's distribution in Third  World countries.  The demonstration marked the beginning  of a boycott of all Nestle products.  ALL IN THE FAMILY     WINCHESTER  FREED  An all-male committee in California's  state legislature has decided not to  make it a felony offense for a man to  rape his wife.  Under present law, wife-rape, like  littering, is a misdemeanor offense,  maer present law, wire-rape, ±iKe  .ittering, is a misdemeanor offense  >unishable by a fine of $500 or les  and possible short prison term.  The state assembly's criminal justice  committee, in deciding against more  severe punishment for wife-rape,  reasoned that passing the proposed  law would mean a man convicted of  raping his wife would be branded as  a sex offender for the rest of his  life.  The committee's chairperson explained  that passing the bill could intensify  family battles if a wife had the  legal right to prosecute her husband  for rape. (Sister/Off Our Backs)  MAKING RAPE PUBLIC  The Committee Against Rape in Berkeley,  California has organized to he]p  raise a reward of $25,000 for the  apprehension of a rapist known as  "stinky".  The rapist has been at large in the  North Oakland and Berkeley area for  five years and the committee hopes to  increase the possibility of his  arrest by offering a reward.  The committee was founded after the  rape of newspaper woman Carolyn  Craven.  Craven, a reporter for an  educational TV station, was raped in  her home on January 13.  The rapist,  "Stinky" has raped at least sixty  women.  Craven had reported on him  three times for her TV news show.  "I'm a public person", said Craven.  "I don't see any way it shouldn't be  in the press.  Rarely will rape  victims face the camera and really  talk about it.  The reasons women  don't talk about it are the reasons  I want to fight...reasons of shame,  guilt and fear",  info from Plexus'  The international campaign to free  NOREEN WINCHESTER has been successful.  On March 21st, 19 year old Noreen  Winchester stabbed her father to death  21 times with a breadknife.  She was  subsequently sentenced to seven years'  imprisonment on a charge of manslaughter after a trial which revealed that  for eight years he had regularly beaten and raped her, usually on Sundays.  On April 7, the Appeals Court of  Northern Ireland had refused to free  Winchester. But on April 21st, the  Secretary of State for Northern Ireland granted the appeal, by Royal  Pardon.  Women's organizations world-wide took  up the campaign to free Noreen Winchester. Audrey Middleton, who runs  Belfast's refuge for battered wives,  said, "Noreen's situation was in no  way unique. Rape of daughters by  fathers is common." Speaking of the  campaign, Middleton said that they  were "Trying to draw public attention  to the wider issues which it raised —  to the class-based system of justice  and the male dictatorship within families."  IT'S ALL IN THE MIND  (New Delhi-Reuter) - A nasal spray  contraceptive developed at the  Indian Institute of Medical Science  is to be tested on women in seven  countries.  The United Nations World Health  Organization will sponsor the three  month trial period beginning this  May on 56 women in Australia,  Mexico, West Germany, South Korea,  Sweden, Britain and India, the  Press Trust of India news agency  reported.  The hormones in the spray enter the  brain directly instead of through  the blood stream and work on the  hypothalmus gland which controls  ovulation. ._       .    _    ,.  ,__.  (Province, Apr. 19, '78) 17  INT€RNATIONAL N€WS  FCMINIST NCTWORK  The International Feminist Network  was proposed at the International  Tribunal on Crimes Against Women  in Brussels in March 1976.  Its  purpose is to mobilize support and  solidarity among the women's movement on an international scale  when needed.  International mobilization of feminist support has  taken place, for example, in the  case of the Three Marias in Portugal,  of rape victims in Australia and  Italy, of political prisoners in  Argentina and Chile, and of the  domestic workers' struggle in Portugal.  This international solidarity of women has been demonstrated  through letters, telegrams, publicity, demonstrations and fund-raising.  The International Feminist Network  (IFN) is being built up because  women throughout the world have felt  the need for concrete expressions of  support and solidarity in their  particular struggles and actions.  Often these expressions of support  are needed rapidly - as in the  cases of trials or strikes of women.  Whenever possible, the IFN is working through existing feminist networks in the various countries.  ISIS - the Women's International  Information and Communication  Service has take the responsibility  for coordinating the IFN.  ISIS publishes an international  bulletin and it's excellent.  They  have had six issues so far, each  of which are extremely valuable  feminist documents:  No 1.  The International Tribunal on  Crimes Against Women  (Brussels) March 1976.  Testimonies from over 30  countries.  No 2.  Women in the Daily Press,  October 1976.  An analysis  with resources.  No 3.  Women in Liberation Struggles,  April 1977.  Almost entirely  from Third World sources and  a variety of political movements .  No 4.  Battered Women and the  Refuges, July 1977.  Brings  together most of the current  resources on women battering  and the initiatives taken by  the women's movement.  No 5/6 Feminism and Socialism, October 1977/Winter 1977-78.  Reports from two international feminist conferences  (part 1) and an extensive  resource listing of materials  available on women and  socialism.  Future issues are planned for Women  and Health, Women Workers, Women in  South Africa and Rape/Feminist Press.  Subscriptions for women and women's  groups $US 10 per year ($US 20 per  year for institution^ from ISIS,  Case Postale 301, CH-1227,  Caraouge, Switzerland.  MALVINA  COURTROOM JOG  A district court judge has aroused  outrage among Honolulu women after  he dimissed a charge of rape against a marine who reportedly hit a jogging woman with a car, threatened  her with a bottle, and then dragged  her to his car where he raped and  sodomized her.  The marine reportedly told the woman  "If you don't do what I tell you,  you're going to end up dead."  The  marine got charged with rape and  sodomy.  After questioning the woman for 20  minutes in open court, District  Judge Robert Richardson ruled, however, that there was no force used,  because the woman did not fight back  or try to run away.  The Judge stated that the incident  therefore did not meet the legal  criterion for rape, and promptly  dismissed the charge.  A spokesperson for Women Against Rape  is warning that if the rape charges  are not reinstated, nearly 600  women who run marathons in Hawaii  will do their jogging in Judge  Richardson's court room. (Her Say/  BMR)  Malvina Reynolds, noted topical song  writer/singer died Friday, March 17th  1978 in a Berkeley, California  hospital. Malvina gave her last  concernt on Wednesday, March 15th.  She was struck by an attack of  pancreatitis and hospitalized the  following day.  She died early  Friday morning of kidney failure.  Malvina was one of a group of activists musicians who were vital  to the mass movement for social  change which began in the early  sixties.  She was active in well  over 50 years of progressive  movements, including feminism  well before the women's movement of  the late sixties and seventies do-  veloped a mass base.  "Rosie Jane",   "We Don't Need The  Men",   "The Edge of the World'',  "No Hole In My Head",   and "The  Judge Said"  are some of her most  well-loved feminist songs.  Unlike many movement songwriters,  Malvina integrated her music into  a rich lifetime of activism in many  causes.  Two struggles that she  took an active part in in the last  several years prior to her death  were the Seabrook, New Hampshire  fight against nuclear power, and  the recall of Madison, Wisconsin  Judge Archie Simonson, which  succeeded this year.  Her song,  The Judge Said,   energized the  movement to recall Simonson, who  she called "the judge who sanctions  rape."  Malvina's fine music and dedicated  activism will be remembered by  all of us, her songs will remain  with progressive movements around  the world and we will all remember  her as a great feminist revolutionary. (Written by Clair, of Big Mama  Rag)  R€D ZORA  PARIS, June 1977 demonstration in support of gay movement  in U.S. against attacks by Anita Bryant.  Police in Cologne, Germany, are  on the lookout for "Red Zora", a  woman who claims to be the female  equivalent of "Zorro".  It seems that someone has been  robbing sex shops, and has, so far,  made off with $50,000 worth of goods.  The thief leaves leaflets signed  "Red Zora" and claims to be the  "avenger of the oppressed".  Says Red Zora, in one of her leaflets, "What is described as love  today is nothing more than the domination of women by men...the porn-  ographers want to use our bodies to  make their profits".  ABORTION  LONDON—Britain's 1967 abortion law,  the most liberal in Europe, was  amended on February 21, 1978 by  Parliament.  The new amendment will  restrict the availability of abortions by shortening the permissible  time period to 20 weeks, requiring  the approval of five National Health  doctors (instead of the previous  two), and introducing a "Conscience  clause" allowing a physician to  withhold approval.  Off Our Backs. 18  CREDIT UNION  USES ENTIRE  ARSENAL  The annual general meeting of the  North Shore Credit Union, attended  by 600 members, was an exercise in  autocracy.  Staged on April 25th at  Carson Graham School, the meeting  clearly demonstrated two things:  the apprehension of management about  confrontation on staff policies and  practices, and the strong defense of  the status quo on the North Shore.  General Manager Ron Davies was prepared for opposition. For months  beforehand, publicity had been generated by Judith Burke, following  her forced resignation over authorship of an article on sex stereotyping in the credit union.  The first weapon used by the meeting  planners was the implementation of  major changes in election procedures.  Nominations for the board of directors were announced almost at the  beginning, instead of at the end.  Judith had prepared copies for everyone of written statements by each  candidate she had persuaded to run.  This move was designed to counterbalance the influence of printed biographical information and photograph  provided for each of the 6 (male)  candidates chosen by the nominations  committee of the board of directors.  Candidates  Silenced  In other years, no information about  people nominated from the floor was  distributed. However, Judith's  efforts in this area were thwarted  by the committees new policy of  "screening" those nominated from the  floor. These four were herded off  to another room, where they were  interviewed and reduced to one impersonal paragraph each (no photo), on  the same page. These candidates  missed a substantial part of the  meeting, and thus a valuable opportunity to participate, making themselves known to the members.  Another variation from previous procedures was the abolition of candidates' speeches. Someone suggested  that the nominations committee consider giving them an opportunity to  speak next year, but no one requested  to hear from them at this meeting.  Of the three candidates Judith had  worked for, only one was a woman,and  she pulled out at the last minute.  After the meeting, Judith discovered  that Mary Bellerby had been criticized by a few members of North Shore  Women's Centre for not taking a public stand on the staff problems issue  and" had made an early, angry exit,  followed by her supporters from the  local NDP women's group. Mary stated that she did not want to be  labelled or identified with only women's issues.  She felt she was being  forced into an uncomfortable position.  The three vacancies on the board were  filled by the two directors standing  for re-election (one of whom was  President - and meeting chairperson -  Sid Butterfield), and a member who  "believes in (the credit union's)  goals and objectives", i.e. empire-  building.  Women  On Display  The second weapon produced a mixed  blessing. General Manager Davies  was out to show examples of happy,  important women staff members, so he  widened the spotlight beam to include  those down on the fourth level of  command.  Assistant branch managers (currently,  one man, one woman) and accountants  (all three are women, promoted within the past year), formerly received  no acknowledgement. This year, they  were introduced at the meeting, and  their photos appeared in the annual  report, along with their male higher-  ups. It is certainly laudable that  women are beginning to move up in  the hierarchy, and that fear of criticism forced management to show appreciation for their contributions.  However, this ploy, designed to convince the members that there is no  cause for concern about the staff,  was to some degree successful.  The point was reinforced by the presentation of "service awards". Five  employees were commended for five  years' service with the credit union,  with special kudos going to the  General Manager. Besides Ron Davies,  there were three other men. The only  woman was also the only non-management recipient. Later, one member  commented, "Is this the best they can  do? Show me the ten-, the fifteen-  year employees!"  The credit union's "atom bomb" was  brought out for use during "New Business", when Dave Williams came forward to speak on the dreaded topic.  A witty, articulate member (of the  North Van. School Board of Trustees,  as well as the credit union), Dave  announced that he had copies of the  resolution he would present, since it  would be considerably lengthy. Chairperson Sid Butterfield told him to  read it first, and then he would  decide if it could be distributed.  At other annual meetings, speakers  were allowed five minutes, but this  year, the period was reduced. The  chairperson warned Dave he was allowed only two minutes.  Concerns  Dave prefaced the resolution with the  following explanation. A highly visible community organization, the credit union has a responsibility to set  a good example for other financial  institutions. Increasingly, members  are growing concerned with certain  staff policies and practices. During  the past six months, ten women employees, all of whom had passed their  three-month probationary period, had  left the credit union, dissatisfied  with working conditions. This high  turnover, in addition to being expensive, is affecting staff morale, which  in turn has an influence on quality  of service to members.  To further illustrate the need for  concern, Dave Williams pointed out  that all the managers are men. Men  comprise only one-quarter of the total  staff, but receive almost one-half the  salaries.  Hooting  At this point, Dave began to read the  resolution. He got as far as "Be it  resolved that: 1. a special task force  on the status of women" when a sudden  and strong chorus of booing broke out.  The noise subsided slightly while he  attempted to outline the remainder of  the proposal. The task force was to  investigate opportunities for female  staff in recruitment, training, development, promotion, pay and benefits, 19  TO KEEP  FEMINISTS  AT BAY  as well as to study opportunities for  female members in loans and other  services. Following this, the group  would make recommendations, assist  directors and managers to develop an  equal opportunity programme, and report their findings at the next general  meeting.  Before the presentation was completed,  the chairperson announced the end o£  the two-minute period, and ruled the  resolution out of order, on the grounds  that the Credit Unions Act made staff  matters an internal function, and  therefore, the sole responsibility of  the general manager.  In commenting by  phone on the resolution before the  meeting, the superintendent of credit  unions spokesperson had expressed the  view that he foresaw no problems in  its acceptance.  Don Burbidge, another school board  trustee, challenged the ruling of the  Chair. West Van. Alderperson, Bob  Wickham, defended the ruling, stating  that members had no business meddling  in management affairs. When the vote  was taken, the ruling was upheld.  The president closed the issue by  saying that, in his many years as director, he had never heard a complaint  from employees. He invited members to  air complaints, first to management,  then to the board, if necessary.  Battle  Continues  The success of the meeting lay in the  response by individuals afterwards. A  number (many men) expressed astonishment at the outcome to Judith Burke.  Some declared their intention to withdraw funds from the credit union.  Others offered to help carry on the  challenge. For Judith, the meeting  strengthened her resolve to continue  the struggle.  The dissidents are working on a presentation to the directors, and on  additional publicity. In the event  that these actions fail to produce  satisfactory results, they are formulating other plans. If you wish to  lend your support, please call Judith  Burke at 985-3852.  THE WOMENS CARAVAN  judy ritter  "If I Forget Thee,  0 Jerusalem, Let My Right Hand  Lose Its Cunning"  In late May up to twelve B.C. women  and children will begin walking from  Northern Canada to Central America on  the first length of a pilgrimage to  Jerusalem. There they intend to meet  with Arab, Palestinian and Jewish  women to talk about peace, feminism  and the reordering of society according to feminist principles.  "We  will ask all the women in the Middle  East, indeed the women of the world,  to stop giving babies to war."  The Women's Caravan Collective, as it  is called, leaves from Zero Mile Post  near Dawson Creek, B.C. Their route  will take them down the west coast of  North America into Mexico and Central  America, where they will go by ship to  Tel Aviv. They expect that during  this two year journey, they will be  joined by many children, women, and  perhaps some men of strong feminist  conviction. Women from California,  New Mexico and England have already  made commitments to link up with The  Women's Caravan for portions of the  pilgrimage.  One of the pilgrimage organizers, who  is also the mother of one of the children going, says that the plan "announced itself" to her two years ago  at a spiritual retreat in California.  Although, at the time, she herself was  skeptical about the feasibility of  such a journey, she was encouraged by  the response she received when she returned to Vancouver. She began with  a small notice in a women's centre  newsletter. The interest expressed by  women in the community was overwhelming. The Women's Caravan Collective  was formed in a candlelight ceremony  November, 1977. Thirteen women declared their readiness to make the  pilgrimage, and others offered support  and encouragement. The women in the  collective are of surprisingly diverse  backgrounds, and their ages range from  fourteen to thirty-five.  transform  the world  The Pilgrimage to Transform the World,  as it is now called, was originally  scheduled to begin one year from now,  replete with donkeys and gypsy wagons.  Recently, however, some of the Caravan  members felt it necessary to depart  immediately, that "what was a dream  become reality". The decision was  made. In late May the Women's Caravan  begins, by foot, a moving women's  community bearing only those things  they can carry.  "The rest will come."  The participants in this unique journey recognize the physical and emotional hardships they must sustain on  such an arduous and long trip. The  earliest stages of the walk in northern British Columbia may prove to be  the most difficult. From Dawson Creek  to Vancouver, they will be seven days  between communities. They expect to  be in Vancouver by August, California  in October, and estimate one and one  half years walk to Central America.  The women involved are financing the  pilgrimage with personal savings, and  donations, but they hope, like pilgrims of tradition, to exchange their  energy and ideas for hospitality.  The pilgrims claim they are bound by  no government; nonetheless they are  ready to deal with border crossings  and bureaucracy. As for danger, "It's  dangerous to live now. Every adventure must be a leap of faith", said  one of the organizers.  pilgrims  oppose  male  iuar culture  The Caravan Collective chose Jerusalem  after a lengthy discussion in which  they considered going to Northern Ireland or South Africa. They decided  Jerusalem was the best place on which  to focus their symbolic statement  against the male war culture. Jerusalem is a city claimed by three faiths,  and one to which the sight of pilgrims  is familiar. It is and has been wrent  by struggle for centuries. Most significantly, it is in the eye of the  world.  Once there, they plan to meet with  women of the Middle East, and jointly  propose that all the countries involved in the conflict drop their borders  as an example to the world. They will  also demand a seven year moratorium on  armed struggle.  "Yes, there are refugees in the Middle East, but when all  national borders are abandoned, we  will see that we are all refugees free  to wander the face of the planet."  The pilgrimage wants to demonstrate by  its own existence, new possibilities  for living. Although guided by certain principles, the organizers feel  the structure will evolve day by day  as new people join.  "We are not looking for unity at all costs, but peaceful diversity." Fantasies for the  future? Perhaps they will continue on  to South Africa after Jerusalem.  Above all, The Women's Caravan wishes  to "provide an example, to demonstrate  the power of feminist principles. By  walking through the world, we will  come to re-own it, transform it. Men  won't do it. It must be the women."  Interested individuals or groups can  contact The Women's Caravan Collective  c/o The North Shore Women's Centre,  3255 Edgemont Blvd., North Vancouver,  B.C.  604-987-4822. 20  are  independent  unions  a quick  solution?  Editor  Vancouver Status of Women  2029 West 4th Avenue  Vancouver, B. C.  The March issue of Kinesis entitled  "Unionize" contained a misleading  and inaccurate reflection of the  situation of women unionists in  Canada today.  The article is totally erroneous  in stating that union leaders have  been loathe to organize women for  reasons such as women only work for  pin money; women's work is marginal  to society; or women work in non-  industrial settings.  It is because of the fact that women  are often receiving only pin money  in jobs which are deserving of far  more that spurs organizing amongst  women.  It is because women tend to  be side-lined into traditional job  categories which are in fact support  services to the more highly skilled,  politically and economically influential jobs, usually held by men that  is leading women to demand equal pay  for equal work, let along equal pay  for work of equal value.  It is  because women are heavily weighted  in the service industries, where  tbudgets are controlled by governments, and not in private industry,  the realm of free collective  bargaining, that highlights the need  for women to unionize.  Unions have been and continue to rise  to this challenge of organizing  female workers.  Unions are busy in  the field of daily talking with  women, meeting with employees,  explaining the history and structures  that have resulted in the women's  situation being what it is.  Women  are beginning to respond too.  It is the first time for many that  they have ever dared stand up and  speak out for their own rights.  Not  only is the thought new, so is the  process of action.  They are learning how these structures  work, how decisions are made within  them.  They are becoming active in  their local unions, or their  executives and within the provincial  federations.  They are learning to  jump up, speak out, argue with male  and female counterparts when they have  something to say.  But this is a whole  new field for women.  Unions, themselves, are hiring more  women into positions of leadership.  The female representatives are  working with other women, and are  also doing front-line negotiating,  organizing, grievance handling!  We  are breaking ground in all these  areas.  To me, this is movement in  the most positive sense.  The author of the Kinesis article  seems to expect the labour movement  to have overthrown decades of  discrimination overnight.  The  fight is on, but life does not work  that simply.  Smaller, independent unions may  appear to the author to be a quick  answer for organizing women workers.  But this is only a short-sifted  solution.  Working women feel  differently.  They are demanding the  same of a union as are their  brothers:  an expertise, strength,  and political savvy to deal with  their sophisticated employers.  They  are no fools.  They realize they are  new to this field, but expect the  same rights and education the union  movement has always made available  to its members.  They know financial resources are crucial to fight  protracted negotiations and legal  battles and for the efficient effective opperations of the union.  I would suggest that the author might  have spent some of the time that was  used on documenting figures to actually looking into the specific  unions in her milieu and see the  changes they have undergone.  Programmes specifically to draw women  into union activities are abundant in  most unions where there is a number  of female members.  I know the author  will find upon closer perusal that  there are many dedicated, talented  women in the trade union movement  today fighting, for and succeeding  in the very goals that she herself  would have bestowed upon us by a  miracle.  Yours truly,  Wendy Danson, Organizer,  Alberta Union of Provincial Employees  astrid davidson  on (WD  Dear "Kinesis":  First let me say that I thoroughly enjoy your publication - it's topical,  interesting, and I read it cover to  cover. There are a few comments I  would like to make re: your statements  on the B.C.Federation of Labour Women's Rights Committee and the March  8 evaluation.  The lack of participation by the B.C.  Federation of Labour Women's Rights  Committee on March 8th was for many  reasons, not just one. At first there  was lack of understanding on my part  as to just who was planning the whole  event and what was required of us.  Not until the day before the workshop  did we receive any written material  about the event and then only one  poster at 4:00 p.m. When I first  reported that the Women's Rights Committee did not want to participate I  was accused of lack of leadership.  Was this because I had not coerced  or bulldozed my Committee into participating? To tell you the truth,  I was somewhat amazed at the Committee's reaction and had beforehand  been quite interested, especially  since the theme was on working women.  I did present the event in a favourable  way and spoke of anticipated criticism  if we did not participate. We had a  lot of discussion about the event. Your  article expressed a correct reason in  saying that the Committee felt a good  deal of. anti-union sentiment at a previous B.C.Federation of Women conference.  Another reason expressed was that they  felt entirely out of place. The women  of the B.C.F.L. Women's Rights Committee are very active in their unions and  have been for a long time. Many of them 21  have fought for years for trade union  principles and feminist issues. They  see their union not as some invisible  god but as part of themselves. And  that is how it should be. One thing  union educators are constantly trying  to emphasize is that "you are the union". These women have seen the benefits they have gained, not only in  working conditions but in terms of  better lifestyles. They have effected  changes of benefit to women. Criticism  leveled at their unions is quite often  felt to be leveled at them. One does  get rather tired of it.  While the Women's Rights Committee did  not like the word "protest" in the  title of the day (they thought it was  negative) it was not a reason for not  participating.  Due to the criticism we received for  refusing to participate we did meet  again to re-assess our previous decision. However, there were other developments which made the Committee more  unhappy. At the end of our second  meeting, and after much discussion,  it was decided a second time that the  Committee would not participate.  I have a tremendous amount of respect  for the B.C.Federation of Labour Women's Rights Committee. I value their  opinions and perspective and I've learned much from them. I am shocked that  anyone would suggest that I go against  that Committee. I am a paid Federation  staff member. They pay my salary. One  person has even the gall to suggest  that if I "had any brains at all I  would hold one meeting a year and  do my own thing the rest of the time".  If that is what leadership is, then  I don't want it.  I am pleased that some members of the  March 8 International Women's Day Organizing Committee feel that it is  important that we can work together.  I think we can. I think we can learn  from each other and help one another  develop trust, understanding, and the  support so necessary in the feminist  movement.  I was disappointed with your last  paragraph which seemed to imply  that the Commmittee had acted under  the heavy hand of our male (?) labour bureaucrats. The decision was entirely the Committee's. In fact, a  couple of male staff members most  vigourously protested our stand.  Finally, rank-and-file contact is  important, but for a number of reasons I think members of the International Women's Day evaluation  who think that that is the only  method of union contact are dead  wrong. We're a large organization  responsible to thousands of people all over the province. Democratic representation through the  many channels of such an organization is certainly slow. I don't  have any answers on how to make it  faster. I hope that if any of you  want to discuss this further you'll  contact me.  In Sisterhood,  Astrid Davidson  Director of Women's Programs  B.C.Federation of Labour  3110 Boundary Road  Burnaby B.C.  Holly Devor photo  At the CITIZENS' LOBBY FOR JOBS, Victoria, March 30, eight  male persons addressed the crowd: Len Guy, George Johnston,  Syd Thompson, Cy Stairs, Harry Rankin, Bruce Erikson, Gor-<  don Bell and Michael Kauffman. Where were the women speakers,  to address the issue of women and unemployment?  Because this has been the topic of much discussion   in the  women's movement, we print two letters here:  Mr. Len Guy  Secretary-Treasurer  B. C. Federation of Labour  3110 Boundary Road  Burnaby, B. C.  V5M 4A2  Attention Officers of the Federation  RE:  CITIZENS LOBBY FOR JOBS  The Women's Committee of the Alma  Mater Society of U.B.C. wish to  criticize the B.C.F.L.'s Citizen's  Lobby for Jobs and the executive of  the B.C.F.L. for a massive oversight  at the March 30th rally in Victoria.  As women participating in the rally,  we were appalled when we realized  that there were no scheduled women  speakers on the platform and women's  issues pertaining to over half the  population of B.C. were not even  mentioned.  We hope that your future public  statements, demonstrations and policies will reflect the needs of the  organized and unorganized women of  this province.  Yours sincerely,  Marilyn Forster  on behalf of U.B.C.  Women's Committee  Ms. Astrid Davidson  Greater Vancouver Union of the  Unemployed  Vancouver Status of Women  Dear Ms. Forster:  I am in receipt of your letter dated  April 13, 1978 in which you criticize  the Federation for not scheduling a-  women speaker at the legislature,  and for not mentioning women's issues.  In preparing the agenda for the rally,  it was deemed proper that President  George Johnston be the keynote  speaker on behalf of the Federation.  In his speech, Brother Johnston  referred to the plight of the unemployed, including students, native  peoples and women.  The Federation Officers also invited  each participating organization to  provide a speaker.  Participating  organizations were those non-affiliated groups, some thirty-five in  number, who were invited to attend  an organizational meeting February  2, 1978.  Each organization who  attended the meeting and who continued to participate in the program was, as mentioned earlier, invited to provide a speaker.  We  would not be so presumptious as to  suggest who those organizations  should provide as a speaker.  I am certain you will agree that in  the past, our concern for the needs  and rights of women has been made  very clear, and you can rest assured  that this concern will continue.  Yours sincerely,  LEN GUY  Secretary-Treasurer 77  Disarmament  VSW is one of the sponsors of the  Ad Hoc Coalition on Disarmament.  On Saturday May 27, we are invited to participate in the cavalcade of cars which will drive  through Vancouver to the PNE.  In doing so, we will be joining the  thousands who will be gathered on  the Plaza of the United Nations  where the Special Session on Disarmament will be in progress.  Included there will be hundreds of  Japanese bringing 35 million signatures to the petition for disarmament .  Meeting place for the cavalcade is  Queen Elizabeth Park. Time : 10:30  a.m.  Phone 224 0468; 733 9018.  Feminist Film Criticism  FEMINIST FILM CRITICS, UNITE:  YOU HAVE NOTHING TO LOSE BUT  SEXPLOITATION  For the coming fall months I would  like to organize and plan a film  course with women of all ages who are  concerned about our visual image in  the media.  I do not, for example,  share the public's euphoria about  "women's films" like "Julia" and "Turning Point" (for my review, see the  next issue of Priorities), especially  now that we can look forward to "Pretty Baby" and more examples of child  prostitutes putting out for money.  Preceding our discussions will be  visits to films and screenings on  television, as well as readings of  scripts, novels and reviews. These  will form the background of an exploration of how we learn to interiorize  negative images and, by accepting them  uncritically, participate in our own  oppressions.  We will attempt to create a radical  feminist film theory within an already  existing critical framework established by women in Britain and the U.S. We  will also write film reviews for publication in newspapers and magazines  in order to provide alternate feminist  points-of-view of current films being  screened in the community.  It will be  a rich and I hope rewarding experience.  Please contact me through Kinesis,  adding your suggestions and ideas.  —Brig Anderson  Women  in Latin America  BCFW  The Inter-American Development Bank  (IDB) held its first conference ever  outside the U.S. or Latin America when  it met in Vancouver from April 17 to  19.  Two thousand delegates representing  major Canadian corporations, Latin  American military dictatorships, the  Canadian government, and U.S./European  financial interests met to discuss  future plans for extracting maximum  profits from such countries as Chile,  Argentina, Nicaragua, Brazil and  others.  The Ad-Hoc Coalition Against the Inter-American Development Bank, which  included representatives from labour  unions., community groups and political  organizations held a one-day counter  conference at Britannia Centre in Van-  Workshops covered numerous topics  including: the Canadian corporate involvement in Latin America, and its  effect on Canadian workers; Human  Rights in Latin America (14 of the 22  countries receiving IDB loans are  military dictatorships where torture  is commonplace); the effects of the  new Immigration Bill - C24, and Women  in Latin America.  The workshop on Women in Latin America  featured a film, "The Double Day",  which analyzes women's working conditions in Latin American countries.  Women from agriculture, mining, domes-'  tic service and manufacturing speak  for themselves.  Following the film, a Chilean woman  spoke of her experiences as an activist in Chile before the coup. As a  teacher in a city slum, her work led  into battles for health care and child  care. Most often, she said, it was  the women who led the struggle for  childcare as they were the ones most  oppressed by the lack of it. Her emphasis was that struggles for women's  liberation lead inevitably into struggles against imperialism.  The workshop took a resolution concerning women's oppression to the plenary  session of the conference. This resolution included a statement of support for women in the Chilean resistance. It condemned: the imprisonment, rape and torture of women political prisoners in the military dictatorships; the use of Latin American  women as experimental subjects for  birth control techniques; the practice  of forced sterilization and discrimination against women in wages and  hiring practices; the lack of social  services and the continuation of  living conditions far below poverty  lines.  Editor's Correction: The March Kinesis mentioned on p.22 that letters  from Marjaleen Repo had appeared  in the December   '77 Kinesis and  the February   '78 Kinesis.  Only the  HIGHLIGHTS OF THE B.C.F.W. LOWER  MAINLAND REGION STRATEGY MEETING  APRIL 20  Issues discussed included:  * An all-day abortion strategy  workshop was proposed, to counter  the recent increase in anti-abortion activity. Sue Moore (736-1313)  and Jackie Simpson (738-4080) have  details.  Pro-choice issues must be  raised during the upcoming Federal  election campaigns.  The first meeting to consider  action during the proposed visit  of Anita Bryant to Vancouver took  place before Kinesis went to press.  For information about subsequent  meetings, contact Meike (736-1313).  Child-care situation was discussed  at some length.  A SORWUC representative pointed out that the only way  to get childcare now is to unionize  women and then make demands for  childcare from the workplace.  Women are needed to help leaflet  banks, and to take part in SORWUC's  crucial bank workers unionization  drive.  SORWUC will be holding a benefit  June 3 at the Fisherman's Hall.  Please attend1  Direct anti-rape action was proposed  by some women.  Basically, this  means confronting individual offenders, making their crime a public  issue, and dealing with it on a  community level.  This will be  discussed at the next BCFW meeting.  The Greater Vancouver Union of the  Unemployed has a Women's Committee.  They held their first educational  May 5.  Organize around unemployment - call 872-7331 for information.  A Women in Trade Unions Workshop is  being organized and anyone interested in becoming involved can call  Sarah at SFU Women's Centre 297-3670.  : The BCFW Health Sub-commitee is  working on a maternal health  questionnaire, distributing the  abortion survey and producing  pro-choice literature.  ' It was apparent from the meeting  that member groups are involved in  a wide variety of work.  One  feeling expressed in common was  that we are all in the battle  against the right-wing backlash;  at a time when we're already  stretched to the limit, there is  need for new energy.  ' The next BCFW Standing Committee  meeting will be held in Kelowna  May 13 and 14.  The next regional  meeting takes place May 25, 7:30  p.m. at 517 East Broadway (Women's  Research Centre).  '78 Kinesis.  latter date is accurate.  m\ woMeN Beco/Me  H3VeMCVeDTO  ~ ,a newstaee.  ivtfVi special -monks n> Rum Avenll €V€NTS FOR FCMINISTS  23  KINESIS  ISSN 0317-9095  1978 MAY  Vol 7 #5  Kinesis is published monthly by the  Vancouver Status of Women.  Its objectives are to enhance understanding about the changing position of  women in society and to work actively towards achieving change.  Views expressed in Kinesis are those  of the writer and DO NOT necessarily  reflect VSW policy.  All unsigned  material is the responsibility of the  Kinesis editorial and production crew,  SUBMISSIONS:  VSW welcomes submissions from the feminist community and  in particular, from VSW members.  We  do reserve the right to edit, and  submission does not guarantee publication.  Include a SASE if you want  your work returned.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver  Status of Women, 2029 West 4th Avenue, Vancouver, B.C. V6J 1N3.  WORKERS ON THIS ISSUE: Lyn Buckle,  Judith Burke, Kris Craig, Portland  Frank, Janice Pentland-Smith, Dorothy Restall, Gayla Reid, Joan Woodward. Thanks to Nora D. Randall.  Membership to Vancouver Status of  Women is by donation and Kinesis is  mailed monthly to all members.  Individual subscriptions to Kinesis  are $8.00 per year and we would ask  members to base their donations on  this and their own financial position.  As we now have the status of a charitable organization and as we are  unable to pay for Kinesis from these  funds due to government regulations,  we will be issuing tax deductible  receipts for the balance of all membership donations over $8.00.  Please remember VSW operates on inadequate funding - we need member  support!  **F0*U  For information on union organizing or the  women's programme of the B.C. Federation uf  Labour, please contact:  Director of Women's Programmes  B.C. Federation of Labour  3110 Boundary Road  Burnaby, B.C.  V5M 4A2  430-1421  RING AROUND   THE  MOUTH MR.  CLEAN  LLE€.  A RESOURCE CENTRE FOR WIDOWS/  SEPARATED AND DIVORCED WOMEN  A Report from the L.I.F.E. RESOURCE  CENTRE - 101 - 395 West Broadway,  Vancouver, B.C. - Formerly the  NEW L.I.F.E. RESOURCE CENTRE.  This  Resource Centre provides a  contact for Widowed, Separated  and Divorced Women, who want to  become members of a self-help group.  These groups provide a supportive  atmosphere which encourages closeness and a willingji<fes>to share  feelings and mutual concerns.  CRANBROOK  CRANBROOK WOMEN's RESOURCE GROUP  NOW HAS A WOMEN'S CENTRE  It is located at 233 10th Avenue  South, in Cranbrook.  Secretary  of State will be paying the rent,  but EVERYTHING ELSE needs to be  supported by donations and  volunteers.  If you have any goodies you can  send them for a housewarming, they  would appreciate your sisterly  assistance.  PRINCCTON  The PRINCETON WOMEN'S GROUP is planning a programme of women's studies  for the fall of '78, to be sponsored  by Adult Education.  Topics for discussion include: Women  and — Herstory; Work; Sexuality; the  Law; Violence; Emotions. The group is  soliciting suggestions and references  for their programme. You can contact  them c/o Box 334, Princeton, B.C.  FCRRON  FERRON is playing at the  SOFT ROCK CAFE, 1921 West 4th Ave.,  8-11 p.m., Friday, May 19th.  WOMANSONG  WomanSong is having an information day  at the Full Circle Coffeehouse, May  27th noon to 4.00 pm. Women interested in wilderness living, building  a women's community etc., please keep  us in mind, and come see what we have  to offer.  FULL CIRCLE  COFFEEHOUSE  152 East 8th Avenue, Vancouver, B.C.  (874-7119)  MAY SCHEDULE  Opens at 8:30 - performance at 9:30  Admission $2.00  I',:ednesdays  Women and Men  May 3   STARSHINE  Singer/songwriter  May 10   R0SLYN SMYTHE  Reading from her novel  "BLIND ALLEYS".  May 17 "this FILM IS ABOUT RAPE''  produced by BONNIE KREPS.  Film & Discussion  May 24   DIANNE CAMPBELL  Songs of Freedom & Passion  from Traditional & Contemporary sources.     ,  Singer/guitarist.  May 31   TBA  Fridays  Women only  May 5   EDIE MCKENZIE  Singer/guitarist  Just started writing her  own material and loving it!  May 12   Coffee House closed  See special event Thursday  May 11.  May 19   DENISE HANELY  Singer, songwriter, piano  player  May 26   BETSY ROSE & CATHY WINTER  "LONG TIME FRIENDS"  Piano, guitar and fiddle.  See also under special  events.  SPECIAL EVENTS FOR WOMEN  Thursday, May 11: The Coffeehouse  will host THERESE EDELL  performing music from her  soon to be released album  "FROM WOMEN'S FACES" on  national tour.  Saturday, May 27:  BETSY ROSE & KATHY  WINTERi "LONG TIME FRIENDS"  (women who attend IWD  Information Day or participated in the parade may be  familiar with some of their  material, as we played their  tape on both days.)  WORKSHOPS.' Call Peggy Sutherland  876-2937  TAR0T workshop, May 6-7, 10 - 3;  $15 - Pat Scott, instructor,  beginners welcome.  BELLYDANCING FOR BEGINNERS, six  weeks, begins May 11, 7:30-  9:30. Cost $15. Phyllis  Argyle and Eliza Carefoot  instructors. Includes herstory  and costuming.  HEALING THROUGH TOUCH/ 6 Tuesday  nights, beginning May 9th $30  7:00 - 10:00  WOMEN EMERGING/ June, 5 days of  workshop $75.00, Sara David  at the Coffeehouse, 10-5 daily.  For info:  Sara 463-6420, 876-2937