 ^MARCH 1999 IWD caHnd^r^pg^SP" S-dal CMPA $2.25  News About Women That's Not In The Dailies  Transformative Quilting:  Connecting the Threads of He<i<tance  wmrmmm  on Freud  971 19A   39 'HltfKTJNBA  •3-9-fl 'TWM iSH3 9832  SlHiy35 - Hi3 »IISS330ad AtRWail  666T/83/S 9ZI9H  Remembering  Poonam Randhawa Inside  KINESIS  #309-877 E. Hastings St.,  Vancouver, BC V6A 3Y1  Tel: (604)255-5499  Fax: (604)255-7508  Email: kinesis@web.net  Kinesis welcomes volunteers to work  on all aspects of the paper. Our next  Story Meetings are on Tues Mar 2  and Tues April 6 at our new office,  309-877 E. Hastings St. Production for  our April 1999 issue is from Mar 17-  24. All women welcome even if you  don't have experience.  Kinesis is published ten times a year  by the Vancouver Status of Women.  Its objectives are to be a non-  sectarian feminist voice for women  and to work actively for social change,  specifically combatting sexism,  racism.classism, homophobia,  ableism, and imperialism. Views  expressed in Kinesis are those of the  writer and do not necessarily reflect  VSW policy. All unsigned material is  the responsibility of the'Kinesis  Editorial Board.  EDITORIAL BOARD  Fatima Jaffer, Lissa Geller,  Kelly Haydon, Agnes Huang, Jenn Lo,  Laura Quilici, Amal Rana,  Colleen Sheridan (on leave),  Ellen Woodworth  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE  Beatrice Fankhauser, Peggy Lariviere  Corin Browne, Joanna Frayne  Nancy Pang, Bernadette Phan  Tracey Palmer, Leanne Keltie  Dorcas Wilkins, Lin Khng  Monica Rasi, Robyn Hall  Marketing: Jenn Lo  Circulation: Audrey Johnson,  Chrystal Fowler  Production Coordinator: Amal Rana  Designer: Jenn Lo  FRONT COVER  "Canadian Menorah"  quilt by Sima Elizabeth Shefrin  photo by Brenda Hemsing  PRESS DATE  February 23, 1999  SUBSCRIPTIONS  Individual: $20 per year (+$1.40 GST)  or what you can afford  Institutions/Groups:  $45 per year (+$3.15 GST)  VSW Membership (includes 1 year  Kinesis subscription):  $30 per year (+$1.40 GST)  SUBMISSIONS  Women and girls are welcome to  make submissions. We reserve the  right to edit and submission does not  guarantee publication. If possible,  submissions should be typed, double  spaced and must be signed and  include an address, telephone number  and SASE. Kinesis does not accept  poetry or fiction. Editorial guidelines  are available upon request.  DEADLINES  All submissions must be received in  the month preceding publication.  Note: Jul/Aug and Dec/Jan are double  issues.  Features and reviews: 10th  News: 15th  Letters and Bulletin Board: 18th  Display advertising  (camera ready): 18th  (design required): 16th  Printing by Horizon Publications.  Kinesis is indexed in the Canadian  Women's Periodicals Index,  the Alternative Press Index, and is a  member of the Canadian Magazine  Publishers Association.  ISSN 0317-9095  Publications mail registration #6426  News  A candlelight vigil for Poonam Randhawa 3  by Agnes Huang; speech by Meena Dhillon  Budget bodes badly for women 4  by Agnes Huang  Valentine's march against violence in the Downtown Eastside 5  photos by Fatima Jaffer  Features  My IWD picture for you 8  by Rubina Saini  Getting back to "good"globalization 9  by Linda McQuaig  Using fabric arts for social and political activism 11  by Sima Elizabeth Shefrin as told to Kelly Haydon  Racism and the Liberal's government's immigration agenda 15  by Sunera Thobani  Calendar of IWD events in the Lower Mainland 23  compiled by Beatrice Fankhauser  Centrespread  Remembering Poonam Randhawa 3  Happy International Women's Day..  illustration by Peggy Lariviere  Arts  Review of Rita Wong's monkeypuzzle 16  by Denise Tang  Marusya Bociurkiw's Nancy Drew & the Haunted Body 17  reviewed by leanne Johnson  IWD film series at UBC 18  programmed by the Women of Colour Network  Regulars  As Kinesis Goes to Press 2  Inside Kinesis 2  Movement Matters 8  compiled by Robyn Hall and Wei Yuen Fong  What's News 7  compiled by Robyn Hall, Amal Rana and Wei Yuen Fong  Letters 19  Bulletin Board 20  compiled by Beatrice Fankhauser and Lin Khng  Linda McQuaig on Viagra 9  nxw - rows e#r $¬Æms,  Then, drop into one of our Story  Meetings... every first Tuesday of the month at 7:00pm  at 309-877 E. Hastings  St.x.      %f     .  Next Meetings  March 2 &  April 6  Or call us at (604) 255-5499  A Nancy Drew mystery Some very exciting news as Kinesis  goes to press... The Aboriginal Peoples Television Network has just won its landmark  bid to be carried as part of basic cable packages. This means APTV will hit small  screens across Canada in the Fall.  The Canadian Radio-Television and  Telecommunications Commission gave  APTV its stamp of approval despite strong  opposition from cable companies and the  CBC. As with other specialty channels, the  cable cable companies will charge subscribers an additional 15 cents for APTV.  APTV, the first national TV station controlled by Aboriginal people, has been several years in the making. One of the reasons for setting up APTV was to ensure  avenues for airing shows produced in different Aboriginal languages.  Over the past few years, funding support for Aboriginal broadcast ventures has  been cut back. For example, when the  Northern Native Broadcasting Access Program was established in 1983 to increase  access to Aboriginal programming in northern communities, its budget was $13.3 million; now its budget is just $7.9 million.  [Htnmm, sounds suspicously similar to the  funding herstory of women's groups.]  APTV will broadcast programs in English and in 15 Aboriginal languages. The  station has also agreed to air 18-hours of  French-language programming each week.  On the line-up so far are: "First Perspectives," a talk show based in Vancouver featuring discussions with Aboriginal people  from all walks of life; "Native Feasts," featuring traditional Aboriginal foods from  Canada and the US; and "Theatre of the  First Peoples," a six-part series featuring  works written by Aboriginal playwrights  in the past two decades.  The Canadian Cable Television Association hasn't issued its response yet to the  CRTC ruling; the CCTA says it is waiting  to hear from its lawyers. We shouldn't wait  to respond. Write to the CRTC and the  CCTA and show your support for APTV.  There's no clearer example of why  Aboriginal peoples need to be in control of  the systems affecting their lives than the recent ruling from the Supreme Court of  Canada.  In an usually quick decision, Canada's  highest court ruled that a child's Aboriginal heritage should not be considered as  the overriding important factor in determining adoption rights. The court was responding to the custody battle for Baby  Ishmael between his biological grandfather,  who is Aboriginal, and his adoptive grandparents, who are white.  In most situations, the Supreme Court  reserves its decision for at least two or three  months. But in the Baby Ishmael case, the  court pronounced its unanimous judgement within 10-minutes of hearing the final arguments.  The Supreme Court reversed a BC  Court of Appeal decision that had awarded  custody of Ishmael to his biological grandfather, Hubert Morriseau. Since then,  Morriseau moved his family back to his  home on the Sagkeeng First Nation reserve  in Manitoba to be closer to his extended  family system of support.  This didn't seem to matter to the Supreme Court; what did seem to be an important deciding factor was economics—  and the fact is Duncan and Nancy Haimerl,  Ishmael's adoptive grandparents, are  higher up the economics ladder than  Hubert Morrisseau.  The Haimerls, who live in Connecticut, adopted Ishmael's mother Melissa and  her sister when they were young. Despite  admitting they had a difficult time raising  Melissa and her sister, the Supreme Court  believed the Haimerls when told they  would be able to ensure Ishmael grew up  connected to his Aboriginal roots.  Ishmael is supposed to be returned to  the Haimerls by June. Given the Supreme  Court is the final arbiter of the land, what  recourse do the Morriseaus have now? Justice for Aboriginal people denied again.  Raging storms and wild winds do  an unpredictable February make. While the  rest of the world was waiting (and waiting) in vain for the weather to make up its  mind, those of us at Kinesis warmed up  with huge cups of tea, popcorn and a great  mix of new ideas and even newer faces.  Some of the new faces you may catch  a glimpse of at Kinesis this month include  production volunteers Tracy Palmer, Lin  Khng and Sally Stevenson. We would like  to extend a warm welcome, and some popcorn of course, to these three amazing  women as well as to our fabulous new writers: Meena Dhillon, Linda McQuaig, Sima  Elizebeth Shefrin, Denise Tang and Beatrice  Fankhauser.  We would also like to thank Rubina  Saini and Peggy Lariviere for their beautiful illustrations in honour of International  Women's Day [see page 8 and centrespread.]  With IWD fast approaching, we can't  help but get excited. However, the end of  February also brings with it the departure  of Beatrice Fankhauser, who has just completed her seven-week internship at Kinesis. In her [very] short time with us, Beatrice  has managed to wear just about every hat  possible for a volunteer. Proofreading, designing, paste-up... no task was too daunting for her. We will greatly miss her infectious laugh and her creative, party deco  rating skills. We wish her the best of luck  on her trip back to Switzerland and wait  anxiously for the day when she may send  some of those famous chocolates our way!  Oops! Last month, we debuted our  new "Write Out" campaigns/petitions section but forgot to mention it! The section  will be running regularly in Kinesis [but not  this month] so if you have any relevant campaigns or petitions, please fax or email them  to us.  IWD and the crazy weather are not the  only things that have us excited this month.  We're also looking forward to hiring a subscription drive coordinator for Kinesis [see  Bulletin Board, page 22.] We'll keep you  posted on how well we do following the  instructions for our new marketing plan.  And of course, last but never least, for  all you aspiring and /or established writers... Our next story meetings are taking  place on March 2 and April 6 at 7pm.  Oh wait, another last but never least...  don't forget we'll be back in production for  our April issue between March 17 and 24.  Drop by and see us, or try your hand at  pasting up. Who knows, you might even  catch a glimpse of Bernadette doing her  letraset-thing.  In the meantime, we wish you a fabulous IWD and a warm, storm free spring  (we hope...)  Status  W   o   rvi   E   M  Our appreciation to the following supporters who became members of VSW, renewed  their memberships or subscriptions to Kinesis, or who made donations during the month  February.  Teresa Gibson * Shelagh Wilson  A special thanks to our donors who give every month. Monthly donations assist  VSW in establishing a reliable funding base to carry out our programs, services and Kinesis throughout the year. Thanks to:  Helen Babalos * Wendy Baker * Lissa Geller * Jody Gordon * Erin Graham *  Nola Johnston * Tamara Knox * Barbara Lebrasseur * Valerie Raoul * Linda Shuto *  Sheilah Thompson  RECOMMENDING WOMEN X  FUNDRAISING RAFFLE  Great Prizes to be Won!  Trip for two to Jasper aboard VIA Rail Passenger Trains Valued at  $1500  Two nights accommodation at the Coast Hotel in Whistler Valued at  $450  1999 Fringe Festival Super Pass Valued at $500  A Charlescraft bread maker courtesy of The Bay  Also theatre tickets, gift certificates, and much, much more!  $3.00 each  2 for $5.00  Tickets available at  VSW, Women in Print, Liberty Thrift Store  or Call 255-6554  Draw Date:  Thursday, April IS, 1999 News  In memory of Poonam Randhawa:  Community responds to  stalking, murder  Harry Randhawa, Anita Sidhu, Jeevan Atwal, Gavin Sarai, Meena Dhillon, Shiv Sarai  by Agnes Huang  Strong gusting winds and the threat of  a storm couldn't keep more than 150 people from attending a candlelight vigil at the  Vancouver Art Gallery on February 21 to  remember Poonam Randhawa.  Randhawa, who had recently turned  18, was a student at Sir Winston Churchill  Secondary School in Vancouver. On January 26, her body was found in an alleyway;  she had been shot in the head.  The man accused of killing her,  Ninderjit Singh (aka Ninderjit Soos), still  has not been apprehended. It is believed  that he is in Mexico. Before Randhawa's  murder, Singh had booked a flight from  Seattle to Los Angeles. By the time she was  found, he was already across the border.  Singh had been stalking Randhawa for  more than two years. To escape his harassment, she changed schools and her family  unlisted their phone number.  In response to the murder, the Coalition of South Asian Women Against Violence and the family and friends of Poonam  Randhawa organized the candlelight vigil  at the art gallery. The Coalition took care of  logistics; Randhawa's friends created the  flyer and a banner commemorating her.  Most of those gathered at the vigil were  members of the South Asian community,  and many of them knew Poonam  Randhawa and her family in some way.  Notably missing from the crowd were individual women and women's groups  whose faces and banners are often seen at  other events held to challenge the prevalence of male violence against women in  our society—events like Take Back the  Night and the December 6th Candlelight  Vigil. The scene was reminiscent of the annual vigil organized by the Coalition in  memory of Rajwar Ghakal and her family  who were murdered in April 1996 by  Ghakal's estranged husband.  Those who did attend the vigil could  feel the pain and the strength in the voices  of those who paid tribute to Poonam, and  of those who actively work to end violence  against women.  Her close friends Anita Sidhu and  Jeevan Atwal and her aunt Nima Sidhu all  spoke about Poonam's character, reading  pieces she had written  about herself for he*-  graduation year. They  wanted to share with  others attending the vigil  a glimpse of who  Poonam was and what  she meant to them, and  their families and  friends.  Poonam's cousin  Harry Randhawa expressed his anger towards the Attorney General [Ujjal Dosanjh, who  was present at the vigil]  and the police for the system's failure to prevent such tragedies from happening.   Her   11-year  old   cousin  Ishay  Randhawa read a poem he wrote for her,  with great courage and love.  The front-line activists who spoke at  the vigil placed the stalking and murder of  Poonam Randhawa clearly into a context  of violence against women: Meena Dhillon  and Zara Suleman of the Coalition,  Raminder Dosanjh of the India Mahila Association, Suzanne Jay from Vancouver  Rape Relief and Women's Shelter, andAjax  Quinby from the Vancouver Custody and  Access Support and Advocacy Association.  [Below, Kinesis presents the words Dhillon  spoke at the vigil.]  To keep the memory of Poonam  Randhawa alive, her family and high  school have established a Scholarship Trust  Fund. Awards will be presented annually  to an outstanding student at Churchill who  not only excels academically but is also involved in many of the school's activities.  To contribute to the fund, send cheques  family and friends  rememberP^nTS  payable to Sir Winston Churchill Secondary School, re: Poonam Randhawa Memorial Scholarship, 7055 Heather St, Vancouver, BC, V6P 3P7. (Charitable tax receipts  will be issued.) For more information, call  (604) 261-6334.  One look into their eyes...  Ishay Randhawa: a poem for Poonam  by Meena Dhillon   On January 27,1 was volunteering at a  transition house for battered women. In the  afternoon, I was sitting and chatting with  three women about their stories and the  measures they had taken to escape their  abusive husbands.  As we were chatting, a fourth women  entered the room. She seemed shocked. She  informed us in a state of panic that the body  of a young woman was found in the alley  of a Vancouver neighbourhood. I got the  newspaper and, in Section B on the second  page, there was a small article about the  victim. There was no identification of who  she was.  As I sat there with these women, I  could see that they were affected by this  because the newspaper report mentioned  that this young women had been stalked.  The women with whom I work are in similar circumstances; in fact, not only are they  in hiding for their safety, but so are their  children.  In my work, I have met women who  are afraid to open their curtains, to walk to  the grocery store, or to take their children  to school because they are afraid of being  hunted down by their abusive partners. As  I continued to listen to the fear and panic  in these women's voices as they told me  their stories, I managed to sneak away and  watch the five o'clock news.  During the broadcast, the young  woman was identified as 18-year old  Poonam Randhawa. I sat there alone in silence for about five minutes. I can still remember the horrifying glimpses of the  news, which showed this young woman  lying on the ground, helpless.  After watching the news, I returned to  the room where the women were still sharing their stories. I was not able to tell them  many details except that the news we had  heard earlier was true. I told them the name  of the woman, and confirmed that yes, she  had been stalked.  I can still remember the chilled faces  of the women. I wanted to believe the police had made a mistake and identified the  wrong person. How could this happen to  such a young woman? Why did it happen?  I watched the 11 o'clock news and this time  no names were mentioned. For some reason I hoped they had identified the wrong  person, but even then, it was still a young  woman.  In the days to follow, the story unfolded. As I heard more details about what  had happened and the loss the Randhawa  family had already experienced, I was able  to understand the causes of this tragedy.  [Poonam's brother, and only sibling, had died  three years earlier.] At the same time, knowing that I too could be stalked and killed, I  asked myself how could our justice system  let this happen and what would I do?  see POONAM next page  MARCH 1999 News  The 1999 federal budget:  Women ignored, again  by Agnes Huang  So... how did women fare in the Liberal government's 1999 federal budget?  Given that concerns expressed by women  didn't even get a mention when federal Finance Minister Paul Martin tallied up the  numbers... not well at all.  Despite facing a forecasted $17 billion  surplus in the coming year, the feds had  little to offer women on February 16, when  Martin read out his budget speech in the  House of Commons.  Despite making promises in pre-  budget meetings with national women's  groups, Martin did not include any additional funding to support women's advocacy and service organizations across the  country. "Paul Martin broke his commitment to Canadian women," says Joan  Grant-Cummings, president of the National Action Committee on the Status of  Women. "Less than a year ago, he agreed  to incremental increases to the Women's  Program funds." (In this year's budget, the  Women's Program didn't even rate a line  item.)  Despite a court ruling in favour of federal public employees who are now in the  14th year of their pay equity complaint  against the government, the federal finance  minister did not include any monies to ensure the dispute will be settled fairly.  "The government does not seriously  consult with women in formulating its  budget, and this budget amply demonstrates that it does not understand the reality for many women in Canada," says Kim  Brooks, a spokesperson for the National  Association of Women and the Law.  Women weren't the only sector shut  out by the Liberal government. Kathryn  Robertson of the Ecumenical Coalition for  Economic Justice (ECEJ) says her organization had been lobbying the finance minister for the past year to support the Jubilee 2000 Campaign, which asks Canada to  cancel debts owed to it by some of the economically poorer countries in the world.  Under the criteria proposed for debt forgiveness—which includes that a country  have a per capita income under $2,000 and  a debt load accounting for greater than 50  percent of its Gross National Product—  ECEJ says more than 50 countries would  qualify.  In his budget speech, Paul Martin announced Canada would take a leadership  role in this area. However, when it came  down to the actual figures, no cash had  been set aside to reach this goal. This, and  the fact that the feds have decreased monies geared towards international development assistance over the past few years  shows they are not committed to supporting poorer countries, Robertson says.  Even though the Liberals have "balanced" the budget, the finance minister  announced that his government would continue to cut program spending, from 12.6  percent this year to 12 percent by the Year  2000/2001.  "Balance" was a big word in Paul Martin's speech. He stressed that it is necessary  to have balance, which he translates as  meaning governments should not have  "too many priorities."  What were the Liberal's priority picks?  Three things: health care, knowledge and  information. These areas will constitute  three-quarters of $7.1 billion in program  spending this year. This includes $2 billion  for improving "productivity measures,"  which will go mostly to research and development projects, and $750 million to  address youth employment, which is at a  critically low state.  According to the finance minister, the  main focus on the federal government's  spending will be on health care. Martin  announced an increase in transfer payments to the provinces to bolster their sagging health care systems to the tune of $2  billion in 1999/2000 and $2.5 billion in each  of the years following (up to 2004).  Kathleen Connors, chair of the Canadian Health Coalition (CHC), says the increased health care funding was the fruit  of hard work by thousands of Canadians  who persuaded the federal government  that Medicare is in serious trouble. While  she acknowledges the additional monies  are a positive first step, she cautions that  they represent only a "short-term injection  into an ailing health care system."  BC's largest health care union, the  Hospital Employees Union, points out that  the federal government has cut transfer  payments to the province by $600 million  since 1995—about half of which is designated to health care. Even at the end of the  increased funding transfer plan unveiled by  Martin, health spending will still have only  returned to 1995 levels.  The well-being of Aboriginal peoples  in Canada was also given just a marginal  see BUDGET next page  see POONAM previous page  I have a criminology and women's  studies degree from Simon Fraser University, so clearly I should know what to do.  The reality is, although I know stalking or  criminal harassment is against the law, I  also know it is hard to get the police to do  anything about it. If I want them to take  action against someone who is harassing  me, I must have proof. At this point, I am  still unclear how to get the police to believe  me, or how to gather the required proof.  How do you know when someone is  crossing the line? For example, does he just  happen to be at the same place at the same  time, or is he there to watch my every move  because in his mind we are in a relationship? I ask myself these questions because  I know my family and friends would also  be asking them.  Over the past few weeks, I have seen  members of the Randhawa family—one  look into their eyes is enough to feel the  emptiness, loss and sorrow they are having to deal with. An innocent young  woman was murdered and I could not just  sit there and let nothing happen. What happened to Poonam could very easily happen to me, my mother, my sister, my cousin,  my friend, or to anyone of you women here  today. I did not want this murder to be forgotten without any action being taken to  prevent such tragedies from happening in  the future.  Poonam, like many young women, felt  she was taking the right steps in dealing  with her stalker; however, her stalker, like  many stalkers, followed through with his  final act of control by taking her life. I  wanted to do something and was waiting  for something to be announced by the various women's groups. But nothing happened.  It was at this point that I was contacted  by Poonam's friends and family. We all  shared our feelings of anger, sadness, sor-  with the Coalition of South Asian Women  Against Violence.  Today, we are here to remember all  women who are victims of violence.  Poonam, Reena Virk, and Rajwar Ghakal  and her family hold a special place in my  Prabhjot Parmar, Meena Dhillon, Zara Suleman of the Coalition of South  Asian Women Against Violence  row, frustration and the need to do something so this tragedy is not forgotten. I took  it upon myself to help the family and  friends organize this event. I called various people I knew and arranged a meeting  heart. These are some of my sisters I've lost  to violence against women.  At the same time, we must remember  the women who are still living in fear, the  women who are still suffering from abuse  and violence, the women who are to afraid  to attend this vigil because there is someone waiting to hunt them down.  My fight and the Coalition of South  Asian Women Against Violence's fight will  not stop until there is zero tolerance towards  violence against women. Everyone who has  been touched by the tragic death of Poonam  must stick together, fight, and demand  changes in the laws to better protect  women. Everyone must believe women  when they say they are being stalked.  In the next few weeks, you will stop  hearing about Poonam Randhawa, just as  you have stopped hearing about Reena Virk  and the Vernon massacre. But all of us must  take it upon ourselves to remember these  women and the many other women and  children who live in fear everyday. We need  to stick together and challenge the policies  and norms which allow violence against  women to exist. Until our society is free  from violence, our fight must not stop.  The next time you see something  where a woman is being abused, think  about what type of message it is sending to  our young people. In order to help eliminate violence against women, we must educate and create awareness about violence  among people in every age group, and  among all men and all women.  I strongly believe that Poonam is in a  safe place with her brother. I know there is  nothing I can do to bring her back, but what  I can do is work towards making changes  that will prevent this tragedy from occurring to any other family. I urge everyone  here to join in the Coalition's fight for zero  tolerance of violence.  MARCH 1999 News   Valentine's march against violence in the Downtown Eastside:  Their spirits live with us  This year's Valentine's March, held in  memory of the women who have died violently in Vancouver's Downtown Eastside,  attracted the largest crowd in history. More  than 400 people came out to share their grief  and support. The significance of the march  was bolstered by the magnificent presence  of six eagles— the greatest number ever—  soaring overhead throughout most of the  march and the rally at Oppenheimer Park.  The eighth annual commemoration  was organized by women involved with  various groups in the community, and  spearheaded mainly by the Downtown  Eastside Women's Centre (DEWC) and the  reaking the Silence Against Violence  Against Women project.  The day began at the Carnegie Centre.  More than 150 people packed themselves  inside the auditorium to hear remarks from  Pauline Johnson and Edna Brass of DEWC.  They addressed the inadequate supports  for Aboriginal women living in the Downtown Eastside, mostly due to the racism  they encounter while attempting to seek  services at community agencies.  The experience of racism was  brought home by the Aboriginal  Women's Action Network's Fay  Blaney who spoke with great courage about her time working at  Carnegie. Blaney was hired on contract by Capilano College and the  Carnegie Centre to do a literacy  needs assessment. She was fired  from her job after being asked to  separate the issue of being Aboriginal from the issue of literacy. Blaney  says she was also told there was too  much "Indian-ness" going on  around Carnegie. Those listening to  Blaney's words gave her a rousing round  of applause.  The crowd then poured out into the  street, first circling the intersection at Main  and Hastings. Along the route through the  Downtown Eastside, the march stopped at  locations identified as places where women  had died. At each site, Elder Alene  LaFlamme said a prayer in the woman's  honour and left tobacco and a rose.  In front of the Main Street Station of  the Vancouver Police Department, Mabel  Nipshank of the Battered Women's Support  Services and Viola Thomas, president of the  United Native Nations, talked about how  the criminal justice system continues to fail  women, especially Aboriginal women. Val  Phillips with PACE (Prostitution Alternatives Counselling and Education) echoed  that reality, noting that many women working in the sex trade encounter numerous  violent incidents, not only at the hands of  customers but also at the hands of police  officers.  The march then moved on to  Oppenheimer Park, where a circle was  formed. Those who had lost family members or friends to violence were asked to  form an inner circle. Pauline Johnson offered them prayers. After, everyone was  invited to call out the names of women they  knew who had died violently in the Downtown Eastside.  The event wound up at the Japanese  Language School, where participants were  treated to drumming, more words, and  some delicious chili and bannock. Sadly  though, it didn't take long for the bannock  to all disappear. Maybe next year...  photos by Fatima Jaffer  from BUDGET previous page  boost. The Liberals committed $150 million  to Aboriginal health programs, which is far  less than Aboriginal leaders say is necessary to result in any significant impact on  members of their communities.  The Liberals again did nothing in this  budget to ensure the universality and accessibility of Canada's medical system,  which they placed in jeopardy when they  brought in the Canada Health and Social  Transfer in 1996 [which cut social program  transfer payments to the provinces.]  Connors says the CHC will continue to  press the federal government to negotiate  a national Home and Community Care Act  to establish national standards for comprehensive care and ensure public dollars go  to patient care and not corporate profits.  "Very flowery," is how Robertson characterizes Martin's budget speech. "It  sounded good in some places—it's obvious Martin has learned to adopt the 'right'  language—but there's nothing to back it  up."  As an example, Robertson notes the  finance minister made it a point in his  speech to distinguish between what the  market can do and what governments  should do. He pointed to the "common  good" things—such as, homelessness or  violence against women or children living  in poverty—and said that the market cannot solve these problems; government must  play that role.  However, Martin's mouth and his calculator didn't dance well together. "It's a  bit disgusting that he mentioned some  things in his speech when he's done nothing to support them in his budget," says  Robertson.  It's clear that eradicating poverty is not  a priority area for the federal government.  Health care was the only social program  offered any real funding increase in this  budget, even though it h s been poor people on social assistance who have paid the  highest price for the Liberals' deficit reduction crusade.  It's also clear that the Liberal government has no intention of honouring its previously stated commitment to eliminate  child poverty by the Year 2000. In response  to the dire need of families with children  in Canada, all the Liberal government offered was $300 million in additional funds  for the National Child Benefit. Again, there  was no mention of funding a national  childcare strategy, which many feminists  say would be the best measure to alleviate  poverty among women and children.  Brooks says that even for "working"  low-income families who would be eligible for the National Child Benefit, "the  modest increases are too low [to make any  meaningful difference.]"  Pam Coates, president of the National  Anti-Poverty Organization, adds that the  finance minister failed to address the most  glaring deficiency with the program: "Not  one penny of the benefit will increase financial support for families with children  who are receiving social assistance." Even  the United Nations has concluded that the  National Child Benefit discriminates  against families on welfare.  There's nothing in the Liberal government's budget that will help poorer people. Paul Martin himself admits that the  announced $1.5 billion cuts in taxes will  benefit mostly middle and upper income  Canadians. The major winner will be those  earning more than $50,000 a year. And despite the fact that a number of major cities  in Canada have declared homelessness a  national disaster, the Liberal government  put nothing towards social housing  projects.  "What we needed to see in this budget  was a commitment to a new national program of income support that guarantees  adequate financial assistance to every Canadian in need, with no strings attached,"  says Coates. "I am definitely disappointed."  The United Nations Committee on  Economic, Social and Cultural Rights  (ECOSOC) obviously was disappointed  with the federal government as well. In its  review last January of Canada's record in  improving the well-being of its citizens, the  Committee severely chastized the Liberal  government for balancing the federal  budget at the expense of poor Canadians,  especially Aboriginal people and women.  "The Liberal's budget is empty and  neglectful," says Grant-Cummings. "The  ECOSOC Committee was right on the button when it called Canada's record on reducing poverty shameful."  MARCH 1999 Movement Matters  listings information  Movement Matters is designed to  be a network of news, updates and  information of special interest to the  women's movement.  Submissions to Movement Matters  should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double spaced and may be edited  for length. Deadline is the 18th of the  month preceding publication.  by Robyn Hall and Wei Yuen Fong  Birth control  handbook updated  The Montreal Health Press is celebrating the 30th anniversary of the Birth Control Handbook with the launch of a revised  edition. The handbook is still the most comprehensive and popular publication dealing with both the technical and social aspects of contraceptive decision-making  available today.  The Birth Control Handbook was first  published in 1968 when it was still illegal  to disseminate information about contraception. It contains basic information on  anatomy, sexuality and reproduction, as  well as information on all forms of birth  control.  The new edition includes up-to-date  information on the female condom, Depo  Provera and the new brands of pills. There's  also a redesigned layout, lots of photos, and  references to relevant websites.  The Montreal Health Press is a nonprofit women's publishing house, dedicated to providing information to the public on health and sexuality. All of its publications are available in English or in French.  Other titles by the Press include: Sexually  Transmitted Diseases, Sexual Assault, and  Menopause. An updated STD handbook will  be out in March.  To order a copy of the Birth Control Handbook or other handbooks, send a cheque or  money order to: Montreal Health Press, PO  Box 1000, Station Place du Pare, Montreal,  Quebec, H2W 2N1. Single copies are $5. (As  a bonus, if you mention this article in your  order, the Press will give you a 10 percent discount.) Bulk orders are also available for as low  as $1 per copy. For more information, visit the  Press'website at http://www.worldsfinest.com/  mhp, or call (514) 282-1171.  Conference on women  filmmakers  This March, the University of British  Columbia and Simon Fraser University will  be co-hosting the first major women's film  conference and festival held in Canada in  many years. The event, Women Filmmakers:  Refocussing, will take place over two weekends and feature workshops, interviews,  screenings and discussions by many well-  known international and local women filmmakers.  Aimed at film enthusiasts, academics,  established or aspiring filmmakers and  those interested in women's issues, the festival and conference features an impressive  roster of talented filmmakers, directors,  theorists and critics.  The inspiration for the series came out  of the 1970s feminist tradition of film festivals held throughout North America and  Europe which celebrated the accomplishments of women filmmakers. Next month's  event is being organized with the intention  of reviving or "refocussing" on the concept  of promoting and supporting women in the  film industry through public forums.  The workshops and presentations  comprising Women Filmmakers: Refocussing  are divided into two themes. The first weekend (March 19-21) focuses on "Europe and  the History of Filmmaking," and the second weekend (March 26-28) concentrates  on "Post-Colonial Contexts and Documentary Filmmaking." In addition, films by festival guests will be shown at the Pacific  Cinematheque preceding each weekend  session.  The first weekend of Women Filmmakers: Refocussing will take place at SFU Harbour Centre, and the second weekend at  UBC's Chan Centre.  The international filmmakers who will  be featured on the first weekend are:  Agnieska Holland (The Secret Garden,  Europa Europa, Bitter Harvest), Helma Sanders Brahms (Germany Pale Mother), and  Swiss filmmaker Patricia Plattner. The second weekend will feature Deepa Mehta  (Sam and Me, Fire) and Indian-English  documentary filmmaker Pratibha Parmar  (Khush, Warrior Marks, The Righteous Babes).  Local filmmakers Christine Welsh,  Loretta Todd and Nettie Wild (Chiapas) will  also take part in the conference, as will  Nicole Giguere from Quebec.  Ann Kaplan, a film studies expert and  author of Women and Film: Both Sides of the  Camera, will present the conference keynote  address on "Multicultural Women's Films:  Resisting Current Stereotypes," March 27  at UBC starting at 8:15pm. Admission is  free.  The cost for both weekends is $75; the cost  for one weekend is $40. (Discounts available  for low income earners). For more information,  call (604) 822-9171 or visit the conference  website at www.wmst.ubc.ca/conference.html.  Securing security  deposits  The Tenants Rights Action Coalition  (TRAC) is leading a new campaign to create a Security Deposit Trust Fund in British  Columbia. The advocacy organization,  based in Vancouver, says that BC landlords  are holding $170 million worth of security  deposits—money that belongs to tenants.  Even though the Residential Tenancy  Act was changed to make it easier for tenants to have their deposits returned, many  are finding this not to be the case. Instead  of going through the legal hassles necessary to regain their money, many tenants  often just walk away from their security deposits.  TRAC says disputes related to security  deposit returns account for more than one-  third of the almost 10,000 calls a year to the  organization's Tenant Hotline, and one-  third of the 25,000 yearly arbitrations  through the Residential Tenancy Office.  Under the proposed system, all deposits would be held in a trust fund that would  be administered by a third party. Tenants  would automatically receive their money  back quickly after they move out unless the  landlord makes a claim against it (such as  for damages or unpaid rent.) Interest  earned from the fund would be used to  cover administrative costs.  TRAC says a BC fund would have  earned $8 million in interest in 1996. It also  would have saved the provincial government money by reducing the number of  arbitration hearings and ensuring the return of deposits paid by the Ministry of  Human Resources.  A security deposit trust fund is in place  in all states inAustralia and in New Brunswick. In some places, it has worked for over  20 years.  TRAC is calling on individuals and  groups to join them in advocating for this  new, and fairer, system. So far, their campaign has been endorsed by many groups,  including the BC Federation of Labour, the  NDP Women's Rights Committee, and various women's centres.  For more information about the Security  Deposit Trust Fund or to receive postcards in  support of the proposal which can be sent to  BC Premier Glen Clark, contact TRAC at:  (604)255-3099 or by fax: (604) 255-0772.  Alternative economic  indicators  A new report, published by the Ecumenical Coalition for Economic Justice  (ECEJ), says that Canada shouldn't rely on  the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) as its  sole measure of the state of our economy.  In the October 1998 issue of its Economic Justice Reports series called  "Through a Different Lens: Alternative Indicators and Our Work for Economic Justice," ECEJ makes a case for developing and  using economic measures which are more  accurate evaluators of the health and well-  being of people and societies.  What is wrong with the GDP? Well...  according to the GDP, cranking up the air  conditioner, increasing the number of people needing medical treatment for cancer,  and environmental disasters all are good  things because they stimulate economic  activity.  Anything that involves a financial  transaction—whether it's beneficial or destructive to society—is counted. If there's  lots of activity, then the GDP is large, and  that's supposed to mean Canada's  economy is healthy  Alternative indicators, says the report's  writer Kathryn Robertson, measure "outcomes as opposed to inputs." She explains  and examines a number of alternative  measures, such as the United Nations' human poverty and quality of life indices, the  Genuine Progress Indicator, and the Economic Gender Equality Indicators developed through Status of Women Canada and  Statistics Canada.  Robertson says alternative indicators  have come back into vogue as more and  more people become aware that traditional  indicators do not adequately describe what  is taking place in the economy. As well, with  the increasing cuts to social programs, more  and more people are demanding that the  impact of these backslides be documented.  ECEJ acknowledges there are flaws  with existing alternative indicators, and  that they need polishing or reworking, or  that new ones need to be created. For example, Robertson says, measures designed  to look at the well-being of women in society should not be based only on direct comparisons between women and men; this  assumes that in order to be "equal," women  must be the "same" as men.  To order a copy of "Through a Different  Lens," send $4 (includes postage) to The Ecumenical Coalition for Economic Justice, 208-  947 Queen St East, Toronto, Ontario, M4M  1]9. Ask for the Economic Justice Report,  October 1998 issue. For more information  about other ECEJ publications or the work of  the organization, call (416) 462-1613, fax:  (416) 463-5569, or email: ecej@accessv.com  Celebrating queer art  The Pride In Art Society (PIAS) is  putting out a call for submissions to be included in its 1999 Pride in Art Exhibition  in Vancouver. The show will be on display  from July 29-August 15 (around Gay Pride  weekend) at the Roundhouse Community  Centre. Opening night will be on July 30.  PIAS was created in July 1998 to nurture and develop culture within the gay,  lesbian, bisexual and transgendered communities. Inspired by the success of exhibitions organized by queer students of  Emily Carr College of Art and Design, PIAS  hopes to ensure continued spaces for Vancouver queer artists to exhibit their work.  All artwork is subject to a selection  process. Any artwork considered to be  "hate" art or "pedophilia" will not be accepted. Jurying will take place from May  29-June 6. A CD-Rom will be produced  highlighting the artists and works chosen  to be included in the exhibition.  To be considered for the 1999 Pride exhibition, send slides of your artwork to: The Pride  in Art Exhibition 1999, c/o Robert L. Hong,  103-1065 Burnaby St, Vancouver, BC, V6E  1N9. PIAS also holds fundraising and other  events to support and promote its goals, and  welcomes financial contributions and volunteer help. For more information on any of this,  email: robbieh@direct.ca, or call (604) 683-  3884.  Taking it to the  financial centres  A proposal has been put forward by  various groups and movements of activists  from England to hold an international day  of action aimed at the heart of the global  economy: the financial centres, banking  districts and multinational corporate power  bases. The suggested date for this action is  June 18.  This proposal for a People's Global  Action is made in the spirit of strengthening international networks and follows the  success of coordinated global actions held  last May. Among the organizations involved in calling for this campaign are:  Reclaim the Streets (a popular movement  seeking the liberation of city streets and  public spaces using direct action), the Western European Conveners of Peoples' Global Action Against "Free" Trade, the World  Trade Organization (WTO), and London  Greenpeace.  The date for the action was chosen to  coincide with the meeting of the G-8  (wealthy industrial) nations in Koln, Germany from June 18-20. It also coincides with  a planned tour of Indian farmers and activists based in Europe to campaign against  the WTO and multinational corporations.  The organizers are encouraging as  many other movements and groups around  the world as possible to organize their own  autonomous protests or actions on the same  day and against the same target groups.  Preparations for this day of action are  being coordinated by email. To subscribe  to the discussion list, send an email to  listproc@gn.apc.org with the following request: subscribe J18DISCUSSION [then  your email address]  For more information about the People's  Global Action visit http://www.apc.org  KfiSs What's News  compiled by Robyn Hall, Amal Rana  and Wei Yuen Fong   Another women's  centre in jeopardy  The Kamloops Women's Resource  Centre (KWRC) in Kamloops, BC has been  forced to close down until April 1st due to  a financial crisis. The historically underfunded centre has been unable to meet its  payroll for its three part-time staff since  early February.  Lack of support for women's programs  by the federal and provincial governments  is at the heart of the problem, says the centre's coordinator Sheila Smith. She adds  that the Liberal government's recently announced federal budget includes no increase in funding for women's groups [see  page 5.]  Started up in 1985, the KWRC offers  various programs to help women in crisis,  as well as those needing support finding  jobs, childcare and information about welfare and other social programs. The centre  also provides referrals to other women's  groups and social agencies.  It costs about $8,000 a month to operate the centre, 70 percent of which comes  from government sources. The rest of the  centre's budget must come from its own  fundraising activities.  The KWRC is currently facing a shortfall of $10,000, or 25 cents per woman and  girl child in Kamloops. Intensive  fundraising activities have been planned  for the next six weeks to ensure the centre  can re-open again. A dance has been  planned for February 26th, and a raffle will  also be held.  "This is truly a desperate situation for  the women of Kamloops," Smith says. "The  centre receives most of its calls from women  who have or are currently suffering from  abuse."  The KWRC is ivelcoming any and all financial contributions. Send donations to the  Kamloops Women's Resources Centre, 7E-750  Cottonwood Ave, Kamloops, BC, V2B 3X2.  Supporters are also asked to contact BC's Minister of Women's Equality Minister Sue  Hammell to tell her about the financial crises  affecting many women's centres in the province. Call Hammell at (250) 387-1223, or toll  free through Inquiry BC if it is long distance  at 660-2421 (from Vancouver) or 1-800-663-  7867 (from the rest of the province).  Sweatshop-free  campuses  Students at the University of Toronto  (UofT) have stepped up their campaign  against the use of sweatshop labour to  manufacture clothes with the UofT logo on  them.  In November, Students Against Sweatshops started handing out leaflets and collecting signatures on petitions, calling for  a code of conduct that will ensure that the  university buys clothing from manufacturers who uphold basic labour standards—  such as a safe workplace, a living wage, no  forced labour or child exploitation, et cetera.  Soon after, the university's administration said it would rework its current licensing agreement policy. However, students  will not be allowed to have input into the  process and they expect the final outcome  will be weak. Students Against Sweatshops  says it will continue its actions, and has  planned a two-day conference on the issue  for the end of February.  Similar protests have also taken place  recently at the American schools Duke  University and Georgetown University. A  31-hour student occupation of Duke's Administration Building in January forced the  school to sign an agreement saying it would  pull out of a 160-school apparel licensing  deal if disclosure of the wherabouts of factories was not included in the contract.  Back in Toronto, the Ontario Public  Interest Research Group (OPIRG) at UofT  is speaking out against a series of Nike ads  that have recently appeared in the school  newspaper, The Varsity. Nike continues to  be a target of protest for unfair labour practices in its factories in developing nations.  [information from Maquila Network  Update, February 1999]  Little Sister's heading  to the Supreme Court  Little Sister's Bookstore is taking its  constitutional challenge against the censorship powers of Canada Customs to the Supreme Court of Canada.  Vancouver's gay, lesbian, bisexual and  transgendered bookstore has been involved  in a long drawn-out court battle with the  border guards. Customs has been regularly  detaining or seizing books, magazines and  videos sent to Little Sister's which it declares are in violation of the Criminal Code  provisions related to "obsenity."  In their last round in 1997, Little Sister's received a partial victory at the BC  Court of Appeal. The appeal court ruled  that Little Sister's had been targetted unfairly by Canada Customs. However, the  appeal court essentially said Customs could  do so if it wanted.  That's why Little Sister's decided to  pursue its case to the highest court in  Canada. The bookstore plans to ask the  Supreme Court to strike down the law that  says customs officials can arbitrarily seize  material at the border because they define  them as "obscene."  Janine Fuller, manager of Little Sister's,  says she is happy the case will be heard by  the Supreme Court. "After almost a decade of legal battles, it's nice to get to the  final stage." She adds she is hopeful that  the Supreme Court will end the discrimination that continues to affect lesbian and  gay bookstores across Canada. (The date  of the appeal has not yet been set.)  Little Sister's will have to raise an estimated $100,000 to take its case to the Supreme  Court. Donations are welcome and are tax deductible. They can be sent to Little Sister's,  1238 Davie St, Vancouver, BC, V6E 1N4. Also  watch out for upcoming fundraising events.  For more information call 669-1753.  Mexican women in  double jeopardy  Recent statistics released by a psychologist in Mexico reveal that violence  against women is leading to an increase in  the number of women landing up in Mexican prisons.  About 500 of the 4,000 women in Mexican prisons are charged with homicide, and  about a quarter of these women are locked  up for killing husbands, lovers and male  assailants who beat and raped them or their  children, says Elena Azola.  Azola interviewed 50 women sentenced for murder at Tepepan Women's  Reformatory in southern Mexico City. She  found that 70 percent of these women had  been abused by their partners or fathers.  Once they entered the prison system, they  were abused further. Azola reports that 60  percent of the women she spoke to were  beaten and abused by police.  Although nearly 5,000 rapes were reported in Mexico City last year, only 387  arrests were made by police. The injustice  women experience through poor police  work is compounded when they are tried  in court for responding to male violence—  judges give women an average of one-third  longer sentences than men.  [information from The New Internationalist, September 1998]  Guatemalan women  kicked out of jobs  Guatemalan workers, mostly women,  arriving at the Phillips-Van Heusen (PVH)  apparel-for-export factory on December 11  were expecting Christmas bonuses before  starting a three-week vacation. Instead,  they found security guards blocking entry  to the Camisas Modernas factory; the workers were handed written notice informing  them that PVH had closed the factory.  In 1997, workers at the Camisas  Modernas factory made national and international news when they won a six-year  struggle to obtain union recognition and a  contract. It was the only maquiladora in  Guatemala that had a collective bargaining  agreement at the time of closure.  The workers' victory was secured by  an international support campaign which  forced the factory owners to abide by a special investigation by Human Rights Watch,  which found the company was under legal obligations to negotiate with workers.  In a statement to the workers, PVH, the  leading US marketer of men's dress shirts,  justified the abrupt closure by claiming that  the loss of a major client resulted in overcapacity in its directly-owned factory. However, PVH's own figures indicate that the  "major" client accounted for less than two  percent of its annual apparel sales. The  company has also said it will continue to  contract work to low-wage, non-union  maqula factories in Guatemala and other  Central American countries.  After a series of roadblocks outside the  factory and meetings with the PVH managers, workers learned that the factory had  violated the workers' collective bargaining  agreement by failing to give advance notice of closure. The workers' protests have  also prompted the federation to which the  PVH union belongs to file a legal action  against the factory owners.  After another worker roadblock and a  march on the Ministry of Labour on January 5th, the Guatemalan Minister of  Economy threatened to suspend the PVH  export licence.  [information from Maquila Network  Update, February 1999]  Phone operators left  in the lurch  In January Bell Canada has announced  it is unloading 2,400 jobs by selling its telephone operator division to US-based  Excell Global Services. Bell has 61 operator centres in 39 cities in Ontario and Quebec.  The announcement could mean the  total number of centres will be cut down to  five, and that the mostly female employees will be forced to take a 40 percent pay  cut and/or relocate.  It's likely not coincidental that these  same employees are involved in a longstanding pay equity dispute with Bell  Canada. The telephone operators are currently before the courts to get their salaries  in line with the higher-paid, mostly male,  telephone technicians. If the operators win  their case, they could be awarded raises of  more than 10 percent, retroactive to 1992.  The total settlement package is estimated  to be around $40 million.  The approximately 20,000 Bell employees involved in the pay equity dispute recently received a boost to their side when  the Federal Court of Appeal ruled that the  Canadian Human Rights Commission  (CHRC) Tribunal could deal with the case.  This is a positive step for the workers because, in another pay equity dispute involving federal public servants, the CHRC ruled  favourably on the employees' behalf.  The company's rationale for "free trading" its operator-services division is that it  is not financially competitive. A representative of the Communications, Energy and  Paperworkers Union, which represents the  workers, says this simply is not true. "We  have the figures to prove it is a profitable  operation, " says Gary Cwitco. He also  accuses Bell of selling what he says is a profitable division in order to sneak out of a  pay-equity dispute.  Bell Canada followed up its announcement a week later with notice that it plans  to challenge the Federal Court of Appeal's  decision in the Supreme Court of Canada.  Women with Disabilities:  We Know What We Need To Be Healthy!  Join us for a panel discussion based  on the results from a recently  completed research study and a  second study in progress on the  health needs of women  with disabilities.  e province of  Women from ai  3C were asked what they  be healthy and what barriers stood  in the way of their good health.  Women interviewed for the study  said "Most of our problems are  caused not by our bodies but by a  ociety that refuses to accommodate  our differences."  omen's Health  aker Series 1999  Tel: 604.875.2633.   Fax: 604.875.3716,  i. (Free admission)  ists, policy makers, care  Event Location: BC Centre of Excellence for Women's Health,  Room E311 (3rd floor) at BC Women's Hospital and Health Centre,  4500 Oak Street, (Gate 3 Entrance at Heather St & 29th Ave),  Vancouver, BC.  Please reserve a seat by calling 875.2633  Refreshments served.  Lower mainland transportation subsidies and  services for persons with disabilities available with two days advance  request. Wheelchair accessible. ^a.  ©  BC Centre of Excellence for Women's Health  E311-4500 Oak St., Vancouver, BC, V6H 3N1  Email: bccewh@bccewh.bc.ca,  Web: www.bccewh.bc.ca s < %SR :  Over 10,000 community social service workers around  B.C. are on the verge of a strike in an effort to end  wage discrimination for women in this sector.  These workers care for and work with the most vulnerable  members of our society, and deliver a huge range of critical  services to families, people with physical or developmental  disabilities, youth and children, women in crisis.  Yet, community social service workers continue to be  underpaid and undervalued.  We urge the government to live up to the promises it has  made to these workers. Send your negotiators back to the  bargaining table with a mandate to end wage  discrimination once and for all.  This  International  Women's Day,  let's end wage  discrimination  for women in  community  social services.  It's time.  BCGEU  B.C. HEALTH SERVICES  DIVISION OF CUPE Feature   Globalization, women and the assault on equality:  What we need is a dose  of democratic Viagra  by Linda McQuaig  Linda McQuaig is a journalist and best-  selling author with a reputation for challenging the establishment. She has written /or The  Globe and Mail, The Toronto Star and  McLean's Magazine. She is currently writing a bi-weekly column for the National Post.  [To those who raise eyebrows at this,  McQuaig says she is not working for  Conrad Black, but against him; she's just  doing it in his newspaper and at his expense.]  She is the author of Shooting the Hippo:  Death by Deficit and Other Canadian  Myths, which traces the real story behind the  deficit and shozvs how social program spending has been falsely blamed. In her most recent  book, The Cult of Impotence: Selling the  Myth of Powerlessness in the Global  Economy, McQuaig refutes the popular notion that governments are poioerless in the  global economy to deliver full employment  and well-funded social programs.  Last February, McQuaig ivas in Vancouver as a guest speaker for Simon Fraser University's Margaret Lowe Benston Lectureship  for Social Justice Issues series. [Benston was  a long-time feminist activist who was instrumental in setting up the Women's Studies Department at SFU.] McQuaig gave two  lectures: one on "Overcoming the Cult of Impotence: How to Make Government Serve the  Public Good," and the other on "Globalization, Women and the Assault on Equality,"  which Kinesis presents below.  It is a great pleasure for me to speak to  a group which is so heavily dominated by  women and students. I like this kind of  audience because I find women and students are very cynical about power. You  tend to be more interested in the message I  have, which is about the importance of  putting limits on the amount of power certain overly powerful groups in society  have. When I speak to groups of men, I find  they're often quite hostile.  One time, I was invited to speak to a  business group. There were hundreds of  men and they were all dressed up. I  thought, "Maybe I'm wrong, maybe business is interested in hearing me tell them  how they should pay more tax." That  wasn't quite the case. In fact, the man introducing me that night began with an apology. He said, "Gentlemen, I'm very sorry  to tell you we have with us here tonight  Linda McQuaig, who is here due to the cancellation of the real speaker, the man you  all came to hear, Conrad Black." [laughter]  Anyway, I'm assuming none of you came  here today hoping to see Conrad Black, so  at least that's a good beginning.  I want to talk about globalization and  the assault on equality and women. When  we talk about the global economy, one of  the things we're really talking about is the  enormous power of financial markets. The  key point I want to make is, [this notion  that financial markets are all-powerful has]  been used to justify an enormous change  in how society operates. Financial markets  are seen as being so powerful these days  because of the mobility of capital. We hear  this all the time: capital can move everywhere. [Those who control capital] can  threaten to withdraw it from countries  Linda McQuaig  which badly need it, and so they can force  those countries to put in place the policies  that they want. These policies include cuts  in the size of government, bigger tax breaks,  caps on inflation. The problem with this is  that it restricts the power of governments  to put in place the kinds of policies ordinary people want, such as full employment  and well-funded social programs.  It's very fashionable these days to argue that globalization is a reality and that  anybody who refuses to accept globalization as we currently see it is refusing to accept reality. You're treated as naive if you  resist the global economy as if you're advocating a return to feudalism or a pre-in-  dustrial society. I think this is definitely a  misreading of the real issue.  The real issue is not: do we live in a  global economy. Of course we do! In fact,  we've been living in a global economy for  more than 100 years, certainly since the laying of the trans-Atlantic cable in the late  1860s. The real issue is: what kind of global economy do we want to live in?  The simple truth is there's not just one  kind of global economy, [even though this]  is the way it's always being presented to  us. If you even take the last 50 years, you'll  find two very different kinds of global  economies, which produced very different  results. From the immediate post-war period until the mid-70s, we had a global  economy that was highly regulated. Markets were regulated in order to defend the  broader public interest. In other words, the  rights of society as a whole were given precedence over the rights of investors.  This was a deliberate policy decision  on the part of the people who constructed  the post-war economic system [in the Western world.] They did this because, above  all, they wanted to avoid a return to the  When it comes to  things women  want, such as  daycare and  equal pay,  suddenly all that  testosterone  leaves the federal  government and it  just says it  absolutely cannot  do these things  disaster experienced during the Great Depression. They wanted to avoid the high  unemployment, the lack of social support  systems. They felt it was absolutely necessary to give governments the power to  manage their own economies.  One aspect of managing your economy  is the ability to control the flow of capital  in and out of your borders. The post-war  architects put capital controls in place, explicitly to prevent the financial markets  from using that threat we hear today, "We're  going to pull our capital out."  The financial elite resisted capital controls all the way, but governments stood up  to them. The result was an enormous increase in the level of equality throughout  the Western world. For the first time in the  history of the modern world, the vast majority of citizens was given access to things  like health care, education and some financial security. In the past, those things were  reserved for the elite; now, they were  broadly available to a large number of citizens.  Maybe it sounds simplistic, but I call  this the "good globalization" period. It was  a global economy run, to a certain extent,  in the public's interest. There were obviously still lots of problems, but the basic  truth is that governments were empowered  in a way we haven't seen since.  This system came apart in the early to  mid-70s, and has been replaced by a global economy which rejects the notion that  governments should be able to control their  economies and the flow of capital. In fact,  one of the basic tenets of today's global  economy is that capital should be allowed  to move freely around the world. What this  has done is exactly what the post-war architects were trying to avoid—it has transferred a lot of power to the financial markets. One of the big impacts of this transfer  has been a dramatic retreat from the egalitarian gains achieved in the post-war years.  This retreat has had an enormous impact on all members of society, but particularly on women. Women have had to bear  the brunt of this [mainly because of] the  demand of the financial elite for cutbacks  in social spending. We've certainly seen that  on a dramatic scale.  Women are, of course, very affected by  [cuts to social programs] because women  tend to be more concentrated at the bottom  end of the economic ladder. Seventy percent of people living in poverty are women  and children. Fifty-seven percent of families living in poverty are led by single mothers. When governments target welfare for  cuts, obviously these cuts affect women.  Even cutbacks to the more "universal" programs, like Medicare, affect women disproportionately. People at the upper end of the  economic ladder can just pay the difference  if health care is cut or if services are delisted  from Medicare coverage.  There's also the flip side to social program cuts. We're always told the cuts are  about deficit reduction. They're not; they're  about tax reduction. It is becoming increasingly clear that governments cut social programs so deeply in order to deliver the tax  cuts the business community demands.  The benefits of tax cuts go mostly to  men because men are more concentrated  at the upper end of the income scale. Tax  cuts disproportionately favour men... I'll  give you one quick illustration of this.  In Ontario, there was a 30 percent  across the board cut in provincial income  tax. Now "across the board" sounds as  though everybody [benefits equally] However, in fact, the bottom 10 percent of income earners—that is, those earning  $15,000 or less, many of whom are  women—saved $160 on average. In contrast, for the top one percent of income earners—who are almost exclusively male—the  average tax saving was $15,540.  Another aspect of the transfer of power  from governments to the financial elite is  that it weakens the potential political power  of women. Government, for all its flaws, is  really the only vehicle the public has for  see MCQUAIG next page  MARCH 1999 Feature  from MCQUAIG previous page  political power. Financial markets are not  only completely undemocratic in the way  they operate, they're also completely  dominated by the big financial players,  who all happen to be male.  Transferring power to the financial elite  disempowers women and limits the potentially positive role women can play in shaping public policy. There is somewhat of a  gender difference in terms of political issues. An interesting study done on the gender gap argues that women are more cynical about the economic system that prevails,  and that they're less likely to buy into the  tenets of free market capitalism. This study  shows that women are less likely to accept  notions that poor people are poor because  they deserve it, or that when the rich do  well, we all do well. Maybe this is because  of personal experience.  This kind of cynicism is really healthy,  because as a society we have been sold a  real bill of goods about the economic system we have today. Our free-market system is destructive and self-defeating in the  sense that we focus more on the ultimate  goal of economic growth than on more reasonable goals like economic and social well-  being.  A perfect example of this is that our  society measures "progress" by looking at  the growth of the Gross National Product  (GNP). The GNP is a silly measure; it's just  the sum of economic activity. That means  things like environmental disasters which  cost huge amounts to clean and the tainted  blood fiasco get added into Canada's GNP.  Clearly though, none of us are better off  because we've had the tainted blood scandal or an environmental disaster.  The business and financial world is a  very macho culture. It is so obsessed with  this notion of "potency," that it's almost like  it's taken an overdose of Viagra or something. It's also true that governments act  extremely macho when it comes to delivering what the financial and business interests want. They wanted low inflation so  Since 1995, we've seen the deepest cuts  [to social program spending] since the end  of World War II. We're now in a situation  where we have the lowest level of social  spending, as a proportion of the overall  economy, since the late-40s.  The cuts were sold to us as being necessary because of the deficit. I would argue that [the deficit] was greatly exaggerated. The deficit was never the threat people said it was. Even if you accepted that  the deficit was such a serious problem that  required greatly cutting back on social  spending, the truth is the deficit is now  gone. In fact, the federal government is generating huge surpluses—the surplus is expected to be $17 billion by next year.  You would think that we now have the  freedom to take that $17 billion and put it  back into social programs, to rebuild the  programs we only reluctantly agreed to see  cut back because we thought our backs  were to the wall. Well, any serious reinvestment into social programs has actually been  quietly pushed off the table by the people  who are controlling the debate: the financial and corporate interests.  I'll give you one example to illustrate  what I mean by this. The CD Howe Institute, [a right-wing think-tank,] put out a  report just before Christmas which responded to the question, "What should be  done with the surplus?" They noted how  huge this surplus was getting and they tried  to make it look as if they were considering  all possible options. They laid out three,  and every single one of them involved restricting social program spending to a very  low level. Even their most "left-wing" options wouldn't see the level of real spending per person on social programs return  to what it was in 1995 until the year 2046.  They rejected this as too extreme.  The CD Howe Institute's preferred  option would have real spending returned  to its 1995 level, when? Never! This was  the option they preferred, and that was their  middle option. Wait 'til you hear their right-  wing option... It would see real spending  cut every year into the future. The CD  If you can track the movement of money,  you can monitor it and you can control it,  if you wanted to.  the federal government set a target of keeping inflation below three percent. (They actually exceeded their own targets.) Similarly with the deficit, the financial markets  wanted it down, so [federal Finance Minister] Paul Martin said he'd eliminate the  deficit come hell or high water. (He then  did it two years ahead of his own schedule.)  However, when it comes to things ordinary people want—such as social programs and full employment—and things  women in particular want—such as daycare and equal pay—suddenly all that testosterone leaves the federal government  and it just says it absolutely cannot do these  things. The government refuses to set targets for any of these social goals, such as  poverty reduction.  I think the extent of the cuts to social  programs has not fully been appreciated.  There's a tendency [given that the Liberal  government has suggested it will restore some  funding to social programs, now that it has the  deficit under control] to believe that the worst  is over and we're on our way back. We're a  long way from being on our way back.  Howe Institute, which is funded by Bay  Street [the Canadian equivalent to Wall  Street] didn't endorse this option (but said  it had some merit) because they felt that  Canadians would be more comfortable  with the middle "compromise" option.  In case this sounds like the extremist  views of a couple of cranks on Bay Street,  let's just look at where Paul Martin fits in  this framework. He's already indicated  what his plans are for the next federal  budget [which was announced February  16, one week after McQuaig's talks in Vancouver] Martin's proposed plan would see  Canada returning to the 1995 real spending per person level in the distant half of  the next century.  I realize I've painted a depressing picture here, and I don't mean to do that entirely. I certainly don't want to give you the  impression that I think all this is inevitable  and that this is the way it simply has to be  in the global economy. I certainly don't feel  that. We had a good kind of globalization  before it was replaced by this bad kind of  globalization. So, why can't we have good  globalization now?  If you listen to the conventional arguments, they say, "We can't because technology has changed everything." We now have  computers and with the computers, money  can move around the world quickly—in a  flash of an eye it's halfway across the world.  How could governments possibly control  the movement of capital given this situation?  The interesting thing about that argument is it only tells half the story about the  computer revolution. It's true computers  sic example of an attempt to transfer more  power to the financial elite. The public, fortunately, got activated and there were all  sorts of grassroots organizing in Canada,  the US and France. As a result, governments felt scared about moving forward on  the MAI.  I would argue the exact same thing  happened with the bank mergers [being  proposed between the Royal Bank and the  Bank of Montreal, and the Toronto Dominion Bank and CIBC] When those mergers  The global economy has  not made governments powerless;  governments have made governments  powerless.  allow us to move money around the world  more quickly than ever before, but the flip  side is that computers also give us enormous power to record and track the movement of money. If you can track the movement of money, you can monitor it and you  can control it, if you wanted to. That's the  key point.  I would argue that what has changed  between the old good globalization and the  new bad globalization periods is not so  much a consequence of the technological  revolution. What has changed is the political willingness of governments to stand up  to financial markets.  I want to make the point that financial  markets seem more powerful these days  because we've handed power over to them  through things like the Free Trade Agreement, NAFTA (the North American Free  Trade Agreement,) and through the removal of capital controls. Basically, we've  empowered the financial markets. The global economy has not made governments  powerless; governments have made governments powerless.  We don't need those treaties; we can  rip them up. Now that's a huge political  issue, but my point is that there is nothing  intrinsic to the nature of the global  economy which requires us to sign those  types of treaties. I would further argue that,  even given how bad the global economy  we currently live in is, governments are not  nearly as powerless as they let on. In fact,  they tend to use this idea of powerlessness  as an excuse for not doing the things the  public wants. As long as the public buys  this notion of powerlessness, it lets governments of the hook.  In the post-war period—the period of  good globalization—the public was very  demanding of government. The public held  governments accountable. They wanted  full employment and they wanted social  programs. When the governments didn't  deliver those things, they got kicked out of  office.  I would argue that the public still  wants those things today, but that we've  bought into the idea that governments can  no longer deliver on them. When governments fail to deliver, we don't kick them  out of office—that leaves governments free  to serve the financial elite.  When the public is mobilized around  an issue, when the public cares about an  issue, when it's involved, when it's activated, the financial elite doesn't always get  its way. Governments are much more inclined to listen.  If that sounds naive, just look at [the  campaign against] the MAI (Multilateral  Agreement on Investments.) This is a clas-  were announced, they seemed like a fait  accompli. The bank chairmen were pretty  certain the public would buy the argument  that this is what they had to do to be "competitive" in the global economy. This is the  way it seemed at the beginning, but the  public didn't buy into it. The public's anger became quite clear and eventually Paul  Martin did the numbers. Martin wants to  be prime minister, and he recognized that  he could not go through with the bank  mergers and become prime minister.  It struck me as ironic that Martin was  attacked in the press, and particularly in  the business press, as a political opportunist: "He just wants to be prime minister." I  thought, "Is there something wrong with  that? Isn't that how democracy's supposed  to work? You do what the people want." In  fact, he should try it again sometime.  I would argue that Paul Martin would  have loved to have approved the mergers  to please the bank chairmen and have them  on-side for his leadership bid. He just realized that there was no way he could be  prime minister if he did that; the public  wouldn't go for it.  The obstacles that stand in our path for  achieving a more egalitarian society—a society where women, and people in general,  are more empowered—are not technology  or globalization. Rather, the obstacles are  the same old obstacles we've always faced:  the enormous power of the financial elite  and its absolute determination to block anything that restricts its power.  The good thing is that we've overcome  these obstacles before, and we can do it  again. In terms of Viagra and all the money  that's going into researching and promoting it... it seems like a waste that we're doing all this to improve the potency of an  already very potent group. What we really  need is some democratic Viagra.  Thanks to Sally Stevenson and Amal Rana for  transcribing, and to Rana and Monica K. Rasi  for help in editing.  fuiMx.uiiwAMmuwiuwm,  Alcohol and Drug  Information & Referral  Outside Lower Mainland  Victims Information Line  660-9382  1-800-663-1441  1-888-795-6111  1-800-563-0808  8-606-LIVE (5483)  SIS Feature  Quilting for social and political change:  All people are artists  by Sima Elizabeth Shefrin as told to  Kelly Haydon   Fabric arts have long been used around the  world to make visible social and political statements. For example, in November 1994 women  in rural areas in Cambodia started weaving together a Ribbon of Hope and Peace. The Ribbon was brought to Beijing, China for the 4th  World Conference on Women in September  1995. There, women attending the NGO Forum continued to create and add pieces to what  became a 10-kilometre long banner. The Ribbon was paraded through the "streets" of the  forum site, then draped along the Great Wall  of China.  Sima Elizabeth Shefrin is a fabric artist  living in Vancouver who has been involved in  social and political activism for more than 25  years. More recently, she has been teaching quilt  making workshops and facilitating the creation  of a Middle East Peace Quilt. Kinesis' resident  painter and health writer Kelly Haydon had the  chance to talk to Shefrin about the use of fabric  arts for political expression.  Kelly Haydon: Can you give us a bit of  history of the use of fabric arts for social  and political activism?  Sima Elizabeth Shefrin :7here are lots of  ways fabric's been used in that way. Historically many North American quilters  used quilts to make political and social  statements, as well as personal ones. There  is still a misconception that quilting uses  onlv standard patterns.  One of the stories 1 like to tell is found  in a book called Artists in Aprons by Kurt  Dewhurst and Betty and Marsha  MacDowell. The story is about a quilt made  in the 1800s by Elizabeth Rosebu.y  Mitchell—the quilt had a graveyard in the  centre and was bordered with coffins. Every  time someone in Mitchell's family died, she  unpicked a coffin from the border, embroidered the name of the person who had died  on it, and stitched it down in the graveyard.  This is one example of someone who was  probably very isolated and used the quilt  to make a statement about her life.  Many traditional quilting patterns also  had subtle political and social messages in  them. I've just been reading about how  during slavery in the United States, secret  messages were incorporated into quilts  made by African American women, which  were instructions for the Underground Railroad [see sidebar page 14. J  In other parts of the world also, people have used fabric to put across impor-  ries of what was happening in their country. They told stories of their daily lives—of  hunger, poverty, arrests, the tanks, the soldiers, and of resistance.  These women taught themselves and  worked with rags or whatever they could  find to make their statements. The tapestries  were smuggled out of the country, in some  cases at great risk, and sent all around the  world to educate people. This was one of  the big ways in which the rest of the world  learnt about what was going on in Chile.  The Names Quilt is another example—  it's the memorial quilt for people who have  died of AIDS. It's not a women's project, but  it comes out of a women's traditional  artform. The Names Quilt inspired a lot of  education not just around AIDS but around  gay rights in general. It gave people a place  to be compassionate toward people who  were dying and it was instrumental in  changing attitudes towards homosexuality.  Another project is the Life Quilt for  Breast Cancer, started by a Vancouver  woman named Judy Reimer. When she was  diagnosed with breast cancer she decided,  "If I die tomorrow I want my children to be  able to say, 'My mom had cancer, but it didn't  beat her'." The center panels of the three life  quilts are painted by Coquitlam artist Gay  Mitchell, and they show a clearcut forest,  new life in the clearcut, and reforestation.  All around the painted area are individual  squares quilted by people who have some  personal connection with breast cancer.  Another example of using fabric for social change are the t-shirts against violence  against women: the Clothesline Project. The  shirts are colour-coded; women work on a  certain coloured shirt, depending on their  experience, to tell their story. The t-shirts are  then hung on a clothesline. It's an international project where women use fabric'to  speak about their experiences of male violence, and ultimately to stop the violence  from happening again.  During the peace movement, people got  really creative—a woman in the States  named Justine Merritt did a project called a  Ribbon Round the Pentagon, where she had  people make banners about what they  couldn't bear to lose in a nuclear war. She  actually met her goal oi: getting enough banners to tie a ribbon around the Pentagon.  In Greenham Common in England,  which was an American cruise-missile base,  the women in the peace movement camped  out around the base for four years. They did  wonderful things with fabric—at one  point, they made a giant serpent and  wove its tail in and out of the fence of the  base, four-and-a-half miles long. It was  huge.  The women used costumes too.  Wearing particular clothing in a demonstration is another way people use fabric  for social change. There was one action  they did at Greenham Common where  they went into the base dressed as sma!  furry animals and had a picnic. They did  wonderful, creative things there.  And then there are all the different  political parade banners, just looking at  our own marches and demonstrations in  Vancouver. It's a different way of reaching people, more expressive and more accessible; it moves people in a  different way.  Haydon: Do you think  political fabric arts moves  more people to take action  than just words?  Shefrin: I think it makes  people think in a different  way. The project I'm doing  right now is organizing a  Middle East Peace Quilt. I've  asked people to make  squares about what their vision is of peace in the Middle  East. Some of the squares  come by mail, but often the  squares are made in the  workshops I do with people.  I'm watching the process all the time,  and trying to assess if it is effective and if  it makes a difference. What I see is that  when someone makes a square for the  quilt, they're taking some moral responsibility because they're taking a position  in their own mind. Some of the people  who make the quilt squares wouldn't go  out and demonstrate, they might not have  figured out a position, or they might be  confused about what's happening in the  Middle East.  By making the square, the;  ing a position that they weren't  taking before. That's the thing  about the fabric project: vou  reach a whole base of people  who wouldn't consider themselves political. They wouldn't  go out and demonstrate or  speak publicly or even write  letters. But the next time, with  the quilt square in mind, perhaps they would sav to themselves, "Well, I've made this  quilt square, and here's this petition; I'm going to give this issue some real thought and consider signing it."  Haydon: Does fabric art  lend itself better to social/political action than other mediums?  Shefrin: That's a bit hard to  answer, but personally I think that the answer is yes. Painting and drawing and  sculpture are embedded in Western European patriarchal art history, and they  come directly out of that tradition. It can  photo credits: top four quilts by Valerie  Pudsey; bottom quilt by Brenda Hemsing  see QUILTING page 14  MARCH 1999  knSis k i n e s i <  Celebrating   25  Years  illustration by Peggy Lariviere Feature  from QUILTING page 11  We Demand Work  :,,.,,;,:;:;:;:;:;  W'' ~£  *  slides and in the afternoon the participants  get to make a quilt square on the issue closest to their hearts. They're really fun.  Lately, I've been doing more  workshops for the Middle East  Peace Quilt, which are similar: I  show slides of projects where fabric has been used for social change  and videos about the Middle East.  I don't teach technique; I just get  out the fabric and the participants  create their own quilt squares.  I believe all people are artists  or start out as artists, but the school  system has made it harder for us  to see that. People sometimes  come into the workshop with the  belief that they can't hold a needle, they can't draw a straight line  and they come out with the most beautiful  pieces. It's wonderful to see.  Haydon: So what is the response of people to the quilts? Do people go off and do  their own projects, or perhaps join other  projects?  Shefrin: They might; I assume they do.  Haydon: Your workshops allow people  to do their own individual projects, but the  Middle East Peace Quilt is different in that  it is a collective project...  Shefrin: The peace quilt has about 165  squares and I'm starting to put it together.  There are still squares coming in. I'm doing workshops and connecting with lots of  different kinds of people. The quilt's going to be exhibited at the Roundhouse  Community Centre in September; the  opening is on September 16th. It'll also be  | University of Victoria in February  2000. It's designed to be a focus  for peace education and dialogue, bringing communities together.  Haydon: What about your  own quilts that you've made over  the years? Do you come from an  arts background?  Shefrin: I've always worked  with fabric. I'm self-trained as an  artist; I didn't go to art school. I  come from a family of sewers: my  mother made our clothes,  slipcovers, drapes. One of my  aunts was a quiltmaker, another was a dressmaker, and  my uncle was a tailor. Sewing  was something which I saw all  the time in my family.  Haydon: What was your  first political quilt?  Shefrin: Before I started quilting, I did  tapestry weaving for awhile. Those were  the days when we first talked about how  the personal is political. I'd go and see a  folk singer who inspired me and I'd come  home and do a picture of her. Or I'd do a  piece of a man with a baby, which was an  unusual image 25 years ago. I once did a  piece called, "Changing the poopy baby." I  didn't think of it as wages for housework  but it's the same issue. All the images I  made were political—a woman giving  birth, a woman nursing—they were all political statements.  Haydon: Have you made quilts for specific events?  Shefrin: Around 1984,1 started making  quilts about Jewish themes, and that's  mostly what I've been doing since then. I  describe myself as a Jewish activist—I work  against anti-semitism, racism and for peace  in the Middle East. All those things are very  integrated for me. My artwork is one way  that integration happens.  I do pieces on garment workers—there  were a large number of Jewish garment  workers early in the century who were active in the labour movement. It's indirectly  through the political organizing which  those people did that I have the luxury of  using fabric as an artform. I did pictures of  them as a tribute, to acknowledge that connection.  I've done work on the Holocaust and  on Jewish history, on holidays and celebrations. A lot of my pieces are Jewish pride  pieces. I also do pieces about what's happening in the Middle East. I'm particularly  interested in the hopeful parts, how people are connecting and working together.  There's a substantial grassroots Middle East  peace movement over there and in North  America. This is what we never hear.  Certainly there are unacceptable things  happening in Israel, like the demolition of  Palestinian houses by the Israeli government. Terrorism is also still a problem. But  some Jews and some Palestinians are working very hard to make connections with  each other. For example, Neve Shalom/  Wahat al Salam is an Arab and Jewish community, an intentional community that has  been in existence for almost 30 years. They  run a bi-cultural, bilingual elementary  school where they celebrate Muslim, Jewish and Christian holidays. They run a  peace school as well. They've raised a generation of children.  There are many projects and individual  people who are working hard to make con  nections. I try to learn more about that and  to get the information out there by using  the peace quilt.  I think what happens in the Middle  East is that it looks so discouraging and  hopeless. I think people get confused: it  looks like you either have to support the  Palestinians or support the Jews. The stories of both people are important to hear,  and you don't need to make that choice—  supporting the Middle East in the best way  is to support the peace process, helping  people come together.  I use my artwork in a lot of different  ways: I use it in workshops against  anti-Semitism. I always put my artwork on  the walls, to share with others, to tell my  stories. That's an invaluable part of the  workshops. I do shows and I sell pieces but  that's not an important focus. I'm much  happier when the work is being used. It's a  way to share a part of myself. Sometimes  people make a distinction between quilts  hung on the wall and quilts used as blankets. I don't think that's a important distinction.  Haydon: Anything else you've been doing?  Shefrin: Last year I needed a break and  I wanted to do some artwork that was  lighter. I was going to a life drawing group  at the time so I created a series in fabric of  nude women. They're fun and yet, as I think  about it, they are also political. We still don't  get a lot of opportunities to see images of  our bodies without a sexual connotation.  Mine are simply women with no clothes on.  Some of them are humourous; I had a good  time doing them.  Elizabeth Shefrin will be offering quilt  making workshops at the Roundhouse Community Centre on May 15 from 9:30am to  noon, and on May 31 from 6:30 to 9:30pm.  Admission is free. Participants are asked to  contribute a $5 donation if they submit a square  for the Middle East Peace Quilt. To register for  the workshops, call the Roundhouse at (604)  713-1800. To Book a workshop on "Stitching for Social Change" or on "Eliminating  Anti-Semitism artform" (for both Jews and  non-Jews) or to find out more about the  Middle East Peace Quilt, call Shefrin at  (604) 734-9395.  Thanks to Lin Khng for transcribing this interview.  photo credits: top two quilts by Valerie  Pudsey; bottom two quilts by Brenda  Hemsing  Quilts and the Underground Railroad  be more of a challenge to use them differently.  Fabric art not only comes out of many  traditions, it's also an artform that's been  marginalized, and so there is a little more  freedom that way. The boundaries aren't  quite so fixed.  Haydon: You've been doing workshops  on fabric arts and political activism. Can  you talk about them?  Shefrin: I do a workshop called "Stitching for Social Change: The Use of Fabric to  Build a Better World." I gave the first one  in the summer of 1997 at the Community  Development Institute, and I've done it several times since. In the morning we look at  14  KINESIS Feature  Immigration legislation in Canada:  Racist restructuring  by Sunera Thobani  The legislation that sits on the books in  Canada concerning immigrants and refugees  was enacted in 1978. Since then, there have  been more than 30 policy changes made. Now,  the Liberal government is gearing up to totally revamp Canada's Immigration and Refugee Act.  In November 1997, a Legislative Review  Advisory Group (LRAG), commissioned by the  Immigration Department, issued its recommendations for changes in a report called, "Not  Just Numbers." Lucienne Robillard, the minister of citizenship and immigration, responded  to the release of the report with cross-Canada  consultations. Many women's and refugee  groups panned the proposals.  This past January, the Immigration Department put out its own document outlining the Liberal government's proposed direction for legislative change. (The Liberal government also introduced a new Citizenship  Act in December, which is currently before the  House of Commons.) The feds hope to have a  new Immigration and Refugee Act passed by  the end of the year.  Robillard has set in motion a legislative  review process, and consultations should take  place this summer. Comments must be received by the Legislative Review Secretariat by  March 31 to be considered in the developing of  new legislation. [To submit comments, see  end of article.]  At a recent forum on "Race, Gender and  Ethnicity" in Burnaby, BC, Sunera Thobani,  the Ruth Wynn Woodward Chair of Women's  Studies at Simon Fraser University, challenged the agenda behind the federal government's proposed changes to immigration  policy. The day-long forum was organized by  the Burnaby Multicultural Society and the  SFU's Women's Studies Department. Below,  Kinesis presents Thobani's analysis expressed  at the forum.  The restructuring of Canada's immigration program is central to the Liberal  government's whole restructuring of Canadian society. When the Liberal Party came  to power in 1993, the first thing it did was  announce major reviews of two policy areas: social security and immigration. Since  1994 when the Liberal government initiated  a round of public consultations on the immigration and refugee legislation, it has  implemented a number of policy changes.  There are two contending goals which  have always been central to Canadian immigration policy. The first goal is to preserve the social and cultural characteristics  of the nation—that is, to "keep it white."  The second goal is to ensure there is enough  labour to meet market demands.  The argument I make is that the Liberal government is trying to restrict the  ability of people, and in particular women,  from "third world" countries to come to  Canada as permanent residents or landed  immigrants—that is, as people who can  later make claims to Canadian citizenship.  At the same time, we are seeing a tremendous expansion in the temporary migrant  workers' program, where people, particularly from the "third world," are being allowed in to fill jobs "Canadians" don't want  to do, without having the right to later  claim Canadian citizenship.  Immigrant women—and I'm referring  to "immigrant" in the racialized way employed by the state—have been set up as a  threat to the interests of the nation. The  Canadian government is appealing to  "real" Canadians—that is, those already  with citizenship—to preserve the cultural,  social and linguistic characteristics of the  nation. These are defined as bilingual and  bicultural. Immigrants who do not fit that  bill are portrayed as eroding the national  identity and cultural cohesion of the country... [unless they  have enough money wm^mimmmimmmmimm^m  to make a significant  "contribution" to  the        Canadian  economy]  An example of  how the Liberal  government is promoting its restrictive immigration  agenda are its proposed changes to  the family-class  and the independent immigrant categories. The way  the immigration  program is structured today, most  immigrants come  in either under the  independent category, which is  supposed to be  based on selection  criteria looking at  individual occupation, education  and skill levels, or  the family-class  category, which is  supposed to allow  Canadian citizens  and permanent wmmmmmmmm——m——^m  residents to sponsor members of their family. In the family-  class category, education and job and skill  levels are not supposed to be in the criteria  for acceptance.  Through this separation of immigrant  categories, a gendering takes place. People  who come in under the independent category are defined as economic actors who  make economic contributions to the country, and are therefore welcomed. These  characteristics are identified as "masculine"  in patriarchal societies.  On the other hand, the family-class  category reflects, even in its very naming,  "feminine" characteristics. People who  come in under this category are viewed as  not making economic contributions, and  are only allowed in because of family relationships. Most people who come in under  the family-class are women. This particular framing sets immigrant women up as  "burdens" on the nation. It erases all the  contributions these women make, all of the  unpaid work they do. Their contributions  to the Canadian economy are rendered invisible.  The changes proposed to the family-  class category would increase the sponsor-  It is important  for women's  organizations to  argue strongly  against closing off  immigration in  such ways that  restrict people  from the  "third world"  from coming to  Canada as  permanent  residents or landed  immigrants.  ship criteria and make sponsorship agreements stricter. Sponsors would be required  to take care of family-class immigrants for  10 years.  This shows that unequal citizenship  rights are structured into Canada's policies.  In three years, family-class immigrants can  apply to become Canadian citizens, but  they have to wait 10 years before they can  make any claims for social assistance, social housing, or other social programs. Immigrant women coming in under the family-class category  ^^^^^^^^^^^^^ are left dependent  on their sponsors  in ways that increase patriarchal  power—the majority of sponsors are  male—and     increase  women's  vulnerability  to  abuse   and   violence.  I want to make  it clear that not all  sponsors abuse  family-class  women. However,  it must be acknowledged that  the state's policies  create conditions  that increase the  potential for abuse  and violence  against women.  The sponsorship agreement  and criteria are  clearly class-based:  it is easier for  wealthy people to  show they can  sponsor family  members. We see  ■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■ the gap between  rich people and  poor people increasing in this country—  those at the lower end of the economic scale  will find it harder to live up to the new  sponsorship criteria.  The Canadian government has also  restructured the Citizenship Act to narrow  the grounds upon which citizenship can be  claimed. This leaves immigrant women  and migrant women workers more vulnerable, as claiming citizenship is a condition  to being able to claim equality rights in  Canada. Those of us who work for different organizations must be aware of how  immigration and citizenship policies increase gender, racial and class divisions in  society.  The Immigration Department plans to  hold consultations on new legislative proposals [which should be drafted by late  Spring]. It is important for women's organizations to argue strongly against closing off  immigration in such ways that restrict people from the "third world" from coming to  Canada as permanent residents or landed  immigrants. We need to stand up to this  racist treatment of people.  This is much more than being tolerant  of immigrants and refugees or respectful  of people from different cultures. This is an  acknowledgement that what the Canadian  government is doing through its promotion  of the "free trade" agenda is creating the  conditions for increased migration globally.  The "free trade" policies which give corporations the freedom to move from one  country to another without being subject  to environmental laws or safety and wage  standards are destroying environments and  people's livelihoods in many parts of the  world.  The Canadian state bears a responsibility for increasing this global migration.  But what has been its response? Closing off  Canada's borders.  The Vancouver Status of Women is calling together an Ad Hoc Women's Coalition on  Immigration and Refugee Issues. Immigrant  and refugee women, women working as advocates, lawyers and researchers, and women interested in better understanding the issues are  invited to be part of this discussion and working group. The first Coalition meeting is on  March 3rd at 6:00pm at the VSW office, 309-  877 E. Hastings St. Among the topics for discussion will be the proposed changes to the Immigration and Refugee Act and the Citizenship Act, strategies for affecting legislative  changes that best meet the interests of women,  and the threat to the well-being of women and  other socially and politically marginalized communities from the conservatizing of society by  the federal government through its immigration policies. For more information or to confirm attendance, call (604) 255-6554. The meeting is a potluck; bring something to share if  you can.  For more information on the proposed  changes to Canada's immigration and refugee  legislation, visit the Department of Citizenship  and Immigration's website at http://  cicnet.ci.gc.ca. To submit comments to the Legislative Review Secretariat, send them to:  Narano Building, 10th Floor, 360 Laurier Ave  West, Ottawa, Ontario, K1A 111; fax: (613)  946-0581; email: legrev@istar.ca.  Thanks to Lin Khng for transcribing this  speech.  WOMEN  IN  PRINT  BOOKS & OTHER MEDIA  3566 West 4th Avenue  Discounts/or  book clubs  Special orders  welcome  f  f    W  North Shore  Women's Centre  CELEBRATING INTERNATIONAL  WOMEN'S DAY  March 5th 10:30-12:30  Video Presentation by IDERA  For more information, please call 984-6009,  Fax: 980-4661, E-mail: nswc©direct.ca,  944 West 16th Street, North Vancouver, B.C. V7P 1K5 Arts  Rita Wong's monkeypuzzle:  Personal flows to political  by Denise Tang  MONKEYPUZZLE  by Rita Wong, Press Gang Publishers,  Vancouver, BC, 1998  I cannot begin writing this book review  without making a confession. It has been a  long time since I picked up a book of poetry. You have to bear with me and follow  my reasoning: I have the habit of reading  poems one poem a sitting, even if they are  all within a collection by a single poet. This  leaves me feeling abandoned, emotionally  disrupted, and, at certain times, politically  disoriented.  In order to avoid such an, for the most  part, unreasonable excuse for not doing this  review, I put aside an afternoon to read Rita  Wong's first published collection  monkeypuzzle.  Her words led me through one corridor after another, lined with snapshots of  historical moments and human portraits.  Her poems urge you to challenge everyday  assumptions in our problematic environments.  Wong offers images ranging from her  work days in a family-run grocery store as  an eight-year old to a nine-hour bus ride  through the Gansu province in western  China. We are reminded of Canada's Chinese Exclusion Act in "for kwong lee taitai,  who landed in victoria the year of the monkey, 1860," the capitalistic garment industry in "denim blues," and the Tienanmen  Square massacre in "excerpts from a diary of  resistance." But just before one's blood boils  over at the injustices and oppression, Wong  etches in your thought canvas images of  strong women.  In response to the historical records of  China Annie's escape from her owner in  Idaho to marry Ah Guan, Wong writes in  the poem, "for annie:"  i am not annie, i am  of annie & i want it  back,   my  eyes,   my  lips, my fingers, my  breasts, my rumbling  stomach, all mine, my  blood  thundering to deafen  an army, jab of my in-  si stent   elbow,   my  pulse  beats defiance: i am  I can feel my pulse beating strong, my fierce eyes  widening, my fists clasping  in readiness to fend for myself and the causes that my  feminist self believes in.  Wong's words demand direct action aimed at exposing Canada's racist institutional immigration policies  and practices. If political  awareness is what this collection asks of us, then we  must respond by equally balancing our thoughts with actions.  The flow and connections between  Wong's personal memories and different  oppressive acts of governments are presented in four sections: memory palate,  monkeypuzzle, transidual, and passion  rampant in small secret rooms.  In the poem titled "memory palate,"  the conflict between English and Cantonese is aptly put:  this bittersweet taste:  words we no longer have  replaced by ones we no longer  want  the roof of my mouth hard  with the sound of the mundane  It is as if the demands of the English  language deposit bitter aftertastes in our  mouths, and leave our tongues only able  to reiterate frequencies of a monotonous  tone.  Fluency of the English language creates  many doubts around our cultural locations  as immigrants, feminists and activists. The  words we learn to utter are the same syllables, demarcating our bodies and our struggles. As we catch ourselves biting our  tongues and swallowing our words, in a  desperate attempt to reject the language in  which many of us only know to speak, we  create within ourselves a space of resistance  towards the pervasiveness of English.  Through the poems in monkeypuzzle,  Wong uses the English language against itself, making new words along the way to  alert us to the multiple possibilities of a language revolution.  Political struggles are brought to the  forefront revolution through poems such as,  "down south peachwomen: minimum  wage pickers" and "reading my dinner."  Working-class and poor Asian immigrants  are coerced into exploitative labour prac  tices, while the state gets to define who-is-  worth-what.  There is an old Chinese saying that  when words of insincerity and of a sarcastic nature are spoken, we cannot hear because we do not agree with what is said. I  have not heard clearly for a while. Have  you?  The poet asks the question:  can we catch a rhythm catch a  train     c'mon can we  escape the pesticide curse  I can feel the pain of being in a larger  scheme and trapped within its web of comforts and luxuries. I make note of my participation in giving excuses and crossed-  arm poses. In "reading my dinner," Wong  gives us a glimpse of her own survival tactic:  only intuition at the back  of my throat says  a loose hand is faster  than a tight one  only laughing can i  survive the violence  of everyday transactions  If you have gotten the impression that  monkeypuzzle is a book solely about social  criticism and politics, then I have failed  miserably in reviewing it. In my aim to finish reading the first three sections in one  afternoon sitting, I went through varied  emotions and imagined Wong's travels  through endless landscapes.  Selfishly, I saved the last section on  "passion rampant in small secret rooms"  for another day of reading. I was waiting  for the right moment to savour these poems.  I made a mistake in waiting...  Wong flaunts elements of strength, love  and sensual naughtiness throughout these  poems in mischievous sayings, flirtatious  moments and (I have to say this) political  acts.  Allow me to give you a selection of  lines randomly taken from the poem "just  one more love poem blossoming in a lilac  spring:  like an endless fall in dreams...  like a wet tongue in a surprised ear...  like food not bombs for everyone on earth...  like hearing aretha franklin  sing "Respect" live...  like a burning bush...  like cannons exploding into tulips...  like fire hydrants released...  The entire poem is composed of 38  lines evoking images of random action,  startling sounds and unpredictable consequences. It is a humorous jab at love itself.  Each sentence challenges our assumption  of what you and I see as passion. The  "cheesiness-trap" is out of bounds for  Wong.  Following the lines, my fingers  snapped, my feet tapping to an imaginary  hip-hop groove track. These words do not  lie silently on the page.  In her final poem, "somniloquy," Wong  appeals to the reader's sense of passionate  longing. It is not a typical poem full of tragically unfulfilled desires. By stark contrast,  the poem calls for familiar touches, sweet  smells and knowing tongues:  when a lover appears in your  dreams with an ankle red-  string-tied to yours, you will  know this is the one. ripple  on still waters hums electric  pull, poesy of nightblack  space, the ache you know better than yourself.  I trip over myself, one time too many,  my cluttered words cannot articulate desire, not for what I want and not of you who  I want. Like a rhythmical string of notes  with resonating sounds, Wong's words  mark the tonality of my feminist consciousness. Are you up for it?  Denise Tang has a secret desire to be a kick-ass  dj.  L>4^\P>4t  It's a party  to celebrate the publication of  Letters to Maggie  by Helen Potrebenko  TO IAGGE  Thursday, March 18  7 to 9:30 pm, Wise Hall,  1882 Adanac Street in Vancouver.  Helen Pofcebenko  Reading by the author & special  performance by the Euphoniously  Feminist & Non-Performing Quintet.  Books and CDs for sale.  Everyone welcome! Arts  Marusya Bociurkiw's Nancy Drew & the  Mystery of the Haunted Body:  With magnifying  glass in hand...  by leanne Johnson  Written and directed by Vancouver  based media-artisf, author and academic  Marusya Bociurkiw, Nancy Drew & the  Mystery of Ihe Haunted Body is a "comedy about incest, freud and Recovered  Memory." Bociurkiw's 45-minute video  was filmed in Vancouver and edited at  the Western front, which explains the  appearance of some of Vancouver's most  notable artists. Nancy Drew had its world  (Vancouver) premiere at the Blinding  Light Cinema in the start of February.  I asked Bociurkiw a little about her  process in making the film. She told me  that four years ago, she had an idea to  write a screenplay about incest and incest survivors. Bociurkiw based her video  on the Nancy Drew novels (which began  production in the 1930s and are still being printed), but says that it was equally  inspired by the Nancy Clue mysteries (a  racy lesbian series).  Bociurkiw was intrigued with the incest subtext of the Nancy Clue series,  which was evident in the suffocating relationship between Nancy and her father in the original stories. Over the  years, she read and heard her share of  incest survivor stories. She felt that  these stories failed to communicate  themselves to a large enough audience.  Bociurkiw wanted to reach a bigger audience, much like the creators of the  Nancy Clue series had done, by appropriating the pop culture icon Nancy  Drew.  urkiw  wrote   the   Nancy  Drew  video in a style similar to the multi-plot  of the mystery series. Magnifying glas'  constantly in hand, Bociurkiw's Nancy  (played with sublime naivete by Kirster  Robek) is looking for mysteries to solve  Nancy has a few of her own mysteric  she is unwilling to pursue (the night  mares that keep her awake at night).  By day, she works as a researchei  at Ihe Psychology Institute (a front foi  the false Memory Institute), and by  night, she pursues mysteries. One day  her menacing boss Dr. D. Nial (played  with sublime stiffness by Erie Metcalfe!  calls Nancy in to help track down missing research papers of a recently murdered researcher at the institute.  Nancy stumbles about with a cheery,  insistent innocence. Sleepwalking  through clues and relationships, she  eventually ends up in the middle of c  debate on false memory syndrome versus recovered memory. Bociurkiw tread;  a fine line between comedy and farce,  and the balance is almost tipped in the  scene where Nancy finds herself on c  talk show. Here, Bociurkiw splices together an episode of Oprah that include;  celebrity incest survivors and a debate  on false memory syndrome.  Perhaps the farce element is enhanced by the ridiculous arguments ol  the false memory adherents —men talking about what the victims' accusation",  have done to their lives. This scene is  brilliantly parlayed in the final scene  in the video when Nancy addresses viewers.  At moments, Nancy Drew gets pretty  corny, such as when Nancy is pretending to drive her car and a prairie  back-drop inexplicably appears, 01  through the use of her magnifying glass  to change from one scene to the next.  (Or worse still, the split scene cuts).  Bociurkiw is definitely working within  the limitations of an indie budget, and  for the most part the cheesiness works.  I like Bociurkiw best when she h  serious. The scenes that have Nancy  alone are perhaps my favourite. Hei  flashbacks are magnificently and simply treated using a doll-sized silhouette of her family home. Nancy keep!  returning to this darkened house. She  cannot enter; she can only peer into H  from the outside. Much of the time  Nancy looks absurd carrying around hei  magnifying glass and flashlight — especially because it's usually broad daylight— but in these scenes she is full ol  pathos.  The most tender moment of the  video is (appropriately) at the end  when Nancy Drew addresses viewers  after finally confronting her past. It is  one of the most realistic moments of  the film. It is made even more real  because it steps away from comedy and  deals with surviving incest in a quiet  and gentle way.  Nancy Drew & the Mystery of the  Haunted Body should be coming to a  theatre near you, and I recommend you  see it if it does. I hope that one day  Bociurkiw gets a large bag of money tc  make a film version of Nancy Drew anc  that it gets maximum distribution. (I  also hope that the projectionists wir  their strike battle before then.)  leanne Johnson  is  writer who lives in  Vancouver basec  <>n.u.LmLiJ.muvMAMAUJ>Lmi.uji>jm» The Women of Color Network, as part of the Women Students' Office at the  University of British Columbia, is celebrating IWD with a film series  narrated by various groups of women in Canada. Each screening will be  followed by a discussion.  Monday, March 1st, 12:30-1:30pm  Older Stronger Wiser  directed by Claire Prieto, 1989  assistant director: Dionne Brand  Focuses on five rural and urban Black women who speak compel-  lingly of what life was like for them in the 1920s, 30s, 40s, 50s.  Their stories authenticate the untold history of Black women in  Canada and the contributions they have made to the vibrancy of the  community and to the heritage of Afro-Canadian people.  Tuesday, March 2nd, 12:30-1:30pm 4&(($ij5A  Mother of Many Children  directed by Alanis Obomsawin, 1977  An examination of the role, socialization and living conditions of Aboriginal women in Canada. This film focuses on the cycles of personal growth  from birth to old age as recounted by First Nations women in a series of  Friday, March 5th, 12:30-1:30pm  Where the Spirit Lives  directed by Bruce Pittman, 1989  This film follows the experiences of a 12-year old Blackfoot  girl, Amelia, taken from her home on the reserve and relocated  by the government to a residential school. Set in 1937.  All screenings are free of charge. The films will be screened in Rm 204 D, Brock Hall. For more information call 822-2415.  Monday, March 8th, 12:30-1:30pm  Under the Willow Tree  directed by Dora Nipp, 1997  Tells of the first women to come to Canada from China and  the women of subsequent generations. Included are stories of  women who were sent from China to marry men they had  never met; stories of battles against racism; stories of changing values and culture preserved and handed down.  Tuesday, March 9th, 12:30-1:30pm  Prairie Women  directed by Barbara Evans, 1987  Recalls life on the Canadian prairies in the 1920s and '30s.  It shows how the women reached out from lonely farms  and a harsh climate to come together to improve the conditions of their lives.  Monday, March 15th, 12:30-1:30pm  A Time to Rise  directed by Anand Patwardhan & Jim Munro,  1991  This moving and well-crafted film documents BC farm workers' struggle to unionize.  The majority of these workers are South  Asian and Chinese; many of them are  women. The film depicts the conditions that  They're going fast. This hot little resource guide is packed  with all kinds of useful information on child care, legal  assistance, employment and training, housing, welfare,'  services for First Nations women, freebies and  cheapies and more! To get your free copy, pick one up  from our office during office hours, or send us a self-  addressed stamped envelope with $1.50 return postage on  it (send a large size envelope please). Organizations can  place an order for multiple copies by phoning VSW at 255-  6554. We ask organizations to contribute $2.00 per copy  toward the cost of the guides.  SO  VANCOUVER STATUS OF WOMEN  #309 ■ 877 E. Hastings; Vancouver V6A 3Y1_  imsmmmm  ■  m Jr, J Book &  j     %r      Art Emporium  Western Canada's  Lesbian & Gay  Bookstore  Open Daily 10am to 1 lpm  Our Books/Our Issues  Gay Fiction  Lesbian Fiction  Our Magazines & Journals  AIDS/Health  Humour  Erotica  Queer Theory  Feminist Theory  Biographies, Essays, Poetry  Religion & Spirituality  Art & Photography  Community  Little Sister's Book & Art Emporium  1238 Davie Street, Vancouver, B.C. V6E 1N4  (604) 669-1753 Phone Orders 1-800-567-1662  Internet Address: http://www.lsisters.com  KINESIS Letters  Don't be PC about fundraising  Dear Kinesis,  I was very interested in Jennifer Johnstone's piece [on feminist  fundraising, February 1999,] and speaking as a woman living in  poverty, I think I have something to add to the discussion. The  major problem it seems to me is terminal political correctness,  trying to be all things to all people. It would not bother me one bit  if this fundraising collective were to hold a fundraiser every  month, at a price far exceeding my price range. Surely it is more  important to attempt to guarantee the survival of organizations  such as those listed, who provide valuable services to all women,  poor or otherwise, than it is to have to close your doors from lack  of the wherewithal to continue.  It is also very important in my view to stop expecting the staff of  feminist organizations to work or less money than they would  receive in the mainstream, and pay them what they are worth. Too  often they are also expected to put in many hours as volunteers.  We would not expect The Bay or The Hong Kong Bank to expect  that of their workers. In fact, we would probably mount a demonstration in front of their doors if they did so.  Verna Turner and I have been in a correspondence centred mainly  on "how women within the women's movement treat each other"  (for the most part in pretty appalling ways) for the past couple of  years, and in the interim have also begun a fundraiser called, The  Defiant Women's Support Fund, which has been set up to loan or  grant funds to women who want to do something creative their  own way without having to jump through the hoops of government grants or the stipulations of banks or their families.  It is hoped for the first year or so that women will be more interested in donating than applying for funds, but the hardest part  from my past experience of fundraising for women's organizations  is trying to pry women loose from their money. It's like pulling  teeth for the most part. So a lot of education needs to be done  around the issues of money and giving, especially with women  who don't normally use a lot of the services. They don't see the  need until the time they require a rape crisis centre, or a transition  house, then a huge awakening takes place. But what a way to have  to learn the value of all these different services.  Dear Kinesis, ]ggq ; Wow, , reaUy want to commend  re: The Vicious Cycle [Decernlie, ' have consistently (twice)  y-w°^whowr::!:c^^j^^^'°u^t^  shown to me your own n icious   y masterpiece attacking  First, the anti-trans defamatron l^WK women.run busi-  (even so much as boycotting!) one of the few dy  nesses in our multi-divided and diverse community.  The whole h.deous advertising »«^^^^'J^^n  almost any silly magazine and see sexual^ ^ ^ ^ ^^  and children (not to condone that or any* mg ^        ^ ^ ^^  over there get it together and put y°**«*£«   *     ^ laughing on  sors, those big ol'corporate compames, sucking th  everyone's behalf!?  other friends know how I feel.  Marcus Horton  Vancouver, BC fe       mind my own! It  PS: 1 am a F2M. I hope my opinion is still valid y  sure is.  dear   readers  Kinesis loves receiving mail. Please  get your letter to us by the 18th of  the month.  If you can, keep the length to about  500 words. (If you go way over, we  might edit for space.)  Hope to hear from you very soon.  Kinesis  You see the same names on lists of sustaining subscribers to  magazines and I would suspect those same names appear on the  donations list of many other organizations working for women. So  the need it seems to me is to talk a lot about women and money and  women and philanthropy. You don't need to be a millionaire to give  something to help support causes you believe in. Even $20 now and  then is welcome. Twenty or $50 a month from a few thousand  women would be wonderful. That combined with regular  fundraisers would likely do the trick. I wonder too if there are  women who have willed funds to places like The Vancouver Foundation, who would be willing to stipulate that it go to feminist  organizations if they knew the need.  In my view, great fundraisers would be regular evenings of  entertainment by paid women performers: singers, dancers, skit  performers, comediens, speakers, poetry readings would be great. If  some of us from out of town knew about upcoming events we could  get a few carloads together and come into the city, and again as a  woman living in poverty, if I knew well ahead of time, I could save  up $20 or $30 so that I could attend too. Or maybe events could  have a raffle for say 10 or 15 seats, that low-income women could  put their names in a pot, and you could draw a set number, and let  them know they could attend for say $5, $10, or maybe even nothing.  My feelings won't be hurt one little bit if I can't go to some  function I can't afford, so have it. It's no different from not being  able to afford a new coat for 10 years, which is the situation I'm in  right now, so does that mean coats shouldn't be advertised or sold?  The only rules I'd apply to any fundraising idea is that the  content be non-sexist, non-racist, non-violent and accessible to the  disabled. Other than that, if you think a $500 a plate dinner would  be successful, go for it. Staying alive is more important than being  PC and having to close the doors.  Yours m Sisterhood,  Mary Billy  Squamish, BC  MARCH 1999 Bulletin Board  read   this  Bulletin Board listings have a  maximum of 50 words. Groups,  organizations and individuals eligible  for free space in the Bulletin Board  must be, or have, non-profit  objectives.  Other free notices will be items of  general public interest and will  appear at the discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $8 (+$0.56 GST) for  the first 50 words or portion thereof,  $4 (+$0.28 GST) for each additional  25 words or portion thereof and must  be prepaid.  Deadline for all submissions is  the 18th of the month preceding  publication. Note: Kinesis is  published ten times a year. Jul/Aug  and Dec/Jan are double issues.  All submissions should include a  contact name and telephone number  for any clarification that may be  required.  Listings will not be accepted over the  telephone.  Kinesis encourages readers to  research the goods and services  advertised in Bulletin Board. Kinesis  cannot guarantee the accuracy of the  information provided or the safety  and effectiveness of the services and  products listed.  Send submissions to Kinesis, #309-  877 E. Hastings Street, Vancouver,  BC, V6A 3Y1, fax: (604) 255-7508, or  email: kinesis@web.net. For more  information call (604) 255-5499.  INVOLVEMENT  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis? We want to get involved with  you too. Help plan our next issue. All  women interested in what goes into  Kinesis—whether it's news, features or  arts—are invited to our Story Meetings  held on the first Tuesday of every month  at 7pm at our office, 309-877 E. Hastings  St. The next meetings are on Mar 2 and  Apr 6. For more information or if you can't  make the meeting, but still want to find out  how to contribute to the content of Kinesis,  give Agnes a call at (604) 255-5499. New  and experienced writers welcome.  Childcare and travel subsidies available.  INQUIRING MINDS WANTTO KNOW!  Do you ever wonder how the pages of text  in the newspaper you're holding gets lined  up so neatly? Want to know what the  fastest way to get wax off your hands is?  How about all the cool things you can do  with a scanner? Does thinking about the  right dot pattern keep you up at night? Or  do visions of rubylith enter into your  dreams? If so, then you definitely need to  come down and help put Kinesis together.  Just drop by during our next production  dates and help us design and lay out  Canada's national feminist newspaper, and  all your questions will be answered. We'll  be in production for our April 1999 issue  from Mar 17-23. Come and join us. No  experience is necessary. Training and  support will be provided. If this notice  intrigues you, call us at (604) 255-5499.  Childcare and travel subsidies available.  FEMINIST FUNDRAISERS WANTED  VSW is seeking enthusiastic, energetic  and creative women to join the Finance  and Fundraising Committee. If you enjoy  raising money for a great cause, organizing events, or just want to have fun, call  Audrey at 255-6554 today!  INVOLVEMENT  VSW IS LOOKING FOR YOU!  If you want to learn to do referral and peer  counselling work at VSW, we are offering a  great opportunity to women interested in  volunteer work during the day. Come  answer the phone lines, talk to women who  drop in, and help connect them with the  community resources they need. For more  information call Shana at 255-6554.  Childcare and travel subsidies available.  VOLUNTEER NEWSLETTER  Are you a volunteer at VSW or Kinesis? If  yes, please feel free to make contributions  to our new monthly "Volunteer Newsletter."  The newsletter is for us—for all VSW/  Kinesis volunteers—and will be a place for  updates on committee work, gossip,  recipes, things for sale/barter, a calendar of  events, and whatever else volunteers want  to put in. There's a box at #309-877 E.  Hastings St just waiting for your submissions. If you want more info contact Amal  Rana (Kinesis production coordinator) at  255-5499 or Rita Dhamoon of the VSW  Volunteer Development Committee at 255-  6554.   RECOMMENDINGWOMEN  1999 will mark the 10th anniversary of the  Vancouver Status of Women's premier  fundraising gala, Recommending Women  on Thurs Apr 15. Confirmed as the  keynote speaker is Governor General's  Award winning poet Dionne Brand, who will  read from her forthcoming novel At the Full  and Change of the Moon. VSW is inviting  women in the community to join the  organizing committee for this very exciting  event. If you have event organizing skills,  enthusiasm, or just want to have some fun,  call Audrey at 255-6554 to find out how you  can get involved. VSW welcomes your  ideas on how to make the 10th annual  Recommending Women the biggest and  best VSW party ever.  KINESIS MARKETING GANG  Interested in being on the hottest new  committee at VSW. Then check out the  Kinesis Marketing Gang. We're looking for  women who have experience or are  interested in advertising and marketing.  The Marketing Gang works as a collective  to strategize on innovative ways to promote  and raise the profile of Kinesis. The gang  meets monthly. Training and support will be  provided by Kinesis marketing coordinator  Jenn Lo. Call her at 255-5499.  EVENTS  EVENTS  EVENTS  NATIONAL FORUM  'Towards Filipino Women's Equality" is the  theme of the first Filipino-Canadian  women's national consultative forum to be  held in Vancouver Mar 11-14. Organized by  the Philippine Women Centre of BC, this  forum will be an opportunity to gather on a  national level to address a broad range of  issues from the perspective of grassroots  Filipino women. The forum will discuss five  major themes: labour and migration; human  rights, systemic racism and immigration;  violence against women; young women  and their issues; and challenges for women  migrant workers. For more info contact  Luningning Alcuitas-lmperial or Jane  Ordinario at (604) 215-1103 or  pwc@netcom.ca.  HELEN POTREBENKO  Lazara Press will celebrate the publication  of Letters to Maggie by Helen Potrebenko  on Thurs Mar 18, from 7-9:30pm at the  WISE Hall, 1882 Adanac St. Refreshments  and entertainment by the Euphoniously  Feminist & Non-Performing Quintet and a  reading by the author. Books and CDs will  be available. For more info call Lazara  Press at (604) 872-1134.  IMMIGRATION DISCUSSION GROUP  The Vancouver Status of Women is calling  on women to come together for the first  meeting of the Ad Hoc Women's Coalition  on Immigration and Refugee Issues on  Wed Mar 3 at 6pm. Last December, the  federal government introduced into the  House of Commons a revised Citizenship  Act. By the end of the year, the Liberals  hope to pass new immigration and refugee  legislation. The Coalition intends to be a  place to discuss the issues and take action  to ensure changes to legislation to best  meet the interests of women. Immigrant  and refugee women, women working as  advocates, lawyers or researchers, and  women interested in learning more about  immigration and refugee issues, are all  invited to attend. The meeting will be a  potluck and will take place at VSW, 309-  877 E. Hastings St (between Campbell and  Hawk). For more info, call (604) 255-6554.  REGINA RYAN  Regina Ryan, a former Catholic nun, will  discuss her book The Woman Awake  Thurs Mar 4, 7:30pm at Women in Print,  3566 West 4th Ave, Vancouver. Ryan's  book is the result of a 15-year search for  the "feminine face of God." Admission is  free. For more info call (604) 732-4128.  DIALOGUE ON EQUITY  The Joint Chair in Women's Studies at  Carleton University and the University of  Ottawa is hosting a symposium on "Women  of Colour and Aboriginal Women: a  Dialogue on Equity in the Academy." The  symposium will take place on Fri Mar 5 at  Carleton University, and is organized by  Rashmi Luther, Bernice Moreau, Bessa  Whitmore and Reva Gutnick of the School  of Social Work. Featured speakers are  Madeleine Dion Stout, Patricia Monture,  Sherene Razack, Joanne St. Lewis and  Wanda Thomas Bernard. For more info  contact Helene Boudreault at (613) 520-  6644 or hboudre@uottawa.ca.  PROTECTING OUR DAUGHTERS  The Richmond Women's Resource Centre  is holding a workshop on Sat Mar 6 from  9am to 3:30pm for mothers and daughters  (suitable for Grade 6 and 7 girls) about self  protection from potential violence in  school, in the community, at work and in  the home. The day will include interactive  workshops on communication, self esteem  and self-defence, and will take place at  Minoah Steves School, 10111 4th Ave,  Richmond, BC. Preregistration is required.  Admission is $10 per person, with lunch  included. Some subsidies available. For  more info call (604) 279-7060. Translations  in Cantonese, Mandarin, Farsi and Punjabi  will be available.  MIDWIVES & DOULAS  The Vancouver Women's Health Information Centre will present midwives and  doulas Sat Mar 13, 11am-1pm at the  Centre, 219-1675 W. 8th Ave. Join other  women in learning the newest information  on midwifery. Discover what doulas do.  Reservations are encouraged as space is  limited. A $3 donation is suggested. To  register call (604) 736-5262 and leave a  message.  MARY CAPPELLO  Mary Cappello will read from her memoirs,  Night Blooms, Tues Mar 23, 7:30pm at  Women in Print, 3566 W. 4th Ave, Vancouver. Night Blooms tells the story of a third-  generation Italian American woman's  struggle to understand the haunting  contradictions of her family legacy.  Cappello is the reader of the family, finding  in their responses to loss and violence a  context to describe her own isolation and  emerging lesbian sexuality. Admission is  free. For more info call (604) 732-4128.  INFORMATION RIGHTS FORUM  As part of the 6th annual Information  Rights Week (Mar 22 - 28), Heather  Menzies will give a free talk on information  technology, "How Come the People Keep  Disappearing?" at SFU Harbour Centre on  Weds Mar 24, 7:00pm. Menzies is the  author of "Whose Brave New World: The  Information Highway and the New  Economy." For more info call (604) 683-  5357  CHILD RESEARCH  The Joint Chair in Women's Studies at  Carleton University and the University of  Ottawa will be hosting a symposium in  honour of Sharon Stephens on Fri Mar 26  at Carleton University. The event, organized by Virginia Caputo of the Pauline  Jewett Institute of Women's Studies at  Carleton University, will feature Pamela  Downe, Jane Helleiner, Allison James,  Cristina Szanton Blanc, and others. For  further info contact Helene Boudreault at  (613) 520-6644 or hboudre@uottawa.ca  POWELL STREET FESTIVAL  On Fri Mar 26 from 7-11 pm, the Powell  Street Festival Society will be holding a  fundraising art and services auction at the  Heritage Hall at 3102 Main St, Vancouver.  The Society, in its 18th year, operates and  supports an annual festival dedicated to  celebrating the arts and culture of Japanese Canadian and Asian Canadian  communities. The auction will include live  performance, raffle prizes, refreshments,  and hors d'oeuvres. Auction items include  works by Taiga Chiba, Mas Funo, Gu  Xiong, Joyce Kamikura, Roy Kiyooka,  Laiwan, Haruko Okano, Yuxweluptan  Lawrence Paul, Miyuki Shinkai, Kyoko  Sumi, Henry Tsang, Amanda White, Paul  Wong, Sherry Jamal, Michelle McGeough,  Zainub Verjee, Lily Shinde, Alisa Kage,  Kaori Kasai, and many others. For more  info call (604) 739-9388.  JANICEWILLIAMSON  Janice Williamson will read from her  moving and poetic book, Crybaby, on Tues  Mar 30, 7:30pm at Women in Print, 3566  West 4th Ave, Vancouver. Crybaby is the  memoir of a woman struggling with intimations of incest, her infertility, and the  suicide of her father. Admission is free. For  more info call (604) 732-4128.   BREAST HEALTH & BREASTFEEDING  The Vancouver Women's Health Information Centre is hosting a workshop on  breast health and breastfeeding on Sat  Apr 10, 11am-1pm at the Centre, 219-  1675 W. 8th Ave. Pam Fichtner, RMT, will  talk about general health and Juliette  Smith, a trained breastfeeding counsellor,  will talk about the pros and cons of  breastfeeding and some of the common  problems that can arise during the  breastfeeding relationship. Reservations  are encouraged as space is limited. A $3  donation is suggested. To register call  (604) 736-5262 and leave a message.  NOT SO STRICTLY BALLROOM  Not So Strictly Ballroom offers dance  classes and monthly dances to the lesbian  and gay community — the only organization of its kind in Vancouver. Coming up on  Saturdays, 12:30-2pm at the WISE Hall,  1882 Adanac is Triple Rhythm Jive and  Foxtrot, and Thursday evenings, 7-8:30pm  Rhumba and Quick Step. Everyone is  welcome, singles and couples. Join us at  our next dance on Fri Mar 19, 8pm at the  WISE Hall, for dance lessons, demos,  social, and country and western dancing.  Not So Strictly Ballroom, where same-sex  dancing is the norm. For more info call 688-  West ext. 2145.  MARCH 1999 Bulletin Board  GROUPS  GROUPS  POSITIVE ASIANS  Are you HIV-positive and Asian? Are you  looking for support? Then, come to the  Asian Society for Intervention of AIDS'  "Positive Asians Dinner" (PAD) in Vancouver Tues Mar 9. The dinner will be a totally  safe and confidential place to meet others  who share the same heritage and circumstances. For more info call ASIA at (604)  669-5567.   16 STEP SUPPORT GROUP  SESRA (Survivors of Extreme Systematic  or Ritualised Abuse) is holding an ongoing  support group for women Thursday  evenings, 7-8:30pm at Room 5, Gordon  Neighbourhood House, 1019 Broughton St,  Vancouver. The group is organized by  survivor peers and based on the books of  Charlotte Kasl and Chrystine Oksana. Cost  is by donation. For more info call (604) 683-  2554.   MENOPAUSE AWARENESS GROUP  The Surrey Women's Centre is sponsoring  a Menopause Awareness Group which will  meet the 4th Monday of each month for  informal discussions around menopause  issues. The group starts at 7:30pm and will  be held at the centre. For location or more  info call Janet or Sharon at (604) 589-1868.  BUILDING BLOCKS  Building Blocks Vancouver offers information and support for Spanish-speaking,  Vietnamese and Aboriginal women living in  the Grandview Woodland area expecting  their first baby or with newborns under  three-months old. The program has a great  team of Home Visitors to assist women. For  more info call MOSAIC at (604) 254-9626  or the Vancouver Aboriginal Family and  Child Services at (604) 251-4844, local  311.   WOMEN ABUSE SUPPORT GROUP  A support group in Vancouver for women  abused by women is available for lesbians,  dykes and bisexual women through  Battered Women's Support Services.  Emotional support, legal information and  advocacy, safety planning, and referrals are  offered. The group is free and confidential  and on-site childcare is available. For more  info call Sarah or Stacia at (604) 687-1867.  GODDESS ART SHOW  Calling all Goddess Artists. If you are  interested in being involved either as an  organizer or participating artist, or know  someone who might be, in a huge show of  Goddess Art for the year 2000. The plan is  to organize a major show in Vancouver,  combined with multiple bus tours of 3-5  days throughout different parts of BC. For  more info contact Mary Billy, Box 2047,  Squamish BC, VON 3G0; tel: (604) 892-  5723; or email: mbilly@sea-to-sky.net.  Donations to help with postage and phone  calls are appreciated.  RAPE RELIEFVOLUNTEERS  Vancouver Rape Relief and Women's  Shelter needs women who are interested in  volunteering for their 24-hour crisis line and  transition house for women and children.  Volunteer training sessions are held  Tuesday evenings. For more info and a  training interview call (604) 872-8212.  COMPULSIVE EATING SUPPORT  A drop-in support group for women with  issues of compulsive eating is held twice a  month at the Eating Disorder Resource  Centre of BC, St. Paul's Hospital, Room  2C-213, 1081 Burrard St, Vancouver. Drop-  in times are 7:30pm to 9pm every 1st and  3rd Wednesday of the month. Facilitated  by Colleen Hyland and Cynthia Johnston.  For more info call (604) 631-5313.  MIDDLE EAST DISCUSSION GROUP  The Vancouver Middle East Discussion  Group in Vancouver meets once a month to  discuss issues related to the Israeli-  Palestinian conflict. The group's focus is to  be part of the struggle for equality and  freedom in the Middle East. Some issues of  discussion include Zionist exploitation of  Nazi genocide, and settler colonialism in  Palestine and North America. In the coming  months, the group hopes to discuss the  experiences of women in the Middle East,  different types of Palestinian feminism, and  the role of the United States in the region.  To participate or for more information, call  (604) 253-4047.  SHAKTI-"STRENGTH"  Shakti (meaning "strength") is a self-help  group in Vancouver for South Asian women  who have experienced the psychiatric  system. The group meets every 1st and  3rd Saturday of the month 1-3pm at South  Vancouver Neighbourhood House, 6470  Victoria Dr. Join the group for outings,  discoveries, peer support, relaxing massage. Participation is free. For more info call  Helen (604) 733-5570 (for English) or (604)  682-3269 box 8144 (for Punjabi, Hindi and  Urdu). Sponsored by the Vancouver/  Richmond Mental Health Network.  SUBMISSIONS  ART SHOW SPACE  The Vancouver Women's Health Collective  is pleased to announce that it has opened  its space to women artists. Shows will run  for 4-6 weeks under contract guidelines.  The Collective will host an opening, and  provide some advertising as well as  hanging materials. For details, leave a  message for Christine Campbell or Tamara  Flick-Parker at (604) 736-4234.   FILIPINA NURSES  Are you a Filipina nurse who came to  Canada under the Live-in Caregiver  Program? The Philippine Women Centre is  gathering the experiences of Filipina  nurses who enter Canada as domestic  helpers. By sharing experiences, participants can identify what the systemic  barriers are that prevent them from developing to their full potential in Canada. One  strategy is to begin the process of getting  collective recognition for the education and  skills Filipina nurses bring to Canada. For  more info about this research project or the  PWC's Nurses' Support Group, call Maita or  Mayette at (603) 215-1103.   API WOMEN AND GIRLS  Are you a wimmin or girl of full, mixed or  partial Asian or Pacific Islander origin?  Have you always wanted to see your  work—be it poetry, art, recipes, rants,  fiction or non-fiction—in print? Fire Moon!  Asian and Pacific Islander Wimmin's  Alliance, wants to print your stuff for its  zine. All submissions can be handed into  the Simon Fraser University Women's  Centre, c/o Janet. Submissions are accepted on an ongoing basis. For more info  call (604) 291-3670 or email: boun@sfu.ca.  ABUSE OF PARENTS  A group of women in Nova Scotia is  collecting information about the abuse of  parents by their teenage children. They  hope to publish a booklet for families which  includes reading lists for professionals and  parents, and ideas for what groups,  including support groups of parents, can do  to help themselves and their communities.  The group is looking for any research,  resources or projects on this issue. To  share info or for more details about the  booklet, email to  barbara.cottrell @ dbis.ns.ca.  CLASSIFIEDS  WOMEN'SPACE  Women'space, a quarterly magazine about  women, the Internet and activism, has  moved from the East Coast to Ottawa. Its  new mailing address is PO Box 1034,  Almonte, ON, K0A 1A0; telephone: (613)  256-5682; and fax: (613) 256-5202. Also  check out Women'space's recently updated  website at http://www.womenspace.ca. The  site now carries 11 back issues, a growing  set of resources on what women are doing  online to promote women's equality.  LIBERTYTHRIFT  The WELL (Women Embracing Life and      ,  Liberty) Society in Vancouver is moving to  a bigger location at 3070 Commercial Dr.  Established in 1995, the WELL Society is a  grassroots women's organization that  provides women fleeing violent relationships with household goods and clothing to  begin again. The Society operates Liberty  Thrift, a store which offers fun, fashion and  funk at bargain prices for women, children  and men shopping for change. The Society  continues to welcome donations of clothing  and household items and furniture. To  make a contribution, drop by the new store,  or call (604) 253-3080.   SPINSTERVALE  Ever wanted to live on women's land?  Small cabin(s) for rent by month, $200-250.  Woodstove and outhouse. Also available at  Spinstervale in Coombs on Vancouver  Island are nightly rates ($7.50/woman),  group rates and work exchanges (three  hours a day equals room/board). Call (250)  248-8809 or email Sunshine @macn.be.ca.  WOMEN'S SELF-DEFENSE  Women Educating in Self-defense Training  (WEST) teaches Wenlido. In Basic classes,  you learn how to make the most of mental,  physical and verbal skills to get away from  assault situations. Continuing training  builds on basic techniques to improve  physical and mental strength. By women,  for women. For info, call 876-6390.   CITYVIEW CO-OP  Cityview Housing Co-op has one, two and  three bedroom suites for $565, $696, $795  per month and refundable share purchase.  Carpets, blinds, appliances, parking and  laundry room. Children and small pets  welcome. Participation required. Please  send a business size SASE to Membership  Committee, Cityview Housing Co-op, #108-  1885 E. Pender St, Vancouver, BC, V5L  1W6.   OUTDOOR ADVENTURES FOR  WOMEN  GAIA (Mother Earth) Adventures presents  Outdoor Adventures for Women. Hike the  Stawamus Chief Mar 13 or Apr 3 and  discover exciting trails leading up to three  different peaks. Ride the ferry to Bowen  Island for an easy and rewarding hike  around Killarney Lake on Mar 20 or Apr 24  (no experience required) or hike the  Squamish Estuary Mar 27. Call 875-0066  today or check out our website at  www.vancouver-bc.com/Gaia.  WANTED TO RENT  Two Canadian feminist writers, currently  living in San Fransciso, in search of cozy  quiet 1 BR cottage (water view nice) on  Galiano for month of July. House exchange  possible. Call (415) 285-5135, or email:  ecwecw@mills.edu.  STITCHED  FABRIC BANNERS  MADE TO ORDER  Sima Elizabeth  Shefrin  [604] 734-9395  {>*  o-t^et -  SEXUAL ASSAULT  Published by the Montreal Health Press,  a women's collective, producing quality  books on health and sexuality for 30 years!  The most up-to-date information on sexual  assault: how lo handle an assault,  prevention, the social context.  1997 EDITION  New information on  ♦ Pregnancy and  STDs resulting  from an assault  ♦ Partner assault  ♦ Dating violence  ♦ Abuse of people  with disabilities  No other  resource offers  the combination  of personal and practical information  an understanding of why sexual assau  happens and ways to work for positivi  C ange^0mmmmm^^ Women's Health C  Also Available are Winnipeg, Mani  -STD-  . BIRTH CONTROL -  . MENOPAUSE-  PORbomc  _,   RATES  Send $5.00 (cheque or money order) to:  Montreal Health Press Inc.  P.O. Box 1000  Station Place du Pare  Montreal (Quebec) Canada  H2W 2N1  Tel.: (514) 282-1171 Fax: (514) 282-0262  E-mail: mhpmontreal@msn.com  Visit our Web site at:  http://www.worldsfinest.com/mhp  KINESIS Bulletin Board  CELEBRATION OF  LESBIANS  March 6th, 7:30 pm @ Bukowski's on  Commercial Drive  THE AWNS HILARIOUS ERIN GRAHAM  DRUMMING 8Y MEMBERS  OFSAWAGITAIKO  THE MUSIC OF VERA LE FRANC  TERRIE HAMAZAKI  ANNE FLEMING, AUTHOR OF POOL HOPPING  0f?<5ANIZet> BY THE VANCOUVER STATUS OF WOMEN.  WANT FURTHER INFO? CALL SHANA AT 255-6554.  Dahl findlay Connors  BARRISTERS & SOLICITORS ▼  We offer a wide range of legal services  to the lesbian, gay, bisexual and  transgendered communities of BC  • Corporate/Commercial  • Family Law  • Immigration Law  • Civil Ligation  • Human Rights  • Adoption  • Wills/Estates  • Real Estate  • Equality Test Cases  Suite 620, 1033 Davie, Vancouver, B.C. V6E 1M7 (604) 687-8752 • Toll Free 1 8  .w WeiL L:uL- ML ut:U^L  LEGAL REPRESENTATION  AND MEDIATION  SERVICES  in:  labour and employment law  human rights,  civil litigation  public interest advocacy.  MUNRO • PARFITT  LAWYERS  Melinda Munro and Clea Parfitt  401-825 granville street,  Vancouver, b.c. v6z 1 k9  689-7778 (ph)        689-5572 (fax)  quality legal services  woman friendly atmosphere  Paula Clancy, b.a.  Certified General Accountant  Auditing  Accounting  Financial Planning  Income Tax Services  for  Organizations  Small Businesses  and Individuals  Tel: (604)215-1720  Fax:(604)215-1750  pclancy@bc.sympatico.ca  WThe  Blue Ewe  Bed & Breakfast  A Beautiful Place  Hot Tub & Sauna  A Memorable Escape  (250) 537-9344  blueewe@saltspring.com  ImjTOj  membere.tripod.com/~blueewe  WfflfM*     P£22B  Position Available  SUBSCRIPTION DRIVE COORDINATOR  Kinesis, a national feminist newspaper published by the Vancouver Status of Women, is seeking I  an organized, self-motivated and creative woman for the position of Subscription Drive Co- j  ordinator.  With support from the Marketing Gang, she would be responsible for:  • Compiling a targetted mailing list  • Entering data and maintaining a database  • Writing and designing solicitation materials and subscription forms  • Determining costs for the production of promotional materials and the mailout  • Coordinating the printing and mailing  • Setting up a tracking system for solicitations  • Compiling feedback on the campaign  The ideal  applicant would have experience with direct mail campaigns; database, i  wordprocessing and graphic design software; writing and designing promotional materials; |  and budgeting. Experience working onpromoting feminist or other alternative publications is  an asset.  The position is an eight-week, part-time contract position. Remuneration will be $16 per  hour for 20 hours per week. There is some flexibility in working hours. The start date for  this position is March 29, 1999.  Aboriginal women and women of colour are strongly encouraged to apply.  Please send a resume, cover letter, and a short writing sample to the address below by March I  18, 1999.  Kinesis  Hiring Committee  #309 - 877 East Hastings St.  Vancouver, BC  V6A 3Y1  or fax:   (604)255-7508  1  We apologize that only short listed candidates will be contacted.  Sunday March 14  Cris Williamson  & Tret Pure  special guest  June  Mi  $25 at door if available  Ellen Mcllwaine • Friday April 2  WISE Hall- 8pm- $14- $17  tickets available at o       . a(t),   .  Uttle Sister's. JSounds^Kunes  Urban Empire (cash only) (JjLuctions  & Women In Print 253-71 &  g  o   1  t  c  I      s o  met  i i  n g    :  •       t  o          s  b e  a y  •>          ',  LOU  D  b e  j   p  R O  u  D  •        A   D  V  E   R  T  1  S  £        l  1 need more info.? cat  jenn  255-5499 1  khSis wmmmmv^m  MARCH 1  MARCH 5  TWO FILMS ABOUT WOMEN  IDERA and the North Shore  Women's Centre are presenting  two films about women from  10:30am-12:30pm at the Women's  Centre, 944 W. 16th St, N.  Vancouver. The event will feature  Trin T Min Ha's exploration of  women's lives in Senegal,  Reassemblage, and Marie Boti's  Brown Women, Blond Babies,  which examines the lives and  working conditions of Filipina  domestic workersj  more info call  CELEBRATING UNSUNG HEROINES  "Visions and Voices: Sisters in the Circle" is  the theme of Douglas College's IWD  celebration. The festivities will begin with a  dinner at 6pm, followed by a ceremony  honoring unsung heroines. The keynote  speaker will be Viola Thomas, president of  the United Native Nations. Tickets are $15  for students and $20 for college employees  and guests, and are available at  Douglas College's New Westminster  Campus Women's Centre, Room 4810, 4th  Floor S. For more info call 527-5148.  LILY'S FRINGE  Celebrate IWD  . with an evening  of fun and foolery  at the WISE  Club, 1882  Adanac St. The  festivities will  include performances by the Mad  Cowgirls (with  Kathryn  Wahamaa), writer  :Gwynne Hunt, the unique Latin flavour of  fancho & Sal, fiddle and stomp of the Bear  , Mountain Dancers, the raw energy of poet  Andrea Alexon, and funny business by Erin  Graham. Doors open at 7pm. Advance  tickets are $10, available from Highlife,  Urban Empire and the Port Coquitlam  Women's Centre. Tickets at the door are  sliding scale $12-15. For more info call  Inspirit at 1-800-261-3281.  MARCH 6  FETE FOR WOMEN OF COLOUR  The Ruth Wynn Woodward Chair of  Women's Studies at Simon Fraser University is hosting a celebration for women of  colour at the YWCA, 535 Hornby St (4th  Floor, Room 5) starting at 7pm. Food,  conversation and poetry will be flowing. For  further info call Ritz at 291-4023.  THE MARCH AND  RALLY  "Equality Through  Global Solidarity" is the  theme of this year's IWD    \\  March and Rally in  Vancouver. Women are invited to gather at the North Plaza of the  Vancouver Public Library, 350 West  Georgia St, at 11:30 am. Participants will  leave at noon for a march through the  downtown core, and then return to the  library for the rally and information tables.  For further info call 253-0067.  CELEBRATION  FOR LESBIANS  The Vancouver Status  of Women is hosting a  Celebration for Lesbians at Bukowski's on  Commercial Dr, starting at 7:30pm. Performances will include members of Sawagi  Taiko, Vera LeFranc, Terrie Hamazaki, and  Anne Fleming. It's a women-only event.  Admission is by donation. For further info  call Shana at 255-6554.  MARKER OF CHANGE  Women on Galiano Island will celebrate  IWD with a potluck dinner and the screening of Marker of Change, a documentary  about the Women's Monument in Vancouver, which was constructed in 1997 to  commemorate the 14 women murdered  December 6, 1989 in Montreal and all  women who have died at the hands of  men.The event will be held at the South  End Community Hall beginning at 6pm. For  more info or accomodation, call (250) 539-  5844.  CABARETV  The Rainbow Concert Band, Canada's only  gay and lesbian band, presents Cabaret V  at the WISE Hall, 1882 Adanac St. The  band's annual revue celebrating IWD starts  at 8pm and will feature emcee Karen  Hoskins, Synchronicity, Psychotic Butler,  Yvonne McSkimming and Mark James  Fortin, the Nat Queen Cool Trombone  Quartet, Main Dance, and Kunk. Tickets  are $14 in advance at Harry's Off Commercial and Little Sister's on Davie St; or $15  at the door. Concession tickets for seniors,  students and the unwaged can be reserved  by calling the Band Line at 290-0556.  MARCH 7  DISCUSSION ANDTHEATRE  The Vancouver Status of Women and  Britannia Community Services Centre are  hosting an afternoon of entertainment and  education on immigrant and refugee  women at the Britannia Centre High School  Auditorium, 1661 Napier Street. There will  be a panel discussion on the proposed  changes to Canada's Immigration Act from  1-3 pm, and "Storytelling Our Lives" by  Puente Theatre from 3-5 pm. Admission is  by donation. The venue is wheelchair  accessible. For further information call 255-  6554.  FESTIVITIES IN RICHMOND  The Richmond Women's Resource Centre  and the Richmond Art Gallery are hosting  a panel discussion on women artists and  the portrayal of women in art from 2-4pm at  the art gallery, 7025 Minoru Gate. Performances by Sawagi Taiko, the Happy  Momma's Dance Group, Asian folk dances,  and the Persian Women's Dance Group of  Richmond. For more info call 279-7060.  SURREY CELEBRATION  A celebration to honour women's struggle  for peace and equality will take place from  2-4pm in the main foyer of Queen Elizabeth  Senior Secondary, 9457 King George  Highway in Surrey. The featured guest  speaker will be Fay Blaney of the Aboriginal Women's Action Network and the  National Action Committee on the Status of  Women, and there will be entertainment by  the Raging Grannies and the More Than  'ĢJust Pay Singers. "Rage," a student art  exhibit, will also be on display. There will be  childcare onsite. Tickets are $10, and free  for the unemployed, and include refreshments. Proceeds of the gala will be donated to SurreyA/Vhite Rock transition  houses. For more info call Surrey Teachers'  Association at 594-5353, or the Surrey  Women's Centre at 589-1868  PLAY DAY  Barbara Karmazyn will facilitate a "Play  Day" to celebrate women's lives and  experiences from 10am-4:30pm at the  Roundhouse Community Centre, 181  Roundhouse Mews. In an atmosphere of  play, exploration and discovery, women will  use storytelling, dance, rhythm and art to  speak their own truth. Dress in comfortable  clothing, bring lunch and images and  instruments. The cost is $35 and includes  materials. For more info call 713-1800.  MARCH 8  CELEBRATING IN WHITE ROCK  The South SurreyAA/hite Rock Women's  Place and the Atira Transition House are  celebrating IWD with the Raging Grannies  and Vera LeFranc at Whitby's Bookstore,  14837 Marine Dr. in White Rock, starting at  7pm. Admission is a $5 minimum donation.  For more info call 536-9611.  POCO OPEN HOUSE  The Port Coquitlam and Area Women's  Centre is holding an Open House for IWD  from 11am-5pm at 2420 Maryhill Rd, Port  Coquitlam. For more  info call 941-6311.  ECONOMIC  JUSTICE FOR  WOMEN  The BC Pay Equity  Network is sponsoring an event for  women in unions  interested in organizing around pay equity  in the meeting room of the YWCA Hotel,  733 Beatty St, starting at 6:30 pm. Refreshments will be served, and childcare can be  arranged if requested before March 1. Call  Maire Kirwan at CUPE at 291-1940.  DOWNTOWN EASTSIDE OPEN  HOUSE  From noon to 4pm, there will be an Open  House at the Downtown Eastside Women's  Centre, 44 East Cordova St, to celebrate  the achievements of women in the Downtown Eastside. Drumming, dancing, music,  an art exhibition, video exhibition and  demonstrations. For more info call 681-  8480.  CANADIAN ACTORS' EQUITY  The Canadian Actors' Equity Association  Women's Committee will present an  evening of performances from various local  female artists, including stand-up comics,  poets, actors, musicians and filmmakers at  the Blinding Theatre, 36 Powell St, starting  8pm. Featured will be Carolyn Bentley,  Tammy Bentz, Shannon Heath, Deb  Pickman, Trish Pattenden, among others.  All proceeds will go to the Breast Cancer  Foundation. For further info call 731-3082.  y  IWD CONCERT  A concert with the  First Nations  dance troupe  Traditional  Mothers, Flamenco dancer  Rosario Ancer,  Chilean actor Carmen Aguirre, Chinese  Yangquin player Chen Uyu Ping, Celtic  musician Philomen Daly, and many others  will take place at 8 pm at the Vogue  Theatre, 918 Granville St. Tickets are $15  in advance or $20 at the door, and are  available at all Ticketmaster outlets.  Designated charities for this event are  Amnesty International, Women Prisoners  of Conscience, and the Vancouver Status  of Women.  RED WOMEN SPEAK  Cleo Reece is hosting an Indigenous  Media Arts Group event for IWD at Video  In, 1965 Main St. starting at 7pm. The  evening will feature works by local Aboriginal women including a sneak preview of  Reece's Red Power Women, the coming of  age of a young Native women and her  contemporaries in the late 60s and early  70s. There will also be a screening and  talk by Okanagan artist Tracy Bonneau  who will present her video Forbidden  Culture about the lives of women affected  by the residential school system. Marie  Baker will also read from her Grannie Boot  Camp escapades. Food and refreshments  will be served. Admission is $1-5 sliding  scale. For more info call 879-6224.  MARCH 11 |  . WE KNOW WHAT WE  jjfj NEEDTO BE HEALTHY  V /^   Join Shirley Masuda, Joan  Meister and Carol Bast of the  DisAbled Women's Network in  a discussion on "Women with  Disabilities: We Know What  We Need to be Healthy" from  10am-noon at the BC Centre for Excellence in Women's Health, Room E311, BC  Women's Hospital, 4500 Oak St. The three  women will talk about two recent research  studies completed by DAWN. Admission is  free. Refreshments will be served. Lower  Mainland transportation subsidies and  services for women with disabilities are  available with two days advance request.  For more info or to reserve a seat call 875-  2633.  | MARCH 13 |  RANDOM ACTS OF SEXUALITY  The Asian Women's Outreach Project at  ASIA (the Asian Society for the Intervention  of AIDS) is hosting "Random Acts of  Sexuality," a women-only dance event  promoting healthy sexuality for Asian  women and their friends. The party will be  held at Club 23, 23 West Cordova St,  starting at 8pm. Tickets are $5, and are  available at Little Sister's, Harry's Off  Commercial and East End Book Company.  For further info call 669-5567. One year  U$20 + $1.40 GST □ Bill me  Two years □ New  Q$36 + $2.52 GST □ Renewal  Institutions/Groups □ Gift  OS45 + $3.1.5 GST O Donation  □ Cheque enclosed   For individuals who can't afford the full amount  for Kinesis subscription, send what you can.  Free to women prisoners.  Orders outside Canada add $8.  Vancouver Status of Women Membership  (includes Kinesis subscription)  D$30+$1.40 GST  Address   Country   Telephone _  Postal code_  Fax   Published ten times a year by the Vancouver Status of Women  #309-877 E. Hastings St., Vancouver, BC V6A 3Y1