 VSW  1090 West 7th Ave  Vancouver  V6H1D0  JULY '79  tus of Women  IKSID6-  iimniinn  -  Summertime, and the big issue's abortion (again)  SFU 17 trial is under way  VSW cooks up new constitution  We have our own art gallery  SORWUC scores two major victories in Muckamuck strike  Across Canada: Bi-national lesbian conference  How the Feds are doing it to us  Marge Piercy on art and politics  The Dinner Party  Speak out against incest  Firefighting on Galiano  Women in the struggle for the liberation of the Phillipines  The great lesbian sense and sensibility debate continues  1  2  3  4  5  7  8  9  12  14  16  18  20  SUBSCRIBE TO KINESIS!  Published By Vancouver Status of Women  1090 West 7th Ave, Vancouver   V6H 1B3  Subscriber Only _  Member/Subscriber  AMOUNT ENCLOSED:  Subs are $8/year Individual (or what you can afford), $15/year Institutions.  VSW membership is by donation. Please remember that VSW operates on  inadequate funding — we need member support! Kinesis July   '79    1  Abortion is back as the big issue this summer  In hospital society meetings held in a  number of communities in June, abortion  was a hotly contested election issue. Anti-  abortion candidates were successful in  Richmond and Powell River, capturing all  the vacancies on these hospital boards. At  this writing it is unclear whether this  will mean an end to abortion at those hospitals.  At the same time, supporters of abortion  as a women's right to choose also scored  victories. In Langley, the anti-abortion  candidates were all defeated in the meeting of June 21.  In Surrey, an energetic group of women  succeeded in enrolling more than 2,000  pro-choice members in the hospital society  in six weeks work. Anti-abortionists also  mobilized and the crowd that-gathered for.  the hospital meeting June 20 was nearly  evenly divided.  In the end, on a recount, two pro-choice  candidates and one "pro-life" were elected  to the 11-member board of trustees. The  pro-choice position now has a two vote  majority. The women of the Surrey pro-  choice group plan to continue to meet.  The so-called "pro-life" movement is presently shifting into high gear. A strategy  planning conference of the national umbrella organization, Alliance for Life,  will be held at UBC June 27 to 30. In B.C.  35 groups will band together in a province-  wide body at the end of June. The present  Vancouver-based Pro-Life Society claims  5,600 members and took in $4-7,000 in donations last year.  Traditionally hosnital board elections  _ " MiioM  igSS?^,,«*«Hriiw«EV'  . CHILD1  UNDER A   }    A  are held in June or September. It is of  crucial importance that women familiarize  themselves with the situation in their local areas now, as it is clear that every  hospital with a therapeutic abortion committee is a target.  In the cases where pro-choice people have  been informed enough ahead of time to mobilize, we have been successful.  The Vancouver group, Concerned Citizens  for Choice on Abortion (CCCA), is prenared  to be a clearing centre for information  and assistance in setting up groups to  deal with this issue.  If you have any information as to what is  happening in your area, or know people who  would be useful to contact, please write  to CCCA at 115 N. Kootenay St., Vancouver,  V5K 3T9, or phone Tessa Stewart at 324-  8890 or Ann Thomson at 684-7696.  CCCA's next meeting will be Tuesday, July  10 at 336 E. 46 Ave., 7:30 p.m. Plan to  come!  Rape Relief refuge becoming a reality  Staff at Vancouver's Rape Relief are in  the middle of a spirited campaign to raise  about $150,000 to enable them to open a  women-in-crisis residence in Vancouver  early next year.  Spokesperson Teresa McDowell told Kinesis  that the five paid staff and 25 volunteer  staff at Rape Relief on Kingsway, have  organized a series of fund-raising events  to take place over the next six months.  They hope to raise, through donations and  pledges, enough money to purchase a large  house for women and children needing emergency shelter from violent situations.  This includes battered wives, rape victims,  and "violence against women in general,"  says McDowell.  Donations and proceeds from a highly successfully benefit held recently have  dropped more than $7,000 in the coffers.  But, admits McDowell, it's a long way to  $150,000.  To meet this end staff are scheduling the  following events:  A Stanley Park Walkathon July 22. This  is a 10-mile walk, pledges available at  Rape Relief. A picnic in the park follows  the walk.  Oct. 27 is Casino night with gambling and  a dice time for all.  McDowell says, Rape Relief is hoping the  Ridge theatre people will sponsor a film  festival 'with proceeds going towards the  home.  And then there's the December Telethon and  a raffle draw.  McDowell said the vision of an emergency  shelter for women facing violence on the  streets and in the home came about when  staff discovered that an increasing  number of women are being trapped in  threatening situations.  We have about 200 oases on file since the  beginning of 1979.    These involve rape,  incest,  sexual assault,  sexual harassment  on the job and child abuse.     We are constantly receiving calls from women raped  by husbands,  acquaintances,  or whose children are being sexually molested by stepfathers,  uncles and other family members.  We realized that there is no resource for  Policy regarding operation of the facility  is still to be worked out. The members  will be meeting during the summer to answer specific questions such as how long  women and children will be permitted to  stay.  Says McDowell: When the home is operational  (furnishings donated by individuals) we  hope to rely as little as possible on money from any level of government.  We will raise enough money for the down  payment and mortgage.    That way the house  is ours and no one aan take it away.  There's T-shirts: "Remember the dignity  of your womanhood, take courage, stand  with us," buttons, pledge cards for donations and the walkathon and more information available at Rape Relief, 45 Kings-  way in Vancouver.   Fast on the heels of the Supreme Court's Gay Tide decision  Lesbians are bad for business?  LIL (Lesbian Information Line) has been  denied advertising space in the Vancouver  Free Press, because it's bad for business.  This follows fast on the heels of a recent  Supreme Court decision that it was okay  for The Vancouver Sun to refuse a Gay Tide  subscription ad on the grounds that an  advertisement for a gay liberation newspaper might, in the paper's opinion, result in a loss of business.  LIL is a counselling and referral service  for lesbian women.  LIL was phoned by the Vancouver Free Press,  says a spokesperson for the group. We  were told to drop by and pick up our ad  copy since our ad had been cancelled.     Well,  we certainly hadnht cancelled it.    So I  went over to their-office,  only to be  given the   'bad for business ' reasoning.  Kinesis phoned the Free Press to find out  what was going on.  Publisher Dan McLeod: I didn't know until  after the fact.    The advertising manager  is making these decisions based on the  fact that we don't want this paper to  gather the same kind of stigma as the  Georgia Straight.  Reconsidering  Advertising manager Tony Kennedy: We are  reconsidering accepting the ads.  ...They   (LIL)  said The Courier is accept-  ^ ing them and we are reconsidering if our  colleagues are placing them.  Kinesis: Has the Supreme Court decision  enabled you to refuse ads by using business  as an excuse?  Kennedy: (Pausa). Yes.    It's a business  decision,  we don't want to be put at a  business disadvantage.  Kinesis: I would think if it hadn't been  for that decision it might have been more  difficult for you to refuse. It might  have been a human rights issue. iocoi3,P2 2    Kinesis July   '79  Adams Lab  outrage  A woman's car was smashed at three in the  morning while she was doing her picket  duty.  The police still don't know who did  it.  The truck of another woman picketer  was smashed up by a company car but she  was accused of having done it herself.  Another picketer, Ron McCann, was hospitalized after he was attacked in his  apartment and stabbed eight times.  These are separate incidents.  But the  three people have something in common:  they are all employees of Adams Laboratories Ltd. in Surrey who went on strike  against the company last Feb. 21.  Their union, Retail, Wholesale, and Department Store Workers, was certified in  November of last year but the company refused to recognize them. The negotiation  for a first contract therefore reached a  dead end.  The workers went on strike. The company  hired relatives and non-union workers to  replace them.  The picket line, therefore, became the  only rallying point of the striking workers.  It also became the scene of many  nasty confrontations.  Suddenly, before anybody realized what  happened, the B.C. Supreme Court came  down with a judgment that is too hard to  swallow.  Two women, Mary Lynn Wheant (whose truck,  was smashed) and Ildiko Szelkely (whose  car was smashed) were each given a 10-day  sentence in jail "for picket line incidents" outside Adams Laboratories.  McCann, on the other hand, was sentenced  to six months in jail after being linked  to the cutting of an air brake on a semitrailer transporting Adams products which  had been manufactured behind the picket  line. Nobody mentioned that he almost  lost his life previous to the incident.  Three other strikers were fined $300 each  while the union was fined $10,000 for  failing to obey an injunction that limits  pickets and their activities on the line.  I was sorry to see them go to jail, says  Keith Robinson, co-owner of Adams.  Me too.  If Robinson and company had been  cooperative enough to give the workers  what is rightfully due them none of this  would have happened. —CesRosales  Boycott London Drugs  Adams Laboratories Ltd. prepare the vitamins for London Drugs. Don't go into  any of their stores until Adams workers  have won their first contact. ■  LABOUR  SFU 17—right to picket is on trial  in Burnaby courtroom  As we go to press, the trial of the SFU 18  is under way in a Burnaby courthouse. The  defence lawyers Stu Rush and Marguerite  Jackson are due to open their case June 28.  Justice Patricia Proudfoot rejecte'd a bid  on behalf of the 18 to have a mass trial,  which clearly would have been advantageous  to the 18 both in terms of finance and mobilizing support.  The trial now proceeds person by person,  with alphabetical hearing dates.  Provincial Justice S.Romilly presides  Peter Armitage is first. The verdict in  this.first trial will be important. If he  is acquitted, it could possibly mean that  the charges against the remaining 16 (one  of the 18 has already had charges dropped)  would be dropped.  The prosecution has presented it case against Armitage. Cop after cop has testified  to having seen him touch the arm of a  policewoman who was dragging defendant  Judy Cavanagh to the paddy wagon - obstructing the officer in the course of her duty.  Prosecution says Armitage made the policewoman turn around ninety degrees.  But Armitage's trial is somewhat atypical,  as he is accused of having touched the cop.  Acquittal could mean that the trials of the  others proceed nonetheless.  An AUCE representative to the SFU Defence  Committee told Kinesis that the costs of  the trials is expected to run as high as  $15,000 - $20,000.  You can make your donation to the SFU 18  Defence Fund by sending it to the committee  c/o AUCE provincial offices, 901 - 207  West Hastings.  Following a support meeting for the SFU  18 June 18, a joint union defence committee  was struck with representatives not only  from AUCE but also SORWUC, CAIMAW and the  Retail, Wholesale and Department Store  Workers Local 580 (on strike at Adams Laboratories Ltd. ) - all of which are targets  of government intervention.  Background  On March 22, 1979, a rally at the picket  line concluded with approximately 200  supporters joining the line.  The picket-  was peaceful and legal and at no 'time did  the RCMP tell the picketers that they  were committing an offence or require them  to disperse.  After three hours, however, the police,  including members of the RCMP security  service's "Ad Hoc Labor Liaison Committee"  Clip and mail  EATONS  ATTN: Mr. D.J. Hudson  701 Granville Street  Pacific Centre  Vancouver, B.C.  V6B 4E5  I SUPPORT THE  BOYCOTT OF J.P. STEVENS PRODUCTS  SOLD AT  EATONS  PLEDGE THAT MY CONSUMER DOLLARS WILL NOT SUPPORT  • UNFAIR COMPETITION TO CANADIANS JOBS  • UNEMPLOYMENT IN CANADA  • DISREGARD FOR HEALTH OF WORKERS  • DISCRIMINATION AGAINST WOMEN  • CORPORATE LABOUR LAWBREAKERS  • SUB-STANDARD WAGES  • SUB-STANDARD WORKING CONDITIONS  Signed_  attacked the picket line and arrested 18  picketers.  The charges laid on March 22, 1979. were  "obstructing a peace officer in the execution of his duty," a criminal offense  carrying a maximum two year jail sentence.  The Crown laid the second charge of  "blocking a highway" approximately a  month later and this is a summary offence  carrying a maximum sentence of six months  in jail or a $1,000 fine. One of the 18  arrested is no longer being charged.  Fifteen of those arrested are or have been  members of trade unions. Twelve of those  15 were also students at the time of the  arrests.  AUCE 2 is the bargaining agent for 650  clerical and technical workers at Simon  Fraser University. After months of  bargaining, AUCE 2 began a series of rotating strikes in December, 1978. In  January, 1979, the SFU administration  stated that its final offer, as directed  by the university's* board of governors,  was six per cent over two years.  On March 6, 1979, the university began  selective lockouts which forced AUCE 2  into a full-scale strike. On March 8,  1979, a picket line was set up at the  entrance to the university and remained  in place until April 20, 1979.  An Industrial Inquiry Commission, whose  decision will be binding, has now been  appointed by the minister of labor with  hearings set for July 3-6, 1979.  All through negotiations, the SFU administration showed bad faith and attempted  to break AUCE 2. For example, the administration made the offer of conditional  binding arbitration, a major condition  being comparability with unorganized clerical workers in the private sector and  selected by the employer.  Unfortunately, the latter are traditionally  low paid and the comparison was put forth  for the purpose of reducing unionized wages  The fact that members of the SFU board of  governors are also involved in big business is significant.  By working against  AUCE 2, board members such as Bill Hamilton (also president of the Employers  Council of B.C. ) work to maintain interests  other than those of the university com-  LILline from p.i...  Kennedy: We've also got the right to run  a successful business...what's the point  i   of backing a minority at our expense?  Kinesis: Well, I could argue that.  Kennedy: That's a moral issue.     This is  business.     We are in a particularly delicate position.     It might be a bit of  over-reaction.   We will be reconsidering  the ad.  On May 22, the Supreme Court decision  said that The Vancouver Sun could, under  a reasonable cause clause, refuse to print  the Gay Tide ad placed by the Gay Alliance  Towards Equality (GATE).  In its judgment the Supreme Court concurred with the findings of Justice A.  Robinson, of the Appeal Court. The crucial  section of Robinson's ruling reads:  The GATE advertisement would offefid sow.  of the newspaper's subscribers, which in  addition would,  of course,  result in a  loss of subscribers and afford reasonable  cause for declining to accept the business,% July. ...3.  L to R: DarlyneJewett, Joanne Einblau, Casey  L to R: Janet Beebe and Libby Weiser  L to R: Debra Lewis, Susan Hoeppner, Nadine Allen, Gayla Reid  VSW  Annual General Meeting-  plans for new constitution  Plans for developing an updated constitution for Vancouver  Status of Women were on the agenda at the Annual General  Meeting, June 13.  Outgoing executive members expressed their desire that the  new executive undertake the process of flattening out the  hierarchical structure of the board.  Lee Grills, who was completing her second term as president,  commented: it is a constant source of amazement to all of  us that we continue to press for solutions to our problems  against such overwhelming opposition...we have more difficult  days ahead but it will not shock me at all to find that we  will continue with energy,  commitment and creativity.  Reporting on the year's activities, VSW staff characterized  the past year as one of survival,  re-location and growth,  pushing ahead with community organizing while maintaining  an office which hums with information  referrals, research  and public responses on women's issues.  Sandra Currie, Diana Ellis, Mercia Stickney and Judy Bourne  were elected by acclamation to the positions of president,  vice-president, secretary and treasurer respectively. Ellis,  Stickney and Bourne are all former VSW staffers . Each of them  expressed a desire to give back energy to the organization in  return for all the benefits working at VSW has brought to  them.  Sandra Currie was emphatic that she would be president only  if the position was not treated with the false accoutrements  of power traditionally foisted upon presidents everywhere.  Elected as members-at-large were: Darlyne Jewett, Kay Matusek,  Jillian Ridington (outgoing vice-president), Sylvia Spring, .,  Joey Thompson (former secretary) and Cat Wickstrom. All affirmed  their commitment to VSW's financial survival and to an ongoing involvement in community organizing. 'ñ†  L to R: Sheila Reljic, Bobbi Patrick, Violet Johnson  Sandra Rose holding ballot box while Rosalie Hawrylko (far right) smiles into* camera  L to R: Norreen Garrity and Linda Shuto 4    Kinesis July 1979  LOCAL MOVEMENT NEWS  Vancouver women now have their own art gallery  By Marg Wood  A new Women's Art Gall.ery opened its doors  in January of tris year.  This small gallery is operated by Women in Focus, Production and Distribution Centre and has  two specific aims:  To provide a space  where women-defined art can get public exposure and be controlled by women artists.  The idea for the gallery came out of the  1978 Vancouver Women's Video and Film  Festival.  In order to create a women-  defined atmosphere for the'festival, local women artists were invited to display ■  their works.  Graphics, paintings, photographs, weaving, life-size figures and  huge paper mache animals contributed towards a successful art environment.  At this time a number of women realized  that space was not available in Vancouver  for the continued showing of this art.  Most, if not all, art galleries do not  consider much of women's art as art.  In  the next few months the Women in Focus  collective converted a 10 x 10 room into  a small but bright and warm gallery.  Many women unable to afford art school  Due to their economic status many women  artists are unable to attend art schools.  They work in their homes using less expensive materials such as colored paper,  cloth fabrics and wire.  In contrast, artists seen in the art galleries work with the more expensive and  accepted paints, metals and clays.  This  work by women has been called craft and  has not been viewed by many as art.  The  images used basically come from the women's own life experiences, which according  to the art critiques, do not appeal to the  masses.  Feminist ideas are often portrayed which, from my own past experience,  is not accepted in the art world.  Just ask Judy Chicago and the many others  who worked with her on "The Dinner Party."  After five years of gruelling work this  masterpiece may well end up in storage.  The content criteria established for the  Women's Art Gallery is that the material  be non-sexist and not contrary to feminist  theory.  If images of men appear they are  to be portrayed in a non-traditional, non-  h  Quilt by Liz Shefrin asks, "I wonder if quilting is art or craft?'  :  JS&KBf  oppressive'way or appear as part of a  feminist political statement.  Each artist's work is on display for  approximately a month and is for sale.  We invite you to come and support these  women artists.  The gallery is located at  Women in Focus, Production and Distribution Centre, #6 - 45 Kingsway.  Hours for  viewing are Monday to Friday, 10 a.m. to  4- p.m. and Thursdays, 10 a.m. to 8 p.m.  For more information especially for women  interested in having a showing please contact the women at 872-2250. ■  Upcoming Showings:  July 2-30 DIANA  KEMBLE, ongoing graphics  in book form.  Aug. 1 - 30 CLAIRE  KUJUNDZIC, paints/  drawings  Devil's advocacy  Coming to town : a women's building  A women's building for Vancouver: we'll  take our five free shares in BCRIC and  pool them.  They will constitute collateral  for a loan, with which we'll purchase our -  very own women's building.  Sounds good? Think again.  *Using BCRIC shares for collateral amounts  to complicity in an unscrupulous Socred  gimmick.  Ordinary people will soon find  that those five "free" shares are useless.  By taking the "free" shares we lend credibility to the Socred sell-out of this  province's natural resources to corporate  giants.  * It's -an energy drain. We shouldn't be  getting embroiled in the hazards of acquiring and maintaining real estate at  this time. We have our hands full fighting cutbacks.  * The building will work towards centralizing the Women's movement.' The strength  of the movement has always been in our  ability to remain decentralized, diffuse.  * The women's building will be divisive.  Our local movement will split between those  who are in favor of the building and those  who are not.  Internal politicking re the  building is an inward-looking project.  want to support the building?  * The building will be for both women  and men. Even after all the effort of organizing the building women still won't  have their own space, where they can get  away from heterosexist hassles.  * The project will mean that a lot of women will waste a lot of time going on and  on about The Man Question.  * The building will encourage passivity.  Women will use the building without contributing their energy to it.  It won't  work as a politicizing tool.  * Women aren't pledging their shares to  the building.  s building  the build-  Are  * Estimated co  half a million-  it for the building—about  ■is way too high. We can't  afford it. Women are dreaming.  * We already have a women's building: the  YWCA on Burrard Street.  * The building will be for women only.  This will feel threatening to women new to  the movement and they won't want to be a  part of the events. What about men who  What do you think of the women'  proposal? What role do you set  ing playing?    Do we need it?  What do you think of these criticisms?  some valid?    Specious?  At Kinesis we believe that debate about the  women's building proposal is useful and  necessary at this time.  Please send in your comments.     They can  be anywhere from 100 to 1,000 words.     If  we receive  them by July IS,  we'll print,  them in the next issue of Kinesis.  (For details of the proposal,  see Kinesis  April-May p.   3).* Kinesis- July   '79    5  After a year, two breaks for SOR WUC within 48 hours  Wading through the Muckamuck strike  By Elizabeth Godley  The Service, Office and Retail Workers'  Union of Canada is a survivor. Neither  rain nor snow nor injunctions nor lack  of money will keep SORWUC from organizing the unorganized.  Although SORWUC first caught the public  eye with its drive to unionize the banks  in 1977-78, the union has been around since  1972. SORWUC was formed by a group of Vancouver working women who say that women  workers are ignored by the traditional,  male-oriented labor movement.  Waitresses make less than waiters,  secretaries make less than janitors,  even  inside the same union,  says a member.  Sexism is not a prerogative of the middle classes.   The established trade unions  have not been fighting for women's needs.  SORWUC has been organizing small groups of  workers since its birth.  It holds the only  certification in B.C. for a bargaining  unit of one person.  Lots of times, women aren 't in a union  because their workplaces are so small  it's not considered economical to organize  them,  explains Jean Rands, the union's national treasurer. And in fact it's just as  hard to organize a unit of three or 10 as  it is to organize a big place with 100 employees.  For the past year, SORWUC has been on  strike at the Muckamuck, a Davie Street  restaurant owned by whites but employing  native Indian workers and serving native  Indian food.  Wages not the only issue  When Kinesis contacted owner Jane Erick-  son, she refused to speaker with us.  She and co-owner Doug Christmas say they  are trying to do the Native community a  service by creating an authentic West Coast  Indian environment in the restaurant.  The workers disagree. Ethel Gardner, a former employee, says, J know for sure that  they were not doing the Native people who  were working there a service....They did  represent much of the Native food and their  decor was fairly authentic,  but that doesn't  say they were doing anybody a service.  The Muckamuck workers joined SORWUC in the  spring of 1978. Wages weren't the only  issue. There were scheduling problems,  with people on permanent staff being told  not to come in for a few days because management was trying someone new.  You might get two or three days work in  three weeks,  says Gardner, adding that another problem was compulsory attendance at  staff meetings, with no pay, even on a  scheduled day off. Job security was nil,  and management would promise to train a  worker in one sort of work - bartending for  example - and then renege.  Ethel Gardner says she forgot to put a pan  of bannock (Indian bread) in the fridge one  night and $7.50 deducted from her pay cheque.  Complaints to the department of labor brought  no results.  We figured that with a union we would have  a right to appeal management decisions and  we 'd have a say in how our schedule was going  to work out,  Gardner adds. The workers wanted  definite job descriptions and, all the protection a union gives.  SORWUC was certified for the bargaining unit,  on March 20, 1978. Three bargaining sessions  were held. When a mediator couldn't bring the  two sides together, a strike vote was taken.  One June 1, 1978 - just over one year ago -  the Muckamuck workers walked off the job.  The union has been picketing Muckamuck for  a year now, and estimates that business has  been cut by 80$. Holding the line together  hasn't been easy,  but we've done it,  says  Pat Barter, national executive member.  The pickets try to persuade customers not  to go into the restaurant by explaining the  issues. Most of the time they are watched  through the window by management and scabs.  A couple of times, the scabs have come  written decision, the LRB stated that to  accede to the application  (for decertification) at this time would not only involve  the board to an unacceptable extend in  the collective bargaining process,  it  would,  in effect,  nullify the strike of  x Muc*(  A* ___**,  support the strike      support the strike  out to picket.  The last time they did that was May 26,   says  Barter. They were definitely locking for a  fight.    But we kept our hands in our pockets^  except when we had to push picket signs out  of our faces.  Pat Barter said that sometimes the scabs  will come out of the restaurant and thrust  themsleves between the pickets and the customers they are talking to. You can imagine  how angry this makes us.  The picket line has not been a tea party,  and on June 1, management applied for a  court injunction to prevent all picketing,  citing violence on the line.  Justice Patricia Proudfoot granted the injunction in spite of the union's protests.  The union had planned an anniversary celebration for that evening - 60 people were  expected to rally at the restaurant, to  sing and eat a huge chocolate cake baked  for the occasion. The celebration moved  to a nearby beach where the shocked union  members tried to recall the last time such  LRB on the decertification:  the employees...".It would thus grant the  employer a victory which they had not  attained in collective bargaining.  The board went on to say that the union  should be given the opportunity to sign a  contract, but that should any unlawful  acts  take place on the picket line, it  would be prepared to consider another  application for decertification.  On June 18 SORWUC went to the Court of  Appeal to have the injunction overturned.  Justice Proudfoot rejected the appeal,  saying that unlimited pickets would damage tourist season business!  What does the future hold for the Muckamuck strike?  Settling the strike would be like getting  on their hands and knees for management  now,  says  Nat Girvan, an employee on  strike for a year. And indeed, management is appealing the decertification  ruling, saying that unlawful incidents  on the picket line should force the board  to reconsider its decision.  t(,. .to accede to the application at this time would not  only involve the board to an unacceptable extent in the  collective bargaining process, it would, in effect, nullify  the strike of the employees. "  an injunction had been granted in B.C.  The injunction was one tactic the Muckamuck management used to try and break the  union. The other was an application for  decertification. Under the B.C. Labor  Code, an application to decertify - remove - the union can be made 10 months  after the union has been certified.  In  January, such an application was made on  behalf of the scabs working behind the  picket line.  The Labor Relations Board  (LRB) was in a quandary—employees must  vote on a decertification application,  and the LRB would have to decide who  could vote: employees working when the  strike began, those currently working at  the Muckamuck, or some combination of  those two groups.  It was four months before the LRB reached its decision.  June 6 and 7 were red-letter days for  SORWUC. Justice Proudfoot's injunction  was modified to allow six pickets on the  line and the Labor Relations Board ruled  against the decertification bid. In its  The owners of the Muckamuck certainly do  not appear to be ready to sign a contract. On June 14, scabs from the  restaurant picketed the building at 207  West Hastings St. where SORWUC has its  office, and the bank where Jackie Ainsworth, the union's national president,  works.  SCRWUC says morale is high, and except  for chronic problems raising money to pay  the strikers $100 a week, the strike is  going well. The strikers are sticking together, in spite of the apparent endlessness of the strike.  Ethel Gardner sums it up. You know,  things are looking more positive for the  union. The Muckamuck owners are going to  have to come across—either that or they  are going to have to put up with a picket  line outside forever, m  Elizabeth Godley is a former SORWUC member  who is currently studying journalism at  Langara campus,  Vancouver Community Kinesis July   '79  New Caledonia Collegemen won't spend women's  access money  The Prince George College of New Caledonia  board members defeated principal Charles  McCaffrey's recommendations to establish a  Women's Advisory Committee and provide a  fulltime Women's Program Animator for a  nine-month period, using $25,000 that the  Ministry of Education has given the college  for Women's Access Programming.  At the June 12 meeting held in Burns Lake  board members agreed that the grant applied  for by the administration was here now and  the board will vote on how to allocate it.  This prompted community education dean  Toulsen to testily explain that the minister  had earmarked the money to be spent exclusively on Women's Access Programming.  Further discussion was of the jocular "boy's  club" genrej equal rights for men, men  are also frustrated at work, it's only  frustrated housewives.  Board member Austin Howard-Gibbon, appointed to the college board by school  board chairman Bruce Strachan, Socred MLA  for Prince George South, professed innocence of the fact that the minister designated exclusive use of money  and went  on to say he protested the exclusivity  and requested the name be changed to  Person 's Advisory Committee and have  both sexes on it.     This was greeted with  guttural chuckles by his male supporters.  The first reading of the motion produced  a tie. Chair Ruth Rushant was under the  impression that the college's new bylaws  restricting the chair's vote, had been  passed by Victoria, when in fact, they  hadn't, leaving Rushant unaware that she  could cast the deciding vote.  Rushant  called for a recess, during which she  assured the women from Women's Equal Rights  Association that she would vote in favor.  The men, however, held a coffee-urn  caucus and returned to defeat the motion  again, leaving the two female members  meekly raising voting hands to half-  mast.  They 'd rather send it back to Victoria!  The question of the $17,000 Animator's  salary arose, fanned by comments such as  we'll find a person willing to do an interesting job as opposed to one paying  $40,000 and offering prestige,   offered  by chair Rushant.  Emotions ran high and principal McCaffrey '  pointed out the college is not obliged to  spend any part of the money.    You won't  lose it to anyone.     We will send it back  to Victoria.  This was in response to a woman's question  of where the money would be spent if not  on women's programming.  Some background information is needed to  make a judgement on the college board's  actions.  The Women's Equal Rights Association of  Prince George had met with college administration through the spring and lobbied  for an educational conference to determine  what women want and need in college programming. The college agreed to the conference  and pledged $5,000 for the conference coordinator's salary and miscellaneous costs  to be taken from the $25,000 grant.  Eighty women attended the conference April  20 and 21. An interim advisory committee,  was elected and resolutions passed. McCaffrey met with the committee twice for assistance in drafting his recommendations to  the board. No hint was ever given that his  proposal might be defeated. The committee  itself was so confident of the board rubber-  stamp approval that not one member attended  the board meeting!  Wants Person's Advisory Committee  One could cynically speculate that the  board action confirms the need for special  women's programs, especially in life  (lobby) skills to gain the knowledge needed to play the political game.  The college  board members are provincial government  appointees, with the exception of Austin  Howard-Gibbon.  Are all of Bill Bennett's non-elected  holders of office cast from the same mold?  Is the take a fag to lunch day slip of the  Human Rights Commission tongue indicative  of the goon mentality which is overlooking  adult education and human rights in this  provinc e ? By Trude LaBossiere ■  10 Canadians arrested in anti-Trident demonstrations  Ten Canadians were arraigned in Seattle  federal court Monday June 11, the aftermath of anti-nuclear demonstrations June  9 and 10 at the Trident submarine base, .  Bangor, Washington. All were charged  with two counts of trespassing..  Two days before the demonstration, the  federal law was changed to impose stiffer  penalties on protestors.  Due to these changes, the 10 women and  men will not be entitled to a jury trial,  despite a maximum possible combined'sentence of one year in jail and $1,000 fine  Public defender Irwin Schwartz speculated  that the people charged may be sentenced  to 30 days in jail on the first charge  and 60 days suspension on the second charge  The charges stem from civil disobedience  actions.  On Saturday June 9, 13 Canadians  crossed the fence at the Trident submarine base in Bangor, Washington.  In a  non-violent action the protestors approached a missile standing near the base's  old main gate and displayed a banner describing the offensive capability of Trident.  Two trees were planted in front of  the missile to symbolize the need to "move  from Trident to Life."  After processing by Navy nersonnel. the  SHOULD NOT PE  IN THEIR HAND*  13 were removed from the base. All were  given barring letters telling them not  to re-enter the base at risk of arrest.  Simultaneously with the action at Bangor,  a rally of Canadians and Americans was  held in Peace Arch Park. About 300 people  listened to live music and to speakers who  voiced their concern over Trident and  the escalating arms race towards nuclear  destruction.  On Sunday, June 10, the 13 Canadians returned to the base.  In a non-violent and  symbolic action, demonstrators formed a  human fence in front of the missile.  Ten had participated in the previous day's  action.  These 10 were promptly arrested  and transported to nearby Bremerton where  they were held overnight to await arraignment Monday.  The three 'first-timers'  were released at the base.  This fall, there wil] be simultaneous  anti-Trident demonstrations at five  locations in the U.S. including Bangor.  These fall demonstrations will coincide  + with the refitting of Poseidon submarines  £ with Trident I missiles and will be or-  % ganized by a coalition of groups in-  * cludine Vancouver's Pacific Life Community.  ^ Contact them at 874 8863 or come to a Mon-  &  day night meeting at 3255 Heather Street. _  UBC School of Social Work surveys women counsellors  By Erica Trimble  Women currently seeking counselling in  the Vancouver area have access to only  limited information about services available to them.  Female clients seeking counselling should  have information about a prospective  counsellor prior to seeking help; a survey  of women-to-women counselling services  is currently being conducted under the  auspices of the UBC School of Social  Work. The survey is funded by the Youth  Employment Services.  A short questionnaire is being sent out  to female counsellors in this area. We  want to identify the type of service  offered, the availability of these ser  vices and the attitudes and treatment  goals each counsellor has for female  clients.  We are limiting our survey to individual,  voluntary, out-patient counselling services for adult women where the primary  goal is psychological change and not  amelioration of specific difficulties  (eg. career counselling) or severe mental disorders.  At this point evidence exists that female counsellors may be particularly  effective with female clients and therefore our survey is restricted to female  counsellors/therapists.  There are two parts to this study. One  involves the compilation of a directory  of services and programs particularly  oriented to women; the second part is a  study of counsellor statements in counselling sessions for the purpose of developing a system of measuring or objectifying differences in counsellor orientations to women.  Researchers are interested in therapists'  statements in an early encounter with an  adult female client.  Your volunteer participation in this study  would be greatly appreciated. If you wish  to participate by supplying names for the  directory and/or audio tapes for the research, please contact Erika Trimble or  Susan White at 228-2383.■ Kinesis July   '79      7  High energy, largest leaping lesbian dance in Canada  Scene:  A hot summer's night. In a large hall,  standing room only, women are dancing,  talking, drinking. On the stage: women  playing excellent rock and roll. The  occasion? The largest Leaping Lesbian  Dance in Canada's herstory.  Scene:  Fifteen women sitting in a circle in a  small cement room with no windows. They  are discussing the state of distribution  of women's art in Canada,  (it needs a  lot of work).  Scene:  Women in friendly groupings sitting and  lying on the lawn outside Hart House,  University of Toronto.  Some are singing  and most are eating out of cardboard boxes.  A woman gives an impromptu workshop on  handwriting analysis.  These events took place at the 1979 Bi-  National Lesbian Conference held from May  19 to the 21 in Toronto.  Over 400 women  registered for the conference. (Bi-National refers to Quebec and Canada).  From Friday night to Monday afternoon there  were workshops, cultural events, reports,  dancing, dining and great exchanges of  information.  The theme of the conference was "Our Lives,  Our Community, Our Movement." The conference was structured so that we talked  about our lives first, then the movements  we have been and are involved in, and on  the third day, arrived at plans for further action.  Thus some of the workshop  headings for the first day were: how do we  cope; booze, dope, cigarettes, ageism;  lesbian mothers; lesbian image/coming out;  bisexuality; organizing our communities.  On the first day there were at least 24  different workshops. About 60 were held  throughout the conference.  The second-day workshop focussed on our  movement, on alliances we forge with other  liberation movements and on the problems  and benefits in working in other groups.  A sampling of titles included: lesbians  and the trade union movement;...and religion;... and the women's movement;...and  socialist feminism.  The third day was a wrap-up session with  women formalizing proposals that had been  discussed and passing resolutions. Each  day was prefaced with a plenary session in  which reports were given. We had time also to raise issues in the larger group.  On each of the three days there were skill-  sharing workshops running concurrently  with the discussion groups, and displays  of art, as well as musical get-togethers.  The conference opened up with a- coffeehouse  A number of excellent performers shared  their music, comedy routines and comments  with us.  Ferron sang.  Unfortunately I  did not take note of the other performers'  names, (oh, provincial chauvincism!).  The  Saturday night dance music was provided by  Mama Quila (Toronto) and Equis (Winnipeg).  Sunday night there was a delicious banquet.  During it we saw slides of women's art,  with a good selection from Vancouver's own,  followed by a play done by women from Winnipeg.  Most workshops were only two hours long,  which gave us time to introduce ourselves  and have a general discussion, but little  time to come up with concrete proposals  for action.  However some workshops were held more than  once, and by the third day there were a  number of resolutions ready to present to  the final plenary. What we were basically  doing in endorsing the resolutions was  saying that we supported the action that  these women were willing to work on. Thus  we supported: l) the formulation of a Lesbian Bill of Rights which would be used as  an aid in organizing and sonsciousness  raising.  2) The development of a special issue of  "The Body Politic" which would have a  large section devoted to lesbians.  (This  was initially undertaken by the Lesbian  Mother's Defense Fund as a response to the  Body Politic's "Men Loving Boys Loving  Men" article).  3) The development of a quarterly national  newsmagazine called Lesbian/Lesbienne.  Printing has been arranged with Dumont Pres  in the Kitchener-Waterloo area. At the  conference, content for the first issue  was planned, and the editorial policy was  formulated which demands that the articles  reprinted be "clearly feminist."  It is not expected that the bulk of the  newsmagazine will consist of originals—  it will be compiled predominantly by taking excerpts from newsletters across Canada.  There is a possibility that next year's  conference will take place in Winnipeg.  That will be finalized within three months.  This year's conference organizers—a group  of about 20 women—worked extremely hard  to pull everything together.  I appreciate  their labor a great deal, as my sense upon  leaving the conference was: this is only  the beginning! ■  By Lou Nelson (help from Susan Croll)  (Note: a contact list of regional reps,  was set up for Lesbian/Lesbienne.   Our B.C.  contact is Sharon Alexander,   1495 Myrtle  Street,   Victoria B.C.   V8R 2Z5.)  Equal pay—  that will be  the day!  After an hour-long debate in the Ontario  legislature May 17 a private member's bill  was passed to give women in Ontario some  hope that wage equa'lity could become a  reality.  Representatives of the many women's groups  which form the Equal Pay Coalition were  present in the galleries to hear the debate. In an earlier press conference the  Coalition had presented arguments in favor  of equal pay for work of equal value concept, along with figures showing that in  1976, women were being paid only 53.5 per  cent of the average earnings of working  men.  The bill calling for equal pay for work of  equal value was proposed by Ted Bounsall  (NDP—Windsor-Sandwich).  Having been passed on a voice vote by NDP  and Liberal members, it will now be considered by a legislative committee, which  can hold hearings to canvas public opinion.  Enthusiasm on the part of the government  does not run high and it will probably  allow the bill to die on the order paper at  the end of the current session of the  legislation in December. A good deal of  public pressure is going to be necessary  for the concept to be enshrined in law in  Ontario. ■  Reprinted from Upstream  more traditional spheres.     In the family  we have provided a moral base; in the  wider world we have consistently struggled  to humanize our environment...  Moral values,   social relationships—women  have taken historic responsibility for all  that which renders communities more fully  human.     If politics is the process through  which society safeguards the humanity of  its members,   then women belong in politics;  and if politics is not such a process,   then  clearly women are needed to make it so.  At its first public meeting, held June 15  ,_,    ,  .  _ in Toronto, the Feminist Party admitted  WOUlQ J^W VOte t effliniSt ! that theirs is a formidable task: turning  __  tp . • 4. r, ^  ^ o x ,     vision into policy and policy into strategy  The Feminist Party of Canada wants to know.  Feminist  IFarty of  Canada  Why build a new political party instead of  increasing the numbers of women within an  existing party?  Because, says the Feminist Party, women  elected from within these male-dominated  power structures usually end up denying  the roots from which they came. At the  moment of victory, most women shake off  their political debts to other women. In  the struggle to retain credibility with-.  in that male context, they walk on alone.  The only way a woman can maintain her  feminist beliefs while in office, the  Feminist Party concludes, is when she is  shielded by a feminist party structure.  EMPHASIS ON WOMEN'S MORAL ROLE  Women's full participation in the political  arena will bring a new direction to government in general, Feminist Party advocates  maintain.  The vision women will contribute to  politics ,-ts the same vision we have always been dependent on to bring to our  Troublesome questions have been raised.  How can you expect women with only gender  in common to take unified action and overcome the years and allegiances of ideological differences?  For the interim committee of the Feminist  Party, the choice is clear. They advance  the idea that a feminist party is, the  only method that could truly be representative of women's needs and desires for  For more information contact the Feminist  Party of Canada, 122 Hilton Ave., Toronto!  Prairie Woman needs your help  The collective of the newspaper, Prairie  Woman, is in trouble. They did not have  enough money to publish a May-June issue.  This is the only socialist-feminist newsletter on the prairies, and they want to  continue. Send them a subscription (it's  only $4.00 a year) to Prairie Woman, P.O.  Box 4021, Saskatoon, Sask. ■ 8- Kinesi3\J-uly:,'7.9:. .  Feds! offensive: reserve army under seige  By Debra Lewis  The history of women's relationship to the  workforce in Canada can only be described  as one of crass manipulation.  The myth of choice—that is, that women  individually and as a group have been and  are in a position to choose what form this  relationship will take—is exactly that.  The position that women are assigned at  any particular point in history is reflected in a myriad of ways—"popular wisdom"  as a reflection of current ideology, media  representations of the "ideal" woman, fashion trends, and so on. Not the least of  these are the ways in which government  legislation and policy manipulates the  ability of women to participate (or not to  participate) in the labor force.  Probably the most blatant and well known  example of this manipulation occurred in  the period of the Second World War and  the years immediately following it.  Restrictions in the federal public service,  for example, had been in force prior to  this time.  The Civil Service Act of 1918  gave the federal government the right to  limit job competition on a number of  grounds including, among others, sex.  Only women who were unmarried and self-  supporting were considered to be qualified  candidates.  Others would be appointed only  if 'qualified' candidates were not available, and then only on a temporary basis.  Rosie the Riveter  During World War II, however, there was a  significant increase in the number of women  working in the civil service.  This reflected the general increase in women's participation rate, particularly in job areas which  had formerly been closed to them.  Child  care facilities rapidly increased to encourage this trend.  The need for women  workers was further reflected in media perceptions - the image of "Rosie the Riveter"  became an acceptable manifestation of women's role.  In the years following the war, however,  the bottom quickly fell out of women's  wartime role.  Childcare was once again at  a premium, and the media role of women as  wife and mother was once again in the forefront. At the end of the war, restrictions  on the participation of married women in  the federal.public service were once again  in evidence.  Only in special circumstances  were they hired or retained as employees,  and even then with restrictions on advancement.  Only in 1955 were such limitations  eliminated (in theory, at least).  The coordinated efforts of government, the  media, and other aspects of the state apparatus accomplished their task admirably.  In 1945, women represented 31.4 per cent  of the labor force.  Only one year later,  this figure had failed to 22.7 per cent.  It was not until the early 1970's that the  participation rate of women once again  reached the 1945 level.  In the reserves  The example of wartime labor force participation is perhaps the most obvious manifestation of the manipulation of women workers.  However, it is certainly not the only one.  A primary feature of a capitalist economic  system is its need for labor reserves. Women constitute a major form of such reserves, and it is this status that provides  the basis of their manipulation in and out  of the labor force.  Consequently, women  are held into a double position of dependence. First, they are dependent within  the structure of the nuclear family.  Further, they are dependent on the needs of  the economy which may or may not allow  them access to independent wages.  Legislating backlash  In the past few years, the backlash against  women's right to an independent role in  the workforce has been very much in evi  dence. Among the clearest forms this  backlash has taken are a variety of governmental legislative and policy changes  specificly designed to limit women's role  as an independent wage earner.  The primary distinction in this phase of manipulation is that restrictions are seldom  placed on women per se. Instead, government propaganda refers to "secondary" or  "marginal" wage earners.  The theory appears to be that changing  the language used may disguise the actual  events which are taking place. However,  no mistake should be made that women are  not the target of a systematic attack by  all levels of government.  UIC  The most public of steps recently taken  Inst women in this respect were last  into practice by late 1978. At that time  the (then) Liberal government brought forward a number of proposals designed to  "tighten up" the system and, supposedly,  allow for resources to be used instead  for job creation.  Changes in eligibility  requirements for "new entrants" and "reentrants" (read youth, and women who have  taken a number of years off to raise a  family), the restriction of benefit  eligibility to those working over 20 hours  a week (and the vast majority of part-time  workers are women) and the reduction of  benefits from 66 2/3 per cent to 60 per  cent (when women earn an average of 59  per cent of men already) are clearly intended to penalize women workers.  In addition, those who have collected  benefits whitin the last year are now  subject to additional weeks of employment  Government policy and women in  the workforce   Part 1  December's amendments to the Unemployment  Insurance Act. Clues to the federal government's intentions in this area could be  nd in the 1977 "Comprehensive Review of  the Unemployment Insurance Program in  Canada."  This report made a number of sweeping and  undocumented statements about women.  It  stated that "secondary earners" are more  likely to abuse the program, that males  were keener in finding jobs than females,  and that the continued growth of secondary  earners with unstable employment patterns  would likely impose unexpected increases in  unemployment insurance benefit expenditures.  The implication, of course, is that women  work only for luxuries (or "pin money")  and consequently are likely to misuse the  program.  The facts, however, clearly  counter this view. In 1975, the female  labor force consisted of 31 per cent single women, 20.7 per cent women married to  husbands earning less than $10,000 per  year, and 9.4 per cent those who were  widowed, separated or divorced.  Clearly  then, at least 61.6 per cent of women were  working primarily for reasons of financial  necessity.  It is further true that many wives are  entering the labor force to maintain a  stable family income in the face of inflation.  Patricia Connelly has pointed  out that while the percentage distribution  of income (calculated by individuals) for  the lowest, second lowest and middle fifths  of the population has decreased since 1951,  the distribution for families in the same  three sectors has remained relatively  stable.  This can only be accounted for by  the increase in labor force participation  by married women. These women work to  maintain a reasonable standard of living,  not to increase it.  "New entrants, re-entrants."  Despite these facts, the hints of things  to come in the 1977 Review were being put  in their qualifying period to be eligible.  Since women are generally "last hired,  first hired" and since many women (particularly those returning to the work  force) are forced to find employment  through temporary employment agencies,  such a provision is clearly aimed at women as a group.  Even Bud Cullen, then Minister of Employment and Immigration, had to admit  that new provisions would particularly  affect women. However, he claimed:  We will compensate for the effects of  these changes by increased and continued  efforts to improve the status of women  in the labor force.  No more outreach  Somehow, Cullen managed to keep a straight  face while making this allegation. Only  a month before, however, (October 17, 1978)  he had announced that women would no longer be considered a target group for Manpower Outreach programs which provide employment-related services for those who  have particular difficulties finding  work. Further, in rationalizing the  elimination of women's outreach while introducing unemployment insurance cutbacks  he stated: But women can in no way be considered severely disadvantaged because they  are women.  No more training allowance  Similarly, changes in Manpower training programs were of particular impact to women.  In September, 1978, training allowances  were decreased to $10 from $45 (per week)  for those 'married to or living with' an  employed person; to $80 from $90 for those  with one dependent; and to $95 from $97  for those with two dependents. Allowances  for those with three or four dependents  were marginally increased. Obviously, such  changes are of most significance to married► Kinesis July   '79  women and single parents (most of whom, of  course, are women).  Again, Cullen attempted to rationalize the  changes by stating that allowances were  never intended to provide training incentives (as if $45 a week is much of an incentive), but to defray costs and therefore  remove disincentives. However, it is obvious that $10 weekly cannot begin to compensate a woman with children for the added  expense of her training—transportation,  child care, etc. It certainly seems that  the minister was adept at speaking with a  forked tongue.  "Undermining incentive to work."  Ironically (or perhaps quite-intentionally),  the report which gave the go ahead for  policy change in the Manpower training  field was also released in 1977 ("The  Canada Manpower Training Program: A Policy  Review).  The report stated:  Income maintenance schemes should seek to  cover those in need without undermining  the basic incentive to work or distorting  programs,  such as training,  which have other  primary objectives.     In due course,  it is  our intention that trainees will receive-  from the training program such reimbursements for expenses and incentives as may be  necessary but will no  longer receive income maintenance payments from this source.  Clearly, the figures cited above indicate  that even expense reimbursement is inadequate.  Further, the move to use unemployment insurance payments to cover training  periods will effectively bar women returning  to the workforce, who already have had their  eligibility for unemployment insurance  severely cut back.  In addition, the policy will have direct  implications for those already working at  cant proportion of trainees withdraw from  the labor force after training, many of them  "to keep house. "   The great majority of  persons in this group are dependents. "  Once again, women are singled out without  reference to the fact that they are, in  fact, women. Assertions such as the above  rest, of course, on a number of crucial  assumptions. First, women working in the  home do not, as the report asserts, contribute skills to Canada's economy.     In  addition, it is supposed that women in  such positions (that is, oat of the paid  work force) will continue in that role.  However, it is clear that removing training courses from these women will in fact  coerce them into precisely that position  ployment insurance cuts was to aid job  creation). An analysis of Phase I of the  program (April 1977 to March 1978) indicates that only 27 per cent of the participants were women and, of these, almost  one half were under 25 years of age.  Given other manifestations of federal government policy, it is difficult to believe  that this trend is accidental. It is interesting to note that Canada Works was  initiated in 1977, which is proving to be  a rather magic year in the attack of the  federal government on women.  This discussion began with information of  past federal government control of women  in its own public service. It is therefore perhaps appropriate that it should  TABLE 1: Comparison of unemployment insurance with Manpower training allowances  based on prior earnings of $3 an hour and a 40 hour week.  §  of dependents none one two three four  U.I. rate  (per month)  Manpower rate  (per month)  $309.60  $309.60  $309.60  $309.60  $309.60  $258.00  $344.00  $408.50  $473.00  $537.00  minimum wage rates. Table 1 presents the  situation for a person employed for 40  hours a week at $3 an hour.  Such provisions, obviously, will have their  greatest effects on single parents (most of  whom are women).  No more language training  Another feature of the 1977 Manpower review was the recommendation to provide  official language training to only those  immigrants who have made "independent applications. The report states: "...in many  cases,  it  (language training) is not being  provided to the right people.    A signifi-  PROSPERITY:  m> KJUST  //jpjm   1  I Canadian Dimension  whether or not they want to be there.  Further, it is certainly not proved that  many women who do "keep house" after language training do so from choice and not  from the effects of a deteriorating labor  market.  Some subtleties, even  Not all government policy changes are so  overt, however. There are other, more  subtle changes in programs which are similarly prejudicial to the participation of  women.  One such indication is that of the  ability of federal job creation programs  to serve the needs of women, particularly  women seeking to re-enter the labor market.  A recent report by Mary Pearson for the  Advisory Council on the Status of Women  asserted that the former job creation  scheme LIP (Local Initiatives Program) was  particularly effective in this endeavor.  She notes that ...LIP was an effective  tool in providing work for unemployed  women,  re-entry women,  sole-support mothers  and welfare mothers.    Evidence for this  statement was drawn from the fact that  41.2 per cent of LIP participants were women.  Of these, 55.4 per cent reported that  they were unemployed and 24.1 per cent  that they were "keeping house" prior to  entry into the program. In addition, 45.3  per cent of female LIP participants were  25 to 44 years of age and 21 per cent of  them over 45.  No more LIP service  Since the phasing out of LIP, its successor,  Canada Works, has been much less effective  at serving*the needs of women.  (It should  be remembered that a rationale for unem-  end with more current information on this  subject. In the past few years, attacks  on the public sector, from the extreme example of the postal workers on down the  line, have become increasingly popular.  This anti-civil servant attitude, however,  once again has particular effects for women.  Comparability nonsense  The prevailing attitude now (and although  at its most acute at the federal level, it  is certainly not absent at other levels of  government) is that public sector workers  should not be paid at levels higher than  those received by those doing similar work  in the private sector. Obviously, this  approach is a thinly-veiled attack on the  collective bargaining process in general,  but it is also an assault on women.  Women employed in clerical occupations in  government constitute one of the few groups  of women in such fields who are organized.  Since office workers are in general both  unorganized and grossly underpaid, a comparison of women in the public sector employed in similar work will have a double  effect.  First, the slim financial benefits public sector women have been able to  accomplish through trade unionism will be  undercut.  In addition, it is likely that this process  will continue to hold down pay levels for  similar work in the private sector.  It  is obvious that this process makes nonsense of empty government rhetoric concerning equal pay.  It is clear that, regardless of rationalizations, rhetoric and empty promises, the  policy of the federal government in recent years has been to severely restrict  the participation of women in the labor  force and to provide them little protection when they are victims of a sagging  economy.  In the second part of this discussion, in  next month's Kinesis, the provincial government as an accomplice in this process  will be examined. ■ 10    Kinesis July   '79  Marge Piercy: "We're in for the long haul."  By Claudia MacDonald and Gayla Reid  I don't think you get much out of not  fighting in your life,   says Marge Piercy.  All you get is a faster defeat and an  earlier old age,  a poverty-stricken one.  Her work, she agrees, is a call to struggle,  a struggle which lasts a lifetime.  But  don't romanticize that into a streetfight-  ing image, she warns, for the kind of  fighting that keeps women alive is kitchen  fighting.  Piercy, the foremost feminist novelist and  poet of our times, came to Vancouver recently as part of the women's studies  program in continuing education at the  Langara campus of Vancouver Community  College.  While in Vancouver, Piercy performed her  poetry, conducted a workshop, spoke with  local women and gave an interview to  Sylvia Spring of Vancouver Status of Women. What follows are notes from tapes  made by local feminists of that interview  and of the workshop.  J wrote both fiction and poetry from the  time I was  15,   Piercy said. Her poetry,  however, began to appear long before any  of the fiction, because her novels were  "totally unpublishable" until the 70's:  I was far more interested in politics  than you were allowed to be,  far more in-  terei ted in women.  Writing feminist fiction in the. 50's was  lonely work. Piercy recalled how, when  working as a secretary, she illicitly obtained a library card to the University  of Chicago library.  She would frequent  the stacks, seeking out information on  witches, goddesses, strong images of-women,  trying to understand what it was that was  killing the women I loved and which was  trying to kill me.  Reading Simone de Beauvoir's Second Sex  and her novels was like walking into a  lighted room. Here was a woman of the  left, a feminist, writing about women's  lives and writing politically. It was  marve I lous.  Active in SDS and the anti-war movement,  Piercy comments that at the height of  anti-war activism she probably had less  feminist consciousness than she had before  or after—ending the war became a real  priority.     What was happening haunted me  day and night.  "My first identification is as a feminist."  Piercy is clear where she starts from:  my first identification is as a feminist.  She sees three great movements of the  theory and practice of social change  in this century: marxism, anarchism and  feminism...my home is in feminism but I'm  never going to be so stupid as to ignore  the other two.    I have a lot of identification with them and with people in them.  These days, I'm a feminist mostly. I work  on other issues when they annoy me enough,  like nukes.  Art is political and writing is work.  It  is a deliberately concocted and fairly  recent heresy that art is separate from  politics, Piercy maintains. You wouldn't  have to go back very far in time before  people started laughing at you: Try telling Alexander Pope  that art isn't political.  Try telling Catullus,  Homer!  Writers live in society, and are part of  the complicated social web (just like everyone else. Art she sees as productive  work: "T believe artistic production is  real production...we create out of the  experiences of other people for other  And writing is a political act. I am not  writing for the women 's movement,  says  Piercy of her novels. I am writing for  people who are not yet persuaded.     If she  wanted to communicate within the movemeni  there are more direct ways of doing it  than going through a New York publisher.  Because: her novels are written for people  outside the movement, and outside literary  circles, it is very important to her that  they be published in paperback: If they  don't get into drug stores and supermarkets  where ordinary people who don't go into  bookstores get books,  they are no use at  all.  There are different constituences for different kinds of work. Some of my poetry  is for feminists.   Looking at Quilts, for example, is addressed specifically to women.  But the Rape Poem is for men: All it takes  to cast a rapist is to be able to see your  body/as jackhammer,  as blowtorch,  as adding machine gun.     The you in the poem addresses men.  Of her novels, Piercy was asked most often  about The High Cost of Living. Among the  workshops participants, there was a general  sense of disappointment with that book,  whose protagonist, Leslie, isn't a feminist. What was she trying to do in that  book?  It's aboit class,  Piercy responded. It  is, she added, about growing up in the late  seventies and facing a narrow range of  choices—a much narrower range than people  faced when growing up in the 60's. It's  about those choices and consequences of  those choices for the three central  characters in the triangle—Bernard, Leslie and Honor.  Not in the matriarchal comics business  Do I want people to think Leslie is a  heroine? No.     She points out that she's  not in the business of producing matriarchal comics—which might make you feel  better for a short period of time, like  having a beer.  It is also about the limitations of taking  a purely moral stance, as Leslie does ,  and confusing that with a political one,  as many people in the late 70's are doing.  Leslie is a lesbian, but the novel is not  about that fact. Piercy says she wanted  to write a novel where being' a lesbian was  presented simply as a given, the same kind  of given as that Leslie has red hair,  comes from Michigan and likes karate.  In The High Cost of Living Leslie is a  graduate student from the working class.  Her boss-professor, George, is her meal-  ticket. He is her only way out. You  could call it The High Cost of George.  "I am writing for people  who are not yet persuaded."  If we don't like the book, then that  probably means that it's not a book which  is useful to us, Piercy suggests. It's  not written for a feminist audience.  What was the audience, then, for her previous novel, Woman on the Edge of Time?  Anyone who is not right happy with the  way things are under the status quo but  who perhaps needs concrete images of  how things might be.  In setting out to write Woman on the Edge  of Time she decided to embody the best  ideas of the future which people working  for social change have developed.  Her ideas, Piercy emphasizes,, are collective ones. That's the paradox of her  novels: her ideas come from the movement ►  !••.'•• Kinesis July!79    11  but are not specifically aimed back at the  movement.  On one point Piercy is particularly emphatic : My books are about collective experience, about the buried lives of lots  and lots of people...1 am trying to articulate buried lives.  Too many novels, she adds, are about suburban adultery, about people who have far  too much money and who see alcohol as  being their sole problem, about people  who are just killing time.  My profession is to be a novelist,   she  says, stressing that she does not write  veiled autobiography or confessional  prose. Many readers mistake fiction for  life, however,  She has received no less  than four job offers for Miriam, the  computer analyst of Small Changes. She  has been called at six in the morning by  a person who said that she/he needed to  talk to Phil, a character from the same  book.  Has she had the experiences she writes  about ?  You're supposed to say yes to that question, yes,  you have to be a lumberjack.  But that's nonsense.  Actually,  if you have  any analysis and you have any gift of empathy ...in truth you have the capacity  to assimilate other people's experience  rather rapidly.  Can she open up to men in empathy for  those purposes as readily as she can open  up to women? There isn't a substance called men,   Piercy answered. 'There are more  men who have power and money and rewards—  at least sexist reward—which give them  licence to oppress someone in this society.  Percentage-wise you are going  to find more  men who are dangerous to you and will hurt  you.     You will also find men who. are involved in trying to change this,  men who  will help you.  Does she support violence, asked one workshop participant.  Piercy's response was  direct: "If somebody's standing on your  foot, you get them off."  People Whose lives are committed to working  for social change, and Piercy identifies  herself as being among them, are in for  the long haul. I'm not one of the people  who believed that in 1969 we were about to  have a successful,  violent revolution,  she says, adding, and I'm not one now.  That long haul is the theme of much of her  writing. You will do it again/for nothing  living/resembles a straight line/certainly  not this journey,   she writes in The Spring  Offensive of the Snail.  Because the struggle is going to be lifelong, she cautions, you have to guard  against burnout. You have to give yourself energy to try things.     You have to  live in a way that you like your life.  Piercy was asked about the nature of friendship in her novels, about the nature of romantic love. Is it possible to love someone and not be friends with them? She responded: Romantic love is a possessive love.  It's a type of love where you have someone  or you'd like to see   'em dead...love me,  or if you're going to leave me I'd like to  see yoi. with your throat cut.. .so I guess  that the only love which I've much interest  in is  loving friendship.  Does sexuality change friendships? Some  it makes more intimate,  some it brings to  an end,  but relationships that begin in  the kind of blind oedipal chemistry that  we are trained to respect as romantic love  frequently,  when that energy is worn off,  there isn't much.     There often isn't even  much sexuality.     I think a lot of sexuality  that is good for us is based upon liking  somebody,   being able to be open about what  you want... "  Is that kind of relationship possible with  men? If it's not possible with men,  it's  not possible with women;  it's not easy with  anybody  ...   except maybe an exceptional  Siamese cat now and then.  The tape is available for viewing at Video Inn, 261 Powell St. Video Inn is starting a women's media night each month. You  can view tapes, learn how to use media equipment. Pat, Shawn, Peg and Claudia have  more information at Video Inn : 688 4336  'Vbu can be a participant in Dreamspace  Women's Dreamspace will be at Robson Square  Aug. 1 to 16.  P.J. will be there, too.  P.J. is a doll.  She's named for her two  mothers, Penny and Joanne.  P.J., seen here with a young friend,  is a composite. She's half young, black  woman and half old, white woman.  Dreamspace, a collective, cooperative project by numerous women is part of a show  in celebration of world unity and the  year of the child. There will be flags,  decals,  a world made out of junk materials.  A walk-in womb.     Lots of ethnic music,  says Shula Leonard, one of the women involved in the project .Dreamspace, a women's  sculptural event.  P.J. was created especially for Dreamspace.  She's now being taken around town  and photographed doing all the things that  women do: at the laundromat, on the bus,  in the park, at the stores...pictures of  P.J. in her everyday woman's environment  will be part of Dreamspace.  Possibly,  pictures of F.J. will also be projected  on to the four outside surfaces of the  white Dreamspace.  Inside Dreamspace, there is a wall of  pain, a wall of change, a herstory wall  and a closet. The wall of pain is about  contraception,  UIC,  all the hassles,  says  Leonard. The closet will deal with women 's clothing from birth to shroud.     It  will feature junk jewellery, plus a huge  cosmic serpent. P.J. will be sitting  next to the serpent, brave as can be.  Different women are coordinating the work  on each of the walls. Centre of the wall  of change is a big, oval 6' mylar mirror  with graffiti, including be sure to ask  for your change.    Sculptured faces done  in gauze frame the mirror.  Directly across from that is the herstory  wall - in red on white colour xerox  pictures of our herstory. (if you have  any pictures of women, the project people  would use them right now).  The ceiling will act as a balance to the  wall of pain. Patchwork sculputre pieces  18" by 18" convey hopeful images for our  future, images of people and things we  love, recurrent dreams.  The whole piece will be painted white so  that you can add your own graffiti to the  piece when you take part in it.  (Paint-  crews are needed to add the white paint  to sculpture). There will be  lots of in  teresting things hidden away in the  sculpture,  says Leonard. Like a photograph album in the closet,  if you happen  to find it.  The process of women being involved in  the sculpture at the Robson Square show  will also be recorded on video.  Many women from very diverse political  backgrounds have come together to work on  this project, and it's really going well,  Leonard concluded.  Be a part of Dreamspace. You can find out  more about the project by phoning Shula  Leonard at 732 9716 or 681 7654.        i SOPHIA  This highest form of feminin  female power misrepresented as  AMAZON  Embodiment of Warric  HATSHEPSUT  d. 1479 B.C. Egypt. Pharoh of the 18th dynasty  ASPASIA  470-410 B.C. Greece. Scholar, philosopher  ISHTAR  Great Goddess of Mesopotai  PRIMORDIAL GODDESS  The feminine principle  Jane Anne Manson  Judy Chicago's "The Dinner Party" is a profound and coherent artistic statement S-  bout the history of women in Western society. The work stands as the major North  American art work about women's experience.  Five years in the making, "The Dinner Party"  is a symbolic representation of the herstory of women in Western Civilization, and  is the cooperative creation of more than  400 different artists working under the  direction of Judy Chicago.  "The Dinner Party" consists of 33 porcelain  plates which represent 33 pre-eminent  mythical and historical female figures.  The plates rest on ornate linen runners  accompanied by porcelain chalices and flatware.  These in turn are displayed on a 48 foot  equilateral, triangular table. The table  stands upon an iridescent hand-poured,  hand-polished porcelain floor.  On this  "Heritage Floor," the names of an additional 999 great women are organized. They  are arranged in streams by century and  profession, flowing to and from each plate  providing the context of each great woman's  emergence.  The floor symbolizes the importance of the network or support system  in producing "greatness." It reminds us  not only of the miltitude of great women  hidden from history, but also of the relationship between these women.  The Dinner Party closed June 17 after a  three-month exposition at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art. Attendance at  the show had broken all of the museum's  previous attendance records for the exhibition of a living artist.  During the  week it was necessary to wait up to one  and a half hours to view The Dinner Party.  However on the final weekend of the exhibit,  when I visited the show, the wait in the  line-up had escalated to five hours.  People were appearing at 8:00 a.m. to  await the museum's 10:00 a.m. opening.  However, the enormous popularity of the  exhibit is deceptive, since only two  museums in North America have deemed The  Dinner Party "worthy" of exhibition.  During her June 10 lecture at VCC Langara  campus in Vancouver, Judy Chicago explained that the museums retain all of  the funds obtained from admission and  sale of catalogues. The artist receives  none of this money. Yet despite the apparent profitability of Chicago's work,  Canadian and American museums have"declined" the opportunity to show The Dinner  Party.  Indeed institutional resistance is so strong  that when a group of women in Houston, Texas, went to their local gallery to lobby for  a showing, they were told that it would be  necessary to raise $50,000. It was claimed  that the money was required to cover the  packing, shipping and exhibition costs.  (However when the women's community successfully raised the money and returned to  ETHEL SMYTH  1858 - 1944 England. English composer  VIRGINIA WOOLF  - 1941 England. English w  the selections committee, they were again  refused.) It should be noted that they  were refused by a publically-maintained institution.  Closer'to home, the Seattle Art Museum was  one of the three original museums that  agreed to exhibit The Dinner Party. The  Seattle, San Francisco and Rochester, New  York museums were to split the packaging  to e, coherent body of information, capable  of altering values and achieving social  change.  Women's artistic endeavors have been historically restricted and simultaneously  demeaned for remaining within the realm  of the "minor" or "lower" arts. Devalued  for their utilitarian or decorative function, these forms are invisible to the  THE  DINNER  PARTY  and shipping costs in order to reduce the  financial burden upon each institution.  When Seattle withdrew their commitment for  "political" reasons, this action reduced  The Dinner Party's audience and potential  impact, but also increased the so-called  risk to the other museums.  The Vancouver Art Gallery was offered the  opportunity to exhibit The Dinner Party in  1976 but turned down the offer after Alvin  Balkind, the chief curator, "was unable to  rouse enough interest in the show to justify  taking it on."  The Dinner Party was offered to the Vancouver Art Gallery for the modest and easily  recovered fee of $9,000.  To understand the art establishment's resistance to The Dinner Party one must understand the sexist and classist framework into which Judy Chicago has been attempting  to make her contribution.  A permanent part of our culture  In the broadest terms Chicago is trying "to  ensure that women's achievements become a  permanent part of our culture." She recognizes that women's accomplishments have  been, and are, trivialized or individualized as inconsequential or something peculiar only to one woman's personality.  However, Chicago believes that the attainments of any woman, artistic or otherwise,  must be compared with those of other women  so that all these deeds may be amassed In-  male-dominated "high" art world of painting and sculpture. An objet d'arte must  be utterly useless, except as a visual experience, to be valued as "high" or "real"  art.  Art is political  Thus the technical excellence of elaborate  tapestries, lacework, weaving, embroidery  and pottery are overlooked as mere "crafts."  Some of the institutional opposition to The  Dinner Party is undoubtedly rooted in  Chicago's attempt to level this heirarchy  within the arts.  Working within the traditional framework of  china painting, ceramics and needle-work,  The Dinner Party confronts the illegitimacy  of such standards as "minor" and "major,"  "low" and "high" arts. The teams of artists  under Chicago's artistic direction have  brought the artist's original drawings to  an awesome fruition. In form alone, the  work poses a threat to established art  notions.  The content of The Dinner Party is another  matter again. The vaginal/flower/butterfly forms are undeniably female—but not  as usually conceived of and desired by men.  The female sexuality evident in the images  cannot be objectified; one can only identify with the forms.  Chicago has developed a broad language for  expressing the various racial, historical  and emotional experiences of women. She  articulates an incredible variety of fates  through the basic icons of female biological definition: breasts, ovaries and  a. 380-415 Alexandria. Roman scholar  MARCELLA  325-410 Rome. Founded the first c  SOJOURNER TRUTH  1797 - 1883 United States. Courageou  vagina.  Margaret Sanger, the birth control pioneer  is represented as a placenta-like form.  Her winged hands grip the edge of the plate  as if to propel herself beyond its constraints and take flight.  The plate of Italian painter, Artemisia  Gentileschi, is a powerful rainbow-colored  muscle. It is impressive for its strength  as well as its self-protective folds. The  plate reflects the biographical fact of  Artemisia's rape by an artist hired to  instruct her and her consequent sensitivity  to the endless gossip which surrounded her  after the assault. A favorite subject of  Gentileschi's paintings was Judith, a Jewish  heroine who is honored in yet another of  Chicago's plates. It is precisely_this  type of interplay between the gallery figures which gives The Dinner Party its depth  and coherency.  For me, seeing the show was an incredibly  moving and satisfying experience. After  hearing Judy Chicago speak and seeing her  show her slides at the Langara campus, I  realized what an important work this was  for me to see. I felt like a time-traveller  reunited with her past.  I went to San Francisco for the specific  purpose of seeing The Dinner Party as if  completing some sort of pilgrimage. I had  to see it to content my own longings for a  feminist millenium.  When I arrived in San Francisco I went  straight to the Museum of Modern Art.  There I joined hundreds of other people  waiting to see the show. The line-up itself was an incredible experience—five  hours gives a lot of time for conversation.  I met students, a sculptor, midwives, housewives and people who knew little about the  work ("I think her name is Nancy Chicago")  but were amazingly willing to wait five  hours.  It was the first time I have felt any sense  of international feminism. As a Canadian I  found it difficult to deal with America,  the nation that dominates Canada, and America, the people. Consequently I was overjoyed to find a kindred spirit amongst us  and such pleasure in our conversation.  An incredibly moving experience  At the same time I was angered that I was  one of the few among my friends who were  able to see The Dinner Party. It was only  with the cooperation of friends and my  employer that I disentangled myself briefly  enough to see the exhibit.  With all this talk in Vancouver about  "Taking the Art Gallery to Court," I wonder  if we shouldn't do so! We should take the  art gallery to court not in the manner  currently advocated but for breach of contract for the non-representation of the  interests of 50 per cent of the public*  CAROLINE HERSCHEL  1750 - 1848 Germany. Pioneer v.  ARTEMISIA GENTILESCHI  1590 - 1652 Italy. Renowned haliai  ELIZABETH R.  1533 - 1603 England.  ISABELLA D'ESTE  r, M 1  HP  PETRONILLA DE MEATH  d. 1324 Ireland. Burned as a  THEODORA  ca. 508-548 Byza  TROTULA  d. 1097 Italy. Physiciai  HROSVITHA  935- 1002 Germany. German playwright, historian  ELEANOR OF AQUITAINE  1122- 1204 France. Queen, asm  HILDEGARDE OF BINGEN  ca. 1098 - 1179 Germany, medical w 14    Kinesis July   '79  Kiss Daddy Goodnight: Sexual abuse speak-out  KISS DADDY GOODNIGHT: A SPEAK-OUT ON INCEST by Louise Armstrong Rawthorn Books,  Inc., New York, $9.95  Kiss Daddy Goodnight,   as the subtitle  promises, is a speak-out.  Sixteen women,  a young man ,and the author herself share  their troubling childhood remembrances.  Armstrong composes an ad:  I am a woman writer doing a first person  documentary, book on incest.     I am looking  for others who hav° had an actual or near-  aotual incest experience to participate  in my   'forum. '  The ads placed, Armstrong then feared  she might be the only one in the world  to whom this  had happened.  "This" refers  to incest—Broadly defined as "the sexual  abuse of a child by a needed and trusted  parent."  Her fear proved unfounded. Armstrong received 183 responses and selected those  arouses strong emotions.  The skeptics among us who might doubt  such testimonies, should note that one of  the most unnerving stories is also the  only one substantiated by both a sister  and. brother, Sara and David. When their  mother goes back to school and a nursing  career, Sara and David a left alone a lot  with their father, "a pillar of the community."  In the mother's absence, the father begins "training" Sara, David and two foster children in various sexual techniques.  He "instructs" them in blow jobs for him  and then puts them into position with  each other. Always, the father does the  orchestration.  Four-year-old Sara is called into the bedroom and told to lie down on the floor.  "That," says Sara, "was my introduction  to sex. Right there."  In later years, the father wants the  she felt "had the ring of the common"  and were within the scope of this book.  In previous books, Louise Armstrong wrote  stories for children. DADDY is a book  about the lives of children—mostly girl  children—one of whom remembers cunnilin-  gus being performed on her in infancy and  another who located hospital records indicating that she'd had gonorrhea at the  age of three.  This book's structure is sometimes tricky  to follow; imagined conversations distract from the actual.  Yet it is Armstrong's choice of structure  which allows the women to "speak" and  lends Daddy  its gruelling tone of authenticity. Weaving her own personal story  in and out of the painful intimacies confided to.her by the 16 interviewees,  Armstrong melds narrative with theory.  With both fine and broad strokes, she  touches upon every aspect of incest.  By  choice, the overriding perspective is  first person and not that of the detached  clinician.  If Daddy  is exhausting to read, it is because separate accounts blend into a collective litany of shocking abuse. Sexual  violation came to the "speakers" when they  were young, uniformed and had no resources  other than mommy and daddy.  In order to  empathize with the experiences being recounted, a reader is required to relive  her own feelings of dependency and helplessness. So reader, beware—this book  Katurah Hutcheson  children to experience intercourse.  David is commanded to perform with a foster sister close to his age; Sara is commanded to perform with daddy. When Sara  resists David defends her and the father  takes out his hostility in various ways.  Sara and David survived with emotional  scars and, in Sara's case with physical  ones as well. Sara has self-inflicted  cuts up and down her arms, and she has  attempted suicide—the only one in the  book, I believe, to have done so. Of  incest, David says:  Kids aren't ready.     It pushes  them...at  that age you want to feel safe and in  control and intact.  Sara says:  Emotions are so hard,   so funny to deal  with.     You can have one strong emotion  one way and just keep it that way—like  hate.    And then something stirs other  memories.    And he could be so good.    And  then so awful.    He was just one mass of  contradictions.  Contradictions thread their way through  Kiss Daddy Goodnight. June, who experienced cunnilingus as an infant, sums it  up best:  I feel this man's actions contributed to  me not having a mind of my own and not  being able to say no to men.    I feel I  owe him    because he raised me like a  daughter (he was her stepfather) but I  hate him for subjecting me to his adult  will at such an early age that I can't  think for myself.  ■ I want to destroy-  every female child's vagina so it can't  be used in an adult way.  For the women in the book, penetration  occurred at different ages—some before  menstruation, some after.  "Kiss you  cherry goodbye." Wendy's dad warned as  she approached menstruation.  Kiss Daddy Goodnight  is a hard book to  take—repulsive in places.  Sandy, trying  to imagine what it's like hearing stories  like this says:  I can get grossed out.     Because it's  repulsive.     Really sickening.     Not just a  grown man molesting a child,  but his  daughter yet.  Louise Armstrong asks, "Why is it necessary for men to eroticize all positive  affectionate, even sensual responses?  And why are men such victims of their own  sexuality?"  As one listens to June, Sara and Sandy,  one gets the sense that they have spent  hundreds of hours brooding over each  single hour of abuse.  It overshadows  their lives.  Louise Armstrong's father made his first  sexual advances toward her when they were  away on a trip.  At the time, Louise was  eleven.  The writing of Daddy  feels very  much like part of her own therapy for the  trauma.  As recently as when she got the  contract to do this book, she had not told  her own mother about her father's sexual  abuse. When she finally did, she learned  more about her own past and the reader  shares in Louise's sense of discovery.  And yet—for Louise—there is no real  relief:  It doesn't go away.     It recedes.     You  don't have  to like it.     You just have to  live with it.     Like a small nasty pet  you've had for years.  Part of Armstrong's motivation in undertaking Daddy  is an attempt to break  through the tradition of silence which  protects the repeated abuse of children  and which also perpetuates shame in the  objects of abuse.  "Rape can allow for a  straightforward reaction but the seduction of a child by a needed and trusted  parent is far more complex."  All the same, some straightforward reactions are to be found:  If something like that happened to my  children,  I think I'd kill him..'.your  father's supposed to  love and protect  you,  and if he does something like that,  it's'the biggest betrayal  there is.     What  you really need from a father is just love.  Jill fantasized about killing her father  with an ice pick.  Kiss Daddy Goodnight,   without being a cold  statistical survey, raises the issue that  far more women were abused as children  than legal files, Social Service records  or case histories reveal.  The issue won't go away  As with wife-beating and rape one longs  not to look. One wants the issue to go  away.  But it will not.  "I just wish I"d been able to cope with  less human wreckage along the way," says  Maggie, who was molested by her father  from ages four to sixteen.  "How can someone do that to another human being?"  For your information Louise Armstrong,  you can count me in on your list of women who formally admit to having had an  incestuous father. Although he's been  dead for 10 years now, I still spend a  disproportionate number of hours brooding over my past life with him and—  like Maggie—"wish I'd been able to cope  with less human wreckage along the way."  By Mary Lou Shields, New Women's Times,  Feminist Review, March IS,  1979. ■ Kinesis July'79    15  Forcing incest out of the closet  By Gayla Reid  Here's some horrendous arithmetic for you:  Take a Grade 12 class of 16 young women.  One in four will have experienced some type  of sexual assault.  Of the four, one will  have been involved, or is involved, in an  incestuous relationship. Experts assert:  Ninety-five per cent of the victims of incest are female.  Ninety-nine per cent of the offenders are  male.  And we can't start dealing with incest until  it is defined as a problem.  Social taboos demand that sexual abuse be  seen not to exist. Like wife battering, like  rape, the sexual abuse of children is an  issue which the women's movement is fighting to bring to public awareness.  Sexual abuse is any physical contact from  one person to another person who is not a  willing partner.  Diana Ladell, of Nanaimo Rape Relief has been  researching the issue and studying the incidence of sexual abuse in the Nanaimo area  over the last nine months.  When Ladell learned of the statistics on  (sexual abuse, her first reaction was one of  disbelief. They're way too high, she thought  they must be exaggerated.  Nine months later she feels that the figure  lof one in four is indeed accurate.  What kind of man would sexually abuse children? What happens to the victims of the  abuse? What kind of situation does child  labuse take place in?  [Kinesis asked Ladell.  When confronted, the response of the sexual  abuser varies:  She's just making it up because I wouldn't  give her an allowance.  She was wearing that flimsy little nightgown,  so what do you expect?  I got drunk and passed out. When I came to  my daughter was sitting on top of me, try-  • to get my penis inside her.  I wanted her first sexual experience to be  a good one.  My God,  I'm glad it's out in the open.  The men who sexually abuse children range  from chronic offenders to those who do feel  extremely guilty and ashamed.  The chronic offender is one who has consistently avoided adult relationships and is  sexually attracted to young girls. He tends  to feel no remorse.  Then there's the sexual abuser who has  found adult relationships stressful and disappointing. He's depressed, he feels that  his manhood has been threatened. It's a  new activity for him, begun when his self-  image is at a low point. More often than  not, this man is a married heterosexual.  The suspicion that the child molester is  homosexual is a sensational media myth—witness their avid attention to the unusual  Toronto murder of shoeshine boy Emmanual  Jacques.  Happens within regular family units  More than 50 per cent of the time, sexual  abuse takes place within the regular family  unit. Attacks by psychotic child abusers  account foi- only five per cent of sexual  abuse. Typically, the attacker is the  live-in father figure. He could be the  father, the stepfather, mother's live-in  lover or a brother, uncle or grandfather.  The abuse ranges from fondling of breasts  to touching genitals, masturbation and intercourse.  Physical violence is rarely involved. Because the child does not have bruises visible on her body, the abuse can go undetected for years. Coercion is present, but  subtle. Daddy's taking care of me, daddy's  paying me special attention, daddy loves me—  these are the seductive images which can  be presented to the victim.  Abuse typically starts when the girl is between eight and 10 or 12 and 13. In one  study the victim was 12 years or younger in  81 per cent of the cases.  "If I leave, she's next."  And it goes on and on—lasting anywhere from  six months to 14 years. In one case a 16-  year-old said that her father had been  "playing with her" for some years now. She  was reluctant to leave home because her  younger sister was 13 and "if I leave, she's  next."  What about the mother? It's often the women who get blamed,  says Ladell...the wife,  the man's own mother,  the daughter:..women  and kids are in a really bad position in  this society.    Economically and to some extent emotionally the mother is dependent  on the husband.     What is she to do?    If she  reports the case, if the man ends up in  jail, she ends up on welfare.    There goes  her breadwinner.  The mother may deny that the sexual abuse  has in fact taken place. Or she may clue  into other disturbing tensions that have  been happening within the family: the grim  pieces fall into place.  Whatever course is taken,  says Ladell, sexual abuse puts the whole family in crisis.  Keeping the family together, the Socred's  resolute answer to social problems, can in  some cases be detrimental. Sometimes that  policy can protect the child but sometimes  it's best to get the child out of the situation,   adds Ladell.  What works?  Ladell outlined for Kinesis readers one  approach which seems to be successful.  That's a therapeutic family treatment program in Santa Clara, California. All the  family dynamics are treated: mother and  father have marital counselling, mother and  daughter have therapy, victims and offenders have special groups.  In B.C.?  People are still trying to cope with the  fact that sexual abuse happens, let alone  get organized around it. I've just come  back from a national conference of rape  ■ crisis centres and I can tell you that we  have as yet no adequate treatment programs  operating in this country. We 're still  at the stage of making the public acknowledge sexual abuse as a large problem.  If we 're going to make any positive steps  towards confronting the reality of sexual  ■ abuse,  Ladell stresses, it's important  that the people who work with children  In that light Ladell sees the B.C. back-  to-the-three R's as not being a helpful  move. It means that students have less  space to talk about their problems. Without that time, the problem doesn't surface  until a point of crisis.  The crisis could emerge when the girl runs  away from home, becomes uncontrollable,or  pregnant at age 13. With cruel irony, the  victim becomes the social problem.  Removing her from her home can feel punitive:  she's the one who must have done something  wrong because she's the one who is taken  away. Keeping her within the home and removing the father can be equally a problem:  she can feel responsible for the economic  consequences; (They'll send your father to  jail and we '11 end up on welfare.    Is that  what you want to do to us?)  The trauma of being used and.betrayed by  her father can often mean that the victim  loses her sense of self-worth. This in turn  leads to further abuse. Studies reveal a  high correlation between delinquent acts  in adolescence, pregnancy, venereal disease,  psychiatric illness and early sexual abuse.  As many as 50 per cent of runaway adolescent  girls have been involved in sexual abuse.  About 70 per cent of adolescent drug addictions and 60 per cent of young prostitutes  were victims of some form of family sexual  abuse.  Many adult women report adult sexual problems as a result of early sexual abuse.  And 90 per cent of mothers seeking help in  a California refuge for people who physically abuse their children said that they  had been sexually assaulted as children.  Almost all of us have our story  Talk with any group of adult women,  says  Ladell. You'll find almost everyone has  a story.     In the course of her study,  she talked with groups of Brownies, with,  junior high and senior high school students. She heard girls speak of sexual  abuse, making it public for the very first  time. She was approached on her own,  after discussions, by students who wanted  to tell someone privately.  Sexual abuse, the most concealed form of  child abuse, is just now being brought out  into the open.  Learning about it feels a bit like seeing  pictures of Dachau for the first time. The  sooner we can generate a better-informed  and less defensive acceptance of sexual  abuse as a common fact of family life, the  better it will be for the women involved.■ 16 Kinesis July   '79  NON-TRADITIONAL WORK  Iowa firefighter fights to feed her baby  By Jan Wood  Linda Eaton, the only female firefighter  on the Iowa City force, has gone to court  over the right to be different. She is  the only firefighter on the force who  breastfeeds her baby during working hours.  Linda states: I'm not trying to create a  ruckus.    I wish we could settle all this  amicably.    I just want to nurse my baby.  I want to continue nursing my baby myself  because I don't want to give up that  emotional closeness.    Also breastfeeding  is healthier than bottle feeding.     With all  the stress on families,  and the disruption in family  life today,  you would  think employers would try to encourage  bonding between parents and their children.  Not try to prevent it.  Asked if she thought her breastfeeding  distracted male firefighters or aroused  their "sexual-aggressive tendencies,"  Linda answered:  I'm nowhere near the male firefighters  when I feed him.  The other firefighters don't even see  Ian when I'm nursing him.     My mother and  my sister bring him to me during my  breaks twice a day.     They usually come  to the back door with him,  and I go down  two flights of stairs to a room reserved  for women.     There are two chairs.       I sit  in the more comfortable ohair when I nurse  Ian.     He's used to the room now.     I'm nowhere near the male firefighters when I  nurse him.  Does it interfere with her job?  No,   if there were a call I would hand him  right over and go and fight the fire.  Has there been any support from co-workers?  Not.   much.    I get the impression from some  of the men that their wives are encouraging them not to support me.    I don't know  how true that is,  but only one firefighter  has expressed publicly his support for me.  He 's the only black firefighter on the  force.     Two others expressed their support  to me privately but they didn't want to  jeopardize their jobs,  or their relations  with the other fellows,  so they want to  keep it that way.    Anyway,  now a memo has  come out saying that the other firefighters  shouldn't make derogatory remarks about  me,  so they're all being very careful."  Does she think being a single mother has  adversely affected her in this situation?'  J wasn't married when I became pregnant,  and I'm not married now.     But even if I  were married,  I think I would still have  trouble about nursing my baby at the fire-  house.  Having a baby is a very special thing to  me.    I would like to spend more time with  my baby but I have to work to support myself.     I like being a firefighter.     It's  a good job and I don't want to have to  give it up.    And besides,  a lot of people  around me are really happy to know that  I'm not on welfare.  Iowa City officials, anxious to avoid a  court battle, offered Linda employment  elsewhere, but she refused.  She was offered jobs as a bus driver, maintenance  worker, animal control officer, and police  dispatcher, all of which pay higher wages  . than what Linda now earns.  She was also  offered the alternatives of an unpaid leavel  of absence, and permission to use a breast  pump during working hours to obtain milk  for her baby.  She has found all of these  alternatives unacceptable.  Asked whether she thought a ruling against  her might jeopardize the rights of her  male co-workers who in future might also  want to breastfeed their babies at the  firehouse, firefighter Linda Eaton had no  comment.  Donations to Linda Eaton's Legal Defense  Fund can be sent to:  Johnson County,  Iowa City NOW, P.O. Box 946, Iowa City,  Iowa 52240. ■  Info: New Directions for Women, The  Guardian and The Express.  In B.C. women can fight fires for free, but not for fee  By Janet Beebe  News of the Iowa woman fighting for her  right to breastfeed her baby at her workplace, the firehall, reminds us of the  struggle B.C. women are waging to become  firefighters.  In Vancouver, that struggle has been going  on publicly for the last two years, since  city officials and a local fire chief  made it clear that women, as well as  Asians, were not considered firefighting  material.  Vancouver officials have resisted any  change in height and weight restrictions  for city firefighters because, they said,  such a move would reduce safety standards.  In debate in city council at the time,  the issue was actually one of cost rather  than safety—the cost of providing facilities should women become firefighters.  A time-worn excuse!  Aid. May Brown stated during the debate:  You can defeat any issue by saying there  isn't enough money.     There never is enough  money for everything.     It is just a matter  of making it a priority.  Height, weight and age restrictions for  firefighters vary somewhat throughout the  Lower Mainland.  Vancouver stipulates a  minimum height and weight of 5'9" and  160 pounds, and a maximum age of 29 for  applicants.  New Westminster and North Vancouver base  selection on individual merit rather than  arbitrary standards.  New Westminster, Burnaby and White Rock  all dropped their age requirements more  than two years ago, fearing that such restrictions contravened B.C.'s human rights  legislation.  Outside the Lower Mainland, smaller cities  and towns commonly adopt standards set by  large cities such as Vancouver.  Standards can be valid, or they may simply be arbitrary and without substance.  In Washington State, where height and  weight restrictions were dropped more  than five years ago, fire officials have  stated: The regulations could not be substantiated.     They were found not to be  relevant to the job.     It was felt there  that height and weight restrictions were  particularly discriminatory to Asians.  Perhaps women just are not cut out for  "rough" jobs like firefighting. After all  think (with appropriate dismay) of the  spectre raised by city officials here,  of a 5' woman struggling—we must assume  unsuccessfully—to carry a 200 pound man  from a burning building. As they say,  Who the hell fights fires in China?  Women can be found fighting fires ably in  a number of cities which have abolished  height and weight restrictions, and in  some specialized areas such as forestry  and the armed forces. It is also significant that women have long been considered  good enough for volunteer firefighting  in countless small towns and rural districts all over North America.  Here, as a positive counterpoint to the  struggle of urban women for access to  firefighting jobs, is a profile of a  volunteer fire department on Galiano  Island, where half of the 40 members  are women.  Volunteering on Galiano  Galiano is one of the Gulf Islands,  approximately 17 miles long and ranging  from i to five miles wide. The permanent population is around 600, but with  the influx of summer residents and visitors the population swells to at least  1,500. Homes are scattered from one end  of the island to the other, most of them  being at the so-called South End, where  the ferry docks are located.  Because about 2/3 of the island is forested, trees are the greatest fire dan- ► Kinesis July '79      17  ger. However, house fires are not uncommon and often result from overheated wood  stoves (still widely used) or chimney  fires.  Potentially, there could be serious fires  at each dock since they are wooden structures chemically treated to prevent rot,  or at the one gas station and the oil  storage tanks behind it. Another fire  problem is the hazard created by the  carelessness of visitors to the island.  Fire hazards highest in summer  As anywhere in B.C., the time of highest  fire hazard is in the summer, especially  dry summers. At such times, the water  table on the island is drastically reduced because of the lack of rain and  the increased population, so there can be  great problems simply in having sufficient  water to fight a fire. If the sea is  close enough to a fire, salt water can be  pumped to the scene (though salt water  can be hard on the equipment).  In the event of a fire, firefighters  and equipment are sent out from the one  fully-equipped fire hall at the South  End of the island. Apart from a small  portable water tank and untrained volunteers, there is no adequate local fire  protection for residents beyond approximately the midway point on the island because of the practical and financial  difficulties of servicing North End residents .  Galiano has no local municipal government  but instead is governed from Victoria.  Because the island is an unorganized area,  and its population too small to qualify  for a provincially-funded fire department,  fire protection is provided by volunteer  effort under the administration of a fire  chief, who receives a small stipend.  Women have been firefighters on Galiano  only since 1975. A year earlier, the \  women's auxiliary to the South Galiano  Fire Department had been formed to assist  more directly in supporting firefighting  activities.  Initially, there was some outrage at the  presumption" that women have any role in  active firefighting. Generally, however,  "I get a lot out of firefighting,  though I'd like to have more  formal training than I do."  team spirit has been good and the active  women have proven their worth as firefighters .  Training in the basic skills of firefighting is available to all active members. Skills include:  — teamwork techniques  — radio 'operation  — driving the firetruck, including operation of pumps and gear  — hose and ladder handling  — salt water techniques  — rescue skills, including familiarity  with first aid and rescue skills  — servicing of the firetruck  — maintenance of the fire hall, including  water supply, tools and equipment  One joins the South Galiano Volunteer  Fire Department simply by volunteering.  New members learn by doing in most  cases, although some people bring to  the job valuable practical experience  from which all firefighters benefit.  For instance, women are often strong  and experienced in outdoor work, or have  skills in such areas as carpentry and  machine handling.  In addition, women  are used to providing back-up, and so  are skilled in teamwork.  Men more often, although not exclusively, have backgrounds in trades such as  forestry, truck driving, mechanics and  a few have previous firefighting experience.  Jean Wilson, who is an active firefighter  on Galiano states:  I^ joined'the fire department because I  didn't want to feel helpless in the event  of a fire.    I wasn't interested in simply joining the WA and helping in the more  traditional ways.     The way we are set up  now,  active women and non-active women  (those who don't actually fight fires) all  belong to the WA.    At our meetings, we  discuss and initiate ways in which,  from  our accumulated funds, we can best support  the SGVFD,  such as the purchase or repair of equipment.  I get a lot out of being an active firefighter,   though I'd like to have more  formal training than I do.    I've learned  some basics about firefighting that I  never had the opportunity to learn in  cities.    I can do_ something responsibly  about a fire,  I have a good practical  knowledge which benefits me and the community,  and I can be active in a way which  best suits me.  Since I am reasonably young and strong  and not great at sitting around in women's  groups geared to being anonymous behind-  the-scenes drudges for men,   this fire department suits me very well.    I like the  women and men in the department,  feel  personally accountable to both,  and have  been impressed by the cooperation and  team effort that has occurred at fires  and in other department activities.  More women should have the opportunity  to prove that they can take an equally  active part in what concerns everybody, m  Meet Kinesis' summer solstice  slippery sardine award winner  The"school district you work in—and in  which your children are being educated—  sends around a flyer announcing that the  Grade 3 girls will be taking part in (of  all things) a Sardine Queen contest.  Knowing that the sardine queens of today  are the Playboy bunnies of tommorow, you  write a letter of protest which is what  Richmond teacher Naomi Lis did.  In part,  she wrote:  With the increasingly-raised  consciousness in the community about the  negative repercussions on women and girls  of sexism in our society. ..I felt sad  that such otherwise excellent schools in  our community continue to support this  archaic and discriminatory  (and, might I  add,  degrading) process in which little  girls are selected and paraded in the  local media and in community events,  to  be accompanied by   'ooh, aren't they cute. '  Too much for Mr. Sardine  This letter was altogether too much for%  Don McKinnon, coordinator of the Richmond  Centennial Sardine Queen Day.  His letter to Naomi Lis wins this month's  slippery sardine award by a mile. Here is  what the Sardine Queen Day coordinator has  to say for himself:  Dear Mrs. Lis;  Reference is made to your letter dated  May 3, 1979...  Normally a letter such as yours is discarded or filed as poison ( McKinnon spelt  it poisen) pen.  However when a teacher in the Richmond  School District takes issue with the efforts of a dedicated group of volunteers  a reply is necessary and I trust you will  read mine and analyze it as I have your  letter.  Firstly you have used some words of a  learned scholar placing your letter high  above the level of a dedicated volunteer.  From my Funk and Wagnalls I have found;  A. Sexism - This word is not in the  Dictionary (I also checked Websters).  B. Archaic - Old fashioned, antiquated,  characterizing a word, an inflectional  form, or a phrase no longer in use.  C. Discriminatory - showing prejudice or  bias. Question? To whom - the winner is  the result of the draw.  D. Degrading - to debase or lower in  character, morals etc.  Question? How do  you lower the character of a Grade Three  student.  E. The reference to "Ooh, aren't they  cute." Question? Do you not show pictures of your children to your friends  and is not the reply the same.  I do hope you attend our pageant on June  9 and that your daughter represents her  school next year. By attending the pageant your eyes will open and you will  see the light.  In closing I am sorry that a teacher  would place on paper words from emotion  rather than thought.  An old saying would apply in this instance-  "Get it first, but first get right."  Yours in Disbelief,  Dan McKinnon  Coordinator  Centennial Sardine Queen Day   ■  Assortment of turkeys  Salem attorney Charles Burt, who represented John Rideout in Oregon's first  marital rape case, recently attended  a dinner for the Bar Board of Governors  where he was presented with a T shirt  that read: Rapists need love,  too.  Found in the employees' washroom of a  Dairy Queen in Penticton:  ATTENTION TO EMPLOYEES:  Any person working the front counter  that (sic) comes to work in a bad mood  and has a sour look on their face will be  asked by management to either improve  the condition or go back home.  ffi  Barbara Amiel (in Maclean's, June 4).*  Guess what they 're protesting this time  ...SEXUAL HARASSMENT.  ...Perhaps I'm just peeved.  I've been in  the labor force for over 20 years in  every job from waitress to executive and  no one has ever sexually harassed i  Maybe I just don 't have any  <  iiii  According to a Gallup poll conducted for  the publication "Woman's Own," one in six  husbands has never looked after his child  on his own; one fourth have never put  their children to bed; and one in three  have never read to their children.  Women's Report/BMR 18    Kinesis^ July   '79  INTERNATIONAL NEWS  KVomen in the struggle for Phillipine liberation  Why are you so hard?    They ask.  Why do you not bend a little?  Taken from a poem dedicated to a Filipino  woman revolutionary, Nelia Sancho, the  verse is actually an apt description of  women and men involved in the Philippine  revolutionary movement.  Faced with the most brutal threat imaginable from the hands of the military under  Philippine dictator, Ferdinand E. Marcos,  women in the Philippines have surged forward in their fight against all the "isms"  such as facism, feudalism, bureaucratic  capitalism and imperialism, which have  caused the sufferings of the Filipino  nation for centuries.  Intimidation, harassment, torture, rape,  imprisonment and even death have failed to  keep women out of the revolutionary mass  movement.  I was very impressed, says Elaine Ko, an  American citizen who was a recent visitor  to the country. Women are definitely in  the forefront of the struggle. They have  taken on leadership positions and are  very actively involved in doing organizing  work.  Some examples that Ko cited occurred in  the province of Davao in the southern section of the Philippines. A slum area in  Davao City called Piapi has an all-woman  leadership in its community organization.  The women have managed to establish collective childcare throughout the area.  Ko talked about the people of Bienvenida,  a small barrio (or village) where one  woman became known as the "revolutionary  heroine of Bienvenida" because of her  leading role in trying to stop the arrest  of 34 farmers who refused to be evicted  from their land.  Unfortunately, she landed in jail along  with the farmers. Meanwhile, the wives  and children of the farmers took over  the work in the fields, plowing the soil  and planting the crops.  In another section of Davao City, workers in a cigar factory (all women) defied military harassment as they went on  strike to back their demand for a union.  In short,  says Ko, women play an active  role in the national democratic movement.     In rural areas they are defying  military abuses and fighting against  evictions.     In urban areas they are  struggling for better living conditions  and demanding higher wages in factories.  I was very impressed.  The participation of the Filipino woman  in the present struggle can be traced to  the so-called First Quarter Storm (1969-  1971).  It was then when the call for a  national democratic revolution was issued  by the Communist Party of the Philippines.  It is national because it seeks to assert  national sovereignity against U.S. imperial,  ism and its local running dogs. It is  democratic because it seeks to fulfill  the peasant demand for equal distribution of land and to restore the full  democratic rights of the people against  fascism.  It was also during this period that the  first militant women's organization,  MAKIBAKA was formed. MAKIBAKA is an  acronym which stands for FIGHT—STRUGGLE  ON.  At the same time, revolutionary songs  were enticing women to unite and fight  against oppression:  0 oppressed woman,  Think and ponder  You have  long been oppressed,  Subject to foreign rule.  Why don't you defend yourself?  Your children are starving  Your youngest wails,  Can you bear to see  them suffering?  Why don't you rise up  If you truly are a mother  who feels and cares?  This song undoubtedly rang through the  hearts of most women.  Not so much because  of the haunting melody, but because the  reality of their suffering became more  vivid.  It was therefore to be expected when  women joined the movement in droves.  They  took on tasks and responsibilities and ►  Women's class locations within the Phillipines  The peasant woman in the Philippines, compared with others, takes a more active  part in the process of production.  Together with her man she plants, harvests  and winnows rice if that is the source of  their livelihood. This affords them more  status, and thus more say, in domestic  affairs and more help from the man in the  rearing of children.  However, other than taking part in some  stages in the process of production, women are compelled to stay home, care for  the children, cook, wash dishes and  clothes, and plant vegetables or raise  pigs or poultry to supplement an insufficient family income.  Unlike the men, women have little or no dealings with the  landlord, and this tends to shut out  from their purview any first-hand knowledge of class struggle in its principal  feudal form (i.e., the landlord-tenant  relationship).  Unlike the men, their knowledge of the  process of agricultural production is  confined to a few stages, and this effectively limits their perspective and confines their vision, rendering them incapable of handling processes bigger than  the management of vegetable gardens and  pig sties.  This limited role of peasant women in the  productive process of the feudal mode of  px"oduction narrows down their perspective.  While peasant women are compelled to stay  home to care for their children, men are  entitled to a certain amount of recreation  that may be unenlightening, but which  nevertheless affords them the ability to  see new things, hear new talk, discuss  new issues.  The fact that men, aside from having a  more thorough grasp of the mode of production, can also expound on vital issues  that affect the barrio, the town, or even  the nation, goes a long way in thickening the aura of male authority that surrounds them.  The fact that women are compelled to stay home and are thus limited  to "tsismis" (gossip) and inane comic  books, on the other hand, goes a long way  in thickening the aura of ignorance that,  pervades their everyday lives.  The knowledge made available to the wives  of workers is'even more limited than that  made available to peasant women in the  sense that these women are nearly all excluded from the productive process of the  capitalist mode of production. And because lay offs are frequent and life is  generally more hectic, the frustrations  of the unpoliticized husband over his  inability to provide sufficient support  for his family often leads him to take it  out on his wife and children, he being  the male authority and breadwinner.  Unpoliticized husbands  take out frustrations on family  The incidence of intra-family violence  with the man as aggressor, is higher and  sharper in worker families for this reason.  However, because layoffs are frequent  and unemployment is rampant in semi-  colonial Philippines under the U.S.-Marcos  dictatorship, the woman is often called  upon to become a worker herself, if her  income as "labandera" (washer woman) is  insufficient to provide for the family.  This is increasingly the case with wor  kers ' daughters in their teens as well  as, less frequently, workers' wives.  The concept of women as domestic slaves  is felt less acutely by wives coming  from the national bourgeoisie, and in  greater degree, from the petty bourgeoisie., This happens because, having  no part at all in the mode of production,  they still partake of the more substantial  fruits of their husbands' labor and do  not have to work too much at home because  they can afford to pay a poor woman to do  their household tasks.  The major occupation of this class of women is to keep themselves pretty and  lively so that hubby can relax after a  day's "work." In these "upper" classes  women are more like commodities, indeed  like legal prostitutes, doled out a regular stipend to provide their men with  the required entertainment and relaxation. Of course they play also the  important role of the incubators of the  next generation of the ruling class by  making babies who will inherit the  father's wealth and property.  On the other hand, they too have little  or no part in production. This says much  about the backwardness of women in the  bourgeoisie in relation to their men as  it does for the backwardness of worker  and peasant women. And if they too are  forced to choose to take up a career,  they are discriminated against because  according to tradition, men not having  been reared and brainwashed as stay-at-  home types, are backed by the work experience and the education that equips them  with a broader perspective and better  tools of work. ■  By Clarita Roja,  Filipino Women and the  Revolution Kinesis July   '79   19  worked as hard as everybody else, at risk  of life and limbs.  With the declaration of martial law in  Sept. 22, 1972, it was no surprise when  women went "underground," left school and/  or their families to work in areas where  they were needed and/or joined the New  People's Army.  Women drawn into major struggles  Today, a fully operational Red Women's  Detachment exists. It is composed mostly  of peasant women and attached to the new  People's Army. Women sit on almost all  party committees and hold responsible  positions in different levels of the organizational structure.  At this stage of the struggle, several  organizations, which exist in the urban  areas to assist people in their fight  against the fascist regime, have women  in the forefront,  Trinidad Herrera, already a victim of  military's torture chambers, is one of  the leading women in ZOTO, a militant  organization fighting for the rights of  the squatters in Tondo, Manila.  ZOTO led a march in 1973 of 5,000 people  to Malacanagn Palace, the residence of  the dictator, to demand that Marcos keep  his promise to improve their living conditions .  The head of Task Force Detainees, the organization keeping a close watch on the  conditions and whereabouts of political  prisoners, is Sister Marianni Dimaranan.  Even in the religious sector, whose role  in the Philippine struggle is now becoming a phenomena, it is known that there  are more nuns than priests involved in  the struggle.  Heartwarming as all this women-power is,  we certainly do remember that "the revolution is not a picnic."  Several courageous women; Liza Balando  (a worker), Lorrie Barros (head of MAKIBAKA)  and Liliosa Hilao (a peasant) to name a  few—have lost their lives in the hands  of the fascist government.  Two social workers, Rose Apit and Susan  Patacsil, were the most recent victims  of the dictatorship.  The two women were  with the poor workers in a watermelon  field in the town of Arayat, Pampanga  (87 km northwest of Manila) when, on  April 15, "the town was disturbed by a  long burst of gunfire," narrated the town  priest.  When this ceased, and when the farmers  found the two ladies, they were lying  exposed'in the field, stripped naked by  the military. Their bodies, from which  life had been cut, were molested in all  parts.  Many more will likely suffer the same fate  for as long as the U.S.-Marcos dictatorship exists in the country.  Others who survived after their capture  are now languishing in military camps  without much end in sight. Nevertheless,  they have managed to be heard by staging  protest actions inside the camp.  One instance was a hunger strike in 1974 and  1977 to back their demands for the release of pregnant women detainees and  for better living conditions in the camp.  On International Women's Day in March,  1977 a solidarity message was smuggled out  by the women detainees.  Today,  we female prisoners in Camp Bicutan  express our firm solidarity with women  everywhere who are in the forefront of the  struggle.     We have great faith in this  struggle.     We believe that the progressive winds of change will blow towards  fundamental changes leading to the liberation of women as part of the liberation of people,  not only in the context  of Philippine society, but also in all  societies where oppression and injustice  previal today.  Female Political Prisoners,   Camp Bicutan,  Taguig,  Metro Manila, March 8,   1977. _  Illinois denied abortion cut-off  The United States Supreme Court this month  refused to allow Illinois officials to cut  off funding for most women on welfare who  want an abortion.  The justices denied two emergency requests  that sought to end financial aid for abortions to all poor women under the Medicaid  program except those whose lives are jeopardized by the pregnancies.  The Illinois department of public aid and  two physicians had asked that the state  be allowed to enforce a law cutting off  most abortion funds pending further appeals.  Justice John Paul Stevens denied the requests, after which they were referred to  the full court for their consideration,  which also turned them down.  Justice Stevens said he found "wholly un-  persuasive" the state argument that it  incurred a financial drain while having  to continue funding abortions, it is less  expensive for the state to pay the entire  cost of an abortion than it is for it to  pay only its share of the costs associated  with a full-term pregnancy,  he said.  All of this must stick in Henry Hyde's  throat. Hyde is the Illinois representative  in Congress who sponsored the infamous  Hyde Amendment, which bans most federally  funded abortions for the poor. As a result  of the Hyde Amendment, a projected 250,000  federally-funded abortions dropped to only  2,421 actual abortions last year.  But that's still too many for Henry Hyde.  "The real problem," says Hyde, lies with  state governments which continue to fund  the abortions for poor women. B  Crigler facing 10 years  A Washington State woman, Sharon Crigler,  who had asked for police protection, is  facing the uncertainty which is finally  over for Wanrow.  Crigler, a 22-year-old  black welfare mother, was sentenced to  10 years in prison for shooting her ex-  boyfriend when he attempted to break into her house in a clear act of vengance.  Initially, the police decided that the  shooting was justifiable homicide.  It  was not until a week after the shooting  in 1977 that Sharon was charged with  first degree murder. The basis for the  murder charge was that  Crigler asked the Tacoma Appellate Court  that her conviction be overturned and  the charges dropped .  It was after Sharon's conviction that the Washington State  Supreme Court ruled, in a landmark decision  known as the "Wanrow Instructions," that  a jury must take into account the physical  and psychological differences when a woman must defend herself against a man in  this society.  The Circuit Court judges have yet to decide  to overturn her conviction. Even if she  wins her appeal, Crigler expects to be retried.  "They have too much at stake to  let me win," she said. "If I win it might  open up a lot of other cases here and  around the country which are based on similar situations."  V.D. linked with miscarriage  A Massachusetts doctor is recommending  that women who want to have children be  tested for a venereal infection which may  be responsible for as many as one in four  miscarriages in the U.S.  Doctor Kuth Kundsin of Boston reports  that the infection known as T-mycoplasma  is often diagnosed as "non-specific vaginitis" in women by doctors who are not  familiar with the disease.  Kundsin says that more gynecologists are  becoming aware of T-mycoplasma after recent studies showed that 93 per cent of a  test group of men with urinary infections  and 51 per cent of women with conception  and pregnancy problems were infected with  this disease.  Pandora ■  Xerox machines fume  Xerox machines can be dangerous to working  women.  They can, and often do, produce  ozone fumes as a byproduct.  Ozone can cause throat and eye irritation,  coughs, headaches and chest pain. A government survey of the ozone in an office  in Philadelphia showed that five out of  six machines had potentially dangerous  levels of ozone at the machine's delivery  trays when they were operating continuously.  Duplicators and electrostencil  machines also give off hazardous fumes.  It is important to take health symptoms  seriously: headaches, sore throats, and *  eye strain are often regarded as "personal  problems" rather than seen as work-rel-  lated.  Union  Boycott Contac-C, Sea and Ski  The Alliance for the Liberation of Mental  Patients is demanding that the production  of Thorazine and Stelazine be halted immediately.  A nationwide boycott of SmithKline's  other products include: Contac cold capsules, Love Cosmetics, Sea and Ski products, Allergy Relief Medicine and Sine-  Off nasal spray.  Every day Thorazine and Stelazine are  forced on psychiatric "patients," prisoners, nursing home residents and other  institutionalized people, with side  effects that include: dizziness, lethargy,  blurred vision, impaired thinking, hallucinations, sexual dysfunction and death.  Big Mama Rag B Kinesis July   '7,  Lesbian Sensibility Debate  —Part III  By Cy-thea Sand  I have followed, with a keen interest,  the Lesbian Sensibility Debate between  Connie Smith and Sylvia Spring (Kinesis:  March, April/May and June 1979).  Connie believes that "It is the artist's  responsibility, especially the lesbian  feminist artist, to help create through  her medium, images.which inspire, set  new standards, and support the belief that  equal relationships between women are  possible and do exist."  Perhaps Smith's perspective would have  been better understood if this statement  had appeared in her original criticism.  Sylvia chose to react to what she calls  Connie's insensitivity.  Inaccurate assumptions and deductions followed.  No where did Connie clump all lesbians  together or infer that lesbianism is a  political choice divorced from emotional  complexity or that there is, or should be  a monolithic lesbian sensibility.  It seems to me that COnnie is interested  in what Cheri Register, a feminist literary critic, calls "prescriptive criticism:  criticism which attempts to set standards  for literature that is "good" from a feminist viewpoint. It is prescriptive in  that it implies a need for new literature  that meets its standards.  It can guide  authors who are writing literary works  from a new feminist perspective as well  as guide those critics who are analyzing  existing literature."  Sylvia's contention that only a minority  of lesbian feminists have or are struggling towards liberated relationships,  does not preclude our need for artistic  expressions of them.  Moreover, Sylvia's question as to whether  or not we "must condemn lesbian literature  from the past for not living up to our  present purified standards," is misleading. Natalie Barney (1876-1972) and Renee  Vivien (1877-1907) infused the gay Parisian  scene of the early twentieth century with  their lesbian feminist visions.  "Vivien scoured her sources for themes of  female independence. Amazons, Androgynes  and archaic dieties abound in her writing,"  writes Gayle Rubin her introduction to  NATALIE BARNEY  1876 - 1972 United Stales. Writer, aphoris  Vivien's novel A Woman Appeared To Me.  Rubin also discusses Natalie Barney's  revolutionary ideas on romantic/erotic  love.  Claire Morgan's The Price of Salt,  published in 1952, is beautifully free of  lesbian sex-role stereotyping.  Our lesbian literary tradition is as complex and  diverse as contemporary lesbian literature.  The enemy of the women's movement is more  multi-faceted than "the myth of romantic  love." I agree, however, that the phenomenon of romantic love is acutely oppressive  n—whether lesbian or heterosexual.  However unfair to Jane Rule and Marge  Piercy Connie may have been, surely there  is room'in our movement for lesbian critics  who express concern and anger with artists  who fictionalize the myth and its accompanying role playing. I do not believe that  this concern infers or suggests that male-  identified women should be ignored in our  personal lives or in our art.  Both Connie and Sylvia are attacking patriarchal romanticism. Connie's demand for  lesbian feminist art which does not perpetuate stereotypes and self-hatred is  both valid and instructive. Sylvia's reminder that we have all internalized the  myth is important and incisive. Their  approaches are complementary.  I think feminist literature should avoid  pedantry, though, writing good politics  but poor art. There i_s a dilemna for  the feminist artist in re-creating life  as it should be or how it is for her.  But as women collectively heal their  psychic scars, imposed on us by androcentric culture, life and art will celebrate women's evolution ..and re-creation. ■  ------————————*---——-———————-—-———————  Langara Women's Studies  Women 9s Room weekend  —anything but dull  I spent the weekend of June 16 and 17 in a  seminar on Marilyn French's novel The Women's Room.  The Langara campus poster advertising the  event asked participants to analyse the  following questions: Is there inevitable  conflict between men's and women's life  goals? Can self-determined lives be combined with close relationships?  As the feminist consciousness level of  the 14 women present was so varied, the  weekend became more like a consciousness-  raising session than a seminar analysis  of the novel. We used the novel as our  frame of reference to stimulate discussion.  Some of the many questions raised were debated; others were ignored by the demands  of time.  We discussed whether or not children were  a trap for women, does money equal power,  do women take power away from other women,  are we inevitably caught in one system or  another, is a permanent and health commitment to another person possible in our  society and whether or not we could find  any hope beyond the novel's ending.  One woman strongly disagreed with her perception of the novel's fundamental assumption: that society is based on male control and dominated by a rape mentality.  Others strongly agreed. Our multi-levelled  t discussions pivoted around our agreement or  disagreement as to whether or not "men are  the ultimate enemy."  As the group was fairly well equally composed of radical, liberal and conservative  women, the weekend was anything but dull.  Frustrating yes, threatening, sometimes but  dull—never.  Atmosphere of tolerance, respect  One of the most beautiful aspects of the  weekend for me was that despite the fundamental philosophical and political differ  ences between us, there was an atmosphere  of respect for and tolerance of each  others views.  This phenonenom is rare  when members of an oppressed group meet  to analyse their discontent.  I was impressed by the brilliance of the  humor and the genuine concern we had for  each other.   Cy-thea Sand ■  Womanspirit:  an artists' directory  WOMANSPIRIT is currently compiling a  directory which will provide a communication link across Canada for feminist  artists.  Womanspirit—an art, research and learning centre in London Ontario wants to  make its multi-faceted artistic directory  as comprehensive as possible.  Categories of interest for the directory  are very broad, ranging from painting and  sculpture through music, mime and literature to dance, video, glass-blowing and  metal-work.  If you are a feminist artist and you want  to be included in this directory, send  your name, address and phone number plus  a short description of your work to:  Womanspirit, 237 Dundas Street, London,  Ontario, N6A 1H1. _■  a birthing experience  Where do babies come from?  Six-year-old Rukmini and two-year old  Tara won't have to ask that question.  They know.  They may ask, Why do my friends ' mothers  have to go to the hospital to have babies?  Hospitals are for sick people.  That's the question and comment their  father, Alan Jacobs, makes'in his song  -entitled "Home Birth." Alan questions  the substitution of advanced medical technology for human warmth and love in the  birthing experience. Placing births in  the hands of the experts has robbed mothers, fathers and children of the right to  natural joys    , the experiential process of creating life and parent-infant  bonding.  For Zin and her husband Alan the birth  of Rukmini in a Vancouver hospital in  1972 simply was "not connected enough."  There was no support. An episiotomy was  administered routinely even though Rukmini weighed only six pounds. Although  Alan witnessed the birth, the hospital version just didn't make it with him. Zin  and he knew that the next one had to be  at home.  An English-trained registered nurse midwife attended Tara's birth in New York  MARGARET SANGER  1879-1966 United States.  city in 1976. Her size (nine pounds)  and Zin's small frame would probably have  encouraged a forceps delivery in the hospital.  Because the midwife applied perineal massage, there was no need for such  barbarity.  The warm feeling of sisterhood developed between midwife and mother  was soul-stirring for Zin.  A Vancouver lay midwife from the Birth  Centre helped Zin and" Alan with Jetsun's  birth last April. Alan says he feels  "incredibly at one with his kids," after  experiencing two home births. For him it  meant holding Zin and squatting behind  her while she gave birth to Tara.  It  meant cutting the cord for both Tara and  Jetsun. It also meant sharing the birth  euphoria with Zin.  Mary Burns ■ Kinesis July   '79    21  Working for your life  Lead?...I've been working here since 1948.  Lead's not dangerous unless you pick it  up and eat it.  So begins an interview at a lead storage  battery plant conducted by Labor Occupational Health Program staff members Ken  Light and Andrea Hricko as part of their  new documentary film."Working For Your  Life," based on the LOHP handbook with  the same title, is a 55 minute color  film focusing on the often overlooked  hazards faced by women on their jobs.  Filmed in over 40 workplaces, the film  highlights occupations that are both  traditional ones for women (eg. clerical  and hospital workers) and jobs into which  women are just beginning to move (such as  mining).  Shots of women at work are  interwoven with interviews of women who  have been injured on the job or who are  actively involved in trying to improve  their working conditions.  One woman discusses leaving her clerical  job to take a higher-paying industrial  job in a production line bakery—only to  have her hand maimed by a machine on which  she had been improperly trained.  Another woman talks of years of exposure  to dust in an electrical appliance plant  before discovering that the dust was asbestos. Their names have been added to the  ever growing statistics on workers whose  lives have been disrupted or ruined by  hazards on their jobs.  But "Working For Your Life" will not be  simply an examination of these problems.  It shows women who are seeking solutions  •to these job hazards, including a woman  who set up a union health and safety committee, women testifying at Occupational  Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)  hearings, and a woman organizer who is  concerned about health hazards in her  electronics plant.  With 20,000 feet of film already shot,  the slow process of editing has begun.  LOHP has been'fortunate to have the  support of many unions and foundations  during the making of the film.  Grants  from the Film Fund and the Woody Guthrie  Foundation have enabled the film to progress to this point.  But over $17,000  must still be raised. All contributions  are tax deductible and any assistance  or ideas for additional sources of funds  will be gratefully appreciated.  A copy of the handbook may be had by  sending $10 to Labor Occupational Health  Program,-University of California, 2521  Charming'Way, Berkeley, CA 94720. Make  checks payable to the Regents of University of California. ■  Five Sleazy Pieces not enough  Remember those movies  we were supposed to like?  By Janet Beebe  I first saw "Five Easy Pieces" when I was  18. I disliked the film but the praise  it received then (and continues to receive) has all these years made me mistrust my initial perception. I recently  saw this film again—to compare my reaction eight years later.  "Five Easy Pieces" gives us scenes from  the life of a working man. Bobby (Jack  Nicholson) has had the benefit of an extensive musical education as part of a  very talented musical family. In his  youth, however, he rejected a musical  career and became a roamer, working when  he needed to.  Bobby is portrayed as a confused individual, caught between two worlds - the cultured milieu of his youth and the less-  threatening world of oil rigs, bowling  alleys and country music that he has run  to. Bobby never stops running in the  film but he is never portrayed as pathetic  for it. He is a hero for being who he  is.  My sympathy for Bobby and for the movie  stops here, for to build Bobby into a  hero requires that every woman in the  movie be put down.  Rayette (Karen Black) lives with Bobby.  She is a waitress who would like a singing career and wants support for that  (recall a similar character in "Nashville").  Rayette receives nothing but  bad treatment from Bobby.  It is clear  that he would like to leave her, but it  seems his compassion (or is it his de-*  sire?) for her won't let him walk away  from her.  Only once in the movie does  Bobby defend Rayette, and that is in a  verbal attack on another woman (a stereotypical pinch-faced spinster, if there  ever was one).  This is a movie, unfortunately, in which  female stereotypes abound. The swinging  singles who provide sexual competition  for Rayette are one-dimensional, almost  disposable characters. Bobby and Rayette  pick up two women hitchhikers who provide  comic relief until they and Rayette begin  to fight and Bobby has to intervene to  "shut them up."  Even his sister, a talented pianist,  comes off as a pathetic character. She  who chooses a career over a man only  courts loneliness and displays her  "penis envy" in the process.  The one woman in the film credited with  intellectual depth and spirit is a music  student engaged to Bobby's older brother,  whose integrity is hard-pressed in the  face of Bobby's inevitable sexual advances.  She succumbs, of course, in the middle of  a fight.  Bobby leaves all these women by the end  of the movie: the swingers, the hitchhikers (at the side of the road), his sister, the music student, and finally,  Rayette.  Bobby leaves her at a truck  stop without a word, only his wallet and  the car, and makes his escape by jumping  into a passing rig.  Of course Bobby is escaping from something  deeper than Rayette or any of the other  women in the film. My question is, why  were the women portrayed as the losers  in this film?  Audience reaction to this movie involved  much musculine approval—guffaws, hoots,  even applause, but there was very little  response from women. They must have been  as disappointed as I was.B  Committee will monitor  TV sexism  from PAT DALEY,   Upstream-  If you're tired of seeing women on television with their heads stuck in ovens,  wishing they'd married Mr. Muscle take  heed. The federal government has established a new committee to monitor sexist  stereotyping in the electronic media  which, according to former federal communications minister Jeanne Sauve, will  through -regularly publishing the results  of its analysis...empower the Canadian  'public to bring pressure on advertisers  and broadcasters.  Announcing the creation of the committee  at the Second International Advertising  Show in late April, Sauve said, The government's concern is based on the view  that the use of sexist stereotyping in  advertising is an impediment to the  changing status of Canadian women and  that the negative portrayal of women is  becoming increasingly offensive.  Sauve also said that the Canadian Radio-  Television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) has started to develop  guidelines and standards to encourage  the elimination of sex role stereotyping  on television and.radio, including the  vh^TMjP>  development of codes to define sexist  content in advertising and broadcasting.  The daily assault on the dignity of women continues,  Sauve told her advertising  audience, pointing to a CRTC report which  shows that 59 per cent of Canadians  —  both male and female—agree that a lot  of television advertisements are insulting  to women.  Statistics like that contain the seeds of  a major revolt.    So.it is in the best interests of advertisers themselves to accept  the reality of change.  The new monitoring committee grew out of  the International Women's Year conference  in Mexico City in 1975. A world plan of  action to be carried out over the next  decade was declared then, Sauve said.  The result in Canada was the federal government's plan of action for women, released this spring, of which this committee  is part.  The seven-woman committee will have its  independence guaranteed, she said, by the  stature of its members and. ..by its right  to publish what it pleases without reference to either the minister or the department of communications.  I have confidence that the committee,  by  providing avenues for translating individual concern into public pressures,  will  soon generate positive results.    And I  have confidence that the day will come  when basic humanity prevails on the airwaves; a day when all of us can enjoy  that simple riqht to dignity,  Sauve said.a  Feminist computer technologists  With the goal of making the powerful tools  of computer technology available to more  women, the Feminist Computer Technology  Project was launched at the U.S. National  Women's Studies Association conference held  last month in Lawrence, Kansas.  The group wants to hear from women who  are involved in the field of computer  technology. An initial action of the project will be to seek funding for an  experimental computing centre to be' set  up in 1980.  Contact the project's communications  facilitator: Helen Eisen-Rotkopf, 4407-c  Normandy Trace Drive, St. Louis, M0 63121. 22    Kinesis July 79  LETTERS  Women's Building  I dispute the research done by Gillian  Marie in her June '79 Kinesis article on  the history of the first women's building  in Vancouver.  Her research leads us to believe that the  first women's building in Vancouver was  founded in 1911, but in fact, Vancouver's  first building was established by the  YWCA, which opened its doors to Vancouver's  women in 1897.  The early work of the Vancouver YWCA wasv  not merely to provide food and shelter to  young immigrant women who came as strangers to the city.  Early activities included classes in bible study, domestic  science, elementary English, voice culture, penmanship, dressmaking, shorthand, cooking and home nursing.  In the early 1900's the YWCA involved women employed in factories, laundries, hotels, restaurants and homes, in self-  governing clubs which met at the 'Y' in  the evening. These clubs served as an  avenue for personal development as they  allowed, by their self-governing nature,  women to develop their leadership potential.  Nor was the early work of the Vancouver  YWCA just educational and recreational  in nature. The 'Y' was involved as it  is today in social issues that affect  the lives of women.  Following the introduction by the 'Y' in 1934 of the first  domestic homeworkers course in B.C.,  action was initiated by the YWCA to endorse the Domestic Houseworkers Code  which established regular hours of work  and a minimum wage for Canada's 134,000  domestics.  The Vancouver YWCA today is a place for  women.  It is all the things that the  proposed, new women's building wants to  achieve.  The organization is owned and  managed by women (70 women staff, 14 women board of directors).  It provides housing accommodation, recreational facilities, an information centre including a housing registry, counselling service, restaurant, child minding service for program participants and  volunteers, meeting rooms, auditorium for  banquets and dances, office space and an  outdoor education - centre for conferences.  More important, the YWCA does not just  provide the physical plant which seems to  be the prime focus of the proposed women's building; it provides leadership  opportunities where a woman can develop  as a total person, physically, mentally,  socially and spiritually.  I cannot support the concept of a new  women's building when the women of Vancouver already have this vision at 580  Burrard Street.  Let's build on what we have and support  the largest and strongest women's organization in Vancouver...an organization  that has been in the business of developing women to their full potential for 82  years.  Sincerely,  Susan Witter ■  YWCA  In my article in Kinesis (June 1979) I  did make the distinction between the YWCA  and the Women's Building.  I saw the women's building as a place  that housed women's organizations, as a  centre, an umbrella if you like, out of  which these women's groups worked.  -The structure was thus different from  the Young Women's Christian Association,  which was part of a nation-wide organization. The women's building was a locally  initiated project.  I have questions about Susan Witters research into the Domestic Houseworkers Code  which, she states, established a minimum  wage for domestics in Canada. My understanding is that domestic workers, and  farm workers too, still do not receive  minimum wage through government legislation. They are excluded from the Labor  Code and thus excluded from minimum wage  legislation, or paid holidays or on-the-  iob benefits.  But I think the biggest difference, though,  is in our perception of what a women's  building is.  The YWCA has its own traditions, programs, focus and structure.  The women's building I hope will be open  to be used by all women but will reflect  the politics and needs of this wave of  the feminist movement.  I do not see the two in opposition but  rather as fulfilling the needs of difference groups of women.  Where at the YWCA can we hold a woman-  only dance or concert, for instance?  There is no room at the YWCA for different, women's groups to be housed—or even  to meet. We do need another women's  building in Vancouver. ■  "Neutral"  To the Editor  Kinesis  Renewal time again and here I am with my  cheque for $10 to cover my membership and  subscription to Kinesis.  I wish it could .  be more.  If I am in a position in the  future to become a "sustaining subscriber,"  I shall certainly be in touch.  I love Kinesis and feel it is a vital organ in the community of women to keep us  informed of what is happening.  The only  criticism I have is reflected in some corn-  comments in the last issue—those dealing  with coverage of lesbian news. While I  consider myself a "neutral" on this subject, I do feel that lesbian news is receiving an undue proportion of space in  Kinesis—that is, it is out of proportion  to the actual percentages of women who  are lesbians and/or those who have an  interest in the subject.  I also endorse the suggestion by one woman in a recent edition that Kinesis try  to report on successes, too. ■  Occupational hazards  Dear Editor:  Why are offices designed to have ALL the  windows assigned to offices for management and sales staff, many of whom are  out during the day, and NONE to the office-  bound secretaries and clerical staff?  Why are windows the property of management anyway? Why should they be used as  a reward for climbing the corporate or  government ladder, a status symbol instead of a human right?  Why should the staff be cooped up in win-  dowless areas, work day after work day,  season after season to contemplate unchanging bland walls, the same humdrum  reproductions, probably developing tunnel  vision?  These dehumanizing floor plans are standard practice in business offices and are  totally unnecessary if a molecule of  though were given to the designs. Are  you aware how prevalent this insensitive  indifference is and how many in our society are demeaned by the injustice?  SHAME on management for such arrogant  selfishness and for thinking of office  employees as no more human than the' office  equipment.  A study would prove that more work is done  more cheerfully with less absenteeism and  staff turnover in offices where a moment  can be taken here and there throughout the  day to refresh the psyche, to look to infinity for the health of the eyes and to  stay aware of the world beyond the confines of perpetual sameness.  Can you tell me where pressure can be  applied to force executives to acknowledge  office employees as human beings by having  them share so basic a human need?  Your comments and advice will be appreciated  Sincerely,.  Jean H. Blair  T.H. 91, 99 Brimwood Blvd.  Agincourt, Ontario,  MLV 1E3 ■  (.^wearagreyiogpgl  I s* .   ^rkvour car when  ,.% who follow me and put  ik in a neck lock;  ktJtk  me hi a • ■-—  «WE ARE FIGHTING BACK,  Ml  .1 VjUt:  ■menlnextseeyoul^5  1. recognize you.  Island up to you.     ^  Snot allow   you to  dale me.      .-£**  %  %_*4&  p Wi\| Defend Mys^-f^  Rape Relief has been putting up this poster in the Kitsilano and Dunbar areas of  Vancouver, in response to repeated rape attacks in those parts of town. It gives  a description of the rapist and his way of operating, and provides Rape Relief's  phone number. BULLETIN BOARD  Kinesis July   '79    23  support  If you have had an abortion and are left  with unresolved feelings or if you simply  want to talk with other women who have  had the same experience, contact the Vancouver Women's Health Collective about a  group being formed for that purpose.  This will be a small group that will  meet weekly with two facilitators.  Call  the Health Collective at 736-6696.  Open Road women's issue  Open Koad, Vancouver's anarchist newspaper,  has just published an anarcha-feminist edition. In addition to pages of news coverage  from many parts of the world including our  own, this issue looks at porn, abortion  unions, occupational hazards and anarcha-  feminist theory. Interesting stuff.  Open Road can be found in Vancouver at  either of the women's bookstores, or can  be requested from Open Road, Box 6135, Station G, Vancouver B.C.  The collective of women who produced this  edition plan to distribute it throughout  Canada and the U.S. and went into debt to  make this possible. So if you request a  copy, send some money to help them to  cover their costs.  They're contagious  What can five women do with musical backgrounds from ragtime to classical?  They form a band called Contagious, with  instruments like fiddle, congas, guitar,  bass mandolin, saxophone, washboard and  spoons, their music is difficult to categorize. But it's easy to appreciate.  To book benefit performances call this  feminist band and ask for Janet or Wendy  at 873-0595.  For an evening of dynamic eclecticism  but subtle musical blending, listen to  them perform at Kitsilano Neighborhood  House, July 20 at 9 p.m.  Women's Work Directory  Volume. #1 of Women's Work Directory is  now available by mail.  If you are in need of a product or service and would prefer to deal with a woman, write to us for your free copy of-  Women,' s Work Directory Vol. #1.  In it you will find 55 listings of women  who: build furniture; read palms; take  pictures and more.  Send 50j^ (to cover postage and handling)  to: Women's Work Directory  C/0 1612 East 8th Ave.  Vancouver, B.C. V5N 1T5  Completely produced by women.  Volume #2.  Watch for  Healthshahng: health networks  A quarterly national newsletter about women's health issues is being prepared by  an Ontario feminist collective, Women  Healthsharing.  The group, a writing and research collective, comments: Currently, too much of  the important medical research and analysis is locked way in specialized professional journals. It is vital that accurate  and practical health information be made  available to Canadian women.  You can contact Women Healthsharing at  P.O. Box 230, Station M, Toronto, Ontario,  M6S 4T3  LIL line 688-4519  LESBIAN INFORMATION LINE 685-4519  We want to be able to tell our callers  what's on about town. If you have any  information about upcoming events call  us anything and leave a message on our .  tape.  LESBIAN INFORMATION LINE 685-4519  Sustainers are great!  Response to our sustainer appeal has been tremendous. We have made our  appeal twice so far - once in the April-May issue of Kinesis and again  in our June issue. Already, you have pledged and donated more than $1000  to the Kinesis sustainer fund.  Thank you,  sustainers.    Your contributions give us a powerful feeling of  community support.    Practically,  they make the continued existence of  Kinesis \  If you have not yet made a sustainer donation or pledge, but have sufficient  income to do so,  we ask you to think about it. Sustainers make a personal  commitment to keeping Kinesis alive. Sustainers contribute $50 a year, in  a lump sum or. in ten installments of $5.00 (or any variation of the above).  Sustainers recreive their own subscription, along with any number of free  trial subs, fo?'their friends.  Why not fill out .this sustainer form to help Kinesis continue?  NAME '   Postal code  I enclose my monthly installment of  I enclose a lump sum of $50  Clip and mail to  Kinesis, Vancouver Status of Women, 1090 West 7th Ave.,  Vancouver V6H IB3  KINESIS  August 10:  Prison Justice Day  KINESIS is published monthly by the Vancouver Status of Women.  Its objectives  are to enhance understanding about the  changing position of women in society  and work actively towards achieving social  change.  VIEWS EXPRESSED IN KINESIS are those of  the writer and do not necessarily reflect  VSW policy. All unsigned material is the  responsibility of the KINESIS editorial  group.  CORRESPONDENCE: KINESIS, Vancouver Status  of Women, 1090 West 7 Ave., Vancouver,  B.C. V6H 1B3.  MEMBERSHIP in.Vancouver Status of Women  is by donation. KINESIS is mailed monthly to all members. Individual subs to  KINESIS are $8 per year. We ask members  to base their donations on this and their  own financial situations.  SUBMISSIONS are welcome. We reserve the  right to edit, and submission does not  guarantee publication.  Include a SASE if  you want your work returned.  DEADLINE; The 15th of each month.  WORKERS ON THIS ISSUE included:  Janet Beebe, Janet Berry, Janice Pentland-  Smith, Gayla Reid, Ces Rosales, Joey Thompson, Leslie Wagman, Jan Wood and Jean  Faguy.  NEXT KINESIS MEETING: July 3 at VSW office,  1090 West 7 th Ave., noon.