 vmjid£  2 Poster campaigners  are challenging city  hall stupidities and  winning  3 The only organized  group of workers in  the private insurance  industry in Canada are  on strike. Support  OTEU Local 15  4 Pro-choice defeated in  Surrey, Victoria, but  triumphs at Lions  Gate  6 Marion Barling went to  Copenhagen for the  UN conference. Here's  an interview with her  O Male guard goes on  trial for assault of  woman prisoner in  Oakalla  9 Telling the real story  of RitaSilk-Nauni,  Native woman  sentenced to 150 years  1 0 Does labour unity  mean smashing  women's unions?  Read all about it  ■ 4 Reclaiming "gossip" from the garbage '  can of sexist  etymology  1 6 Massage: Susan  Westren tells us why  we feminists might  have a feel for it  20 My Brilliant  Career: everything is  brilliant, except the  feminism  Cover: a Chilean wall mural. September 11  was the seventh anniversary of the military  SUBSCRIBE TO JC/AfWJXJ  Published 10 times a year by Vancouver Status of Women  1090 West 7th Ave., Vancouver, B.C. V6H 1B3  Subscriber $10  Member/Subscriber By donation  Institution $20 •  Sustainer $50  Payment Enclosed       Phone   Please  remember that  VSW operates  on  inadequate  funding — we need member support!  K)  SEPT/OCT1980  Oi  KfMESIJ  news about women that's not in the dailies  ££;  C   tr1 O  /  \  5 Kinesis Sept/Oct'80  FREEDOM OF SPEECH  Poster campaigners are challenging city hall harassment  By Kinesis staff writers  The right to poster is brewing up nicely as  an issue in this November's municipal elections. By the time voting day rolls round  the contenders for city power will be wishing Volrich and his pals had left well  enough alone.  For it's the city authorities who are coming out of this one with the egg dripping  down their faces.  The city began its ill-timed harassment in  June, issuing a notice announcing that the  "attachment of posters to poles and street  furniture is becoming widespread, making  the fixtures unsightly."  Everyone — press to protestors — had lots  of fun pointing out that the fixtures are  themselves thoroughly hideous.  They can  only be improved by postering.  "Persons convicted of postering," the notice continued, "will face a maximum fine  of $2000 or three months in jail."  The class and corporate bias is abundantly  clear.  "They don't want anything that distracts from consumer advertising" says protestor Don Stewart, "and that's very  greedy."  Bylaws outlawing postering on the streets  are currently on the books in most Canadian  and U.S. cities although they are not often  enforced. Vancouver has had such laws  since 1912.  But now the bylaw has been tightened and  the penalties upped.  Those of us who cannot afford TV, radio or newspaper advertising — feminists, theatre companies, music  societies, community groups, religious and  political organizations — are cut off from  our audiences.  As well as being muzzled, we are being  tainted with an air of illegality. The city  has sent letters to businessmen asking them  to inform on people they see postering. And  many music and political groups have been  threatened with prosecution.  In defence of our right to free speech, 80  community groups, including Rape Relief,  Vancouver Status of Women, Press Gang, and  the Health Collective, have mobilized.  The opening round got under way on a fine  Tuesday afternoon in July, when the protestors converged on city hall.  One highlight was the taping of a poster  to the wall right behind His Worship Mayor  Volrich's throne while His Worship bleated:  "you are interfering and trampling on the  rights -— the democratic rights — of people . "  The other highlight was getting a ticket  for postering around city hall, thus clearing the way for the test case in court.  Here's where the egg really  an to drip.  City's bylaw was a dud  The bylaw was found to be invalid.  City  lawyer Derek Creighton had to admit that  his bylaw was a dud.  The charges went be-  for B.C. Supreme Court Justice K.E. Meredith to be formally quashed.  Convinced  that the person charged, Don Stewart, had  been acting in the public interest, Meredith made the city pay his $700 in costs.  A fine old farce: the city having to pay  $700 for its own bylaw to be given the  boot.  The legal flaw, by the way, was that the  authority for bylaw enforcement went to  the city engineer. He would have been  the one to decide who could poster and  who could not: discrimination would have  been inevitable.  End of round one. It was September 8.  The very next day, however, city council  rammed through an amendment to plug up the  hole. This they did without notice and  without any opportunity for public input.  ("You are trampling on the rights — the  democratic rights — of people." Remember?)  Aid. Darlene Mazari moved that the motion  to amend the bylaw be deferred to allow  public discussion.  Nobody seconded her  proposal. Then everyone except Mazari  voted for the bylaw as amended. Aid.  Harry Rankin voted for it. Aid. Mike Harcourt, the man who would be mayor, voted  for it.  The hastily-amended bylaw removes authority from the city engineer and specifies  which posters are okay. Traffic and  parking notices are okay; so are signs  authorized by bylaws or government legislation. So  are advertising signs covered  by special agreement with the city, such  as advertising on bus kiosks.  Clearly, it's still discriminatory. Those  with the bucks get the special agreements.  Those without get the fines and go to  jail.  After this shabby display of city hall  democracy, the protest groups had to go  in search of another ticket for another  test case.  This was to prove quite difficult. One  hour's solid postering at Broadway and  Commercial failed to draw police attention.  This despite calls on the special police  line for poster crime. The cops that did  drive by zealously looked the other way.  In their efforts to win a ticket the protestors were forced to re-locate — this  time right outside the cop shop at Hastings  and Main. Even there they had to endure  the yawns of at least half a dozen cops  before a policewoman offered to do her  duty.  Now it's on to an appearance in B.C. provincial court on November 7, just one  week before the..civic elections.  What direction will the legal defence take?  The groups can't tell all at this point,  but explain that the city, in its rather  indecent haste to cover its error, has  goofed. Again.  The recent Saskatchewan precedent in which  a provincial court judge ruled that Saskatoon 's poster bylaw was discriminatory  could well add fuel to the flames.  In Saskatoon, one Bob Fink was busted for  putting up two anti-nuclear posters on a  city utility pole. He was charged under  the Saskatoon bylaw which has many similarities to the Vancouver one.  Judge Marion Edge found the bylaw discriminatory,  commenting, "city council appears to have  unfettered discretion in deciding what persons or groups will have access to city  property for postering...! am satisfied  that a bylaw has merely to have the potential or power to discriminate ... to be declared discriminatory."  The protestors are prepared to take the  issue all the way, if need be, to the Supreme Court of Canada.  That's going to be expensive. So the groups  have been raising funds to see them through  They've had two benefits so far, and more  are being planned. They've received donations from civil-liberties minded people,  and would welcome more.  If you:  — care about freedom of speech in this  country;  — realise city council is a huge embar-  assment to the citizens of Vancouver;  — like a community organizing issue with  tons of visual flair,  don't just sit there. Phone 681-7654- and  find out the next meeting time for the  coalition which is working to defeat the  bylaw.  The coalition meets weekly and  operates by consensus. Give them a call.  You'll find yourself among friends.  Donations, which are sorely needed, should  be made out to "Ad Hoc" and mailed to  2250 West 4th Ave, Vancouver B.C. £  Women aoyoss the world are taking back the night  "Vfomen Unite, Take Back the Night" was  chanted by over 350 women as they marched  along East End Vancouver streets on the  night of August 2.  On that night across Canada and in many  places around the world women marched or  held information sessions to focus attention on the appalling increase of sexual  abuse and of all kinds of violence against  women in the streets and in our homes.  The organization of the march was excellent.  Incidents with, by-standers were handled  firmly and quietly. Credit goes to Rape  Relief, the organizers, for their planning.  There is something wrong, however, with  the title "Take Back the Night", as Leslie  Timmins illustrated in her opening remarks,  There is something seriously wrong with  the  title of our maroh.   We cannot merely  take back the night.   We must remake it,  recreate it,  non-violently.  And not just  tonight but for many,  many years to aome.  By standing together in solidarity with  each other and with all women around the  world marching tonight,   Timmins added,  we shall seize and recreate  the night.  There will be another march next year. Rape  Relief is hoping that more women's groups  will be involved with the planning for that  one. J Kinesis Sept/Oct '80  LOCAL LABOUR  Insurance industry workers strike Crown Life for living wage  Fifty-six members of the Office and Technical Employees Union employed at Crown  Life Insurance have been on strike against  the company since July 9. VSW has been  co-operating with the union to provide  support for the strike. As in most insurance companies, the vast majority of the  Crown Life workers are women.  The certification at Crown Life represents  the only organized group of workers in the  private insurance industry. Since the cert-  ifiction and first contract was signed last  year, the company has spent almost a quarter of a million dollars in its attempt  to halt the organizing drive.  There can  be little doubt that the threat to the  insurance companies presented by a successful union local is reflected in the company's refusal to bargain in good faith.  The last offer made by Crown Life contained  an average 5.7$ wage increase. Efforts to  re-open negotiations through a mediator  have to date proved unsuccessful due to the  company's unwillingness to bargain.  It is  clear that Crown Life hopes that a lengthy  strike will weaken the union to the point  of wiping it out of existence in the industry.  At a press conference on September 17,  VSW's Debra Lewis joined OTEU business  agent Bert Mitchell, local member Aileen  Dorington, B.C. Federation of Labour Coordinator of Women's Programs Astrid Davidson and Opal Skilling of the Vancouver and  District Labour Council in urging support  for the strike. Lewis emphasized that  the strike is not only a labour issue, but  Diana Kerr and Linda Kunster on strike at Crown Life  one that is of fundamental importance for  both organized and unorganized women.  Working Women Unite and BCFW have also  offered statements of support for OTEU  Local 15's struggle, and have joined with  the strikers on the picket line.  The issue is wages. Speaking at the press  conference for VSW. Debra Lewis commented:  "V/e have no legislation in this province  guaranteeing equal pay for work of equal  value.  The trade union movement has a  key role to play both in organizing unorganized workers and in insuring that  equal pay becomes a reality for women in  clerical and other employment areas.  "Studies such as the Washington State Comparable Worth Study have shown conclusively  that when jobs performed by women and men  are compared on such factors as skill,  mental demand, accountability and working  conditions, those tasks performed by women  are paid at a rate as much as 70$ below  those performed by men."  You can join in the action  Picketting continues at the offices of  Crown Life, housed in an office tower owned  by the company and occupying the entire  block of the south side, 1500 W. Georgia.  If you are able to give an hour or two to  support the picketters, please do so. It  is extremely important to women workers  in the local, and in the insurance industry  in general, that this strike not be lost.  For more information, contact Nadine or  Debra at VSW. 0  Union report recommends more flexible work patterns for B  More flexible nursing patterns are needed    eluded: policy she  C. nurses  More flexible nursing patterns are needed  to help meet the staffing requirements of  the health system and to keep highly educated nurses in the system, according to a  union brief to the Canada Employment and  Immigration Advisory Council (CEIAC).  The brief was prepared by the Registered  Nurses' Association of B.C. (RNABC) Labour  Relations Division, which operates completely separately from the professional  association.  CEIAC is an advisory body to federa]. Employment Minister Lloyd Axworthy.  It had asked  for the union's input to a study on whether  or not part-time employment should be encouraged in Canada.  "This union endorses the concept of part-  time employment for nurses, so long as traditional full-time patterns of nursing employment are not eliminated," says the  brief.  "The goal of the health system must be to  establish an appropriate combination of  flexible job patterns that include part-  time, casual and full-time nursing employment. Each has its place, but full-time  employment must be considered as the keystone of professional nursing."  The brief charges that existing nurses job  patterns are unnecessarily rigid.  Easing  inflexible and outmoded scheduling requirements would allow more nurses to meet  family responsibilities without sacrificing their careers and help meet the 24-  hour-a-day staffing requirements of most  health agencies.  A health system facing chronic nursing  shortages must look at the problems created by permanent shift rotations, little  or no choice of shifts and lack of variety  in work experiences and clinical settings.  The union cites a 1979 RNABC survey of  nurses who had left the profession. The  results indicated that family responsibilities and dissatisfaction with work  schedules were "among the most important  factors in the decision to stop nursing,"  according to the brief.  In its submission to CEIAC, the union con-  * That part-time employment in nursing is  desirable, in that it can be an effective way of meeting staffing requirements  of the health care system;  * that for nurses, the majority of whom  are women, part-time employment may be  the only way to stay in the profession  while meeting family responsibilities;  policy should foster more flexible employment patterns in nursing, including  encouragement of part-time employment  to supplement but not displace traditional patterns of full-time employment;  'Ģ that the 20-hour-per-week employment requirement for UIC benefits should be  eliminated, as it discriminates against  nurses employed on a casual or part-time  basis.  Nancy Schute/Women Press  RNABC endorses the concept of part-  time employment for nurses, so long  as traditional full-time patterns of  nursing employment are not eliminated  * that health care employers should develop greater flexibility in shift patterns  and job settings in full-time work, in  order to accommodate the many nurses who  presently must restrict themselves to  employment on a casual basis;  * that health care employers should provide  casual workers with improved accessibility to contractual benefits like medical, dental and long-term disability  plans;  * that legislative actions and government  The union urges that nursing employment  patterns "should be modified to incorporate for all nurses the advantages of  part-time and casual work. These advantages should be built into full-time  nursing because they can never be replaced by part-time and casual nursing."  In concluding, the RNABC comments: "Our  concern is that this liberalization process be a coordinated one, taking into  account the needs of the system, our  members and their patients."      0_ Kinesis Sept/Oct '80  REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS  Pro-choice defeated in Surrey, Victoria, triumphs at Lions Gate  By Kinesis staff writers  There will be no more abortions at Surrey  Memorial Hospital.  There will be no more  abortions at Victoria General. But there  will be abortions at Lions Gate, which  serves North and West Vancouver.  That's the abortion update for September.  It's been a month of nightmare disputes at  hospital board annual general meetings.  Nothing has been proven except that the  federal abortion laws of this country are  an extremely sick joke.  On September 24, Surrey Memorial Hospital  became the first hospital in the province  to be completely taken over by anti-choice  advocates. They now have a majority of six  on an 11-member board.  And at Victoria General's annual general  meeting September 25 a motion to abolish  that hospital's therapeutic abortion committee was swept through at the end of the  evening.  How we could have won in Surrey  The Surrey Memorial meeting, which took  place at the Cloverdale racetrack, was a  bitter experience for pro-choice organizers  from the Surrey-Delta Association for the  Right to Choose (ARC). ARC had worked all  summer long to sign up 3,000 pro-choice  people.  They'd phoned them all to remind  them of the meeting. With those numbers,  the pro-choicers could have handily won  a majority for another year.  But they didn't show.  At the voting, pro-  choice candidates received only 800 votes  each. Where was everybody? Betty McClurg  of ARC told Kinesis, It was apathy  that  killed us.   Last year we just made it.  Pro-  choice candidates were elected by a narrow  margin.     This year there were hundreds and  hundreds of people who should know better  — who realise what happens to women forced to bear unwanted children,  who realise  what happens to unwanted children  — who  weren't there when  they should have been.  McClurg concluded, You can't fight this  thing all by yourself.  During the voting for Surrey Memorial a  statement was delivered by the medical  staff in full support of their therapeutic  abortion committee. To no avail.  The anti-  choicers had 30 more supporters out than  they did last year and that was enough to  take them over the top.  What does all this mean for the women of  Surrey seeking abortions? Increased harassment,   says Dr Silvia Glen, who works  at Surrey Memorial. Women will have to  go to other Lower Mainland hospitals, where  they will need referrals from local doctors. Probably it will mean increased demand at Vancouver General, which has the  least stringent residency requirements.  It's an equally dismal situation at Vic  General. We were out-numbered and out-organized,   says Maxine Boag of Victoria's CARAL.  For the annual general meeting of Victoria  General there were 1,500 people out, compared to 500 in 1979. The anti-choice candidates came in with a 500 vote margin,  taking all three seats up for election. Vic  General has nine elected seats on a 13-mem-  ber board. The three new members are the  only anti-choicers on the board so far.  At the Royal Jubilee the annual general  meeting takes place October 9. Should the  anti-choice faction ever take over that  board, the women of Victoria would be completely without access to abortion.  And how we won a victory  at Lions Gate  On the evening of September 17, the communities of North and West Vancouver elected pro-choice persons to all four vacancies  on the Lions Gate Hospital Board.  2955 people (700 more than last year) tried  to crowd into the North Vancouver Recreation Centre's ice arena.  The overflow had  to watch the meeting on closed circuit tv  from the nearby curling rink and Centennial theatre.  Just over two-thirds of the crowd voted  for choice on abortion.  Cordinator of the North Shore Association  for Choice on Abortion (NSACA), Carol  Bruce, said of the vote: I was very grat-  ifed with the way people came out. But  I also realised that we are going to have  to do it all again next year. I just hope  people realise  that.  One of the pro-choice candidates, Hilary  Clarke, told the crowd of her own experiences with Lions Gate. When she had a  mastectomy there the surgeons gave her  the relevant information and the, respecting her right to choose, left the decision  to her. This is what should be given to  the people of the North Shore,   Clarke told  Kinesis, North Shore people got out and  voted for freedom of choice on abortion.  They don't want people  telling them what  to do.  Maurice Fellis, Jim Warne and Peter White  were the other pro-choice supporters elected.  The 17-member board of Lions Gate has 12  elected members.  The pro-choice sweep of  this election reduces the anti-choice number to four. The 1979 election saw five  anti-choicers elected. But one of their  seats came open this year and was taken  by a pro-choicer.  It was a splendid victory for the women of  the North Shore. But as Carol Bruce cautions, the war is far from won.      0  Now tampons are toxic, shocking?  By Chris de Long  The discovery that tampon use may have  been linked to the deaths of 25 women in  the U.S. has spurred the Canadian federal  health department to investigate four  brands of tampons — Playtex, Tampax, Carefree and Rely.  The head of the U.S. Center for Disease  Control, Dr Alastair Clayton said Canadian research is being encouraged in order  to determine the prevalence of toxic shock  syndrome. Fourteen non-fatal cases of  the syndrome have been reported in Canada,  ten of them in B.C.  In the U.S., Proctor and Gamble suspended  production of Rely tampons when the Center  for Disease Control (CDC) found that women  afflicted by the syndrome used it two times  more often than any other brand. Rely is  not marketed in Canada.  In a CBC Morningside interview, a spokesperson for the CDC stated that three out  of one thousand women who use tampons experience the syndrome to some extent. When  the shock occurs (that is, failure of the  major body organs) supportive care in the  form of respirators and replacement of  body fluids is the only available medical  treatment.  Kinesis spoke with Dr Christopher Wong of  the New Westminster Royal Columbian Hospital, who has diagnosed two cases of  toxic shock syndrome related to tampon  use. Dr Wong states emphatically that the  tampon itself does not cause the disease.  Vagina offers growth medium for bacteria  In his opinion, the combination of menstrual blood and the retentive quality of  the tampon in the moist, warm vagina  creates a perfect growth medium for the  bacteria. Staphylococcus may be the culprit in question, but this is yet to be  clearly established.  Wong describes the press coverage of toxic  shock syndrome as "sensationalist", saying  that the mortality rate of 15$ applies  only to those women whose symptoms advance  to the level of true "shock" — that is,  body organ failure following a drop in  blood pressure.  "Partial manifestation"  of the syndrome may result in the symptoms  of fatigue, muscle pain and/or diarrhea.  The prevalence of the disease in women  under thirty may cultural rather than  physiological. Women under thirty are  more likely to use tampons exclusively.  Furthermore, the presence of the suspected staph bacteria in the vagina is not  related to personal hygiene. Two to five  per cent of women already carry the bacteria.  The toxins may be washed out of the  vagina with a simple water douche, but  this in itself will not cure the disease.  The recurrence rate for staph infection  is 40$, and the staphylococcus bacteria has  developed some resistance to penicillin.  Vancouver doctor Liz Whynot points out  that the incidence of the syndrome in the  70$ of North American women who use tampons is extremely low.  Information concerning the association of tampon use with  the syndrome is only three or four months  old. It is difficult to prove statistically that tampons alone are responsible for  the disease.  Women who wish to minimize their risks of  exposure, however, may either use sanitary  napkins for the entire cycle or alternate  use of napkins with frequently changed  tampons. This program is based on the  assumption that staphylococcus bacteria  give off toxins and become more dangerous  the longer they have a chance to do so;  for example, by being held up close to the  cervix by a tampon.  Drs Whynot and Wong agree that sea sponges,  now used by many women as an alternative  method, are functionally similar to commercial tampons. Says Dr Wong, "Any foreign body combined with menstrual blood  becomes a culture medium."  For further information on toxic shock  syndrome, see the Women's Health Collective  files under menstruation, tampons and sea  sponges. (The Health Collective is at the  corner of Granville and Broadway, phone  736-6696). Kinesis Sept/Oct '80  ACROSS CANADA  Native people protest the  stealing of their children  It's one of the most crippling issues the  Indian people have to contend with : the  stealing of their children.  The apprehension of Indian children is oc-  curing ac eight times the national rate:  over A0%  of the children in care with the  Ministry of Human Resources are of Indian  ancestry.  So on October 13, B.C. Indians will march  to protest child welfare conditions on  the reservation and the apprehension of  Indian children by the ministry. Native  Indian people want to create and build a  system of child welfare based on their  own customs and traditions.  A caravan of protestors from all over B.C.  will converge on Vancouver October 12.  There will be a rally at Oppenheimer Park,  at Dunlevy and Cordova, before the march.  One of the protest organizers told Kinesis  that Thanksgiving Day was chosen "for the  sake of contrasting the splitting up of  Indian families, while non-Indian families  reunite and gather around a roasted turkey ."  Chief Wayne M.Christian of the Spallumcheen  Band tells the story of what's happened on  his reserve: "the Spallumcheen Reserve has  a population of about 300, yet since the  mid 1950's almost 100 of our children  have been apprehended.  These figures do  not include times when parents voluntarily  released their child to the Superintendent  of Child Welfare because of the coercion  of social workers. In some cases, these  children may have benefitted, but I know  of many who have suffered. One of my Band  members who has been fostered experienced  25 different home. I was lucky; I only had  three."  October 12, the day the protestors gather  in Vancouver, is internationally recognized  as a day of solidarity with the Indigenous  Peoples of the western hemisphere.  Support the issue by taking part in the  protest.  Quebec Human Rights  Commission exposes  RCMP role in firing of  women at Pratt and Whitney  The Quebec Human Rights Commission recently revealed that visits to the company by  an RCMP agent were "decisive" in the political firings of Suzanne Chabot, Katy Le  Rougetel and Wendy Stevenson from their  jobs at Pratt & Whitney Aircraft last  November.  The commission's summarized report accompanied by its recommendations constitute  the only information released by the commission so far.  The document discloses  that from the women's fourth week of employment at Pratt, the RCMP "carried out  an investigation." The federal cops  "communicated" the names of the three  women to the vice-president of Pratt's  personnel office and the director of industrial relations.  They were asked to single  out the three for surveillance. Neither  foremen nor general foremen were informed  of this action. . Industrial relations  counselors were assigned to watch the  women.  The commission's report stresses that  among the 190 probationary employees at  Pratt during that time, the three women  were the only ones to be watched in this  manner.  These findings make mincemeat of the company coverup concerning the firings. The  "personnel surplus" Pratt claimed as a  reason for the three "layoffs" is pure  fiction. The commission report states  that 24 new employees started work the  Monday following the firings. Some of  them filled positions identical to those  held by Chabot, Le Rougetel, and Stevenson.  The commission, on the basis of its findings, says the three women should be rehired immediately and demands that Pratt  pay almost $30,000 in back-pay and damages  to the victims.  The commission is now investigating additional firings of the women. On April 11,  1980 Chabot and Stevenson were fired from  their new jobs at Canadair and Le Rougetel  was "laid off" from her new job at Canadian  Marconi — two different companies, on  the same day] Company explanations of  these firings are flimsy to say the least.  The RCMP and Pratt have been caught per-  pertrating a monstrous breach of democratic rights — rights enshrined in the  Quebec Human Rights Code.  Chabot, Le  Rougetel and Stevenson have been found  guilty of no crime. By the company's own  admission they were exemplary workers.  Yet they have been deprived of their livelihoods, according to the Human Rights  Commission, because of their political  activities and their socialist political  views.  "V/e are socialists, members of the Revolutionary Workers League," explained Katy  Le Rougetel to a May 24 solidarity meeting  for the three women in Montreal.  Those wishing to contribute or simply desiring more information on the case should  contact: Committee to Defend the Pratt  Three, 4271 Chambord, Montreal. Tel. (514)  521-2791.  In Vancouver, you can obtain  more details by calling M. Jones 437-0373  Socialist Voice  Anti-choicers peddle grisley  propaganda  Bernadette Russell, Manitoba president of  the Catholic Women's League, says she  simply doesn't remember.  Did she tell a Halifax reporter the Health  Sciences Centre in Winnipeg is currently  conducting research on live aborted fetuses?  "I may well have said it; I may well not  have said it," she commented in a recent  interview. "I don't know."  Regardless of what Russell told the Halifax reporter, she and others in the Manitoba delegation to the league's annual  meeting in Halifax presented a resolution  urging "the government of Canada to ban  all experimentation on live aborted babies." The resolution was passed.  Allegations that experiments on live fetuses were conducted at the Health Sciences  Centre between 1973 and 1975 were made last  year by Winnipeg-based anti-choice groups,  Right to Life and Physicians for Life.  The Health Sciences Centre and the provincial and federal .governments launched Investigations into the allegations shortly  after they were made.  After a four-month probe ending last March,  Manitoba Attorney-General Gerry Mercier  said that the 200 fetuses aborted at the  hospital between 1973 and 1975 were not  killed by experiments in which they were  used. A report prepared by the Health  Science Centre said the experiments were  done no sooner than half an hour after the  abortion. The federal study concluded that  there was no evidence the fetuses had been  alive at the time of the experiments.  Russel and her colleagues describe these  conclusions as "cover-up jobs."  The Manitoba Women's Newspaper  Federal employees struggling  for maternity provisions  The Canadian Union of Professional and  Technical Employees is in the midst of a  struggle for maternity leave.  Representing the Translation Group — the  translators, interpreters and terminolog-  ists, mostly women, who work for the  federal government — the union is demanding maternity leave of 17 weeks at 100$.  The Treasury Board, with which they are  negotiating, has commented at the bargaining table:  The  leaders of our government are not willing to accept paid maternity leave under  any conditions.   Despite pressure from women's groups all over the country,   the  government feels  there is no justification  for it.  The Translation Group has been without a  contract since March 1979. After negotiations broke down, a conciliation board was  appointed last December. The Treasury  Board has refused to accept the recommendations of that conciliation board. That  brings us up to date with the current  stalemate.  The union comments: They want us  to drop  the maternity  leave demand before they  will negotiate the other items.  We need  your support to win this crucial demand.  They are asking the movement to create as  much noise as possible: write or phone  your MP and demand to know what's going  on; send messages of support to the Translation Group of the Canadian Union of  Professional and Technical Employees at  Suite 505, 77 Metcalfe Street, Ottawa. Kinesis Sept/Oct '80  INTERNATIONAL  Vancouver feminist went to Copenhagen for UN conference  The United Nations Decade for Women Conference, held in Copenhagen from July 14-  30, marked the mid-point in the UN Decade  for Women established in 1975 as a follow-  up to International Women's Year.  The  Mid-Decade Forum of Non-Governmental Organizations ,(NGO) — designed as a place  for a presentation of views not necessarily  articulated on the Conference agenda —  and the First International Festival of  Women Artists — ran parallel to the UN  Conference.  The following is an interview with Marion  Barling of Women in Focus  who attended  both the NGO Forum and the Arts Festival.  The interviewer is Elaine Auerbach.  How many women from Canada attended the  Mid-Decade Forum?  There were 28 NGO delegates from Canada.  Four were from Alberta.  I was the only  delegate from B.C.  If we had had at  least four of us there representing  Women in Focus and our work, let alone  anybody from western Canada, it would have  been more meaningful.  I don't mean to say  it wasn't meaningful for me, it was.  But  it was very difficult to participate in  the proceedings of the Forum while I was  engaged in giving workshops.  So you had specific duties to perform as  an official delegate, such as conducting  workshop presentations?  Actually, no.  To be a delegate was to be  present at seminars and different activities of the Forum.  I wanted to exchange  information Women in Focus had collected  by presenting workshops for the NGOs and  for the Festival of Women Artists.  I was  interested in presenting our group as a  feminist alternative media and arts centre  in an international setting where I could  make contact and share information with  women from other countries.  "tow our situation was different from other  groups who represented social service  agencies in that they did not have a product where they could say "this is what we  do".  In our case, and in the case of many  women there, we had a product.     As a media  and arts centre, we operate a women's art  gallery and also produce and distribute  film, video and other materials.  I felt  that our work would be of interest and use  to women and could be a basis for discussion groups.  As a representative from a group that operates without core funding, how did you  obtain the funds  to make the trip?  After I found out about the event, I  started to talk to Canada Council.  The  Council gave Women in Focus funding to  send a representative of the group for the  purpose of doing curatorial work for the  gallery. Because the Council could only  manage half of the expenses, we also  applied to other places — you have to  understand that Copenhagen is quite a distance away and the air fare alone is significantly high. So we applied to the  Secretary of State in both Ottawa and B.C.  who provided us with the additional funds  to send a delegate to the NGO Forum. Our  remaining expenses were covered by funds  we received from the Provincial Secretary  and private donors.  Could you describe the presentation you  gave?  I gave presentations at both the NGO Forum  ■and at the Arts Festival.  At the Forum  I gave two workshops utilizing our slide-  tape production Reclaiming Ourselves: A  Feminist Perspective on Pornography,   two  presentations of the film It's Not Your  Imagination  — about sexual harassment —  and one showing of an historical tape on  Caroline Herschel, the astronomer. At  the Glyptotek Museum, where the Festival  was held, I did.another presentation of  the Herschel tape. I also did a joint  workshop on Canadian women artists with  Nel Tenhaaf from Powerhouse in Montreal,  where I used slides of all the women artists who had exhibited at the Women in  Focus Gallery.  How would you characterize the audience  you had and what types of responses were  generated by the film on sexual harassment?  The audience was composed mainly of women  from various European countries and from  North America.  For the sexual harassment  film, the women were primarily from Canada  and Europe.  The film stimulated discussion like "this  happened to me too" and started women  talking to each other about different  cases of sexual harassment that they had  not considered to be sexual harassment  before.  There were some women from China and from  Africa (although I don't know which African  nation) who saw the film.  They thought  sexual harassment happened in some industrial cities but that it was not a problem  Marion Barling  Aleta Walsh of New York in performance in Copenhagen during the International Women's Arts Festival.  The piece is called "Woman Bound and Unbound."  in rural areas. They did not relate to it  as a problem of theirs in the Third World  countries.  Would you agree that sexual harassment is  mainly recognized in industrialized cities.?  Judging by the responses I received from  Third World women to the film, I would say  yes, I think it is. I am aware that our  film starts from a place that is directed  towards a North American or European audience where the idea of feminism and some  feminist theory has been articulated for  quite a while.  I think African and Chinese women are not  encouraged to view themselves as women  and  to explore their experience of the world  as women.     There seems to be far more emphasis placed on exploring the reality of  living as part of a Third World country  that has been colonized and oppressed. My  impression is that any understanding of the  oppression of women as a class  is secondary  to other considerations.  What kind of discussion developed from  your workshop on pornography and from the  Herschel  tape?  The response to Reclaiming Ourselves  was  "I never thought of that before" or "of  course this is violence against women but  I have never quite thought of it as  violence". The audience had a theoretical  familiarity with channels of feminist  thought criticizing sexist advertising  and whatnot, but the connection between  soft-core pornography and advertising —  which is so often acceptable to women —  and the blatant violence, degradation and  humiliation of women — was "new" to many.  My presentation — which used material  that can be found on. record covers and in  the corner grocery — was "hard" enough  so that women got the message how even the  so-called "harmless" porn is just a milder  form of the spirit of hatred and oppression  of women that goes on in the world.  Denmark is known for its  liberalized  attitude towards pornography.     Did you  have any exchanges with Danish women regarding their views on the issue?  Unfortunately I was not aware of any Danish  women in the workshops I gave, but I did  have an interest in making contact with  them in order to find out what they  thought.  I spoke to Lone Backe, the  author of a book on kiddie porn called  Lustful Lolita.     She concurred with what  I was saying and was very angry about the  male Danish "experts" who were going  around the world acting as ambassadors for  the liberalization of porn.  Their line  is that porn is good because it allows men  to take their aggression out in their fantasies and does not affect the real women.  Of course, our slide tape on pornography  draws the opposite conclusion.  The Danish women were not organizing  against porn except on an individual basis.  I think that pornography is so all-consuming that women hardly know where to start  with it, which was one reason why we did  our production.  We felt that more work  needed to be done on the topic from a  feminist perspective.  I don't mean to  imply that we were the first  to do the  work, we were not.  V/e just joined the  groups who were already working in the  area.  What are some of the priorities or strategies of the Danish women's movement?  Well, there seems to be in Europe and  North America a developing network of  transition houses. The women of Denmark  have made use of their "minority status"  — by this I mean not that women are a  minority, but that they have been locked  in with minority groups — by squatting  buildings which they then claim for women.  The Danish women now have two buildings  they have obtained through squatting.  Their newest acquisition is a shelter for  women called The Grevinde Danner House.  Grevinde Danner was a poor woman — an ex-  dancer — who married one of the kings of  Denmark. After the king died, he left  her an inheritance and she built a huge  castle-like structure in his name where  she lived until her death.  The house remained vacant for many years  until some women from the movement squatted  the building. The government decided to  sell the building over the women's heads,  whereupon the women said to themselves  "we'll buy the goddamn thing if this is  their game" and they started a huge funding drive.  Now the Danish people have a history of  acknowledging, funding and giving space  to "minority" groups, and when they heard  about the action of the government, they  were outraged. As a result, millions of  kronas poured in to the women's movement  and they were able to buy the Danner House.  This is the kind of thing the Danish women  are doing. They also have a women's camp  on one'of the islands in the area that is  for women only.  It is both a recreational  and educational camp called Kvindehojskolen,  The object of the camp is to live and understand your life with and about women.  I would like to change the subject now and  focus on the theme of the NGO Forum which  was employment,  education and health.     How  were these issues addressed either at the  Forum or the Festival?^- Kinesis Sept/Oct'80 7  INTERNATIONAL  There were workshops at the Forum on these  topics which were working sessions where  women voiced their opinions and exchanged  information. But there were many, many  things addressed at t2je Forum other than  those topics.  The organization was very  loose.  If you had another Interest, for  example, you were able to form a group or  workshop that was more suitable.  The way I directed myself toward the topic  of health was that I took with me a collection of slides and resumes of women artists  from B.C. who had exhibited at the Women in  Focus gallery, two of which were on the  theme of health. One was called Anti-  Psychiatry  and was assembled by Portland  Frank and Persimmon Blackbridge. It was a  very powerful exhibit and made clear statements about women's relationship to the  field of psychiatry. The other was by  Corinne Kingma called Born and Begotten of  Women  which came out of her experience of  the birth of her daughter. Her exhibit  concerned women's relationship to obstetrics and gynecology, part of which was her  analysis and historical research on midwifery. Both exhibits were very powerful  statements of women's relationships to  male doctors in terms of how doctors exercise control over women's minds and bodies.  Would you say that there was a general  emphasis placed on crimes of violence  against women that was incorporated in the  theme of the Conference and Forum?  I think violence against women was addressed but it was not a predominant topic.  There were women like Kathleen Barry,  author of Female Sexual Slavery,  who were  talking specifically about violence against  women.  When you have an international gathering  of women from different cultures you are  going to have different perspectives,  naturally.  One instance of this was on  the topic of infibulation.  As I am sure you know, North American women  have been doing research and work on the  subject of infibulation, and some of the  African women were offended by American  women taking up the problem.  They felt  that American women should not dabble in  something they have not been part of, in a  cultural sense.  I think that oppression of women is oppression cross-culturally, but I found out  from the conference that that isn,'t  an  assumption that everyone has. When I work  from that assumption, then I am interested  in hearing from other women how their  oppression takes place.  I don't know what  to do with the inference some women make  that this is "our form" of oppression so  keep back.     I feel we have to reach out  to each other cross-culturally without  being accused of ethnocentricity or cultural imperialism.  I think feminism cuts  through — or has a potential for cutting  through — ethnocentricity, based on the  belief that we have a common bond as  women  throughout the world.  What do you think you gained by going to  the Forum?  For me it was very rewarding to meet other  women from other countries who were working  in the same area as myself — in film,  video, slide and in political analysis,  and to find my work was validated by other  women.  I made quite a few contacts throughout the  world.  It is really good to know that  there are women's galleries in Denmark,  Berlin and Amsterdam and there are feminist  film makers and video-makers throughout  Europe and North America.  There are  feminist groups such as CINEMEIN  from Holland who distribute women's films and  COW-Cinema of Women—a  group that is just  starting to do video and film distribution in England.  I was happy to see that the work of the  women who have exhibited in the Women in  Focus Gallery was received with interest  and acclaim.  The standard and quality of  B.C. women artists was not lacking in any  way and the content and the work of  combining feminism and art was one of the  best on a world wide comparison. Q  Watch for these upcoming events:  FESTIVAL   '81  A Celebration of the Arts, By, For, and  About Women — June 19, 20, 21 — London,  Ontario.  Contact: Womanspirit, 237A  Dundas Street, London, Ontario, N6A 1H1.  1981 Feminist Video and Film Conference  Amsterdam. Contact: C.O.W. 156 Swaton  Road, London, England E3.  1983 Second International Festival of  Women Artists  Vienna,  (in the planning stages.  Contact:  Helen Lait Klunge, Leerbjerg LOD 15, NY  Hammersholt, 3400 Hiller Denmark)  1985 End of Decade Conference  — NGO Forum  Tentatively planned to take place in Tokyo.  International feminist anti-  nuclear network formed  A worldwide antinuclear feminist network  was established when 8000 women from more  than 150 countries met at the recent UN  conference on women.  Representatives from nongovernmental organizations and women activists from around  the world attended workshops, participated  in panels and exchanged information.  They  established networks on issues of concern  to women including nuclear power, women  and development, multinational corporations, ecology and feminism, peace and  disarmament and a nuclear-free Pacific.  Several marches and demonstrations were  organized spontaneously in opposition to  the Bolivian coup, against nuclear power  and in support of Danish Women for Peace.  In six weeks, the Danes had collected  500,000 signatures to support disarmament. Outraged at the spiralling arms  race they declared that "500 million people  go hungry in the world — we will no longer  live on other people's misery!"  Before returning to their respective countries, several hundred of the antinuclear  feminists gathered to discuss plans for a  European women's antinuclear meeting this  fall. First priority of such a gathering  will be to give support to Austrian women  who are faced with a referendum in November designed to overturn the antinuclear  referendum passed in 1978.  Q  The Guardian  Feminists display Democratic clout  Despite heavy Carter opposition and without official Kennedy support, the feminist  movement passed the strongest ERA and  reproductive rights planks in political  history at the 1980 Democratic Convention.  Women, for the first time in American political history were 50% (49.23% to be  exact) of the voting delegates. And the  50-50 representation did make a difference  for women. When it came to women's rights,  Carter and Kennedy delegates alike voted  for the feminist positions.  One of the most striking elements of the  women's rights victories was that women  activitists from a wide variety of groups  and backgrounds worked exceedingly well  together. Women activitists and feminist  organizations formed the Coalition for  Women's Rights only one month before the  convention. The coalition supported the  open rule for the convention's nominating  process; equal representation for women at  the national and state levels and other  structures of the Democratic party; Minority Plank #10 (putting teeth into the ERA  plank by requiring the Democratic Party  to withhold financial and technical support  for candidates who do not support the ERA);  and Minority Plank #11 (supporting Medicaid funding for abortion and declaring reproductive rights a basic human right).  Minority Report #11 was supported by Voters for Choice and NARAL in addition to  the Coalition.  Coordinated efforts to pass the minority  planks withstood massive pressure to withdraw Minority Plank #10 and substitute  substantially weaker language. Feminists  held strong and did not compromise. Q  National NOW Times  N.Z. ruling: rape if woman  withdraws consent  In Auckland, the Court of Appeal has decided that a man is guilty of rape if at  any time after intercourse has started he  continues once the woman withdraws her  consent.  This ruling was made when the Court of  Appeal dismissed an appeal from a man previously convicted in the Auckland Supreme  Court of rape. At the trial the man's  defence had been that he "honestly believed  that the woman had consented but he had  stated that after he became aware that she  was not consenting following penetration  he did not desist.  The two judges who agreed to dismiss the  appeal said: "Sexual intercourse is obviously a continuing act and there is no  novelty in the concept that a continuing  act may (become) criminal during its  progress as a result of a change in the  state of mind of the complainant." Q  Mother Jones  Prostitutes abused as children  The first-ever government funded study of  prostitutes by the Delancey Street Foundation for the National Institute of Mental  Health has released its findings.  Interviews with 100 ex-prostitutes revealed  that over 50 percent had* been abused sexually by their fathers.  Ninety percent  had lost their virginity through sexual  abuse as children. Only two percent of  the cases were ever brought to professional  attention.  75 percent of the women were  white and most came from middle-class  backgrounds.  Spokesperson for the project, Teri Lynch,  said that for most of the women this was  the first time they had told their stories.  A majority of the women were 16 years old  — or younger. Lynch says that the foundation will be setting up a hotline and  counseling service for San Francisco  prostitutes. 0_  Her Say Kinesis Sept/Oct '80  WOMEN IN PRISON  Male guard goes on trial for assault of Oakalla woman prisoner  By Yvonne Chesimard  The struggle for justice around the incidents of last December at the Oakalla  Women's Unit still continues. These incidents all involved the use of extreme disciplinary measures — women removed from  the general population and placed in solitary confinement cells; denied legal  attention; their water turned off; taken  to their court appearance in pyjamas;  forcible stripping and assaults — and  caused the anger of all the women there to  build up and explode with the riot of New  Year's Eve.  The riot is over now but the fight has  been continuing in the courts.  Geraldine  Ferguson brought a charge of assault  against one of the male guards as a result  of a scene in the isolation unit on December 4. On June 2, we had the first day  of this assault trial and then on Sept. 15  the trial continued for a second, and  final, day.  The first day of the trial ran through  testimonies of the prison administrators  and guards involved in the incident in  which Geri Ferguson was assaulted and  stripped by Don Stevenson, one of the male  staff at Oakalla who are supposedly "only  brought in as standby to be used in case  of violence."  (Stevenson was transferred  to the men's unit in January as a result  of the incident.  Pie is limited to working  in the supply stores there because the  male prisoners have promised to "pay him  back" if they can get near him.)  Geri was in a cell in the isolation unit  when three male staff, and four female  guards entered telling her that she had  to strip and move to another cell.  Obviously, the presence of the three men  does not serve to calm a situation but  rather intensifies the fear and animosity  and brings on the "emergency", thus  justifying their presence there. All of  the seven guards testified that they felt  it was an emergency situation because a  fire had been lit the previous night in  one of the adjoining cells, so they were  searching for fire-lighting materials.  What is questionable is whether it was  necessary for them to harass Geri, and  the specific manner in which they enforce  their policies.  Guard testified to witnessing assault  The guards agreed on the details of Stevenson entering the cell and approaching Geri,  who was standing on her bed backed into  the corner.  They agree that he grabbed  her legs pulling her down onto the bed  causing her head to slam against the wall,  where the struggling continued forcing  Geri off the bed, onto the floor, where  she received more injuries hitting her  head against the metal frame of the bed.  And they agree that the male staff held  her down and stripped her pyjama top off,  and then slapped the handcuffs on her.  The point of contention is that they  approve of this as a necessary and fine  procedure, whereas Geri knows that the  moment that the three male guards entered  her cell, it was an assault!  Astounding all of us in the courtroom,  one of the seven guards present during  all this, Lesley Delaney, gives evidence  of the crisis point of the assault — the  essential ingredient that all the lackey  guards conveniently and obviously ignored.  Delaney testifies that, she saw Don  Stevenson remove Geri's top and then  strike her in the face with his fist at  least twice, this while she was handcuffed  and subdued. As he struck her he said,  "this one's for hitting Johansen (referring to the assault on the Oakalla nurse  that Geri returned to Oakalla to do a  forty-day sentence for). These punches  produced visible injuries to her face.  Geri was then dragged into another cell  where Stevenson held her face-down on the  floor while a matron pulled off her pyjama bottoms. She was locked into this  cell, and left naked and handcuffed with  no bedding for over 24 hours.  It is necessary to understand the operation of a prison to realize the magnitude of these happenings.  Delaney was  very fearful of giving such truthful testimony against a fellow guard (she has  since left the prison) because her life  would be endangered by the dominant regime  there.  But it was important enough to  her to take tilat risk of getting "paid  back"! As for Geri, her situation is  much more pronounced.  This society is  violent against women, prison is the extreme in this violence against women.  They are inside the walls, locked into  cells, vulnerable at every moment to whatever kind of assault and injury the guards  strengthens both this case and Geri herself.  The facts aj-e out and they are obvious.  We have the corroborating testimony of  Geri Ferguson, the plaintiff, and Lesley  Delaney, a guard.  The rest deny it all!  The trial was almost laughable with the  blatancy of the lies from the prison staff  and the obvious collusion between the  prison and the state legal arbitrators.  When both the prison system and the court  system are so bound up together, each  keeping alive the existence of the other,  and when both have the same employer, the  state, you can't really expect any justice  when you're prosecuting one of their people  But Geri's role in this case has been more  than symbolic. She has got them sweating  because when someone resists their power  want to lay out. And there is no-one  there who can help to stop an assault, or  even know that it is going on.  The prisoner is always held captive by the  prison system, even when they are released.  Geri has been back inside since that first  day of the trial, and the staff there tried  to break her.  Threats of repercussions  from this trial were always present, and  she was told that "she had better shut-  up" and "they would be a lot happier if  she just 'disappeared'". After being  released in August, she has been intimidated by cars parked outside her home,  being followed around the city by people,  and having her home broken into in an obvious attempt to make her feel vulnerable.  Still, Geri has been consistently brave all  through this fight, knowing she believes  in the need to expose conditions inside.  On the witness stand, she was strong in  keeping to her story of what happened and  why it had to be said despite the attempts  of both the prosecutor and Stevenson's  lawyer to discredit her.  They couldn't  abide the idea of a prisoner charging a  guard — it's contrary to all norms and  rules.  As Geri kept trying to bring in  other incidents in which this guard is  known to have assaulted, abused and manipulated women prisoners, the judge brought  down the legal axe which requires her to  stick to the facts of this charge alone.  She knows that she has laid this charge for  all the other women who have had the same  treatment inside; the court attempts to  break this common spirit and common cause  because they know it is what particularly  Dan Zedek/WIN  and refuses to be passive even when the  odds may be against her, their morally  illegal system gets exposed to the whole  population and it encourages others to  resist.  Her testimony showed her strong will to  say what she thought was relevant not what  the court thought was.  3ecause of her  persistence in what she thought was fair,  she was able to speak to the courtroom at  the end of the trial after the lawyers'  concluding statements. Here she explained  the tricky position of danger she is in as  a result of these charges, and her dissatisfaction with the court's investigation  Decision coming down October 24  The judge has postponed the decision on  this case. It is important to remember  when the decision comes down that Don  Stevenson is the one charged and he certainly is guilty of it. He is also guilty  of being the perpetrator of an inhuman  system but remember always that it is the  prison system that is to blame and must be  destroyed.  The male guard assaulting  women is an enemy but the warden, Marie  Peacock, gives the approval, the orders,  and the behind-the-scene control.  We must also remember that Geri is not  doing this for self-satisfaction but for  every woman who has been through this  treatment or may go through it in the future.  To keep up her bravery and resistance, she needs continued support. The  verdict comes in on Friday, October 24 at  9:30 a.m., at the Burnaby Courthouse. Be  there! Q Kinesis Sept/Oct '80  NATIVE WOMEN  The true story of Rita Silk-Nauni, sentenced for 150 years  By Cole Dudley  Rita Silk-Nauni is a woman charged with  murder.     She is also a woman who suffers  the double oppression of being an Indian  and a woman.    At the Black Hills Survival  Gathering,  July 1980, Frances Weis,  a  member of Women of All Red Nations,  spoke  at a plenary session of over 2,000 people  and told all of Rita's story.     The events  leading up to the  tragedy are important:  Rita's oppression forced her into a situation that was out of her control.     The  following is an edited version of the  speech given by Frances Weis.  I have heard many speakers here tell of  the strength of women and the role that  women have played (in the struggle).  It  touched me because there are a lot of times  when people do hard work and there's no  one around to say you are doing a good job.  I salute all the women that are here today and I stand with you in sisterhood for  the betterment of mankind.  We have a sister who is sitting in the Oklahoma County jail right now. Her name  is Rita Silk-Nauni. She's from Standing  Rock Reservation in North Dakota. She's  31 years old. Rita to me is the epitome  of every Indian woman or minority woman  living in this modern day.  I don't know if all you brothers realize  how hard it is to be a woman living in the  modern day. What a struggle it is for us  to maintain dignity; what a struggle it is  to keep our families together; what a  struggle it is to work and fight by your  side for the survival of us all.  Our sister Rita is a woman like any of us  here. The problems Rita has suffered in  her life, many Indian women and many  women across the world have suffered.  Rita is an Indian woman who went through  the trauma of being re-located from her  reservation area to a heavy urban centre,  Los Angeles. She's a woman who suffered  as a battered woman. She has a small  child and has basically raised that child  by herself. She's a woman who has faced  financial problems and racial discrimination on the job.  Rita left Standing Rock Reservation in  1966. She lived in Los Angeles and worked  at a variety of jobs: factory worker,  assembly worker. She married a Comanche  man from Oklahoma. They both lived in  L.A. at the time, and had a son named  Derrick.  That marriage fell apart and she later became involved with another man.  This  second man was the man* who abused her,  threatened her life, pulled a gun on her,  and shot around her house over and over  again.  Her husband was threatening to kill her  Out of all the trauma that was happening  in Rita's life, she started suffering psychological problems.  She wasn't insane;  but sometimes she would come to a point in  her life where she would feel like she was  going to break. Well, in late August 1979,  everything just started becoming too much  for Rita in L.A. Her husband was threatening to kill her.  At one point he broke into her home and  knocked her to the floor. Her son Derrick,  came running out of the bedroom and saw  the man holding a gun on her. Derrick  threw his body over his mother's to protect her, and Rita knew then that she had  to get that boy out of there. She decided  that she would take the boy back to his  father in Oklahoma.  She left L.A. on September 18 and arrived  in Oklahoma City early the next morning.  She was having a lot of problems and it  was hard for her to hang on.  She didn't  know, what kind of reception she was going  to get once she got to her ex-husband's  home in Lawton (outside of Oklahoma City).  He was already re-married and there was  friction there.  She landed at Will Rogers Airport, just  outside of Oklahoma City.  The buses were  on strike at that time and she couldn't  get a way out of there.  It was a two hour  drive from Oklahoma City to Lawton.  It  cost $60 to take a cab there; she had $56  on her. She sat in that airport for two  hours and finally reached a decision. She  told her boy that they were going to hitchhike down to Lawton. She had to get out  of there.  When they started walking, Derrick was  carrying a flight bag which got too heavy  for him.  Rita took some of the clothing  "A nation is not conquered  until the hearts of its women  are on the ground. "  —motto of Women of Ail  Red Nations  out of it and laid it down beside the  road. They contined walking and got two  miles from the airport when two airport  security officers stopped them.  Now these security officers were professionally trained people, trained by Oklahoma City Police Academy. Those two officers stopped Rita and Derrick.  There was a  female officer driving and a male officer  riding shotgun, and the male officer had  Derrick's clothing. He got out and handed  them towards Derrick and asked if they were  his.- Derrick said they were. When Derrick  reached for them the male officer grabbed  his arm and Derrick got scared and started  trying to fight.  All this time Rita was telling the security  guards to go away and leave them alone;  that they haven't bothered anyone.  The  officer then threw Derrick to the ground,  jerked him up, slammed him into the side  of the police car and proceeded then to  try and put him into the police car.  While all this was happening Rita started  moving — that was her child. As she started moving towards the male officer, the  female officer intercepted her and they  got into a fight, a wrestling match.  The  result of the fight-was that the female  officer was wounded. Now we have to  remember here that Rita was unarmed.  In interviewing Derrick, he found it hard  to remember things because it all happened  so fast. He couldn't remember if the male  officer had his gun all the way out of  the holster and had it levelled at his  mom or if it was only part way out. But  the next thing he knew, he heard three  shots.  During the scuffle with the female officer  Rita lost her glasses, and without her  glasses she can hardly see. She fired  three shots, three wild shots, and one got  the male officer through the lung. He  died about twenty minutes later.  Rita got her son and jumped into the squad  car; she was still reacting as any mother  would. She was still trying to get her  child out of danger. She drove about five  miles from that airport, down busy streets  in Oklahoma City.  By that time there was an APB out on her.  Police cars from all over Oklahoma City  were converging on that area, plus the  entire airport security force.  When they finally caught up with Rita, one  of the police cars rammed her off the road,  across the street from an all-night restaurant. When the people in this restaurant saw all this commotion going on, they  came outside.  They witnessed the Oklahoma  City police officers pull Rita out of the  car, knock her around, handcuff her hands  behind her back, take her to the back of  the police car and knock her to the ground  with six to eight officers beating her  and stomping her.  It was brutal. It was so brutal that four  people who didn't even know Rita went down  to the Police Department and filed police  brutality complaints with the Internal  Affairs Division of the Police Department.  I salute those people. They didn't have  to get involved. They saw something wrong  and they wanted something done about it.  But we have to remember how the man protects himself. The Internal Affairs Division is the only mechanism set up in  most cities to handle police brutality  complaints. "Internal Affairs" means the  police investigate the police. So, they  investigated themselves and they cleared  themselves.  The charges that were filed on Rita were  first degree murder, with the state asking  for the death penalty, and assault with a  dangerous weapon with intent to kill. Rita  went on trial June 2nd in Oklahoma City.  V/e had an all-white middle-class jury. We  had a racist judge, a racist prosecutor,  and racist media coverage.  That all-white jury came in with a guilty  verdict.  I must tell you that we had a  victory. Rita beat murder one and the  death penalty.  The jury came in with a  verdict of guilty of first degree manslaughter, which was a lesser but included  charge.  They came in with guilty of  assault with a dangerous weapon with intent to kill.  They recommended 100 years  on the manslaughter and 50 years on the  assault — a total of 150 years.  I feel good about being able to talk to  this kind of gathering about this case.  This is a Native American case, but it's  broader than that — it's a women's  issue. We are all blessed in that we are  able to touch Mother Earth today and come  together to help her and protect her. We  can also do the same thing for our sister  Rita.  I stand with you in solidarity to  free Rita, I hope.  0_  On August 15, 1980, Rita Silk-Nauni was sentenced for  her charges of first degree manslaughter and assault with  a dangerous weapon with intent to kill. The judge went  along with the jury's recommendations and sentenced her  to 100 years for the manslaughter charge and 50 years for  the assault charge, to be served consecutively—a total of  150 years. The appeal bond was reduced from $150,000 to  $100,000.  The day before the trial, August 14, the LA. Women's  Health Collective staged support demonstrations for Rita.  Other feminist groups in California are organizing campaigns to free Rita.  The Rita Silk-Nauni Defence Committee is appealing to  the State Court of Criminal Appeals. Financial help is  needed for this work which is estimated to take from two to  three years. The committee is asking for letters of support  to be sent to Rita in jail and for letters to be sent to the  judge urging a suspension or reduction in Rita's sentence.  HOW YOU CAN HELP. There is a need for financial  support for appeal work. Also Rita can be free during the  appeal if the $100,000 bond can be raised.  Send letters to:  Rita Silk-Nauni  Oklahoma County Jail  Oklahoma City, OK 73102  Write letters, send telegrams now urging the judge to  suspend or reduce Rita's sentence:  District Judge Joe Cannon  Oklahoma County Courthouse  Oklahoma City, OK 73102 Kinesis Sept/Oct'80  Kinesis Sept/Oct '80  AUCE DEBATE  Does labour unity mean smashing women's unions?  As feminists and clerical workers, we are  writing to answer the article "Moving Out"  which defended the present attack on AUCE.  AUCE is the kind of organization that will  make the potential power of working women  a reality. The loss of AUCE would be a  serious defeat for the women's movement.  Women workers with the right to strike  have the power to win the demands of the  women's movement - child care, maternity  -benefits, economic independence. Women  workers potentially have the power to shut  down the banks, insurance companies, telephones, retail trade and the administration of government and industry.  But the  overwhelming majority of women are still  unorganized, and most of the minority who  are unionized are in bureaucratic unions  dominated by men who discourage any fight  for women's rights.  In order to exercise  our power, working women must build.organizations that we control ourselves.  The fight for immediate bread-and-butter  demands is essential to feminists.  Independence is economic, and women can't  afford to be independent on women's  wages.  Women stay with men they might  prefer to leave because they cannot support themselves and their children. We  cannot be independent, or even struggle  effectively, so long as we are economically dependent.  In North America women earn on the average 55% of what men earn.  Women do 2/3  of all the world's work, earn 10%.  of the  world's income, own 1%  of the world's property.  We need better wages, paid maternity leave, better working conditions and  child care.  We need more money here and now. We  need more control of our working lives.  The organization of women is necessary  to win the liberation of women. An  essential place for organization is at  our workplaces.  The authors of "Moving Out" claim there  are no fundamental differences between  their objectives and ours, and that we  all share the same feminist objectives.  But our objective is to build unions  'of working women controlled by working  women, whereas they are prepared to destroy one such union in the interests  of being able to participate in women's  caucuses, committees and conferences  within male-dominated unions.  This is the same argument that is traditionally used against the women's movement and its right to exist. Whenever  we demand our cwn organizations we are  accused of splitting the working class.  It is a critical question for feminists:  Is it necessary for us to have our own  organizations, our own independent  power base, or can we win by influencing  and infiltrating established male-  dominated organizations?  The authors of "Moving Out" opt for the  latter. They confuse the argument by  using words like "merger", "joining  forces", "sharing AUCE's history and  experience", which suggest AUCE would  continue to exist as an independent  union, when in fact they propose that  AUCE cease to exist and be replaced by  CUPE.  The writers of "Moving Out" deplore the  fact that debate on this issue has become increasingly heated.  They patronizingly admonish us to "be sure we understand where and why we disagree". As  women who have been on the left, the  women's movement and the trade union  movement for many years, we have all  heard this "Now, now, let's be reasonable" kind of argument before. Well, we  are full of rage. We see our struggle  for fair wage rates as clerical workers,  for benefits when we get pregnant, our  very livelihoods, getting lost in an uncaring bureaucracy. We see control over  our lives being handed over to a male  power elite. We see losing hard-won gains  and starting our struggle over again at  the bottom. We see standing up in union  meetings to speak and being harassed by  wolf-whistles from men union members.  This is not just an intellectual or  abstract debate to us, but a'fundamental  and gut issue, The only way we can organize clerical workers into a force strong  enough to win the contracts that we need  and deserve is to organize and build  unions that clerical workers control.  Leftwords  AUCE and SORWUC  formed as independent  women s unions  AUCE and SORWUC are independent feminist  unions founded in the early seventies.  They are a concrete example of women's  struggle for liberation. Clerical workers  at UBC had already tried to organize  through OTEU and through CUPE. When organizing with OTEU in 1971-72, they found  that the professional union leaders  assigned to UBC were a hindrance rather  than a help. UBC clerical workers wrote  leaflets about their pay and conditions  and the need for a union at UBC, handed  them to the OTEU business agents for distribution and never saw them again. The  OTEU refused to give the UBC organizers a  copy of the union constitution. When they  finally got hold of the constitution,  they were shocked at the powers of the  international president and the provision  that the international could replace  elected local officers with appointed  "trustees".  When the OTEU campaign failed, the organizers looked at CUPE as an alternative.  But CUPE's constitution is almost as undemocratic as OTEU's, and its record at  UBC in representing its own women members  was poor. The wage gap between men and  women who were covered by the CUPE contract was even greater than between unorganized men and women support staff!  UBC clerical workers concluded that our  only hope for success was to organize our  own independent union. We didn't want a  union where power would fall to an elite  few, where the majority of members are  women but the appointed officials are men.  AUCE succeeded where CUPE and OTEU had  failed. AUCE organized UBC, Notre Dame  University, Simon Fraser University,  Capilano College, College of New Caledonia  and the Teaching Assistants at SFU. We  won some of the best clerical workers'  contracts in the country. We spent our  time building our union without having to  fight to convince conservative business  agents or a male-dominated executive in  Ottawa or New York.  The conditions that led to the formation  of AUCE still exist. Most women workers  are still unorganized and the CLC is  doing little to change that.  "Moving  Out" gives a false impression of the  actual organizing of women being done by  The CLC can *t organize  women  the CLC.  Nearly all the growth in union  membership among women is a result of  public employee organizations achieving  union status.  The increase in the number  of women union members has had no effect  on the fact that the average woman earns  just over half of the average man's wage;  the wage gap between men and women is  actually widening.  The CLC can't organize working women because the people who run the CLC don't  want to challenge that wage differential.  They have no respect for our skills as  clerical workers, and no respect for our  right to run our own organizations.  Democratic unions of women workers are a  threat to the stability of the organizations these bureaucrats administer. Often  they actually oppose equal pay. For example, a CUPE representative giving a  stewards seminar said that to demand that  clerical wages be brought up to the base  rate for general labourers would be an  insult to general labourers.  This is not  just theory, either.  In the last CUPE  agreement with the District of Surrey, the  mostly male outside workers got a second-  year increase of 1.5%  while the lower-paid  clerical workers got only 7%.  The CLC takes the position that wages  are not an issue for bank workers.  They  say it makes sense to sign lousy contracts to get "a foot in the door" or "a  base to build from".  But in fact their  contracts are used as an anti-union argument by management in unorganized bank  branches. Contracts like that can't be  an organizing tool or a base to build  from. As long as bank workers see that  union branches get the same wages as unorganized branches, they will not join a  union in large numbers.  Clerical workers will join unions that  fight for equal pay.  The hundreds of  thousands of women workers in the job  ghettoes of the private sector have the  power to challenge the wage differential,  but it is a difficult battle.  Some of  the most powerful corporations in this  country depend on the cheap labour of  women for their profits. It's been estimated that in 1974 women workers in  Canada lost about $7 billion in potential  wage and salary income due to male-female  inequalities. Our employers won't give up  those profits without a fight.  And the  only organizations that will take on that  fight are unions controlled by working  women.  Of course we support the struggle of  women within CLC unions, but we fail to  see how the absorption of AUCE by CUPE  would benefit that struggle. AUCE and  SORWUC have records second to no other  union in fighting for women workers in  unorganized industries.  The total bargaining" power of clerical workers would  be substantially reduced if AUCE and  SORWUC were to disappear.  We should not have to give up our democratic constitutions and traditions, our  feminist goals and our control of our own  collective bargaining objectives, to  meekly "merge" into CUPE, BCGEU or OTEU,  in order to gain admission to the "House  of Labour". As CLC supporters, the  authors of "Moving Out" should demand  that the CLC allow AUCE and SORWUC to  affiliate as AUCE and SORWUC.  While we support the struggle of women  within the CLC, our immediate tasks are  different. Our goals in AUCE and SORWUC  are not the establishment of women's committees and caucuses within our unions.  These are important and necessary in institutions like CUPE which are male-  dominated, where women must struggle to  T- have their voices heard, but they are not  the final goal of feminists.  Indeed, our  whole union (AUCE) has been referred to  contemptuously as "just a women's caucus".  We will have more impact on the labour  movement as a women's union than as part  of a CUPE women's committee.  The reason  for the creation of AUCE and SORWUC is the  same as the reason for the creation of  the present women's movement - we learned  that in the trade union movement, as in  the male-dominated left and in society at  large, our concerns are treated as  secondary.  I The message of the women's movement has  I always been that "nobody can do it for  "; that women have the skills, compe-  I tence and ability to organize to fight  I our oppression. It is in the interest  " of the employer to devalue the skill and  ^importance of their employees.  It is in  j.the interests of working people to join  'together and negotiate the value of our  ^'labour collectively.  This'is what  :unions are about; men's labour has more  fy. value because more of them are organized  g5 than women.  Clerical workers are not inherently less valuable or less skilled  ££ or even less powerful. When clerical  fm workers have the courage to organize and  '&.  to strike, we have the power to win.  : But to clerical workers, our employers  a '?"■ still look awesome and all-powerful, and  »**. we are "just tellers", "just typists"  and "just women".  The example of AUCE  • > is important to unorganized working women  because only democratic, feminist unions  will organize large numbers of clerical  workers in the private sector. AUCE's  Success proves that women can organize  and fight and win.  Who controls those  resources?  One of the more seductive arguments of  the pro-CUPE forces is the question of  "whether we have the resources to defend ourselves".  They go on to attack  what they call the AUCE tradition of  volunteering, and state that this "excludes the involvement of working  mothers".  In fact, AUCE locals encourage  membership participation by holding union  meetings during working hours, rather  than in the evening, and (in Local 6)  providing child care during union meetings.  Rather than proposing ways to make it  easier for working mothers to participate  effectively in decision-making in the  union, the authors of "Moving Out" propose that we throw up our hands in  despair and turn over the decision-making  to experts appointed by National Office.  There is no reason to believe that the  use of highly paid "professionals" to do  the work of the union will encourage membership participation. One of the reasons  that so many people distrust and dislike  unions, and see them as corporate concerns  just like "big business", is that union  members have little or no say in the running of things. Members become alienated  and cynical when they realize that their  input is actually discouraged by the paid  officials who have the "expertise".  This  is hardly the situation in which the  involvement of working mothers is  "encouraged.  AUCE's union representatives are elected  by the membership and paid at the same  rate as their regular job.  In contrast,  CUPE, which is held up to us as an example  of democracy, hires its business agents  through its national headquarters in  Ottawa.  The members of the local have no  say in the hiring process.  Being in CUPE  doesn't necessarily mean more paid union  staff; it-does mean losing membership control over the paid union staff.  For all  of the 136 CUPE locals in B.C. there are  only 17 staff reps.  Of these 17, only two  are women.  In Canada, CUPE has 160 staff  reps of whom only nine  are women and 151  are men.  As examples of gains made by women workers,  the authors of "Moving Out" point to the  wonderful motions and resolutions passed  at CLC, B.C. Federation of Labour and CUPE  conventions calling for the inclusion of  women's rights clauses in union contracts.  Instead of going to conventions to fight  for resolutions, AUCE and SORWUC feminists  have been able to spend our time organizing our workplaces and fighting our employers for these rights on the job.  AUCE has contract clauses giving women  full pay for the period of UIC maternity  leave (the employer is required to pay  the difference between UIC benefits and  the woman's regular salary).  This clause  was challenged by UIC and AUCE fought it,  through to the Federal Court of Appeal  and won.  The newest AUCE local, the  Teaching Support Staff Union at, SFU, has  just signed a f'.rst contract that, includes  compassionate leave for the death of a  worker's "homosexual companion" and a  clause giving members the right to fight  sexual harassment through the grievance  procedure. AUCE at UBC has won a two-hour  lunch break with no reduction in pay for  union meetings, in recognition of the fact  that most of our members have two jobs -  one on campus and the other at home - which  make evening meetings impossible to attend  and make membership involvement difficult.  Those advocating CUPE will tell you that  it is worth -it to trade off control for  "access to greater resources".  It is  dangerously naive to assume that because  these resources (strike funds, professional  staff, etc.) exist, they will be used in  the interest of the local union membership.  When the highly paid male business agent  who has never done clerical work in his  life negotiates a contract for low-paid  female clerical workers, is it likely that  he will effectively represent their concerns, or even understand them? Is it  likely, if they reject the deal he has  negotiated, that he will recommend to the  regional and national union executives,  also well paid mostly male professionals,  that strike funds be released to those  workers? It is no wonder that AUCE's  contracts are so much better than CUPE's.  Ultimately, the best and only effective  resource that a trade union has is the  unity and militancy of its members.  The  biggest strike fund in the world will not  help if the members are not willing to  fight, or if their union representatives  sign sellout agreements behind their  backs.  Star Rosenthal  AUCE 2  Jean Rands  SORWUC  Jackie Ainsworth  SORWUC  Sheila Perret  AUCE 4  Lou Nelson  SORWUC  Michele Pujol  AUCE 6  Ann Hutchinson  AUCE 1  Mary Mabin  AUCE 6  Susan Margaret  SORWUC Kinesis Sept/Oct '80  AUCE LETTERS  "Moving Out" misleads  Dear Sisters:  As a feminist, a nurse active in both  the RNABC and SORWUC and a long-time  reader of Kinesis, I would like to  comment on "Moving Out: an open letter to  feminists and trade unionists" which appeared in the August 1980 issue of the  paper.  First, the RNABC is not and never has  been part of the CLC or of the B.C. Federation of Labour. To credit the CLC  with our recent wage increase is incredible.  We owe whatever gains we have made to our  unity and our militancy.  In fact, John  Fryer, a recently re-elected member of  the CLC executive, publicly attacked our  contract as being excessive and a good  excuse for government to reimpose wage  and price controls!  Second, to cite the BCGEU and the Communications Workers Union as examples of  organizations which have recently organized "in some of the most exploited sectors" is very misleading. Both of these  unions have grown almost exclusively as a  result of mergers and changes in legislation.  Third, as a working mother (who isn't?)  I take strong objection to the statement  "volunteering for union work that has  played such a large part in AUCE's history  effectively excludes the involvement of  working mothers..." What kind of cheap  rhetoric is this? "Volunteering" is the  only way most of us can ever be involved  in the union movement. Or are the authors  suggesting that all working mother activists will become paid union bureaucrats  after the proposed merge with CUPE? The  negotiating of paid two-hour lunch meetings by AUCE at UBC came out of the need  for working mothers' participation in  their union's activities.  Further, it is condescending to feminists  inside CUPE to suggest that they are incapable of struggling successfully without you. Of course work inside the CLC  is important, but so are examples of  successful feminist unions. And what are  the reasons for SORWUC and AUCE's coming  into being? Has the need for organizing  the unorganized in women's job ghettoes  diminished? Feminist activists in AUCE  should be pushing for a closer relationship with SORWUC because only when downtown office workers become organized and  well-paid will AUCE members also receive  just wages.  I agree that AUCE does need to take a  more active part in the labour movement;  their activists should be helping with the  all-important task of organizing our unorganized sisters. AUCE's money and  efforts must be used to this end, not to  sink in the bureaucratic swamp of the CLC.  In Sisterhood,  Bernadette Stringer.  CUPE members advise  AUCE independence  Dear Sisters and Brothers:  We are members and officers of CUPE local  1341, Selkirk College.  Some of us are  former members of AUCE local 3. We hope  you will excuse our intrusion into the  AUCE affiliation debate. We do so only in  the interests of democratic trade unionism,  and in the belief that we may have some  useful insights into the workings of CUPE  and the CLC.  In the winter of 1978, CUPE local 1341  absorbed AUCE local 3, by order of the BC  Labour Relations Board.  The LRB had  ruled on an application by Selkirk College  for a "clarification of certification"  attendant on their assuming management  control of the former Notre Dame University campus.  The day before the LRB ruling,  1341 went on strike against Selkirk College  and became participants, with four area  school board locals, in the strike-lockout  which culminated in the back-to-work legislation known as the West Kootenay Schools  Bargaining Assistance Act.  The two key issues in this strike-lockout  were:  * a calculated and concerted declaration  of war on the wages and working conditions of public sector workers. Thanks  to the special interest of the then-  Minister' of Education, Pat McGeer, educational institution employees were  given the honour of being the first to  be dumped into the trenches.  The instrument chosen to prosecute this war was  an accredited employer's organization,  the British Columbia School Trustees  Association.  * a determined stand by the locals in the  area to resist this attack and in particular to resist the attempt by the  accredited employer's organization to  impose a master contract. In short, a  fight to preserve local autonomy.  This fight against accreditation was in  complete accord with national and provincial CUPE policy which had passed numerous  resolutions condemning accreditation in  the public sector. Imagine our embarrassment when, after seven weeks on the picket  lines, the B.C. Division Director informed us that the anti-accreditation  stand had been "received for information  only" at the last B.C. Division convention. We began to detect a certain ambivalence on this matter.  At the height of the strike lockout, the  leadership of all the locals involved were  summonsed to Victoria and treated to a  classical big union pressure session. After  the wining and dining, officers of the CLC,  CUPE national, and CUPE division delivered  their message: get your asses back to work.  The government is preparing back to work  legislation.  This is heavy politics now,  we have to provide the NDP with ammunition  for a legislative fight so give up your  battle with your employers.  The net result of all this was Bill 46,  with the famous extension of the Essential  Services Disputes Act attached as a rider.  The response of the B.C. Federation of  Labour and the CLC was instantaneous and  meaningless. A province-wide series of  rallies was held, condemning the legislation and calling for an all-out effort to  elect the NDP next time around. Not one  call for job action and not one call for  support to the striking locals.  To this  day the B.C. Division holds the West Kootenay locals, and 1341 in particular, responsible for the enactment of this anti-labour  legislation.' The soldiers marched a little  too well to suit the generals.  Binding arbitration was the result of the  foregoing. We must.say that the local received first-class assistance from the  area staff rep. (who had been the vigorous  coordinator of the anti-accreditation fight)  and from the CUPE national research department which helped prepare the arbitration  briefs. The B.C. Division remained ominously silent.  The arbitration "award" left the most contentious issues between 1341 and Selkirk  College unresolved, particularly the matter  the matter of the clerical and cafeteria  workers' pay rates.  To the present, the  former AUCE people retain their superior  pay rates, while their counterparts in  Castlegar (the original members of CUPE  1341) work for up to two dollars an hour  less.  The reluctance of the (binding)  arbitrator to intervene was really an invitation to the employer to continue a war  of attrition which we are still engaged in,  one and a half years later.  Within two months of the arbitration local  1341 filed some 115 grievances. We  appealed to the CUPE Div. leadership for  assistance in getting the arbitration enforced. (Management was claiming that there  was no  collective agreement) No response  from the Division.  The staff rep. was  kicked upstairs to Alberta. The national  research department person was recalled to  Ottawa.  The CUPE giant was beginning to  stir. The CUPE local 1341 Bargaining  Committee was called to Vancouver for a  meeting with Selkirk College management,  CUPE Division Officers, and the arbitrator.  This meeting is very difficult to describe.  We went expecting the B.C. Division to  pressure the arbitrator to enforce his own  arbitration.  Pushing up the daisies  What we faced at the table were three like-  minded groups, united in their disgust  with us. We didn't grasp the realities of  the situation. We had been legislated  back to work and subjected to binding arbitration. We were supposed to confine  our activities to pushing up the daisies  above our cemetery plots.  Several months later, a team of job evaluation experts flew in from Ottawa and Vancouver. They told us that job evaulation  was probably the answer to our problems.  They flew back to Ottawa and Vancouver.  Time passed (as in a dream). The director  of the B.C. Division of CUPE and several  of its executive officers visited us and  set up a meeting with Selkirk College management. We were not permitted to attend  that meeting. We will probably never  know what transpired at that meeting. We  speculate a lot.  We have recently be advised by the Division, that a meeting between the B.C.  Division Officers, and the Deputy Minister  - of Labour, has taken place. The meeting  was ostensibly to determine whether or not  our situation warranted a meeting with  the Minister of Labour himself. The decision was negative. Since no reps of the  Local were present we have no way of knowing how this decision was arrived at.  Credentials challenged  By the time this summer's CUPE (B.C.) Division Convention rolled around, our local  had come to the conclusion that the best  we could hope for from the CUPE apparatus  was to be left alone. We were not to be  so lucky.  At that convention our credentials were challenged. Almost all of our  15 resolutions were challenged, by the resolutions committee.  The right of one of  our officers to stand for Division office  was challenged on procedural grounds; it  took a half hour floor fight and a vote of  the entire convention to overturn the  ruling of the chair on this question. We  were generally treated like pariahs, dis-  ruptees, and all around nuisances.  We have read with interest the argument  put forward in AUCE's debate concerning the  opposition with CUPE, and AUCE's chances  of strengthening that opposition after a  merger.  Based on our observations of the  last B.C. CUPE convention, and elsewhere,  we have a few comments.  First, there is  independent opposition in  CUPE and we admire and respect it.  We  think this independent opposition draws  great strength from the independent trade  union movement of which AUCE is now  a 'ñ∫ Kinesis Sept/Oct '80 13  AUCE DEBATE  part, particularly in regard to women's  issues and issues of union democracy, which  AUCE and other independents are free to  fight for in ways undreamed of by those  caught in the CLC labyrinth.  We would go so far as to say that the more  control the official "house of labour" has  over the labour movement at large, the  worse off its internal opposition will be.  All opposition pots on one stove  Put another way, if all the opposition  pots are boiling on one stove, they are a  lot easier to switch off.  Then there is the not-so-independent  opposition.  In CUPE it is sometimes referred to as the official opposition. At  the last Division Convention, on its last  day in fact,a slate of opposition candidates for Division officers appeared out  of nowhere. No program for this slate  appeared. No speeches explaining why the  convention should vote for this slate and  oppose the incumbents were made. They  quite simply just stood for office.  Cautious inquiries led us to the conclusion that this opposition slate consisted  of a portion of the "left" in loose alliance with aspiring career diplomats. The  roughly 30$ of the vote won by this slate  provided a tidy outlet for the anti apparatus feeling at the convention.  The toleration of this "opposition" by the  CUPE bureaucracy is traced to their basic  agreement on some fundamental issues: they  both yearn to play the part of labour  statesmen on the tripartite boards they  see in the future.  They favour regional  and master bargaining strategies.  They  believe that control and manipulation of  the union membership is their entre to the  corridors of power.  They get very hostile  when anyone mucks around with their ability  to exercize that control.  It is this  opposition which is now busy pinning the  label of "adventures" on CUPE local 1341.  Some adventure!  This has been a rather tangled tale. We  thank you for taking the time to thread  your way through it. We hope that the  point is clear.  Does AUCE really need to  voluntarily immerse itself in this kind of  slime? We, and hopefully other opposition  groups in the CLC, look forward to a long  hard fight in alliance with a truly independent and honest labour movement. We  hope you decide to survive as AUCE, and  continue to be part of that alliance.  Yours in solidarity,  Roger Cristofoli; Sigrid Shepard; Louise  Soukeroff; Steve Geller; Mickey Kinakin;  Dee Engleman; Jeanette Poty; Shirley  Bonney; Ross Klatte; Marilyn Strong.  0  CLC hostility hurts women  Dear Kinesis:  I would like to throw my two cents worth  into the AUCE affiliation debate. In particular, I want to respond to "Moving Out",  an open letter written by four AUCE members and published in the August issue of  Kinesis.  The Utopian nature of the letter disturbs  me. I for one believe that it will be most  difficult for AUCE members to continue the  good fight within the CLC.  I am a member of the Telecommunications  Workers Union (TWU) Local 31. It's the  fifth union I've been in. The others are:  CAIMAW, IBEW, SORWUC and the BCGEU. Of all  these, only two — SORWUC and CAIMAW —  are striving for and actively having a  democratic union. SORWUC is in truth a  feminist union.  My views are shaped by my own experiences  and the experiences of others as they have  told them to me. No one that I have talked with who is a member of a CLC affiliate  union has any warm feelings for the CLC  or for the unions they are in. Rather, the  feelings are a conglomerate of frustration,  YOU! GETBAOCK) WORK!  sadness and anger.  I am not belittling the feminist women who  are struggling to bring about changes in  their unions and in their workplaces.  Theirs is Indeed a difficult task.  I remember hearing about what happened to  the women's rights committee within the  Letter Carriers Union. Where was the B.C.  Federation of Labour's Women's Rights Committee during the struggle of these women?  I recall hearing that there was no support  from the B.C. Fed of Labour for this group  of women. Instead, support came from various feminist groups in Vancouver.  Yes, the B.C.Federation of Labour's Women's  Rights Committee recently had a conference  on sexual harassment and made some very  fine recommendations.  However, I cannot remember reading about  them in my own TWU union newsletter.  Is it true? Have unions gone beyond lip-  service to feminist issues. Are concrete  improvements being made? If they are,  they need to be discussed and publicized  more widely.  I do not believe that AUCE and SORWUC are  outside the labour movement. Unless, that  is, the CLC is what is meant by "the labour movement." I ask myself, where are  all those bankworkers the CLC was going  to organize?  I don't imagine that if AUCE merges with  CUPE, for example, that (as "Moving Out"  promised)'hundreds of public sector women'  will be actively engaged in helping unorganized, private sector sisters to  unionize. I cannot see those 'thousands of  workers on the first picket line of bank-  workers' or 'a demonstration of thousands  of trade unionists for abortion or against  sexual harassment' or 'a feminist conference of several thousand CLC rank-and-file  delegate women from across the country'.  What is preventing all these fine events  from taking place?  "Moving Out" implies that only when AUCE  ceases to exist as AUCE and the feminists  within AUCE are active in the CLC will all  these splendid things come to pass.  Why can't they happen now?  For me, the impossibility of these dreams  being realised in the here and now is a  sad comment on the labour movement.  The hostility of the CLC to independent  unions only hinders the organizing of the  unorganized. This hostility makes its difficult for feminists in various unions  — CLC affiliates and independent unions  — to work together.  Sincerely,  K. Gabriel/Graphically Speaking  Solidarity needed with  Peruvian women's strike  A group of Peruvian women has been defending the basic right to work by occupying  the plant of Consorcio Electronico S.A.  (CONEL) since last December.  They urgently  need financial support and a show of international solidarity if they are to persist in their struggle.  Central America is not the only region of  Latin America currently affected by major  political upheavals.  In the Andean area,  the Bolivian military is refusing to relinquish cower, while in Peru, Fernando  Belaunde Terry has recently assumed the  presidency after 12 years of military rule  Belaunde has promoted himself as the leader of a new Peru, but his actions since  the May elections have indicated that he  will continue the previous regime's harsh  repression of the country's trade unions.  The plight of the CONEL workers clearly  illustrates this fact.  CONEL managers stopped production in May,  1979, and informed employees, most of  whom are women, that there was no demand  for the company's product.  The women  were not convinced by this argument, because CONEL is one of the few Peruvian  firms that produces components for radios  and televisions.  Since they occupied the  plant, they have found orders from clients  in company files, and evidence that CONEL  is continuing production at another location.  The CONEL closure is a blatant attempt to  break a militant union.  During the past  few years, many Peruvian firms have used  the same tactic to dispose of workers and  their organizations.  They simply shut  the operation down and reopen when they  find it convenient.  The women occupying the plant remember  that three workers were killed when police  stormed the worker-occupied Cromotex factory early in 1979, but they have not  been deterred by the possibility of violence.  They have already successfully  resisted two attempts to dislodge them.  CONEL workers are currently facing heavy  fines and prison sentences of six months.  They need money for basic survival within  the plant, as well as for legal expenses.  Cheques should be made out to the Latin  American Working Group, and directed to  the CONEL Appeal at the address below.  Contributions will be sent directly to the  union.  Send letters demanding that their  right to work be respected to Fernando  Belaunde Terry, Plaza de Armas, Lima,  Peru.  Latin American Working Group  Box 2207,   Station  "P"  Toronto,  Ontario    M5S 2T2 Kinesis Sept/Oct '80  MOVEMENT MATTERS  Reclaiming "gossip" from the garbage can of sexist etymology  By Dome Brannock  Gossip has traditionally been associated  with women and, like most things associated with women, it has negative connotations .  Feminists have been cleaning up words that  have negative connotations and making them  into beautiful words with positiveness  oozing out of them.  "Woman" was a word  that man tried to make ugly — but feminists triumphed and now there are millions  of women not only proud to be called women  but fighting to be called by their proper  name.  "Lesbian" is another word that has  been take out of the male garbage bag and  shined to make it look like it should.  Mary Daly in her book Gyn/Ecology  does a  beautiful job of reclaiming words whose  true meaning was buried deep in male history.  So I in true feminist fashion want to help  with the cleanup — and the word I want to  clean up is "gossip".  When do people gossip and who is said to  gossip?  People gossip when what they are told is  different from what they see, and when  they don't understand what is happening  around them. They gossip to help themselves see if other people's reality fits  with theirs and in general to help themselves understand the world they live in.  The people who are said to gossip are  usually people who do not have power to  control their own lives, e.g. women, servants, and "uneducated" workers.  Bosses  are not said to gossip — they discuss,  have meetings, or just plain talk, make  decisions and act.  The male "uneducated" workers are seen as  gossipers only in the framework of their  job, whereas women are seen as gossipers,  period.  This is because when the men are  not at their job they are in their families and communities and within the framework of their families they have power.  A worker will talk about her or his boss  more than the boss will talk about her/  him. Women traditionally have talked more  in g., thing as true as g. gds'-  pellep n., reader of g. in Communion service (hot gospeller,  rabid propagandist),   [good, spell]  g-dss'amer. 1. n. Filmy substance of small spiders' webs  floating in calm air or spread over  grass; thread of this; flimsy-  thing; delicate gauze. 2. adj.  Light, flimsy, as g. g6ss'a-  mepy a.   [   ]    m  gdss'ip. 1^4lr(Arch.)rataiiliar  acquaintance^ esp. woman*? idle  talker, tatferai esp. woman,: idle  talk; informStH^wHf^B^^vriting  esp. about persons or social incidents. 2. v.i. Talk or write g.  goss'ipya. (-iness). [E,= related  in God, fellow godparent]  Oxford English Dictionary  about their husbands than men have about  their wives. The reason for this is that  it is important to figure out and understand those who have physical and psychological power over your life.  It is the people for whom society holds  little regard who are said to gossip.  Why is this so? Is this because those  people are stupid, spiteful, and harmful,  and what they have to say unimportant  anyway? If so, is what the bosses say  brilliant, well-intended, and helpful?  The answer to all the above questions is,  no — "women gossip, men talk" is just  another way of putting down women and  making light of their reality.  "Bosses  talk, workers gossip" is just a way of the  bosses saying, "you stupid people don't  know anything, you are just stupid women."  Gossip is talk, and like all talk it can  be positive or negative. It can be called  discussing, fact-finding, or thinking out  loud with friends. Likewise fact-finding,  discussion, or thinking out loud can be  called gossip.  Words and sayings that have positive or  negative connotations have these connotations for a reason.  If you look closely  at the reasoning behind the connotation,  you will more often than not discover that  somebody else is benefitting at your expense. For example, you might be told not  to gossip but take your complaint straight  to the boss. And recently in our women's  community the saying goes, "don't gossip,  go to the source". If you do either of  those things when you are confused about  what is going on or don't understand the  implications of what is happening, you are  putting yourself at a great disadvantage.  If your perception tells you one thing  and a group or a person is telling you  another, check it out.  Check it out with  a lot of people; in other words, gossip.  Gossip with people who left the group,  with people who are friendly towards the  group, and with people who don't like what  is happening. Talk to people who like the  individual and to people who don't. Gossip, like talk, is healthy so long as you  are not misusing it to hurt others. Check  your intentions and state them, where  possible, to the person you are gossiping  with. When you have the clarity, the  strength, or the desire, go to the source  of the contradiction or the misunderstanding and see if you can work things out to  mutual satisfaction.  Q  Taking action on  occupational health  Women's Action on Occupational Health is  a feminist resource group in Vancouver  which has begun to collect information on  occupational hazards, legal procedures and  organizing ideas around women's occupational health issues. They are also undertaking research on pesticides and clerical  work, as well as a public series on issues  of concern to women workers.  They plan a  regular bulletin on women workers' health  issues.  Don't miss their Women Workers Health  series, taking place during October. See  the Bulletin Board of this issue.  They seek your input — health issues in  your work, your organizing experiences,  questions and ideas.  Contact the Women's  Action on Occupational Health at 1501 West  Broadway, Vancouver B.C. Phone 736-6696.  Introducing Aikido  By Sharon Burroughs  In a positive, supportive atmosphere we  would like to introduce Vancouver women to  the practice of Japan's most refined martial art — Aikido.  Aikido is uniquely appropriate to the life-  affirming stance of feminist women, teaching a concrete physical way the arts of  blending with the environment, affirming  our right to personal space and integrity  while doing the least possible harm to  others.  In class, we will stress mind-body coordination; centering and balancing; unblocking  energy; self-discipline, awareness and  focussing techniques, and ways of affirm-  I ing female power and performance. We will  also validate and support the extraordinary  difficulties for a woman studying any martial art in a male-dominated environment.  The pratice itself will focus on physical  self-defence techniques, demanding the  most intense effort each person can develop.  This is not a course in self-defence (which  we also recommend you do) but a lifetime  discipline of transcendance, resulting —  over the years — in a balanced personality, powerful and directed, able to face  conflict, physical and emotional threat  in an active, affirmative and harmonizing  way.  We believe that living out the alternatives requires dedication, self-discipline  and high performance standards and that  Aikido can be a physical and ethical model for feminist women.  Join us at Britannia : 10:00 am Sundays;  at Kerrisdale : 6:00 Wednesdays and at the  Fraser Boys and Girls Club TBA. (The Bulletin Board has fuller details.) For more  information, call Sharon: 324-4216 or  Lidia : 324-8890.  Bino's boycott ends;  management apologises  Charging discrimination against women customers, Project Taking Action (PTA), a  Vanccuver-based women's organization,  called for a city-wide boycott of Bino's  Restaurants this summer.  Their campaign quickly won a public apology from a Bino's spokesperson.  Project Taking Action charged that the management of Bino's had allowed male customers to insult, harass and assault women  not in the company of men.  Lesbians and  women suspected of being lesbian were particularly victimized by management and  male patrons alike.  Connie Smith, a PTA organizer, was slapped  across the face July 12 by a male customer  while she and five other women were waiting to be seated. Neither customers nor  management came to assist her. "It looked  to me like she was asking for it," said  the manager.  PTA uncovered at least 43 other incidents  of discrimination against women in Bino's  restaurants over the last four years.  But Bino's doesn't wish to offend "any  part of the population" said the apologetic spokesperson, referring to lesbians.  Project Taking Action will continue to  monitor Bino's as well as other Vancouver  restaurants. All women who have experienced discrimination in this area are asked  to contact PTA at 2417 Trafalgar, Vancouver B.C. V6K 3T2.  Women willing to speak up  for choice on abortion  Last spring an ad hoc group of women, concerned about the anti-choice invasion of  high school classroooms, came together to  form Speakers for Choice.  While this group has no intention of debating with anti-choice organizations, they  do want high school students to hear the  pro-choice perspective and to be aware of  accurate information on birth control and  abortion availability.  The group is now getting ready for the new  school year, and would welcome contacts In  schools through staff and students. For  further information about Speakers for  Choice, phone Pat at 251 - 1555.  0_ Kinesis Sept/Oct '80  MOVEMENT MATTERS  Now's the time to join the  women's building committee  Get involved  in the Women's Building:  — do we want a house with a few offices or  a large building with an auditorium?  — do we want City Hall or any other government body as landlords? Under what conditions?  — should we consider renting at all?  — what is women's culture?  These are a few of the .important issues  being discussed within the planning comit-  tee of the Women's Building Society of Vancouver.  Our meetings are open to all women.  Presently we are trying to concentrate our  efforts in certain areas such as: fund-  raising, obtaining a tax number, carrying  out a building search, establishing by-laws  and planning for an upcoming general meeting. To do all this we need a larger action group.  If you have ideas, time and energy, the  Planning Committee meets every second Thursday at 5:30 p.m. at VSW offices, 1090 West  7th. For more information call Gillian at  VSW — 736-1313 or Marg at 434-6767.  The Women's Building Collective would like  to thank those individuals and groups who  wrote letters in support of our efforts to  obtain the Fire Hall #1. Although we did  not get the building, meeting with City  Hall was a learning experience. And we did  make the top four in the final selection  process!  Chilean women abducted  by right-wing thugs  The Committee for the Defense of Human  Rights in Chile is appealing for support  in their urgent campaign to protest the  abduction of six relatives of political  prisoners. Five of the six are women, and  all were active members of the Association of Relatives of Political Prisoners  in Santiago.  They were abducted by the  ultra right-wing terrorist group known as  the "Martyrs' Avengers Commandos."  This terrorist act was carried out just  when the political prisoners of the Santiago Penitentiary and their relatives '  were on a hunger strike to protest the  inhumane conditions in the prison.  The names of the six are:  Genoveva Villalobos; Isabel Pizarro; Mel-  ta Grebertt; Eugenia Villalobos; Malda  Dominguez and Martin Hernandez.  Please send telegrams and letters to the  following, demanding the release of the  six:  General Augusto Pinochet  Edificio Diego Portales  Santiago - Chile  Ministro del Interior  Sergio Fernandez  Edificio Diego Portales  Santiago - Chile  Ministro de Justicia  Monica Madariaga  Compania 111  Santiago - Chile  Horatio Arce  56 Sparkes Street, Suite 816  Ottawa, Ontario, Canada  Joaquin Grubner  Chilean Consul in Vancouver  1124 Lonsdale  North Vancouver B.C.  Send copies of your letters to the Committee for the Defense of Human Rights in  Chile at P.O.Box 80593, South Burnaby B.C.  V5H 3X9.  n Island Women's Festival  Battered women support services  is training group leaders  Battered Women Support Services (BWSS) is  currently running a training program for  leaders of support groups for women who  are, or who have been, in physically abusive relationships.  BWSS hopes to have its support groups in  operation by the end of October. If you,  or someone you know, needs this kind of  group, you can phone Debra at 736-1313N  for details.  Battered Women Support Services is also involved in education and advocacy around  issues of concern to battered women.  See  next month's Kinesis for a report on the  group's work.  BCFW bash coming up at  Trout Lake  The seventh annual convention of the British Columbia Federation of Women (BCFW)  will be held this year at the Trout Lake  Community Centre in Vancouver on November  7,8,9 and 10.  This year the convention is inviting unaffiliated women to participate in the  workshops on Saturday afternoon and Sunday  morning. Any woman can register as an observer, although space is limited. Observers have voice but no vote and are expected to follow the same guidelines as delegates. All delegate and observer registration must be submitted by October 17.  Registration fee is $10:00.  Here is a sample of the workshops which  are being planned:  * Accountability  * Burn-out  * Constructive Criticism  * Feminism and the organized left  * Outreach  * Organizing paid women workers  * Rape Relief shelter  * Starting up a women's group  * Spirituality  * Violence against women  * Wages for housework  * Welfare workshop  Some of the workshops are for delegates  and affiliates only, but most are open to  all women.  Delegates this year will be considering  some basic structural changes which could  improve communications, maximize impact  and at the same time conserve energy and  involve more women.  Details can be obtained from the BCFW  Convention Planning Committee, Box 24687,  Station C, Vancouver V5T 4E2.  All out-of-town participants in this year's  BCFW convention will be billeted. If you  live in Vancouver and you're able to provide floor or bed space contact Marie Ar-  rington, 793 West 69th Ave, Vancouver,  phone 324-1454.  Diaphragm fitters explain  themselves  Faced with the dangers of birth control  pills and the IUD, a choice for concerned  women is the diaphragm.  This is a much  safer and equally effective method (97% -  98.5%).     The diaphragm fitters collective  is a group of lay women who fit diaphragms.  The collective wants women to be fitted  accurately and to fully understand diaphragm use. Two fitters work as a team,  allowing for full discussion on the method  and collaboration on the size.  Fittings  are done in homes, and at the Health Collective . They take one to two hours.  The group consists of about a dozen women  who meet monthly to discuss their fitting  experiences and to update their information.  Every three to four months they hold  all-day workshops. These include discussior  of the politics around birth control, and  practice sessions. The workshop ensures  consistency among the fitters. About once  a year the group begins a training program  to include new members.  Of the more than 200 fittings done this  past year, slightly more than half have  been for women whose previous method has  been the pill. About 15$ were former IUD  users; 20$ were diaphragm users needing  rechecks; about 20% were using foam and/  or condom, rhythm or no method at all.  The interest in diaphragms indicates an  awareness of women's need for a less hazardous and more user-controlled means of  preventing pregnancy.  As more information  is available on the unhealthy effects of  tampons (such as shock and vaginal ulcer-,  ation) more women are using diaphragms  as a menstrual cup.  There's a growing interest in another  safer and alternative method, the cervical  cap. The diaphragm group is now researching and discussing the cap.  Plans to begin fittings in January are in the works.  To book a diaphragm fitting and for further health information phone the Women's  Health Collective at 736-6696.    0 Kinesis Sept/Oct '80  OUR BODIES.OURSELVES  Massage: why we feminists might have a feel for it  By Susan Westren  I'm writing in response to the interviews  with massage therapists which were printed  in the April issue. Because the focus of  that article was on how the women being  interviewed has become interested in doing  massage, and on how they enjoyed their  work, there was only brief mention of the  benefits of massage and no attempt to deal  with the theoretical basis for the work.  As there is such a growing interest in  massage, this article is my attempt to  provide some of this information. There  are a wide variety of massage techniques  being introduced or reintroduced and I  will deal with some of these quite superficially.  I hope to provide a deeper  understanding of the theory with which I  have been most personally involved.  Massage has a long history. Methods such  as Shiatsu, acupressure and reflexology  (sometimes called zone therapy) are based  on ancient eastern traditions dating back  to at least 1800 BC.  One of the assumptions made in the first two of these methods is that energy moves through the body  along defined pathways and massage is  done to stimulate or unblock the flow of  this energy, thus aiding the natural  healing abilities of the body.  Reflexology is based on the belief that massage  to particular points on the feet and hands  aids the functioning of corresponding  parts of the body.  Western methods are based on the use of  massage by the Greeks and Romans and on  more recent techniques developed in Europe  in the nineteenth century.  These systems  tend to deal exclusively with the physical  manifestations of trauma which may occur  through injury, disease or stress.  Healing is assumed to take place on this physical level in that massage stimulates  the circulation, encourages the flow of  lymphatic fluids, stretches muscle tissue  and promotes over-all relaxation.  A third trend in massage, seen in systems  such as "Touch for Health", Holistic  Massage and Polarity Therapy, attempts to  draw on both eastern and western methods  in that it incorporates western medical  knowledge and techniques with concepts of  energy exchange, psychic healing and self-  awareness. Each of these systems has its  own particular set of assumptions and  techniques.  There is also the massage which focuses  primarily on the connection between mind  and body. This kind of massage is based  on the following assumptions: that though  we are generally not well connected to our  bodies, we can be; that once this connection has been remade, we have access to  important information about ourselves; that  we hold and move ourselves in particular  ways which reflect our emotional history  and that working through the body we can  begin to free ourselves from restrictive  and habitual patterns of response.  Western patriarchy developed a  mind/body split  The patriarchal intellectual tradition,  which in western culture culminates in the  identification of the ego as the seat of  individuality, has progressively cut us  off from our bodies and hence from the  kinds of knowledge of ourselves which can  be had through our bodies. A significant  split has developed between mind and body/  head and body: life is lived in the mind  (experienced by most people as being behind the forehead) and our bodies are  viewed only externally or simply as a vehicle for movement in the physical world.  We don't in fact have a language to express  the kind of knowing which is based on  body experience. We have words such as  intuitive, empathetic, psychic, but these  all suggest mind functions rather than  body awareness and these are all reaching  out words rather than ones that suggest  reaching in and down to our own reality.  How many of us know where or how our  caring is felt on a body level? How does  strength, confidence or power, feel in our  body? Once we have contacted the body  space from which any of these feelings  flow, we can learn to reopen them, relocate  their source and draw on them. I remember  the surprise and delight I felt when I  found strength in my legs, strength which  I had not felt before and which helped me  to believe I could make changes, take  risks, and these legs would hold me up.  Coincidental with the move away from the  body and into the mind, patriarchal values  have not legitimized our emotions, in  Susan Westren  fact have devalued emotional experience.  Emotions are body reactions, "gut" level  responses to external reality. When we  connect with our bodies, we can begin to  connect with our emotional experience.  Emotions felt at a body level are only  later interpreted or analyzed at an intellectual level, if indeed we allow ourselves to be aware of them at all. We  have become so good at denying them, at  smothering them, often using our bodies to  block bur knowledge of our feelings (holding the breath, for instance, or tightening the shoulders). When we are able to  recognize and identify our emotional  responses, we have the choice as to whether or not we express them.  In this way we  have a better understanding of ourselves,  and our needs, and we become more effective  in the world.  For example, if I am able to recognize  that a particular situation always makes  me angry, I can either express that anger  in an attempt to change the situation or  I can avoid that situation. This may  sound obvious, but for years I did not  recognize my anger, until bottled up for  too long, it tended to explode, often uncontrollably; or I directed it at the  wrong person. As I began to be more connected to my body, I became more aware of  how I had controlled and masked my anger,  how I had held my stomach and diaphram in  fear of it, how I had stopped its expression with my shoulders and throat. As  long as my anger went unrecognized, I  could make no choices about how to deal  with it, and ended up with tense shoulders  and an aching gut.  Another example: if I become adept at  tensing my shoulders and neck in an effort  not to let any emotions surface, my muscles will become very tight; in a short  time my neck and shoulders will be very  painful. When I am able to let that  knowledge through, when I am able to recognize and identify my emotional responses, I can choose how and when to express  my feelings.  The tension is released and  the energy used for holding is made available for use.  The way in which we hold our bodies and  move them, the way we are in the world,  is indicative, I believe, of patterns of  response we have developed throughout our  lives.  These patterns of response to  particular kinds of situations, to language, to our feelings, can become habitual  and automatic. We can be trapped inside  responses which may become ineffective  for us as circumstances change or may be  self-destructive or self-defeating. These  patterns are reflected on the physical  level and are manifested in muscular tensions which may become chronic and can  lead to illness.  How we learn to live without our  bodies, or outside them  If I have learned to be passive, unassertive and afraid, in response to my specific personal situation and to societal  pressure, I also have learned to collapse  my chest, and hunch my shoulders.  I may  have withdrawn my energy so far inward  that I have lost all sense of my physical  presence.  People do not take me seriously,  nor do they engage with me.  In some real  sense, I am not there. As I begin to  connect with my body, I can experience  this holding, this collapsing and withdrawing and can begin to change this physical attitude if I choose to do so. By  opening my chest, rolling my shoulders  back and moving my energy to create real  boundaries for myself, I and then others  can see and feel my growing power.  By contacting our bodies, we can remove  ourselves from the intellectual process  which for many of us can become an entangled one. It's not that we want in any  way to eliminate the mind function, but  my own experience is of winding myself  higher and higher in the process of thinking, especially when dealing with problems or major decisions.  I can too easily  loose contact with the physical reality of  my being.  Contact with my body brings me  a sense of ground, of centre, and this  helps to clear the tangle and the anxiety  generated by it.  If we experience ourselves in terms of body as well as mind,  our sensations are more concrete. Rather  than simply thinking about sensation, we  can experience sensation, and we become  grounded in a more complete reality.  Most of us are used to living without our  bodies, or outside of them. We are not  familiar with this aspect of ourselves and  the process of re-entering what has become  an alien place can sometimes be difficult  and painful.  There are parts of the body  which we may remove ourselves from because we are carrying traumatic memories  there, or perhaps we simply do not know  how to incorporate the information found  there.  If I am used to seeing myself as closed  and experiencing myself as protected and  I find I have a strong sense of vulnerability and softness In my chest, I may  have trouble adjusting this new sense of  myself in the old view. The new information may threaten to shatter the self I  have known and that can be very frightening.  I may simply choose to distance myself  from my chest but I may choose to risk this  incorporation, trying to feel my vulnerability again and allow my softness to be  seen.  As feminists we are trying to find and have  the use of more than the "traditional"  ways of expressing ourselves in the world,  of being in the world, to have a range of  possible reactions to situations we may  find ourselves in, to be able to draw on  more than what has been defined for us as  feminine.  I believe that one of the ways  we can begin to develop this range of  choices, can begin to free ourselves from  the patterns we have developed in response  to social pressures, is by re-connecting  with our bodies.  Experiencing massage is  one of the ways we can begin to remake  this contact. > > > Kinesis Sept/Oct '80  MOVEMENT COMMENTS  It is extremely difficult to talk about  how this process of connection happens  during massage as it happens in such a  variety of ways for each individual.  I  cannot say that if a woman doing massage  does a particular set of strokes, then a  specific thing will occur. Each of us  experiences ourselves and our bodies in a  unique fashion and the results of each  particular manipulation or stroke, the  response to various kinds of touch will be  different for each woman, different even  for a particular woman depending on her  situation. But the touching is the important factor. Massage is touching, is  contact.  When I am touched physically, I can more  readily focus my attention on the areas  being contacted.  The hands of another,  especially if they are confident and  caring, will reinforce or define my body  boundaries.  In the security of the contact I can allow myself to be there, in my  arm for instance, under the touch. I can  find the density of my physical self and  begin tentatively to make sense of myself.  Does my arm feel large or small, light or  heavy, weak or strong? I may have a  visual image, a clear memory, a feeling,  Susan Westren  a dreamlike fantasy, even a smell. Any of  these may trigger an understanding of  what I am holding or carrying in the tension in my arm.  In focusing on myself,  I learn also to give attention to myself,  to give to myself, to accept myself.  ;e is also essentially relaxing. As  particular muscle groups are worked on,  the tension begins to release.  This in  itself may bring with it the release of  emotion or the recognition of emotion.  As I relax, I can begin to let go of the  way I normally structure myself, and can  begin then to experience the possibility  of structuring myself differently.  For  example, if I am normally somewhat belligerent and hence hold my shoulders high  and my hands clenched, ready for a fight,  so to speak, work done on the shoulders  and hands brings a relaxation of the normal attitude. How does it feel to be a  woman who is not always on guard?  Massage, then, can be an exciting process  of discovery.  In connecting with our  bodies, through massage, we can gain an  awareness of how and where we hold our  tension; we can learn to recognize and  express our emotional responses, thus  freeing ourselves from the tension so often associated with holding back these  responses; and we can begin to have more  use of ourselves and our capacities,  drawing on resources we may not have been  aware of before.  0  Wake me when it's over  By Jen Moses and Mamie Maser  Although we weren't at the Lilith performance, we would like to respond to the attitude relfected in Nan Gregory's comments  about children and, more importantly, open  up some general discussion about our children at community events.  Let's imagine that everyone is the same  age. What would have happened then, at  the Robson Media Centre? A few people become tired and bored, one in particular  becomes disruptive. What would we do?  As a group, we often deal with this situation.  But when we are not all the same age, we  don't take group action. When some people  in the group, or audience in this case,  are children, people often assume that  they are "with someone." That "someone",  because they accompanied the child/children to the event, is responsible for the  "behaviour" of that child/children. Because of this assumption, ushers, performers, and other people in the audience do  not deal with the children.  Nan talks about an ideal society. But how  does she envision this society coming  about? She talks about sharing responsibilities for children, but she is not prepared to be inconvenienced by someone  else's child.  Ideally, we must all take more active responsibility for all of our children. But  building the ideal takes immediate and constant collective actions and responsibilities.  We all deal with inconsistencies and contradictions in our lives, but we- cannot  afford to let others do all the work to  make the ideal society. We must all look  at ownership of children ("my child is  sitting quietly in my lap"); we must discuss creative childcare, the integration  of children at "adult" events, the need  for equal and direct interaction with  children. n  Festival sexism critique  By M. Wallace  Having just read the article concerning  the Vancouver Folk Music Festival, I felt  a need to express a somewhat different  opinion of what happened that weekend.  On the whole it was good.  The workshops  gave the opportunity to pick and choose  what kind of music one wanted to listen  to. Unfortunately this wasn't true of the  evening concerts.  The Friday and Saturday concerts both contained music that I, as a feminist, would  have preferred not to listen to. But the  worst was saved for Sunday night.  With Odetta and Holly Near slated to appear  that night, there were many feminists in  the audience. All was going relatively  well until Robin Williamson hit the stage.  One of the songs he chose to sing was a  blatantly violent, abusive song of the  rape-the-virgin-make-her-bleed-and-love-it  variety that really grossed me out.  Yes, there were women booing him and when  he chose a second song that mirrored the  same sentiments we booed him again.  Thankfully he didn't come out for an encore.  If women + music = power you could say that  I was powerfully angry with having to  listen to such garbage. Maybe I was still  too high from singing "Fight Back" earlier  and I overreacted. But from talking to  other women I know I wasn't alone.  Going back to the equation of women + music  = power, I'd like to see us center our  power in writing to the organizers and  expressing not only our positive feelings  of their recognizing our community and  their trying to meet our music tastes but  also our negative feelings. A little  consciousness raising wouldn't go amiss.  The address is: Vancouver Folk Music Festival, 401 Main Street, Vancouver, B.C.  Quadra disputants meet,  reach tentative solutions  By Anita and Roxanne  This is a follow-up article on the one in  the last issue of Kinesis entitled C.O.M.B.A.T. Q. We don't have a title for this  month's article because we were hesitant  to repeat our last month's creative attempt  at forming a word by using initials. This  spurt of creativity (in the midst of a  gruelling political meeting in which the  committee was originally formed) almost  defeated our purpose.  Our purpose was to bring women to a meeting to discuss and hopefully resolve some  of the conflicts between the management of  the Quadra and the women's community.  The word combat  has obviously antagonistic  implications and started off our meeting  on a (to put it mildly) defensive note.  We realize that it also gave an antagonistic tone to the article which was not  intended. The article was intended to inspire controversy and even emotions around  the issues raised. Which it did.  It also  inspired eighteen women to come to the  meeting. As those of us who frequent  meetings know, that is an impressive showing.  At the meeting, interestingly enough,  exactly half of the women who came were  representing the Quadra. We used a speakers ' list and a chairperson in hopes of  maintaining a solution oriented meeting.  It began with a lot of tension, friction  and defensiveness but soon people began to  realize that they would be heard and the  atmosphere slowly relaxed.  The women who came to the meeting with  grievances were heard. The management's  position on these grievances was heard.  What we heard from the management was that  running a women's bar in this city is  neither easy, profitable nor fun.  We  heard that the women running this bar are  open to working with the women's community,  They are open because their social lives  are somewhat at stake.  They also expressed  fear for their physical safety.  They do  not want to be seen as monsters in this  community and they acknowledged that to  work with us and not against us is to  their benefit as well as ours. They do  have power over our social lives but it has  become apparent that this community has a  parallel power over theirs.  What we heard from the women who came with  grievances was that they want some recourse  to being barred from the club. They also  want a place to air their grievances.  It was agreed that there should be a series  of regular meetings held at the Quadra  during the day where management would hear  grievances.  It was also agreed that a set  of rules would be drawn up and posted at  the club advising people of the regulations  and policies regarding the laws, access to  the telephone, restrictions and consequences of breaking restrictions (i.e.  length of time of being barred from the  club).  It was proposed that another meeting be  called in which the management, in cooperation with any women who are interested would draw up these rules and set up  the grievance meetings.  This meeting will be held at Brittania  Community Centre, Sunday October 12 at  7:30 p.m.  Room L-5.  Please come and contribute your ideas and  energy.  If the management of the Quadra  and the women's community can work together perhaps some of the problems can  be minimized if not avoided altogether. 00 J Kinesis Sept/Oct '80  BULLETIN BOARD  Just Out  IN HER OWN RIGHT, essays on women's history  in B.C. is due for release this month.  Edited by Cathy Kess and Barbara Latham,  this anthology costs $6:00. Order it  from: In Her Own Right, Liberal and  Applied Arts Division, Camosun College,  1950 Lansdowne Road, Victoria B.C. V8P  5J2.  HEALTH COLLECTIVE GROUPS are forming  around such topics as :  - menopause  - pregnancy over 35  - patients' rights  - hysterectomy  - infertility  and more. For information about these  and other groups, call the Health Collective at 736-6696.  LESBIAN/LESBIENNE, a publication by and  for lesbians will be on the stands  this fall.  Co-ordinated and published  by a Toronto collective,"Lesbian/Les-  bienne" aims to reflect the needs of  lesbian women from coast to coast.  Subscriptions are $5:00 a year and  are available from: "Lesbian/Lesbienne"  530 The East Mall, Apt. 312, Islington  Ontario.  FEMINIST ISSUES, a new journal of feminist social and political theory began  publication in August 1980. It is  the English-language edition of the  French journal "Questions Feministes",  which is edited by Simone de Beauvoir.  "Feminist Issues" will have two English-language editors: Mary Jo Lakeland and Susan Ellis Wolf, directors  of The Feminist Forum in Berkeley.  Canadian subscriptions are $17:00 for  individuals and $27:00 for institutions. Order from: Transaction, Inc.,  Rutgers-The State University, New  Brunswick, N.J. 08903, U.S.A.  1981 EVERYWOMAN'S ALMANAC is out.* Theme  for 1981 is "friendships" — in the  workplace, with men, with women of  older and younger generations. To supplement the interviews, descriptions  of support services for women are included, as are listings of women's  centres across Canada. Fine original  illustrations, as usual. $5.95 in  your favourite feminist bookstores.  TWO NEW VIDEO PRODUCTIONS from Women in  Focus:  "A Respectable Lie" examines pornography from a feminist perspective.  Four women express their feelings about  pornography and encourage other women  to examine their own reactions.  "That's Not Me They're Talking About"  examines the restrictive stereotypes  of women perpetuated by the mass media.  The tape encourages more positive  images by looking at women's own depictions of ourselves.  Both are available on 3/4" colour  cassette. Rental $35. Purchase $110.  From Women in Focus, 6-45 Kingsway,  Vancouver B.C. V5T 3H7.  Phone 872-2250.  THE FLECK WOMEN is a unique video tape of  the Fleck Manufacturing strike in Huron  Park, Ontario (March - August 1978). It  traces the personal and political struggle of 80 women strikers during the bitter five-month strike, exploring the  bonding process between them as well as  the courage they found collectively.  Rental : $50:00 from the producers,  Women's Workshop, P.O. Box 7083, Station E, London, Ontario, N5Y 4J9.  Groups  THE PORT ALBERNI WOMEN'S RESOURCES society  is a newly-incorporated group concerned  with the situation of battered women.  They hope to open a transition house  in the near future. Any input or relevant information would be welcome.  Write to them at : Room 8, 4965 Argyle  Street, Port Alberni B.C. V9Y 1V6  SINGLE PARENTS GROUP FOR VANCOUVER EAST is  being organized by Single Parents  Group, c/o Britannia Community Centre,  1661 Napier Street, Vancouver V51 4X4.  Phone 253-4391, local 57.  Classified  WOMEN'S WORK GALLERY.' Women artists interested in the formation of a co-operative  artist group and gallery call Robin at  255-5363 or Valerie at 986-5443.  WOMEN AND PREGNANCY.  I am putting a book  together on women's experiences in  pregnancy.  I'd like to talk to a woman who gave her baby up, either for  adoption through an agency, or to  relatives. Her identity can be anonymous in the book.  Contact: Daphne  Morrison, 1358 Graveley Street, Vancouver B.C. V5L 3A2. Phone 253-9320.  NEXT LESBIAN CONFERENCE event will be a  Halloween Dance, Friday, October 31  at the Teamsters Hall, 490 East Broadway. Phone 253-6415 for more details.  OPEN SHOWINGS: The first in a series of  monthly concerts featuring Vancouver independent artists in dance, music and  theatre will be held at the Western  Front Lodge, 303 East 8th Ave at 8:00  p.m. on Sunday, October 12. Tickets  are $2:50 at the door. For more information, call Nan Vie at 874-7166.  PARENTS WANTED. As a child, were you physically punished/maltreated, e.g. received non-accidental injuries which  required medical care; were hit with  an object; received beatings, etc?  Do you as a parent not  physically  abuse your own children?  A research project in the department  of psychology at Simon Fraser University  is interested in interviewing, confidentially, parents who have been successful in breaking this pattern of  violence. Parents interested in participating please contact Lesley Joy  at 291-3354 or 733-8652.  Graphically Speaking, a collection of graphics and cartoons from the past five Everywoman 's Almanacs  is a new release of the Women's Press. $2.95,64 pages, black and white.  WEN-DO, Women's Self Defense:  Classes can be arranged for groups  of 10 or more women. For information, contact Wen-Do West, 2349 St  Catherines, Vancouver. Phone 876-6390.  FOUR PARENTS and two three year olds seek  other kids and parents to share in  childcare. Non-sexist, non-authoritarian  health conscious. Call 327-6457 or  736-1800.  AIKIDO SELF-DEFENCE for women. Courses are  offered at Kerrisdale Community Centre  on Wednesdays, 6:00 - 7:30 p.m. (at  42nd and Arbutus) and at Britannia  Community Centre on Sundays, 10:30—  12:00. For more information call 324-  8890 (p.m. ) or 266-8331 (days).  A FEMINIST is looking for a woman to sublet her apartment for six months to a  year. Small but pleasant, at 12th and  Cambie. $200 for everything. Call 873-  4143.  SUPPORT GROUP FOR GAY WOMEN with Marsha  Ablowitz. Thursdays, October 9, 16,  from 7:00 — 9:00 p.m. Sponsored by  Family Services of Greater Vancouver.  Call Robbie at 731-4951 for details.  CATS!: three timid yellow kittens are immediately available. Call Chris at 251-  3671 after 9:00 p.m.  WOMAN MECHANIC will do qualified repairs  on most imported and domestic cars for  $15 an hour. All work guaranteed. Call  Jeri at 251-2893-  SETTING UP A TRANSITION HOUSE? Any group  interested in setting up a transition  house please write to the newly-formed  Society of Transition Houses of British Columbia, Box 213, Port Coquitlam,  B.C. V3C.3V7.  HOUSING FOR WOMEN urgently needed. Call the  YWCA Housing Registry at 683-2531, Local 220.  LESBIAN DROP-IN meets every Wednesday  night at the Vancouver Women's Bookstore, 804 Richards at 8:00 p.m.  LESBIAN INFORMATION LINE (LIL) is open to  calls two nights a week. Thursday and  Sunday, 7 — 10 p.m. Call 734-1016.  DROP-IN FOR YOUNGER LESBIANS meets each  Thursday night, 7:30 — 10:00 p.m.  1501 West Broadway.  FACING YOUR FAT is a new approach to dealing with weight loss which emphasizes  self-acceptance, enjoyment and fulfilment. We will explore what fat means  to you and what alternatives you have  through the use of fantasy, movement,  gestalt, body awareness and group discussion.  Three evenings and one weekend session  in October. Fee: $100. For further  information call Doris Maranda M.A. at  736-7180 or Sandy Friedman M.A. at 731-  8752.  LESBIANS OVER 40 meet Monday night at  the Women's Bookstore, 804 Richards,  at 7;30 p.m.  GET YOUR CLASSIFIEDS IN by the 20th of  each month. Phone 736 1313 for details.  THE BELLE OF AMHERST, a play based on the  life of Emily Dickinson, opens October  23. Produced by Westcoast Actors at  the Waterfront Theatre, 1512 Anderson  Street, Granville Island. For ticket  details call 689-3821. BULLETIN BOARD  Kinesis Sept/Oct'80  Events  RAPE RELIEF WOMEN'S DANCE, Saturday October  11, 8:00 p.m. at the Eagles Hall, 748  Kingsway (at Fraser).  Admission is one hour's pay if you can;  less if you can't. Taped music. All  proceeds go to Rape Relief House. Childcare provided. Call Carol or Krin at  872-8212 for information. Tickets are  available at the Women's Bookstore (804  Richards), at Ariel Books (4th and Mac  Donald) and Rape Relief (4-45 Kings-  way).  "If I can't dance I don't want to be*  a part of your revolution." — Emma  Goldman.  PRESERVING LIFE ON EARTH will be the core  concern when peace-oriented anti-nuclear  women and friends gather:  Thanksgiving Weekend, October 10, 11,  12 at Squamish Easter Seal Camp.  All are welcome to attend this event,  which includes the annual general meeting of the B.C. Voice of Women. Call  June at 687-6510, Joan at 929-1377 for  more details.  DANCE OPEN TO ALL WOMEN. The BCFW Convention dance will be held November 8 at  the West End Community Centre, 870 Den-  man, 8:00 — midnight. Sponsored by  the Women's Building Committee. Tickets  are $3:00 for non-delegates and are on  sale at Ariel Books, the Women's Bookstore, VSW, Rape Relief, Octopus Books  East (1146 Commercial Drive) and Passac-  aglia Books (1230 Davies). Daycare will  be available.  Call 434-6767 to register.  FEMINIST VIDEO SERIES at Women in Focus:  October 14:  "Losing: A Conversation  With the Parents"  "We Will Not Be Beaten"  October 21:  "The Fleck Women"  "It's Not Your Imagination"  October 28:   "It's Not My Head, It's  My Body"  "That's Not Me They're  Talking About"  Tuesdays at 7:30 p.m. at Women in Focus  6 — 45 Kingsway, Vancouver. All women  welcome. Donation: $2:00.  -TASK FORCE ON OLDER WOMEN sponsored by the  NDP Women's Committee has set up the  following public hearings:  October 10, 11  October 24, 25  November 7, 8  November 14, 15  November 21, 22  November 28, 29  December 5, 6  For more details,  NDP constituency office.  — Terrace  — Kamloops  — Campbell River  — North Vancouver  — New Westminster  — Vancouver  — Victoria  contact your local  WOMEN ONLY group takes place on Galiano  Island October 25-26.  For more information call Sara David at 539-2547.  FEMINIST COUNSELLING AND THERAPY.  The Women's Resource Centre at Capilano College and the Feminist Counselling Association of B.C. have organized a one-  day seminar with Judith Bardwick, the  author of Psychology of Women. Wednesday, November 5, 9:30 am to 3:30 pm  at Robson Square Theatre. Cost is $35  (lunch is included).  To register,  contact the Women's Resources Centre,'  Capilano College, 2055 Purcell Way,  North Vancouver B.C. V7J 3H5.  DAY OF PROTEST on all B.C. campuses November 6 to draw attention to the dismal state of childcare for student  parents. Call Jean Bennett of the  Students Federation for more details.  She's at 291-4677.  Teresa Reimer  TERESA REIMER is the featured artists this  month at the WOMEN IN FOCUS ART GALLERY  #6 — 45 Kingsway. Her series of documentary drawings are on display Mon —  Fri: 10:00 a.m. — 5:00 p.m. and Sat  from 1:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m., October 2  through 30.  SINGLE MOTHERS SYMPOSIUM sponsored by the  Vancouver YWCA takes place October 18  and 19 during Single Parent Week in  B.C. Subsides are available. Call  Sharon Willms for details: 683-2531,  Local 251.  WOMEN WORKERS" HEALTH SERIES is being  presented by Women's Action on Occupational Health, a feminist resource group  for women workers' health issues.  Three evening sessions, 7:30 p.m. at  Mount Pleasant Neighbourhood House,  535 East Broadway, Vancouver.  Call 736-6696 for more information and  childcare for the series.  OCTOBER 15 : WORKING FOR OUR LIVES  An hour-length colour film focusing  on the hazards faced by today's working women.  Filmed in 40 different  workplaces, highlighting both traditional and non-traditional jobs. First  ever showing in B.C.! A discussion  will follow the film.  OCTOBER 22 : PESTICIDES  An issue for farmworkers and for the  community.  OCTOBER 29 : CLERICAL WORK  Offices are dangerous places!  Back problems, noise, lighting, stress,  chemicals, and VDTS (video display  terminals) will be discussed.  All women are workers!  Come and bring your friends!  KINESIS  KINESIS is published ten times a year by Vancouver  Status of Women. Its objectives are to enhance understanding about the changing position of women in  society and work actively towards achieving social  change.  VIEWS EXPRESSED IN KINESIS are those of the writer  and do not necessarily reflect VSW policy. All unsigned  material is the responsibility of the Kinesis editorial  group.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status of  Women, 1090 West 7th Avenue, Vancouver, B.C. V6H  1B3.  MEMBERSHIP in Vancouver Status of Women is by  donation. Kinesis is mailed monthly to all members.  Individual subs to Kinesis are $8.00 per year. We ask  members to base their donations on this, and their own  financial situations.  SUBMISSIONS are welcome. We reserve the right to  edit, and submission does not guarantee publication.  Include a SASE if you want your work returned.  DEADLINE: 15th of each month.  VSW updates  VANCOUVER STATUS OF WOMEN, 1090 West 7th  Ave, Vancouver V6H 1B3, phone 736-1313  is open 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Mon-Thurs.  GUIDE TO THE B.C. WOMEN'S MOVEMENT is now  ready.  Comprehensive,.annotated list of  B.C.'s women's groups, including phone  numbers. To receive your copy, send $1:50  to VSW at 1090 West 7th Ave, Vancouver V6H  IB3-  THE B.C. FAMILY RELATIONS ACT. Our 12-page  appraisal of the new B.C. Family Relations  Act, covering such areas as custody, separation and property settlements, has been reprinted and is available for 50 cents from  VSW at 1090 West 7th Ave, Vancouver V6H  IB3. Written by feminists Jillian Ridington  and Ruth Busch, it's invaluable.  NEW ASSERTIVENESS TRAINING GROUP is starting on Tuesday, October 14 from 7:00 —  9:00 p.m. at South Vancouver Family Place,  4932 Victoria Drive at 33rd ave. Fee is  $5:00 for four weeks. Phone Cat at VSW for  details : 736-1313.  WOMEN WORKERS IN THE HOME is now holding a  speakers' series in a dozen family places,  community centres, moms and tots groups etc  Topics include Shared Parenting, Assertiveness Training Techniques, Welfare Rights,  Housework, Single Parenting.... If you'd  like to get a series going in your neighbourhood, phone Gillian at VSW: 736-1313-  GROUPS FOR WOMEN OVER 50 will be starting  soon. Here group facilitator Ima Kraya-  noff offers some thoughts about the group:  "I have never led a group with an upper  or lower age limit-. My thinking has  always been and still is that human problems are basically the same for adults  of all ages.  The impact of the problems  may be similar for all adults but in my  experience the frequency and intensity  of the types of problems change according  to age and.maturity.  "Moreover, the turmoil in younger women  who must make decisions about directions  in their lives is more readily accepted  than the mental and emotional agonies  about equivalent decisions for older women. The emphasis shifts from decisions  about marriage, career, having children  and so on to other areas, such as: death,  divorce, retirement.  "Older women are expected to have reachea  their life goals, to be serene and wise.  These expectations are unreal and in themselves constitute a problem.  "Women over '50 are often dealing with a  profound loss:  — loss of a partner through death, divorce  or separation;  — loss of focus with the departure of the  last child from the family home;  — loss of a job through retirement;  and the most common loss for women over 50  in this society:  — loss of youthfulness.  "This society values women for our youtn-  fulness.  When I told a friend, 'this summer I became 60 years...', she interrupted  and filled in 'young'. Mo!  On my 10th  birthday I became 10 years old. Now I'm  60 years old.  A willingness to experience sorrow and anger with the loss is essential for forward  movement.  In a group you will find other participants  who are struggling with similar or identical  problems. That in itself can diminish the  feelings of loneliness.  As facilitator I create opportunities for  growth by helping you deal honestly with  pain and loneliness on a practical, emotional and mental level.  GROUP FOR WOMEN OVER 50 starts OCTOBER 27  and runs to DECEMBER 1, from 2:00 — 4:30  or from 7:00 — 9:30 p.m. Call VSW for  more details about signing up: 736-1313- Kinesis Sept/Oct'80  CULTURAL WORK  This film may be brilliant, but is it feminist?  By Helen Mintz  My Brilliant Career  is touted as a feminist  film. The film portrays a woman who defiantly refuses the roles foisted on her  by family.  Sybylla, the woman in question,  refuses to accept a job as a servant despite her mother's pleas that her"contribution is indispensible in maintaining  them on their backwoods farm. Sybylla is  then shipped off to her mother's wealthy  relatives 'who are determined to make a  real lady of her and marry her off to a  wealthy suitor.  But Sybylla refuses to  swallow the tempting bait; she is unflinching in her determination not to  marry until she has successfully pursued  a career.  At the end of the film, Sybylla  "has become" a writer, describing the  conditions of poverty in which she grew  up and to which she has returned.  We would expect a film about a woman  struggling to realize her objectives as a  writer. We would expect to see her  struggling with the demands of the craft,  with the frustrations of getting her work  published and before an audience.  We  would expect to see her dealing with the  questions of how she will support herself  while writing, of how her writing can  actually serve the people whose conditions  she is describing.  What we would expect  is a film about a woman and her career.  Forget it.  This is not  a film about a  woman and her career. My Brilliant Career  concentrates instead on Sybylla's relations with her suitors. More than any  other theme in the film, the majority of  footage has the audience following Sybylla through scenes in which she flirts  provocatively and daringly with men.  It  is true that she refuses to play the  passive female but insists instead on enjoying herself, drinking, dancing, laughing uproariously, and generally carrying  on in a way that allows her to express  her desires for fun and frivolity.  Sybylla also makes demands on her men. When  the man on whom she has fixed her eye fails  to contact her as he had promised, Sybylla  is angry.  And she lets him know it.  So we have here a woman who makes demands  on her men; a woman who insists on her  right to self-expression.  But the area we  see Sybylla choosing for her self expression is the area of flirting and frivolity.  She acts the child, sharing her impetuous-  ness. The career, to which Sybylla alludes  throughout the film, remains, until the  very end, an idle dream.  And so, in fact, we have one more film  about a woman and her romantic relationships.  One more film which reinforces the  stereotype that the central aspect of a  woman's life is the manner in which she  carries on her romantic life.  The film  never shows us Sybylla involved in the  painful work of plying her career.  By the  end of the film she has become, as if by  magic, a writer.  Sybylla is a woman caught between two  classes; her immediate family who are  poor subsistence farmers on the one hand  and her mother's wealthy relatives on the  other.  Sybylla's identification throughout the film is with the world of individual possibility, the world of wealth and  privilege. She wants a life where she  does not have to worry endlessly about the  harsh realities of survival on the farm.  She wants to think about music and art;  she wants a better life for herself. When  Sybylla is told that she can go to stay  with her wealthy relatives, she is ecstatic.  This is understandable.  However, Sybylla's identification with the  privilege of her wealthy relatives means  that she stands against the women of her  own class.  Her first meeting with the man  with whom she eventually "falls in love"  takes place when he sexually molests her,  mistaking her for a servant girl.  The  embarassing joke they later share is that  he did not recognize her as his neighbour Is  granddaughter.  For the understandable  error of failing to recognize her claim to  status and respect, they are both willing  to laugh. We can only assume that they  both share the assumption that it is his  right to sexually molest women in "lower  positions" than himself.  In fact, the world of the poor is used in  this film as a. backdrop to depict the  lives of the wealthy.  The characters who  are really developed are all, with the  single exception of Sybylla herself, individuals from the "upper classes". We  know Sybylla's grandmother, her wealthy  aunt and uncle, her suitors.  Sybylla's  immediate family are shadows in the distance.  Moreover, the poor are depicted in a manner  that is almost unbelievable. Because of  her refusal to settle down and act like a  proper lady, Sybylla is sent off to teach  in a secluded peasant outpost. The people  who she teaches are so slovenly and boorish  written about the poverty in which she is  living. With this information, we are to  believe that Sybylla is involved in activity that is beneficial to the people  about whom she writes. We are never shown  that the disdain which characterized  Sybylla's attitude toward her immediate  family at the beginning of the film is  altered. Without knowing about either her  relations with the subjects of her writings or the content of her work, we can  make*no such assumption. To describe poverty is not necessarily to struggle effectively against it. And so, with the information we are given, we must see  Sybylla's achievement as the success of an  individual.  Yes, My Brilliant Career  tells us that  individual women can resist the expectations which are placed on them by family  and environment. This, in the abstract is  an important and strength giving message  for women.  However, My Brilliant Career  as to be barely more civilized than animals.  They are depicted as lacking in  all human dignity.  They are there to show  the audience the extent to which Sybylla  is willing to go in her determination not  to marry.  Sybylla's desire to pursue a career is  shown, at the beginning of the film, to  be in conflict with the immediate survival  needs of her family.  We see a woman at  odds with her environment, a woman bent  on pursuing her.individual needs for self  fulfillment despite the conditions of  those around her.  The film opens with a  scene where the family farm is under  attack from a violent storm. While everyone rushes frantically to save what they  can, Sybylla stares dreamily out the window.  The question remains at the end of the  film. How has Sybylla reconciled her desire to be a writer with the needs that  poverty has created in those with whom she,  lives.  This question is never really  dealt with.  The audience is told that Sybylla has  gives us women's strength with one hand  while showing us women's insignificance  with the other.  For, in the end, this is one more film  which tells its audience that the most important aspect of a woman's life is her  romance. This is one more film placing  other aspects of women's lives in the  background, as a backdrop to the romantic  activity. One more film shows us a picture of a woman who is ready to ally with  a man without struggling with his assumptions that it is his perogative to sexually  molest other women.  And this is one more  film which tells us that it is the lives  of the rich that are really worth knowing  about while the "lower classes" parade insignificantly behind the scenes.  Without getting into an argument about what  is and isn't feminist, it would be well  worth our while to examine what films like  these are telling us about the possibilities not only for women, but for men as  well.  By the way, the scenery is fantastic, the  photography really great. Q  THE KINESIS BENEFIT WAS BRILLIANT  Thank you all for coming  and helping us through the next six months  AD HOC WAS BRILLIANT  We'll do it again next year, in a bigger hall