 MARCH 1996 IWD Calendar...pg 12  CMPA $2.25 Inside  KINESIS  #301-1720 Grant Street  Vancouver, BC V5L 2Y6  Tel: (604)255-5499  Fax: (604)255-5511  Kinesis welcomes volunteers to work  ill aspects of the paper. Our next  Story Meetings are Monday March 4  and April 1, at 7 pm at Kinesis. All  women welcome even if you don't  have experience.  Kinesis is published ten times a year  by the Vancouver Status of  Women.Its objectives are to be a  non-sectarian feminist voice for  women and to work actively for social  change, specifically combatting  sexism, racism,classism, homophobia, ableism, and imperialism. Views  expressed in Kinesis are those of  the writer and do not necessarily  reflect VSW policy. All unsigned  material is the responsibility of the  Kinesis Editorial Board.  EDITORIAL BOARD  Fatima Jaffer, Lissa Geller,  wendy lee kenward, Agnes Huang,  Robyn Hall, Alex Hennig  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE  Dorcas, Alex Hennig, Susan Chang,  Amy Johnson, Centime Zeleke,  Susanda Yee, Annthea Whittaker,  Fatima Jaffer, wendy lee kenward,  Agnes Huang, Laiwan  Advertising: Sur Mehat  Circulation: Cat L'Hirondelle, Andrea  Imada, Linda Gorrie, Chrystal Fowler  Distribution: Fatima Jaffer  Production Co-ordinator: Laiwan  Typesetter: Sur Mehat  FRONT COVER  Corporate hogs at  BillionS for Banker$ Rally.  Photo by Andrea Imada  PRESS DATE  February 28, 1996  SUBSCRIPTIONS  Individual: $20 per year  (+$1.40 GST)  or what you can afford  Institutions/Groups:  $45 per year (+$3.15 GST)  VSW Membership (includes 1 year  Kinesis subscription):  $30 per year (+$1.40 GST)  SUBMISSIONS  Women and girls are welcome to  make submissions. We reserve the  right to edit and submission does not  guarantee publication. If possible,  submissions should be typed, double  spaced and must be signed and  include an address, telephone  number and SASE. Kinesis does not  accept poetry or fiction. Editorial  guidelines are available upon  request.  DEADLINES  All submissions must be Teethe month preceding publi  Note: Jul/Aug and Dec/Jan are  double issues.  Features and reviews: 10th  News: 15th  Letters and Bulletin Board: 18th  Display advertising  (camera ready): 18th  (design required): 16th  Kinesis is produced on a Warner  Doppler PC using WordPerfect 5.1,  PageMaker 4.0 and an NEC laser  printer. Camera work by OK Graphics. Printing by Horizon Publications.  Kinesis is indexed in the Canadian  Women's Periodicals Index,  the Alternative Press Index, and is a  member of the Canadian Magazine  Publishers Association.  ISSN 0317-9095  Publications mail registration #6426  News  Rallying against banks and corporations 3  by Andrea Imada  Residential requirement for refugees in BC 4  by Wei Yuen Fong  March for women in the Downtown Eastside 4  by Fatima Jaffer  BC's Bubble zone law struck down 5  by Marni Norwich  International trafficking of women 8  by Siriporn Skrobanek  Crisis at the Vancouver Lesbian Connection 11  by Kris Karlsson and Agnes Huang  Centrespread  International Women's Day Calendar 1996 12  compiled by Fatima Jaffer  lentary  An alternative budget.  Diana Gibson  Arts  Passionate about women's issues?  Want to see those issues in these pages?  Come to the next Story Meeting  on Monday March 4 and Monday April 1  at 7 pm  at  #301-1720 Grant Street, Vancouver.  Telephone: (604) 255-5499  Taxing corporations 3  the problem is  that no country  is using the  trafficking law  in order to  protect or offer  assistance  Ito women  Trafficking in women.  Theatre review: Karla and Grif 17  by Cy-Thea Sand  Review: A few from Women in View 18  by Janet Askin  Regulars  As Kinesis Goes to Press 2  Inside Kinesis 2  Movement Matters 6,16  by Joanne Namsoo  What's News 7  by wendy lee kenward  Letters 20  Bulletin Board 21  by Amy Johnson  Karla and Grif,  MARCH 1996 Change. We're coming up to springtime. A time for change. And right now  there's lots of change in the air...or is  there?  The federal government in their recent throne speech made it clear—things  are not going to change... (unless you consider the further devastation of Canada's social safety net, change) For most  women, whatever change there is, it's  definitely not going to be for the better.  'Tis the season—Finance Minister  Paul Martin is busy preparing a special  "Happy International Women's Day"  present for women in Canada (read in  the serious sarcasm here). Two days before IWD, Martin plans to release this  year's federal budget, and what can we  expect...more of the same-old, same-  old—or should we say, it'll be business  (big big business) as usual.  Martin's motto to "ordinary Canadians" (that's where we women fall in)  is: "Be prepared to make do with less."  Question is: how much less can we do  with—haven't we already had to do with  less and less and less under the federal  government's "pander to the corporations and the Right-wing" agenda, while  big corporations and banks and rich people have been getting to do with more  and more and more?  We're just one month away from the  Liberal's dreaded CHST—the Canadian  Health and Social Transfer—which will  solidify the erosion of our social programs: medicare, welfare, pensions, UI,  education, childcare...  As the budget and CHST get closer  to descending on us...women, workers,  activists, students-"ordinary Canadi  ans"—have stepped up protest actions—  rallies, marches, educational sessions—■  taking them to the streets in cities and  towns across the country trying to get the  message through to (not only the federal  government but) all governments, that  enough is enough. It's time corporations  and banks and who benefit most from  the slashing and burning of social programs start paying their fair share.  The federal government likes to pretend they're doing it all for the sake of  cutting the deficit, and try to balance  social program cuts with talk of "job  creation." Well, so far, that's all it is, just  talk. Through all the cuts—cuts which  are resulting in serious "job destruction"—the federal government has yet to  come up with any "real job" creation  strategy.  The Chretian government is turning  it over to the corporate sector, saying  that now that he's reduced the deficit, it's  up to corporations to create the jobs. But  hey, they're too busy working on their  own "profit creation" projects.  Ah, some thing change...some  things...  In BC, there have been some  changes...As Kinesis was going to press,  there was question about the fate of the  only free standing women's equality  ministry in Canada. Rumours were swirling that new premier Glen Clark, who  was preparing to announce his pared  down cabinet, might dissolve the ministry altogether, or create a new ministry  called Ministry of Women and Family.  Women's centres and organizations  weren't prepared to take any chances:  Many around the province spent the  week before the announcement busily  faxing letters to Glen Clark with the underlying message: don't touch the Ministry of Women's Equality.  As Kinesis was just about to go to  press, we heard that the Ministry of  Women's Equality was left intact, but  with a new minister: Sue Hammell. We'll  bring you more about the goings-on in  BC provincial politics next issue.  Hey here's some good news hot of  the press...We got a scoop that two Chinese Canadian writers—Larissa Lai and  Yan Li—have been nominated for the  Chapters/Books in Canada first novel  award. Larissa is being nominated for  When Fox is a Thousand (Press Gang Publishers) and Yan for Daughters of the Red  Land (Sister Vision Press) [see review Kinesis February 1996].  The winner is... well, unfortunately  we don't have the scoop on that one~  we'll have to wait until the end of April  Thanks  Our appreciation to the following supporters who became members, renewed their memberships or donated to Vancouver Status of  Women in January and February:  Maryann Abbs * Lucy Alderson * Margaret Bugg * Shauna  Butterwick * Karen Clark * Joy Cohen * Fatima Correia * Marlene  Coulthard * Gail Cryer * Joanne Drake * A. Jean Elder * Valerie  Embree * Lynda Erickson * Stacy Fitzgerald * Sydney Foran * Cindy  Geroux * Sharon Goldberg * Jo Hinchliffe * Deborah Lerose *  Jacqueline Levitin * Barbara Jo May * Carol McEown * Sheila  McFadzean * Sandra Moe * Rosemary Rupps * Margaret Sutherland  And a special thank you to our donors who give a gift every month.  Monthly donations assist VSW in establishing a reliable funding base  to carry our programs, services and Kinesis through the year. Thank  you to:  Barbara Curren * Elaine Everett * Mary Frey * Teresa Gibson *  Jody Gordon * Erin Graham * Barbara Karmazyn * Barbara Lebrasseur  * Karin Litzcke * Jane McCartney * Bea McKenzie * Gail Mountain  * Eha Onno * Neil Power * Gale Stewart * Elizabeth Whynot *  (we're sure it'll be, as Kinesis is going to  press). Congratulations to both Larissa  and Yan.  Don't forget that Friday, March 8th  is International Women's Day. And to  celebrate IWD, Vancouver Status of  Women is holding an evening on the  NGO Women's Forum and the 4th World  Conference on Women: Beijing and Beyond. [For details see ad on page 14].  Kinesis Editorial Board member  Fatima Jaffer and others will be on hand  to report on their experiences at the Forum and what, if anything, the happenings in China mean for activists here in  Canada. Also slated for the evening is a  premiere screening of Aboriginal filmmaker Marjorie Beaucage's video highlighting the activities at the Huairou NGO  Forum.  Well that's all this month—Kinesis  really needs to go to press.  Happy IWD!  This month inside Kinesis, we're starting to get things back to "normal" after  the two burglaries of our office last December. It took almost two months, but  we're finally getting all our computer  equipment woes sorted out.  It was close...we almost didn't get  any computers in time for production  this month. We owe a great deal of thanks  to Andrea Imada for working late nights,  negotiating with all the right (insurance)  people, researching the numerous computer options (can't we just choose by  colour?), and finding us some exciting  new pieces of technology.  A ton of thanks also to Steve Chow  for coming in and setting up the necessary programs to make sure all the things  that are supposed to work actually do  work. And to Laiwan...thanks for loading 300,000 fonts into the computer! How  many do we really need?! (Okay, okay...  there are only 300 fonts.)  Again, many many thanks to all those  who made donations to help us cover the  costs associated with the break-ins, to  the nice folks who lent us computers and  other equipment, and to everyone who  just kept encouraging us through it all.  We appreciate your support.  Speaking of Andrea Imada... we have  to say a sad goodbye to her. Andrea is  leaving her position at the Vancouver  Status of Women at the end of February.  Andrea worked on adminstration and  fundraising for the organization, which  included working on all the fun admin  stuff for Kinesis.  Andrea, who used to live in Toronto,  has no plans on moving back there... No,  she's sticking around Vancouver and is  going off—across town—to work on market development with three small local  publishing houses.  Andrea promises that she won't  abandon us entirely...she says she'll be  coming back to haunt...er, help us out...  but only with the glamorous jobs. (Glamorous? Writing night-before-press-day  1200 word news stories is very very glamorous.)  Thanks Andrea for all your hard  work, and best wishes to in your new job.  We'll miss you...lots! P.S. Don't forget to  take your business cards with you.  In January, members of the Kinesis  Editorial Board and several key volunteers met for two days to discuss restructuring issues at Kinesis. We spent the first  day talking about our visions for a feminist newspaper (Someone mentioned  something about needing a hot tub...),  how Kinesis fits into those visions, and  how we can achieve those visions. We  also discussed some of the realities—  funding cutbacks, reliance on volunteers,  right-wing backlash, and so on—that we,  and other feminist publications, have to  deal with.  We started the weekend with a goal  of coming up with some very concrete  and practical strategies and solutions.  We did figure some things out that could  work, but we also realized that it will  take a lot of time and a lot more work to  get the structures to a place where we'd .  ideally want them to be.  Thanks to everyone who participated  in the restructuring meeting. We'll keep  you, our readers, posted on any developments we make in our efforts to make the  Kinesis' content, structures and processes  the best they can be.  This month we'd like to welcome a  number of new writers: Amy Johnson,  Diana Gibson, Siriporn Skrobanek, Kris  Karlsson and Marni Norwich.  A special mention to Amy who came  out here from Toronto for a week's holiday. She decided to drop in and check  Kinesis out, and...three days later;.. Bulletin Board and lots of copy editing was  done. Thanks for all your help, Amy, and  come visit again soon.  If you're interested in finding out  about or contributing to what's happening in the pages of Kinesis, come to our  story meetings: Monday March 4 and  Monday April 1, at 7pm at our office,  #301 -1720 Grant St. Or, if you can't make  it, give Agnes a call at (604) 255-5499.  This month, we'd like to welcome  new production volunteers Susan Chang,  Marni Norwich and Amy Johnson. Production for our next issue—April 1996—is  from March 20 to 26. If you're interested  in getting involved, give Laiwan a call at  255-5499.  Well, that'sallfor Inside Kinesis. Have  a great IWD.  MARCH 1996 News  Actions against banks and corporations:  Calling corporations  to account  by Andrea Imada  $37 billion in deferred corporate  taxes; $167 billion in untaxed corporate  profits between 1980 and 1992; $5.3 billion in profits raked in by the Big Five  Banks in 1995.  These figures are providing the cornerstones for a new public message from  labour, student, women's and anti-poverty groups who are upping the ante on  challenging the preferential ways in  which governments treat corporations  when it comes to income taxes.  At the heart of this fightback is the  federal government's corporate tax  policy—a policy which has enabled corporations to defer $37 billion in taxes  (deferred taxes are taxes corporations do  not have to pay because of tax breaks  they receive for depreciation allowances),  and to use a variety of tax credits and  deductions to reduce their income tax  rates from levels of over 40 percent down  to zero, or in some cases to reap tax  credits.  The end result is that while unprecedented cuts to social programs—the loss  of national welfare standards, regressive  changes to unemployment insurance,  cuts to social assistance levels, and the  erosion of health care services, to name a  few—are spelling dramatic change to  the lives of many individuals, a lot of  companies are enjoying record-high profits, in no small part due to federal tax  policy.  The polar situation has led groups  working for social justice to take this  corporate comparison to the street. A  number of public protests through the  first two months of this year, along with  the release of the Alternative Budget [see  analysis page 15], is lending fuel to a campaign to uncover the low tally on corporate taxes and place it side by side with  the reality of many Canadians who are  feeling the brunt of social cutbacks.  "Evening news programs carry pleas  from shelters for donations of warm  clothes and blankets. In the 10 shelters  (in Vancouver), there are approximately  486 beds—and they still turn away more  homeless every night," says Robby  Yateman of End Legislated Poverty, addressing the "Billion$ for Banker$" rally  outside the Royal Bank headquarters in  Vancouver, BC in late February. "Meanwhile the top 5 banks accumulated over  $728 billion in assets, an average of 11  percent increase over last year," adds  Yateman.  "It's tough that all levels of our government donot put equal value to capital  and labour," says Cenen Bagon of the  National Action Committee on the Status of Women. "It is with this injustice  where people who are already in the  losing end, lose further—those who are  unemployed, those who are on welfare,  those who are in precarious jobs, those  who feel powerless."  The first 1996 event to mark the renewed corporate consciousness was  "Corporate Tax Freedom Day," a mock  celebration of companies living high, high  up on the "hog" ladder of success. Corporate Tax Freedom Day, organized by  labour and social justice groups in BC,  Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba and  Ontario. The day was started in 1993 to  draw public attention to the enormous  loss of government revenues to corporations at the expense of individual taxpayers.  Corporate taxes in 1994 accounted  for only eight percent of the federal revenue coffers, says the BC Federation of  Labour (BC Fed), which organized the  event in Vancouver. The day—January  25—was chosen to mark the point on the  calendar when eight percent of the year  had gone by, representing when the percentage of the total federal revenues derived from corporate income taxes had  also gone by.  By contrast, in 1961, corporations  paid a 21 percent share of federal revenues. By further contrast, individual  taxes today account for 46 percent of  federal coffers says BC Fed.  Corporate Tax Freedom Day featured a veritable "Race to the Trough"—  a hog race pitting wind-up toy pigs, each  wearing the flag of a company that has  established itself as a grunting tax hog.  Entries included Chrysler Canada,  with 5-1 odds, whose portfolio includes  $283.2 million in profits in 1994, yet  boasted an income tax rate of 3.1 percent.  As well, the Ontario government found  fit to forgive some $37 million in loans to  Chrysler.  CP Rail earned its spot at the starting  gate by featuring 6,000 layoffs since 1992,  along with a 4.2 percent income tax rate  on $720 million in profits in 1994, and an  accumulation of $1.8 billion in deferred  taxes.  In the end, in the hog race in Vancouver, Nova Corporation emerged as the  winner. Its profile includes a 6.6 percent  tax rate and $738 million in profits, along  with $168 million in deferred taxes.  Student groups have also taken up  the corporate campaign. On the February 7th, the Canadian Federation of Students (CFS) coordinated a national day  of action which focused attention on the  links between the actions of banks and  corporations, and government cuts to  post-secondary education, health care  and social services. Rallies were held on  campuses and in cities across the country, bringing together students, unions,  women's and community organizations.  At its Billion$ for Banker$ rally held  in mid-February in Vancouver, the Canadian Autoworkers' Union dumped  1000 $1 million burlap bags on the doorstep of the Royal Bank of Canada to bring  Cenen Bagon of the National Action Committee on the Status of Women  speaks at the Billion$ for Banker$ Rally in Vancouver.  Photos by Andrea Imada.  a visual element to the $1.2 billion in  profit that the bank rolled in last year.  The sacks of money were carefully  guarded by a troop of joyful masked  pigs.  At the rally, NAC's Bagon spoke of  the impact of current government corporate tax policies and social cutbacks on  women: "These cuts are happening in  the midst of increasing poverty of women  and children, in the midst of endemic  violence against women, in the midst of  further eroding the rights of First Nations women, women with disabilities  and lesbians, and in the midst of increased racism and sexism and increased  discrimination against immigrant and  refugee women," she said. "They will  bear the brunt of the cutbacks. Because  they don't have capital. They only have  their labour to be proud of — paid and  unpaid labour."  A major plank in addressing the tax  inequities is to establish a minimum corporate income tax—20 percent, says BC  Fed's Mary Rowles. Such a tax rate would  guarantee federal revenues from corporations, regardless of accounting wiz  ardry.  Rowles cites research and development tax credits and capital cost allowances as examples of how liberal interpretations of federal tax policies has allowed companies to write off expenditures (such as computer software programming or machinery purchases) that  in most cases should be counted a part of  everyday business operations, rather  than be grounds for a tax break. Rowles  also notes that small operators do not  enjoy nearly the same level of benefit  that larger corporations do.  The Alternative Budget, written by  the Centre for Policy Alternatives, has  also advocated this avenue for tax reform, as well as other measures to close  the tax gap. Groups are calling on federal  Finance Minister Paul Martin to implement these policies in his soon to be  released—early March—budget and to  apply these increased revenues to deficit  reduction rather than continuing to gouge  social programs.  Andrea Imada has just completed her tax  return and discovered that she owes $400+  in taxes. She can be found at various  financial institutions in a futile search for  tax breaks and shelters.  A gang of corporate pigs grab their millions and guard the profits of the  banking establishment in Canada. News  February 14th march:  Their spirits live within us  by Fatima Jaffer   An unprecedented number of  women, men and children marched for  about four hours through the streets and  alleys of Vancouver's Downtown  Eastside in the annual Valentine's Day  march in memory of women who have  died violent deaths in the neighbourhood—women who were murdered,  died from drug overdoses or apparently  committed suicide.  Over 250 people gathered at  Carnegie Centre on the morning of February 14th to mourn the deaths and celebrate the lives of their sisters, daughters, friends and loved ones. Most of the  women commemorated were First Nations. New additions to the list of women  commemorated this year were South  Asian women murdered by their spouses,  brothers or fathers.  The annual march is held every year  on Valentine's Day to keep the spirits of  these women and those they left behind  strong and vibrant. The Downtown  Eastside in Vancouver is the lowest income neighbourhood in Canada.  The march began with a smudge  and prayer ceremonies. At noon, marchers proceeded through the Downtown  Eastside, walking to the many hotel doorways and alleys where women have died.  At each site, Elders performed death  prayers, sang sacred songs, and laid red  roses in memory of the women.  As they marched, family members  and friends carried placards bearing the  names of the 118 women who have died  in the neighbourhood since 1992, including names of seven women found murdered over the last two months.  Participants stopped briefly outside  the Vancouver Police Department (VPD)  headquarters, where friends and relatives wrote out the names of the 118  women in chalk on the sidewalk. The  march's organizers pointed out that  "Most of the 118 violent deaths of street-  involved women have not been solved.  This is an indication of how the law  perceives working women more as statistics than as victims. Are the killers still  out there because of the double standard  of the law and who these women were?"  VPD spokeswoman Constable Anne  Drennan responded to the charge that  the VPD is doing nothing to solve the  murders of the women by saying the  police are doing their best and treat all  people the same.  The march ended in Oppenheimer  Park, where women formed a circle as an  elder said a prayer for the women who  had died. All participants were then invited to a free lunch at Four Sisters Housing Co-op.  Refugee claimants in BC:  Residency requirement  creates hardships  by Wei Yuen Fong   Last month in Vancouver, refugees  and their supporters set up a "tent city"  in a local park to send a strong message  to the BC provincial government about  its new welfare policies.  The Coalition for Refugee Access to  Income Security, which organized the  action, says the government's three  month residency requirement for social  assistance is having a devastating impact on refugees and is calling on the  government to rescind the requirement.  The residency criteria requires welfare applicants to have lived in BC for a  minimum of 90 days before they can  even be considered eligible for social  assistance. The requirement applies to  anyone coming to BC.  The Coalition was formed in November 1995 after the NDP government  announced its changes to province's  welfare policies.  The Coalition is made up of 26 organizations in Vancouver and the lower  mainland of BC. Most of the members  are non-profit service agencies, including the BC Inland Refugee Society (IRS),  the African Canadian Association, MOSAIC (an immigrant services society),  the Vancouver Refugee Council, the Latin  American Community Council, and the  Iranian Refugee and Immigrant Society.  The Coalition says they set up the  tent city to call the attention of the public  to the residency requirement and its effect on refugee claimants. A number of  activities were held during the five days,  including a candlelight vigil, music, and  speeches. Information about the situation for refugees in BC was available and  a petition to rescind the residency requirement was being circulated.  Catalina Hernandez, a staff person  at the Inland Refugee Society, says the  legislation denies access to income security for refugee claimants. She adds that  95 percent of the refugees who will be  affected are new refugee claimants—  people who have come to Canada from  other countries, and not from those who  come to BC via other provinces.  Hernandez says coming in as a refugee is not easy and that the government's  new policy will worsen the situation for  new refugee claimants. Very often, they  have little support around them—family or friends—and little income, she says.  The number or new refugee claimants that come to BC is about 120 per  month. Hernandez says (IRS) usually  provides services for approximately 50  refugee claimants a month. Since the  residency requirement came into effect,  the agency has been seeing an increase in  the number refugees coming in for help.  Prior to new welfare legislation being put in place last December, new refugee claimants were eligible to apply for  hardship benefits to help them get settled in their new environment. There  was no waiting period before applying.  Hardship benefits were decided on  a case by case basis and at the discretion  of the social services worker. Essentially,  the benefits were allotted as a shelter and  food allowance. Now, says Hernandez,  new refugee claimants don't even have  that little bit of security.  The residency requirement is also  putting a lot of strain on service organizations that support refugees. Hernandez  says a lot of people come to IRS to ask for  help finding housing, food, clothing-  services and goods which the Society is  not always able to offer.  Hernandez adds that even Ministry  of Social Services staff is referring refugees claimants to IRS and other organizations after denying them income assistance.  At the same time, the federal and  provincial governments are cutting back  on funding to social service agencies,  which further heightens the strains on  organizations, their staff and volunteers,  and on the people they are intended to  support.  Alison Sawyer, president of the IRS,  says the Coalition and the NDP government are currently is negotiating an  agreement that would temporarily alleviate some of the hardships for refugee  claimants.  Sawyer says the government has  agreed in principle to give IRS about  $1200 a month for the next three months  to assist them in providing direct services to refugees. Sawyer says the full  details of the agreement have not been  finalized.  Still it is only a short-term stop-gap  measure, and will do little to help most  refugee claimants. The Coalition says it  will continue pressing the the government to rescind the residency requirement.  For more information about the Coalition 's work or to make donations of money or  goods to the BC Inland Refugee Society,  contact IRS at 1720 Grant St, Vancouver,  BC, V5L 2Y6; telephone: (604) 251-3360.  MARCH 1996 News  Access to abortion in BC:  The bubble bursts  by Marni Norwich  The fine line between "peaceful  protest" and threat of violence is at the  heart of a current court battle over  British Columbia's "bubble zone" law.  In late January a BC Supreme Court  judge dismissed charges against the  first person ever charged under the  Access to Abortion Services Act. In  acquitting anti-choice protester  Maurice Lewis of two counts of violating the Act, Judge E.J. Cronin ruled  that sections of the Act were unconstitutional.  The Act is intended to protect the  rights of women seeking abortions as  well as abortion service providers from  harassment and intimidation by anti-  choice protesters. The Act set up access  zones (bubble zones) within which anti-  abortion activities could not take place.  The zones were established around  abortion clinics, homes of service providers, and offices of doctors who perform abortions. The Act also proscribes  penalties, for violating an access zone,  of up to $5,000 and/ or a jail sentence of  up to six months for a first offense [see  Kinesis July/August 1995].  The bubble zones were set up last  September, nearly a year after the November 1994 shooting of Vancouver  physician Garson Romalis in his  home—a shooting believed to be related to Romalis' performing of abortions. Vancouver abortion clinics have  been the focus of increased anti-choice  protest over the last few years, from  pickets to blockades to a February 1990  break-in at Everywoman's Health Centre. And anti-choice protests south of  the border have escalated to violence  on several occasions in the form of  shootings and bombings.  In his ruling, Judge Cronin struck  down two provisions of the Act, saying they violated the Charter of Rights  and Freedoms by going too far in limiting "peaceful protest" near abortion  clinics. The provisions prohibited  "sidewalk interference" and protest  within an access zone. Sidewalk interference is defined as advising or persuading a woman to refrain from making use of abortion services, or informing a woman concerning issues related  to abortion services.  Judge Cronin also ruled that although the sections only limited people from protesting within access zones  (that is, they were free to protest elsewhere), they were still in violation of  the constitutionally protected freedom  of expression. The Charter permits  imposition of limits on freedoms only  when those limits can be justified by a  pressing social interests.  Cronin did not rule unconstitutional other sections of the Act, which  include restrictions on besetting, physically interfering, graphically record  ing, harassing or intimidating a patient  or service provider within an access  zone.  Critics of the decision challenge  Cronin's basis for making a distinction  between peaceful and violent protest.  BC Civil Liberties President Kay Stockholder says Cronin's ruling doesn't take  into account the ability for public protests to escalate to violence. "In our  view, the judge made it seem much  easier than it is to discriminate on the  spot between what is and what isn't  peaceful," she says.  A physician who works with the  Everywoman's Health Clinic, Dr. Ellen  Wiebe, argues that while anti-choice  protesters may appear peaceful, the  fact is that both her Canadian and  American colleagues have been shot,  and she's heard protesters interviewed  on TV say she ought to be dead.  Joy Thompson, spokesperson for  the BC Coalition of Abortion Clinics,  says that several American physicians  have been shot and killed or wounded  over the last few years by assailants  who emerged from within a crowd of  protesters. "The ability to draw a firearm and aim and shoot...is less likely to  happen if one is not part of a crowd of  protesters," she says. "[Cronin] failed  to understand that a zone where protesters aren't permitted provides a  sense of security and a tripwire where  people inside the zone are monitored  carefully."  While the judge's ruling against  the constitutionality of the two sections rested partly on his assertion that  injunctions sought by the clinics to keep  protests in check have been adequate  for the most part, pro-choice activists  contend that getting injunctions enforced by police has been problematic.  Part of the problem is that with  injunctions, "police can only immediately intervene when it gets to an extreme like a blockade," says  Everywoman representative Kim  Zander. In any other  case, the clinic must use its own  resources to take legal action, she says.  Injunctions haven't been requested  since Judge Cronin's ruling, and  Zander says that while police are expected to continue enforcing injunctions, she questions the extent to which  they'll follow through on enforcing  sections of the Act prohibiting harassment and intimidation.  Wiebe says that while she was initially optimistic about the effects of the  legislation, she found that anti-choice  protest action outside Everywoman's  increased in severity in the days following the Act's passage. "I'd never  seen the staff as upset," she says. "The  police j us t sort of sat there and watched  the protesters." She says that the protesters remained outside the bubble  zone shouting and holding bibles and  rosaries instead of placards.  Since the arrest of Lewis in September, there's been an increase in the  number of protesters outside  Everywoman's and a heightened tendency among protesters to push clinic  boundaries. "As a result we see women  coming into the clinic that are far more  upset than they've been in a long time,"  says Zander.  Women's Equality Minister Penny  Priddy told the Vancouver Sun that  Judge Cronin's decision had set the  women's movement back years. She  said women were calling in to ask if  they should go to appointments and  that there was a fear among healthcare  providers. Joy Thompson says she  knows of two physicians in the lower  mainland who have stopped performing abortions out of fear.  The BC Attorney General's office  says it will appeal the ruling. The BC  Court of Appeal will hear the case May  13-14. The BC Coalition of Abortion  Clinics has approached some feminist  organizations, like West Coast LEAF  (Women's Legal Education and Action Fund), to apply for intervenor status at the appeal. A spokeswoman for  LEAF says the organization is looking  into the issue.  Joy Thompson says that women  who've experience harassment first  hand and who would be willing to  testify before the Court of Appeal could  make a big difference to the outcome of  the trial. There's been a reluctance to  make this request of women because  of the issue of confidentiality, she says.  Meanwhile, Kim Zander says women  can be active in working toward the  repeal of the decision by writing to  their political representatives regarding women's right to abortion free from  harassment.  Marni Norwich is a Vancouver-based  magazine writer.  How do you  get dean schools?  Vote for it.  THE PEOPLE we elect make decisions that directly  affect the quality of our daily lives - decisions on  janitorial services and teaching assistants, parks and  safety inspections, clean water, traffic lights, garbage  pick-up, health care and on hundreds of other  important public services.  The people we elect also decide who provides  those services - public employees or profit-making,  Before you vote in any election, please take time  to find out where all the candidates stand. Then use  your vote to support good-value public services provided  by the publics employees.  CaPE©B.C.  CANADIAN UNION OF PUBLIC EMPLOYEES  BRITISH COLUMBIA DIVISION  Fax:(604)291-9043  Bernice Kirk, President  Colleen Jordan, Secretary-Treasurer  MARCH 1996 Movement Matters  listings information  Movement Matters is designed  to be a network of news, updates  and information of special interest  to the women's movement.  Submissions to Movement  Matters should be no more than 500  words, typed, double spaced and  may be edited for length. Deadline is  the 18th of the month preceding  publication.   by Joanne Namsoo  Worldwide campaign  on trade  Women Working Worldwide  (WWW) is promoting the exchange of  information and opinions on the issues  of world trade, particularly concerning  the establishment of a social clause in  trade agreements. The organization says  a social clause would guarantee basic  rights for workers and would allow economic sanctions to be taken against exporters who fail to observe these standards.  The WWW is a UK-based women's  group concerned with the effects of a  changing world economy on the lives of  women as workers, its work has focused  on examining the relocation of labour  intensive industrial processes to sites in  the south and its consequences for  women workers.  WWW has prepared a briefing paper, "World Trade is a Women's Issue"  which gives the background to the issues  DR. PAULETTE ROSCOE  NATUROPATHIC PHYSICIAN  HOMEOPATHY  COUNSELLING  DETOXIFICATION  HYCROFT MEDICAL CENTER  108-3195 GRANVILLE ST.  VANCOUVER, B.C. V6H 3K2  731-4183  and to the particular implications for  women workers. The organization is also  compiling perspectives from different  countries in Asia, Latin America and  Africa.  In April 1996, a conference on women  and world trade will be held in Manchester, England, and will be attended by  representatives of women workers in  Asia, Latin America and Africa. The goal  of the conference is to exchange viewpoints and try to develop a common  perspective for lobbying purposes.  WWW, working together with the  Clean Clothes Campaign in the Netherlands, is also coordinating "The Labour  Behind The Label" campaign in the UK.  The campaign aims to promote consumer  awareness about the labour conditions  under which garments are being manufactured. The campaign also aims to put  pressure on retailers to take responsibility for the way the garments they sell are  produced.  WWW is interested in promoting  direct trading networks as ways to develop alternative trading opportunities  for women workers. WWW wants to be  able to work closely with groups organizing garment workers in Asia in order  to check on the appropriateness of the  "Labour Behind the Label" campaigning strategies.  For groups or individuals who want to  receive more information about the work of  WWW, please contact: Angela Hale, Women  Working Worldwide, Centre for Employment Research, Room 3, St. Augustine's  Building, Lower Chatham St, Manchester,  England, M156BY. Tel: 0161 2471760;fax:  0161-247-6333; e-mail: (Geonet)  MCRl:women-ww; internet site: women-  ww@mcrl .poptel.org.uk.  Evaluating programs  for wife abusers  Up-to-date and comprehensive assessments of intervention resources for  wife abusers are hard to come by. In  1991, a conference in Ottawa brought  together some of the most renowned US  and Canadian analysts and providers of  such programs.  Montreal Men Against Sexism  (MMAS) has, since then, assembled a  200-page paper—"Limits and Risks of  Programs for Wife Batterers"—that offers not only significant quotes from this  conference's proceedings, but also appendices, little-known research data, conclusions of literature surveys, theoretical  discussions and personal essays spanning all aspects of programs for wife  abusers and of their integration into a  coordinated community response. Offering no set conclusions, this paper is  designed to provide professionals, community decision-makers and individuals with the necessary information about  such intervention programs.  "Limits and Risks" includes a very  extensive bibliography of little-known  US and Canadian resources on various  related issues—for example, intimate violence against women with disabilities,  young women, elderly women, lesbians,  immigrant women and First Nations  women. The bibliography also lists,  among other resource material, feminist  research and advocacy on these issues.  "Limits and Risks" is available for $20  from Montreal Men Against Sexism, 913 de  Bienville, Montreal, Quebec, H2J1V2. Please  make cheques payable to Martin Dufresne.  For more information phone or fax: (514)  563-4428. The document is also available in  French: "Limites et Risques de I'approche  psychologisante aupres des batteurs de  femmes."  VANCOUVER  WOMEN'S  BOOKSTORE  31SCAMBIEST.  VANCOUVER, B.C. HOURS:  V6B 2N4 MONDAY - SATURDAY  TEL: (604) 684.0523 10 AM - 6 PM  WOMEN  IN PRINT  BOOKS & OTHER MEDIA  Discountsfor  book clubs  3566 West 4th Avenue  4  Vancouver BC  Special orders  Voice   604 732-4128  welcome  Fax       604 732-1129  10-6 Daily ♦  12-5 Sunday  Breast implant  counselling services  The Women's Health Clinic in Winnipeg, Manitoba has expanded their services for women who are considering or  who already have breast implants.  The Clinic now has a breast implant  educator and nurse who can counsel  women in person or by phone. This service is intended to complement the ongoing medical care in the community, and  works with an informal network of primary care providers and specialists.  This appointment service adds to  the already existing services of the Breast  Implant Program, services which include:  a detailed information package, a Breast  Implant Information Centre, phone information and support, monthly group  meetings with guest speakers, referrals  to specialists as required and advocacy  within the medical system.  The Clinic is seeking the names of  physicians who are interested in providing ongoing primary care to women who  do not have a current doctor. It is also  currently working with the Federal Government to develop a specific written  resource for primary care physicians.  For appointments, information, or if  you are interested in participating in the  program, contact the Women's Health  Clinic, 3rd Floor-419 Graham Ave, Winnipeg, Manitoba, R3C 0M3; tel: (204) 947-  1517; fax: (204) 943-3844.  Janet Riehm. b.b.a,  CERiified GeneraI Accountant  Business ConsuInnc,  CoiwpltiE Accounhnc, StwvicES  PhoNE (604) 876-7550  Bottom Line Accounting  h% for...  OUR COMMUNITIES!  OUR PUBLIC SERVICES!  A message from the Public Service Alliance of Canada   •   (604) 430-5631 What's News  by wendy kenward  Still no national  childcare program  A national childcare program—  promised by the Liberals as part of their  election campaign (2 years ago)—is no  closer to becoming a reality.  The federal government recently indicated that a national childcare program  would be dependent on a cost-sharing  agreement with provincial governments.  This, in a time when the Liberal government is severely and continuously cutting transfer payments to provinces for  social programs.  In November, then Minister of Human Resources and Development (HRD)  Lloyd Axworthy promised a new national  childcare program, which would include  a guarantee of funding for the expansion  of childcare programs nationally.  The program would have involved  approximately $630 million for childcare  to be shared with the provinces over a  period of three to five years. Axworthy  also promised $72 million to increase  childcare spaces in First Nations communities and $18 million for research and  development.  In February, new HRD minister Doug  Young announced the federal government's intention to cancel the program.  The Liberal government cited the reason  for scrapping the proposal as being provincial disinterest in the plan.  While some provinces indicated they  had questions about parts of the childcare  program, most appeared supportive of  such a program.  After a wrench in a national daycare  strategy, Young said the program needs  to be 'retooled.' The revision process is  supposed to involve consultation with  the provinces.  Early childhood educators, families  and childcare advocates have been lobbying for the establishment of a national  childcare program for a long time, and  the announcement of another stall is frustrating. They say that this is just another  example of the government's lack of support for childcare.  Increased funding for childcare and  other social programs is being put on the  backburner by the federal and provincial  governments as they continue their cuts  to spending and their dismantling of the  social safety net.  Another example of the lack of support for childcare comes from Ontario  where the conservative government—  which has been severely cutting back everywhere on social programs and services—says it is considering cutting daycare  subsidies in favour of a voucher system.  Ultimately, the proposed vouchers will  not cover the costs of childcare for a lot of  families, and would make childcare even  more inaccessible.  Last November, to protest the Ontario government's proposals, educators—supported by many parents and  children—organized a one day strike to  send a message to the politicians that  childcare is valued and needed.  Feds renege on  lesbian rights  The federal government will likely  renege on their longstanding promise  to ensure the rights of lesbians and gays  are protected in the Constitution and  Human Rights Acts.  Justice Minister Allan Rock hinted  in mid-February that although the Liberal government would always be committed to gay and lesbian rights, it wasn't  an issue that would be discussed in the  near future.  As part of their election campaign,  the Liberal party made a commitment  to actively pursue changes to the Canadian Human Rights Act that would prohibit discrimination on the basis of sexual  orientation.  It has been two years since the Liberal government came into office, and  two years since the promises were made.  During these two years, the Liberal government has not acted on their promises, and now it seems that it never will.  Some members of the Liberal caucus—including newly appointed Secretary of State, Status of Women and  Multiculturalism, Hedy Fry—have spoken out publicly in support of changes  to the Charter of Rights and Freedoms  and the Canadian Human Rights Act.  The reasons for breaking the promise are speculative, but there seems to be  a split in the Liberal caucus over lesbian  and gay rights. A number of key Liberal  caucus members have come out strongly  against protecting the rights of lesbians  and gays. Given the lack of internal  support for these amendments, it appears that the government isn't willing  to risk the potential political fallout.  Over the last two years, a number of  courts—including the Supreme Court  of Canada—have ruled that the equality rights of lesbians and gays should be  read into the Charter and human rights  legislation.  Lesbian activists say changing the  Charter and the Canadian Human  Rights Act would now be more of a  gesture on the part of the federal government of their support for the rights  of lesbians and gay men in Canada.  If legislative changes were made to  the Charter, then judges at the provincial and federal levels would not be left  to decide for themselves on an individual basis what constitutes discrimination and how it relates to the existing  Charter.  A recent Appeals Court in Alberta  is an example of the difficulties faced  when the Charter and provincial legislation are open for interpretation on an  individual case basis.  In the case involving a man who  was fired from his job for being gay, a  lower court judge, Anne Russell, ruled  that the Indvidual Rights Protection Act  conflicted with the equality provisions  of the Charter. She ordered that the Act  be interpreted as though it contained  protection on the basis of "sexual orientation," and that the Alberta government amend the Act to prohibit discrimination. Her decision was overturned by an Appeals Court judge.  An activist for gay and lesbian rights  commented that this decsion just highlights "the need for legislators to provide the courts with clearer guidelines."  Social housing in  the Downtown  Eastside  A landmark building in Vancouver's Downtown Eastside will be revitalized into a housing project, according  to an announcement made by outgoing  BC premier Mike Harcourt in February.  The heritage Woodwards building,  which has been sitting empty for over  two years, is slated to become a mixed  residential project, with over half of the  living space being reserved for social  housing.  Since the Woodwards site was vacated in 1993, activists in the Downtown  Eastside have been lobbying the City of  Vancouver and the provincial government to ensure that the interests and  needs of the community are taken into  account and not just those of profit-  oriented developers. Community  groups and individuals wanted the decision around Woodwards to be a community based project.  Social housing and anti-poverty  activists in the area and the developers  of the site clashed over the fate of the  Woodwards building. The owners  wanted to build condominiums, which  would further "gentrify" the Downtown  Eastside—a growing trend in the area—  and further push people living in the  community, who can not afford to buy  condos, out of the area. Initially, it appeared that the Woodward's building  would be developed exclusively for 350  condominiums.  The deal recently announced is intended to involve a "partnership" between the community, the provincial  government and the developer.  Women living in the Downtown  Eastside, which has the highest proportion of people living in poverty in  Canada, say that the lack of affordable,  safe and clean housing in the area is a  serious issue for them. There are limited  options in the area—most of the available housing consists of single rooming  housekeeping suites and hotel apartments [see Kinesis November 1995].  The provincial government has  agreed to fund the creation of 210 single  and family social housing units in the  new residential complex, which will sit  alongside 160 condos.  The 94 year old former department  store site will be converted into multiple  dwellings and will include a courtyard,  two levels of shops and stores. And yes,  the great red " W" on top of the building  will remain intact.  For more information about the project,  contact the Community Action Group at  (604) 689-0397, or drop by its office on the  second floor of the Carnegie Community  Centre, 401 Main St, Vancouver, BC.  1-800-680-9739  THE KEEPER  (MENSTRUAL CUP)  faction rate  da liv Eco Logique Inc.  ic(:cUJ59(g)|rceiiel.carlet0ll.  n Mall Order Price)  Hate crimes in  Canada go  unreported  A recent study commissioned by the  federal Justice department has found that  a large percentage of hate crimes committed in Canada go unreported.  The study, conducted by Julian  Roberts, a criminologist at the University of Ottawa, is the first comprehensive  look at the range of hate crimes in Canada.  Roberts' study, "Disproportionate  Harm: Hate Crime in Canada," found  that significantly more people are assaulted, threatened, or their property or  communities vandalized by someone  who is motivated by hatred of the person's race, religion, sexual orientation or  ethnic background than is reported to  the police.  In 1993-94—the year of focus for the  study—only 1,000 hate crimes were reported to police. That figure is extremely  low considering that the study puts the  actual tally of hate crimes committed, in  major cities alone, at approximately  60,000.  In this growing climate of backlash  and scapegoating of women, people of  colour, lesbians and gays, and immigrants and refugees, the incidence of  hate crimes is of particular significance  because they target a person's identity,  increase fear within communities, and  heighten tensions and violence between  groups.  The study shows of the total number  of hate crimes reported to police, 61 percent are motivated by racism. The study  further indicates that 23 percent of hate  crimes target people on the basis of their  religion, 11 percent are against lesbians  and gays.  The study says that fear of retribution from attackers and lack of institutional support from the legal systems to  prosecute hate crimes are the major factors in the disproportionately low  number of reported cases of hate crimes.  The study calls for stronger legislation and legal definitions of specific hate  crimes, such as vandalizing a place of  worship or homes. It also strongly recommends more extensive research on  hate crimes as a basis for finding solutions.  CARDLYN    SCHETTLER  FINANCIAL   SERVICES  Bookkeeping, Consulting and Incorr  Tax Preparation for Individuals  and Small Business  MARCH 1996 Feature  Feature  International trafficking in women:  Research and action for the   rights of women  by Siriporn Skrobanek  Siriporn Skrobanek is the coordinator of  the Global Alliance Against Traffic in Women  (GAATW) in Thailand and has been involved in the Research Action Project on  Trafficking in Women (RATW), a project  aimed at forumlating effective stategies to  protect the rights of migrant women and to  help trafficked women.  She co-facilitated a ivorkshop on trafficking in women at the NGO Women's  Forum last September in Huairou, China  and presented the findings of the RATW.  In January, Skrobanek was in Canada to  participate in Praxis Nexus, a conference on  feminism, academia and community activism held at the University of Victoria. Below  are excerpts from the speech she gave at the  conference on the RATW and the work of the  GAATW.  It was as a student at ISS The Hague  [in the Netherlands] where I started my  journey into this issue of trafficking because this happened to me—when I travelled in some countries in Europe, men  would approached me and asked how  much?' So as part of my study in Europe  I wrote a research paper on transnational  sexploitation of Thai women.  When I went back to Thailand, I  wanted to translate my findings into actions, so I started the Women's Information Centre in 1984 in Bangkok. It's now  been over a decade, but this problem [of  trafficking] has not been solved, and I  think it's [even] growing in magnitude.  Even with more research, more publicity, more video tape, more films, more  articles, it cannot stop the sexual exploitation of our women. And the more publicity there was about the situation of  women or children in Thailand [working in prostitution], the more men came  to our country.  In 1992, we started a research  project—the Research Action project on  Trafficking in Women (RATW). We did  this research with two basic concepts in  mind. The first concept is that trafficking  is part of international migration. When  some developing countries adopt this  policy of labour export, it's mostly men  who travel. Many women would like to  work overseas, but because they are  women, they have very limited job opportunities in the international labour  market. Working in the sex industry is  one of the limited opportunities open to  women.  The other basic concept is that trafficking in women is a violation of human  rights, so we tackle this issue from a  human rights perspective.  Parti: Research  We did research in four rural areas—two in the north Chieng Mai  and Chiang Rai and two in the northeast, Nong Khai and Udon Thani —  and in two urban areas, Bangkok and  Pattaya, because Pattaya is the sex  town.  From our research, we found that  there is very good cooperation or collaboration between recruiting agencies and [authorities]. Look at the pattern of the recruiting system in our  country, and you will see that a recruiter will go directly into a village to  recruit women, and then send them  to the provincial office and then to  Bangkok. Then the agent in Bangkok  will send these women to some other  country.  For instance, in the case of Thai  women going to Japan, sometimes  women just go directly to Japan, but  cruiters go to the villages then recruit  the women to go directly overseas.  Of course, they do not tell these  women what kind of work they're  going to do—they will tell them  they're going to work in a factory or  as a domestic helper. So our concern  is that it is younger and younger  women who are becoming the victims of this pattern of trafficking.  At the same time, Thailand has  also become a destination country of  women from other parts of the  world—Latin America, China, the  former USSR, Nepal, and Eastern  European countries.  So you can see that there is no  singular pattern where one country  We would like to have a broader and more precise  definition of the term "trafficking persons"  because ... sex trafficking is only one aspect of  international trafficking. There are also other  aspects, like trafficking for marriage—false  marriage—and trafficking for forced labour.  sometimes they cannot go directly  there because of the immigration restrictions, so the traffickers will send  them first to Malaysia or Singapore or  the Philippines, and then try to arrange for their documents to send  them to Japan.  We also found a pattern of trafficking—a pattern we call the two-  step pattern. At first, women will  migrate from their own village to work  in big cities like Bangkok or some  other big city and either work in factories or sex industries. There, they  get contacts, like with those who work  in prostitution and with tourists who  come to Thailand. Sometimes these  tourists will invite them to go to Europe or to some other country. Then  they move overseas and work in prostitution, or marry foreigners and  they're sometimes forced into prostitution.  Sex tourists play quite an impor-  tantrolein whathappens. In the 1980s,  many countries in Europe like Germany, Switzerland, and the Netherlands were the main receiving destination of these women. But in the late  80s, early 90s, the pattern changed  from Europe to Japan, and Taiwan  because now there are factories in  those countries as well. In the 1990s,  the main country of destination is to  Japan and now also North America,  Australia, New Zealand and South  Africa.  Since the late 1980s, the two-step  pattern has changed to a one-step  pattern—from village to overseas. Re-  remains the sending or receiving country; now the pattern of trafficking is  mixed up. A single country could be  sending their own women, receiving  women from other countries, and  sending women to to other countries  also.  We found many and various  forms of human rights violations of  women who are victims of trafficking: first of all, they are deprived of  the right to self determination. Many  Thai women who go to work in Japan  or in Germany, even today, know  they will be involved in prostitution,  but they don't know that they will be  indebted. For instance, a woman going to Japan has to pay for the agent  fee, US$1000, to arrange their trip to  Japan. As soon as they arrive in Japan,  the trafficker will sell the women to  the local bar owners or brothel owners, and then the one who bought the  women would tell them they have to  pay about US$40,000. They are  bonded sex workers. They will spend  one or two years working to pay off  the debt.  These women are also targets of  racial prejudice and discrimination.  For instance, in Japan—and I use Japan as an example because in our  research there are many cases of  women going to Japan—there is a  community initiative to "solve" this  problem of migrant prostitutes. [The  initiative involves] putting up various posters in the red light district in  Tokyo which say that "whenever you  meet migrant prostitute—women  from Latin America and Asia—call  the police because they are spreading  AIDS, spreading crime."  Some migrant women are forced  into the situation which we call the  "stateless person," because many of  them travel with false documents and  when they are arrested, the authorities cannot identify where they come  from so they send them to detention  centres. For instance, there are about  100 cases of stateless persons in detention centres in Taiwan. Many of  them are from [ethnic] minorities in  Thailand.  We asked the Thai ministry of  foreign affairs to try to help these  women and bring them back, but they  say these women are minorities and  they do not have Thai nationality. So  once they left the country, it was not  anymore the responsibility of Thai  government to take care of them.  In almost every country there are  laws on trafficking—a prostitution  law—but the problem is that no country is using the trafficking law in order to protect or offer assistance to  women who are victims of trafficking. But what they are using are immigration laws because these women  enter receiving countries illegally or  work there illegally.  Our research has also shown that  when women try to pursue a court  case against traffickers, it's very difficult. Many women do not want anyone to know what they've been involved in in receiving countries, and  because prostitution is illegal still in  Thailand they do not want to have  this social stigma.  It's really courageous of the  woman if she does pursue a court  case. But we found that the system  does not facilitate an open space for  women to seek out [justice].  For instance, we have a case of a  Thai woman recruited to work in Germany, and she was bought—she  worked in prostitution. When she  came back to Thailand, she contacted  our group about pursuing a court  case. We brought her to the police and  told them that everything was confidential—nobody could read her testimony whatsoever.  One month later, we found in a  local newspaper a big headline and [a  story with] every detail of how she  was recruited, her identity, and the  conditions of her work. It was so terrible. The woman wanted a new life  so she enrolled in adult education.  But after this newspaper was released,  her class started asking her what she  did in Germany.  In almost every country there are laws on  trafficking—a prostitution law—but the problem is  that no country is using the trafficking law in order  to protect or offer assistance to women who are  victims of trafficking.  Part 2: Action  In the second part of the RATW,  what we did was to share these findings with the local women—the  women in the research areas—and  then tried to think together to decide  what kind of actions should be taken.  We're trying to to build up a network of women in the north and the  northeast, because that's where we  did much of our research. We're bringing women who are victims of international trafficking together to talk  about their experiences. We ask them  whether they would like to share their  experiences with other women. If they  agree, we organize a small meeting  for three or four women to talk and  write about their own experience, and  then we publish their writings in a  book. [The books are in Thai but are  translated into English.]  In October 1994, as a part of our  research, we organized the International Workshop on International  Migration and Trafficking in Women  in Bangkok. Women from about 20  countries attended. We presented a  workshop report and we also brought  women who were victims of trafficking—local women—to attend this  workshop. We provided translation  and they said they were very interested in this workshop even though  they said it was harder listening to all  these women's stories than working  in the fields. The women still thought  it was necessary that they participated  in this kind of international event.  At the workshop, the participants  agreed to build an alliance to work  together—the Global Alliance Against  Trafficking in Women (GAATW). We  now have about 40 member organizations, but I think we do not yet have  any members fromCanada, so if anyone would like to be part of GAATW  please be.  We would like to exchange information from various parts of the world  and make alliances with international  organizations. In the past, we worked  at the national level or at the local  level, but now we see the need to have  an alliance at an international level, in  particular with human rights organizations.  We would like to develop content  for a new international convention on  the trafficking in women to replace  the 1949 Convention [for the Suppression of the Traffic in Persons and  of the Exploitation of the Prostitution  of Others]. And right now, GAATW  is helping the Special Rapporteur on  Violence against Women to write a  report—an international report on  trafficking in women.  When we ask for the new convention, we would like have the principles, of human rights and the rights  of all persons to self determination,  included.  We would also like to have a  broader and more precise definition  of the term "trafficking persons" because from our research and also from  information  from  organizations  In the past, we worked  at the national level or  at the local level, but  now we see the need to  have an alliance at an  international level, in  particular with human  rights organizations.  working on these issues, we found  out that sex trafficking is only one  aspect of international trafficking.  There are also other aspects, like trafficking for marriage—false marriage—and trafficking for forced labour.  We would also like to separate  this issue of trafficking from prostitution and from child prostitution, because we see that we need different  strategies to address these issues.  We think this convention should  also address issues of policy and pow-  erlessness of women, and that [national governments and the international community] should provide  support systems and strategies to  combat trafficking.  The 1949 Convention is not appropriate anymore because now the problem of trafficking is very complex. It  addressed only one aspect of trafficking—that is, forced prostitution.  In Beijing [at the NGO Women's  Forum in September], we organized a  workshop and distributed our recommendations. We also did some lobbying work around the Platform for  Action [the blueprint for discussion  at the Fourth World Conference on  Women] on the parts addressing trafficking.  There are two positions on this  issue. One is the GAATW position  which separates the issue of trafficking and prostitution because we think  that now there are many women in  first and third world countries who  "decide" to work in prostitution and  who think that working as a prostitute should be their choice. At the  same time, they are victims of trafficking.  The other position is proposing a  new convention that would eliminate  all forms of sexual exploitation, and  by their definition sexual exploitation  includes everything from female infanticide to prostitution. We think it is  too ambitious to mix everything.  Something like female infanticide we  think is a violation of women's human rights and not just a sexual exploitation issue.  We did quite a hard job in Beijing  lobbying around the Platform, and  we were happy that their position  was not included in the Platform.  What we are trying to do right  now—because we think that a new  convention is a long way away—is to  have something very practical.  Our concern is protecting the  rights of women who are victims of  international trafficking, so right now  we are launching a Minimum Standards for the Treatment of Trafficked  Persons [see sidebar]. We have laws  against trafficking but there are no  clear guidelines for treating victims  of trafficking, so we drew up this  draft of minimum standards and are  in the process of collecting suggestions about it.  We think it is very important to  have this kind of international instrument to we can do something with the  governments in both sending and receiving countries that brings them to  be accountable to these kinds of human rights violations of women.  For more information about the  Minimum Standards draft or about the  Research Action Project on Trafficking  in Women, contact the Global Alliance  Against Traffic in Women, c/o Foundation for Women, PO Box47, Bangkoknoi,  Bangkok, 10700 Thailand. Telephone:  (662) 433-5149. Fax: (662) 434-6774.  Minimum  Standards for the  Treatment of  Trafficked Persons  The Global Alliance Against Traffic in Women (GAATW) is in the process of working on a draft of the minimum standards with the aim to protect  the human rights of those individuals  who have been trafficked and in par-  ticulatone'sright to control one's mind,  body and life. Below, is an excerpt  from the preface and a list of some of  the proposed guarantees being put forward.  Trafficking is defined as the transporting of a person from one place to  another through means of deception,  kidnapping, actual, threatened or implied violence, and/or the abuse of an  individuals actual or perceived position of authority; that is, immigration  officer, police officer, et cetera. An  individual may be trafficked for the  purposes of domestic employment,  work in the commercial sex industry,  manual labour, arranged marriage, et  cetera.  All governments must recognize  and address their obligations in regard to all forms of trafficking, including such new forms as servile marriage, sex tourism, and forced labour  (especially domestic labour). Recognizing that traffickers exploit poverty,  gender violence, armed conflicts, and  other conditions which subordinate  people and that some people seek to  escape these conditions, individuals'  rights must be protected against deception as well as physical, psychological and economic coercion and  violence.  Governments must investigate,  prosecute and punish persons who  profit from trafficking, whetherstafe or  non-state actors. Governments must  also commit to reforming policies  which marginalize trafficked people.  Steps to address marginalization and  resulting abuses must ensure equal  protection of the law to guarantee the  rights and fundamental freedoms of  individuals, including the freedom of  movement and residence in each state,  the freedom to choose one's place of  residence, the right to safely return to  one's own country, and the right to  seek asylum or otherwise legalize  one's status.  The Minimum Standards sets out  a series of rights to be guaranteed for  all trafficked women, including:  •Freedom from persecution or harassment by those in positions of authority;  •Adequate, confidential and affordable  medical care;  •Freedom from HIV testing without the  trafficked person's consent and knowledge;  •Access to a competent, qualified  translator during all proceedings, and  of all documents and records pursuant  to having been trafficked;  •That the history of trafficking shall not  be a matter of public or private record  and shall not be used against the trafficked person or her family and friends,  particularly in regards to their right to  freedom of travel, marriage, search  for gainful employment.  The Minimum Standards also lays  out the responsibilities, specific to receiving, sending and transit countries. CELEBRATING  INTERNATIONAL  WOMEN'S DAY  UFCWLOCAL1518  WOMEN'S COMMITTEE  Marg Brown-Co Chair  Betty Stevens - Co Chair  Nan Fredericks  Nora Louie  Leslie Shefley  Sandy McLeod  MarleneSimister  Dawn Green  Karen Palmer  Trudy Hulley  Sharon Parberry  United Food and Commercial Workers Union, Local 1518  For organizing information, call 434-9000 Feature  Vancouver Lesbian Connection:  To be or what not to be...  by Kris Karlsson and Agnes Huang  A long brewing crisis at the Vancouver  Lesbian Connection (VLC) is coming to a  head. Bet Cecill, one of the few remaining  members, says the VLC may close its drop-  in centre in April unless an appropriate  new group of lesbians can be found to take  over the Society. Since the announcement,  groups of lesbians have been strategizing  to prevent the VLC from closing its doors.  The VLC, a registered non-profit society, operates a social and political centre for  lesbians in Vancouver—a women-only  space which houses a resource library, a  peer support phone line, and the VLC offices. It was founded in 1984 by a group of  five local women as a radical lesbian feminist organization. The work of the VLC  includes providing services for lesbians,  facilitating support groups, and political  activism work around lesbian rights.  The current phase of the crisis at the  VLC stems from a decline in the number of  women on the Society's Collective, the body  which makes the operating decisions for  the Society. The size of the Collective has  been dwindling and, as of this year, was  down to one active member—the centre's  paid coordinator Terrie Hamazaki, who  left at the end of February. (Two other  remaining members—Cecill and Monica  Chappel—are on long-term leave from the  Collective.)  Last September, several former Collective members were asked to form an 'active' Board of Directors to assist the  shrunken Collective with duties it could no  longer handle. The Board was also asked to  take on the work of restructuring the VLC.  The VLC's difficulties can be traced to  the fall of 1994, when issues of accountability and accessibility were raised by an outside group of lesbians that included a few  VLC volunteers and one employee. While  the VLC was involved in a serious internal /  policy problem (the details of which cannot  be made public for reasons of confidentiality), the outside group approached the VLC  with concerns about the safety of ritual  abuse survivors, racism, and the structure  and membership conditions of the organization.  The outside group asked the VLC for  loosened membership requirements (so that  non-volunteers could have some say in  VLC decisions), and a community meeting  to bring to the fore their concerns and possible solutions.  In October 1994, the VLC held a public  meeting. Following the meeting, two working groups (which would allow non-VLC  volunteers or members to participate): were  set up at the VLC "Structure and Membership" and "Race and Accessibility."  The working groups met for the following year and then dissolved due to loss .  of momentum when attempts were made  to combine the two groups so that all four  issues could be discussed in relation to each  other.  Before it dissolved, however, the Structure and Membership WorkingGroup produced a number of recommendations, including provisions for a general membership. Its powers are restricted to ratifying  Board and Coordinating Collective appointments, and programming. These recommendations have not yet been adopted by  the Board. Cecill says that the recommendations are still "too vague" to implement,  pointing out that there remains significant  problems around what issues the general  membership should have a say over.  Cecill says the present Board lacks the  energy and time (three of the five Board  members are leaving Vancouver this spring)  to perform all the steps necessary to restructure the organization.  According to Cecill, personal attacks  that were made on VLC Colleci ve members  at the October 1994 community meeting  challenged the dedication of several collective members, who eventually left the organization. Not enough new members came  forth to replace them, resulting in the crisis  the VLC now faces.  In January 1996, the VLC Board put out  a call for proposals from groups of lesbians  interested in taking over the VLC. They  chose this option after considering three  others: closing down the centre; limping  along as a Board and continuing to search  for new members; or becoming Collective  members themselves and taking responsibility for the operations of the centre.  The proposal package includes five  pages of guidelines on the beliefs and goals  that a group must or should hold to be  considered suitable. Much of the guidelines is taken from the VLC's "Basis of  Unity," the organization's detailed statement of principles, policies, structures and  procedures.  Among its principles are the following  commitments: to putinto practice the VLC's  political beliefs; to address racist, sexist,  heterosexist, classist, sizeist, ageist issues  and behaviours; to build alliances with other  organizations; and to support the right of  women to choose what to do with their own  bodies.  In addition to excerpts from the Basis  of Unity, the VLC guidelines for proposals  includes the requirement to "include community involvement; i.e. input from a larger  circle of women than just the organizing  circle/'TheVLC'spresentstructurehasno  guaranteed mechanism for broader community input.  Cecill says the Board sees the proposal  process as an opportunity for women in the  community to step forward and revitalize  the organization. She thinks the original  political vision of the organization is worth  preserving, and that their proposal process  ensures that can happen.  The Board set February 28 as the deadline for submitting proposals and will make  a final decision on which, if any, proposals  to accept by April 10.  Meanwhile some local lesbians say they  disagree with the VLC Board's decision to  solicit proposals from groups of lesbians.  They say the VLC, should be the property  of the wider lesbian communities and cannot just be 'given' to a group of women.  They say a public meeting should have be  called prior to the Board making its decision.  One such critic, lesbian activist Nadine  Chambers, points out that it is inappropriate for a small group of lesbians to decide  the fate of the VLC. Chambers was involved with the outside group that asked  for the public meeting with the VLC in  1994. She says she supports an open process where the people in power "have their  community with them," when they make  decisions.  Chambers wrote an article in the February issue of Angles, a Vancouver gay,  lesbian, bisexual and transgendered newspaper, in which she raises questions about  the VLC's "public proposal package" and  the process the Board has taken to decide  the VLC's fate. In it, she also raises concern  that the VLC Board's criteria for groups  submitting proposals includes that they  consist of "lesbians who were born and  raised as women"—an apparent attempt to  block transsexuals from participating in  the VLC's decision making processes.  Critics of the VLC proposal package  cite this new stance on transsexuals (the  Basis of Unity does not mention transsexuals) as an example of the arbitrary decisionmaking process of the VLC Board and Collective. The Board made the decision to  prevent transexuals from being involved in  takeover proposals without consultation  with the broader community.  In a letter published in Xtra West, a  Vancouver gay and lesbian newspaper,  VLC project worker Tina Hurd claims the  Board has made all its decisions around the  proposal without consultation with the VLC  Collective, employees or volunteers.  Although transsexual involvement in  feminist organizations hasn't been widely  discussed, recent events in Vancouver have  shown there is a growing acceptance of  transsexuals within gay, lesbian, and bisexual communities.  The VLC currently has two transsexual  lesbian volunteers who have assisted with  the work of the centre, says former coordinator Terrie Hamazaki. Hamazaki, who  objects to the Board's decision to exclude  transsexuals, says she supports including  them in the VLC's decision-making processes, and has always had the attitude towards transsexuals that "the door is open."  Although Chambers is critical of the  the VLC Board's position on transsexuals,  she wants to make sure that "transphobia"  is not seen as the central issue in the problems at the VLC. Chambers says she feels  the problems are related to broader questions of accessibility and accountability.  For example, she says, the VLC's membership structure raises concerns about accountability. Currently, the Society has no  provision for general membership. Membership in the VLC is limited to lesbians  who are members of the Collective. Becoming a member of the Collective requires:  meeting volunteer and committee requirements; understanding and agreeing with  the organization's Basis of Unity; and being  approved unanimously by the VLC Collective. Membership in the VLC Collective  over the last few years has averaged six  women.  Critics say such a restrictive structure  works contrary to the principle that the  VLC should serve the community rather  than lead it.  Although she supports an expanded  membership, board member Cecill says she  has longstanding concerns that the principles of the organization could be threatened by opening up membership.  Chambers, however, argues that a politically open structure does not automatically mean that the principles of the organization will be compromised.  She also suggests that the VLC is "operating in its own world," and questions  the degree to which the VLC is actually  upholding its own principles—particularly  its principles around diversity.  Bet Cecill says the VLC membership  structure is the way it is because it is necessary to ensure that decisions are made by  the women who do the work at the organization. She points to the VLC's unwritten  policy of encouraging women to "do for  themselves" via an infrastructure provided  by the VLC, which has ensured some measure of community involvement when  women choose to take advantage of the  VLC's facilities.  Hamazaki believes the VLC should  have called a community meeting and made  an attempt to revitalize the Collective, rather  than putting out the call for takeover proposals. [Hamazaki was not present at the  meeting in which the Board made the decision to put out a call for proposals because  she had decided to end her active participation with the Board in order to work on  revitalizing the Collective. ]  Hamazaki says that since the Board  put out the call for proposals, she has been  fielding a lot of questions from local women  who come in or call the centre asking about  what is going on.  As Kinesis goes to press, it is rumoured  a few groups of women are working on  proposals to take over the VLC. Others are  organizing to submit a petition to the VLC  requesting that membership conditions in  the organization be loosened.  Agnes Huang is a Chinese feminist activist  who lives, writes and edits in Vancouver.  Kris Karlsson was involved with the  outside group in 1994, and has continues  to be involved in working towards a more  open membership structure at the VLC. International Women's Day arose out of the protest and political activism of working women at the beginning of the 20th Century. Among the many  struggles which took place was the 1908 strike of garment workers, 80 percent of whom were women, in New York City. The strike began at the Triangle  Shirtwaist Company, and grew to become a general strike of 30,000 garment workers.  In 1910, the idea of a "Women's Day" was taken up by socialists and feminists. At the 2nd International Conference of Socialist Women attended by  women from 17 countries, a proposal for an international "Women's Day" was put forward: Clara Zetkin presented a motion that women throughout the  world should focus on a particular day each year to press for demands and to commemorate women and their struggles. Women passed the motion  unanimously, and "International Women's Day" came into being.  The first International Women's Day was held on March 19,1911 in a number of European countries. The date later moved to March 8. The day became  more widely celebrated with waves of the feminist movement and following the United Nation's International Year of the Woman in 1979, which began  the UN Decade of Women (1976-1985). (Based on material gleaned from past issues of Kinesis and the memories of various women.)  B.C.  100 MILE HOUSE  March 8:100 Mile House & District Women's  Centre Society plans an open house with guest  speakers and presenters. For details, call Pam  Simpson at 395-4093.  CASTLEGAR  March 9: For the first time, the West Kootenay  National Exhibition Centre & Kinnaird Hall in  Castlegar present a variety of IWD events. At  10-12 a.m., there will be a workshop, "Women  Nurturing: Creating personal space through  experiential art" for $15, followed by a bag  lunch. From 1-4:30 p.m., there will be workshops on "Women Sharing: Communication in  Art", "Poetry of the Soul," and "Refugee Stories." The evening celebration from 6-10 p.m.,  entitled "Women in Delight," will include an  international gourmet buffet dinner, entertainment and speaker Linda Wilkinson on the  Beijing UN International Conference on  Women. Cost is $15. For more information, call  the NEC at 365-3337.  CHETWYND  The Chetwynd Women's Resource Society  will participate in the annual Coffee House &  Art Show at the Recreation Centre's Cottonwood  Hall. They will set up an information table on  services and women's health information. They  will also host a video presentation profiling  women. Call 788-3793 for details.  COMOX VALLEY  March 16: The Comox Valley Women's Resource Centre presents a day-long celebration  with various events on the theme of "self-care".  Call 338-1133 for more information.  CRANBROOK  March 9: The Cranbrook Women's Resource  Centre plans to screen the National Film Board-  Studio D's video production of Five Feminist  Minutes. The screening is followed by another  "Five Feminist Minutes"-live performance  pieces and skits by women. For location and  other information, call Sandra at 426-2912.  DUNCAN/  COWICHAN VALLEY  March ft. Na-Du-Vic Vancouver Island Immigrant Women's Society is hosting a luncheon at St. John's Hall. Guest speakers will speak  on the theme "Women and Safety." Call 748-  3112 for more information.  March 5,6 and 7: The Cowichan Campus of  Malaspina University College at 222 Cowichan  Way is the site of free consecutive film screenings of the women and spirituality trilogy: Goddess Remembered (March 5), Burning Times (March  6), and Full Circle (March 7). There is no need to  register. For more information, call 748-2591.  FORT NELSON  March ft The Fort Nelson Women's Resource  Centre will have a family day of celebration with  lots of activities for kids. From 10 a.m.-4 p.m. at  the Women's Coffee House, Northern Lights College. Call Emily at,774-3069 for details.  KELOWNA  March 8: The Kelowna Women's Resource  Centre has reserved Capri Mall from 9 a.m. to  9 p.m. Displays will be set up throughout the  mall, with a particular emphasis on the history  of women in Kelowna, as well as all-day poetry  readings, singing, dancing and speeches. For  details, call Debbie Kereluk at 762-2355.  KITIMAT  March ft Tamitik Status of Women will be  celebrating their 20th Anniversary on International Women's Day. For more information,  call 632-2020.  LANGLEY  March 10: Langley Family Services will host  its 5th annual International Women's Day  luncheon at the Sheraton Inn Guildford from  11:30 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. The guest speaker is  Constable Anne Drennan, Media Liaision Officer for the Vancouver City Police. The "Joan  Murrell Memorial Award will also be made to  the a "woman who has made a difference" in  her community. Cost is $25. Call 534-7921 for  more information and to register.  NANAIMO  March 4-8: The Nanaimo Women's Resource  Centre wil be hosting a variety of events ranging from a march around Swy-a-Lana Lagoon  followed by a pot-luck lunch at the Maffeo  Auditorium, to videos, discussion groups, performances, guest speakers and an annual IWD  evening event. Call Donna Reed at the NWRS  at 753-0633 for more information.  NELSON  March 8: Nelson District Women's Centre  presents "Five Feminist Minutes," live performances, skits and creative moments by  women only. From 7-10 pm. Men and children  are welcome in the audience. At Elks Halls, 812  Stanley Street, which is wheelchair accessible.  Call 352-9916 for more details.  NEW WESTMINSTER  March ft Douglas College Women's Centre is  sponsoring an IWD celebration at the Venus  Restaurant on Sixth Street, New West. There  will be food, an open mike and guest speakers.  Call 527-5148 for more information about tickets and times.  March ft. The Canadian Congress for Learning Opportunities for Women is hosting a pot-  luck supper and discussion titled "Academic  Freedom and Responsibility," with guest  speaker Gillian Creese, coordinator of the Women's Studies Program at UBC, at 6:30 pm at 307  Queen's Avenue (between 3rd & 4th Street)  New Westminster.  PENTICTON  March 2: The Penticton and Area Women's  Centre presents the 4th Annual International  Women's Day Festival at the Penticton Trade  and Convention Centre at 273 Power Street,  Penticton. Festivities will be 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.  and will include workshops, performances,  massage, reflexology, crafts and a fashionshow.  Childcare is free. General admission is $3 with  a food bank donation of $2. Kids under 13 are  free. Workshops cost $5 each. For more information, call 493-6822.  PORTCOQUITLAM  March 8: Port Coquitlam Area Women's Centre will host their annual IWD open house at the  centre at 2420 Mary Hill Road. Call 941-6311 for  details.  QUESNEL  March 8: Quesnel Women's Resource Centre  plans to hold a potluck dinner with guest  speaker(s) from Guatemala. For details, call  Vinder at 992-8472.  RIDGE MEADOWS  March 5 The Ridge Meadows Women's Centre Society is holding a woman's potluck dinner at 6:30 p.m. to celebrate and share women's  stories. Call 460-0064 for details.  SECHELT  March 8: The Sunshine Coast Women's Resources Society is hosting an IWD celebration  for the whole community at Davis Bay Community Hall at 6 p.m. with lots of food and  family entertainment. Call 885-4088 for more  information.  SALMON ARM  March 7: The Shuswap Family Resource &  Referral Centre is having a film night at  Okanagan College in Salmon Arm with The  Company of Strangers and Bob's Birthday. Call  832-2170 for details.  TERRACE  March 8: The Terrace Women's Resource  Centre will hold a potluck dinner and celebration. Call 638-0228 for details.  UCLUELET  March 8: The Westcoast Women's Resource  Centre presents an evening of dance, song, music, poetry, drumming, and a pot-luck dinner  with guest speaker. Call 726-2343 for details.  VANCOUVER  March 4-8: Simon Fraser University Women's Centre is currently organizing various IWD  events. For information, call 291-3670.  March 7: Capilano Campus Women's Centre  is having an open house and offering snacks in  Room LB 137, Capilano College, 2055 Purcell  Way, from noon to 2:30 p.m. For more information, call 986-1911 and ask for the women's  centre.  March 7: The Women's Studies department  at Capilano College is sponsoring a series of  IWD events from 8:30 a.m. to 9:30 p.m. The  College will be open to the community all day,  with 20-25 instructors presenting lectures in  classrooms open to the public on issues relevant to women. There will be art exhibits and  a display of Women's Studies books in the  Library. Dirty Laundry, a theatre production,  will be from 12:45-1:30 p.m. at the Cedar Build  ing, Room C148. Andrea Lebowitz, associate  dean of Arts at Simon Fraser University, will  lecture in the evening at the Cedar Bldg, room  148. All events are wheelchair accessible and  are free, except for parking. For more information, call the college at 986-1911: Margaret  Denike or Rosalee Hawrylko at Local 2463.  March 8: Vancouver Status of Women is holding a public forum on the Fourth United Nations Conference on Women and the non-governmental (NGO) Women's Forum in China.  See ad on page 14 for details.  March ft The Vancouver IWD '96 Committee's annual IWD women's march and rally  will begin at 11:30 a.m. at the Hamilton/ Robson  comer of the new Vancouver Public Library.  The theme this year is: "Women struggle for  equality: Poverty & Conservatism". Women  will march to the First United Church at 320  East Hastings. There will be information tables,  speeches and entertainment. For information  on childcare, call Julie at 733-3753. For information on the march and rally, call Taylor at 873-  8719. To book a table or wheelchair attendants,  call Claire at 708-0447.  March ft The Philippine Women's Centre,  Nuestra Voz, South Asian Women's Centre,  and women from the African Community are  sponsoring a panel discussion "Our Common  Struggles" at an IWD event titled "Building  Solidarity Among Third World Women: Onward with the struggle," from 4-10 p.m. at  Lakeview United Church, 2776 Semlin Avenue  (at 12th Ave, eastof Victoria). The guestpanelist  is Amparo Lotan of UNITRAGUA, the National Union of Guatemalian workers. All  women are welcome. Childcare is available.  Call Hulda at 877-8601 or Mable at 322-9852 for  more info.  March 9 and 16: North Shore Women's Centre  is tentatively having an open house at the centre  on March 9. On March 16, with the North Shore  Voice of Women, the Centre presents a screening and discussion of the video, Who's Counting?  Marilyn Waring on Sex, Lies and Global Economics,  with guests Barbara Little and Maria Abbott at  Capilano District Library. For details, call NSWC  984-6009 or VOW at 988-7564.  Calendar 1996  March 15: The Vancouver Society of Immigrant and Visible Minority Women will hold its  4th annual fundraising dinner to celebrate  "Women Making a Difference" in recognition  of IWD and International Day for the Elimination of Discrimination at 6:30-11 pm at  Collingwood Neighbourhood House, 5288  Joyce Street. Cost is $30 per person (vegetarian  dinner available). Call 731-9108 for tickets.  March 16: The Vancouver Committee for  Domestic Workers and Caregivers' Rights is  having a fundraising IWD dance at Eagle's  Hall, 748 Kingsway (east of Fraser Street). Cost  is $10. There will be prizes and a no-host bar.  Call Julie or Lorina at 874-0649 for more information.  VICTORIA  March 8: The Victoria Status of Women Action Group and Everywoman's Bookstore is  inviting women to celebrate IWD at an evening  of poetry with Chrystos at 8 p.m. at the Kaleidoscope Theatre. The performance will be followed by a gala reception. Cost is $6 un/  underwaged;$12waged.Call 383-7322 formore  information.  March 8 and ft The Greater Victoria Public  Library and Victoria Voice of Women present a  program of NFB productions. On March 8,  screenings are The Glass Ceiling by Sophie  Bissonette and "Gathering Strength", a video  compilation of two films, Her Chosen Field by  Barbara Evans and A Time to Reap by Damar  Toufel. On March 9, the film is Terre Nash's  Who's Counting: Marilyn Waring on Sex, Lies and  Global Economics. All at the Central Library  Multi-purpose Room, 735 Broughton Street.  For times, call SWAG at 383-7322.  ONTARIO  Toronto  March ft "We Won't be Stopped! Women on  the March for Survival and Dignity: Defend  ourselves against the Provincial Cuts" is the  theme for Toronto's annual IWD march and  rally. Rally is at noon at Convocation Hall,  King's College Circle, U of T; march is at noon.  For information, call Women Working with  Immigrant Women at (416) 760-7855.  USA  Seattle  March 1ft "The Worldwide Web of Working  Women: A powerful force of change" is the  theme of Radical Women's IWD event at 2 pm.  An international buffet will be served from 5  pm for US$8:50 donation. Door donation is $2.  Sliding scale and work exchanges possible.  Wheelchair accessible. Held at New Freeway  Hall, 5018 Rainier Ave, Seattle. For rides within  the city or childcare call (216) 722-6057 or (216)  722-2453.  This year's calendar was compiled by  Fatima Jaffer, with help from Darlene  Snider of the BC Ministry of Women's  Equality.  4     g /T g g   + / Photos by FaUnTHT ^"^ 'ñ† *"  JiappyJntermWnal Women's D ay Beijing and Beyond  In celebration of International Women's Day  Sponsored by the Vancouver' Satus of Women  A forum on the NGO Women's Forum and the Fourth World  Conference on Women in China. Fatima Jaffer and two other  delegates will provide reports and answer questions.  March 8, 1996  7:00 - 10:00 pm  Native Education Centre  285 East 5th Ave Vancouver, BC.  Call Terri Netsena (604) 255-5511.  Event is Free. Refreshments to be served.  Childcare subsidies will be available.  EastsjcIe DataCrapIhjcs  1458 COMMERCiAl DRiVE  teI: 255-9559 Fax: 255-5075  Happy  International ^ Day  Union Shop  Recycled Paper, Office Supplies,  Artists Materials and Craft Supplies  Happy  IWD!!  Frotw  Call: 291-3670  Serving Vancouver's women's community  for over 20 years  \ot*allo/usa'cQ£*  IfllfayBMtflljM^fMHiaM  CCEC Credit Union  Drive, Vancom  e 254-4100   Fax  Greetings on  International  Women's  Day  Bring this coupon in for  11  20% off regular priced books  until Mar 25, 1996  1391 Commercial Dr.  Van, BC V5L 3X5  253-6442  DOTHISEVERYDAYNOHEROSVWJMENFIGHTBACKEVERYOAYKNOWTHISWOMENDOTHISEVERYDAYFIGHTBACKNOHEROSWOMENDOTHIS  'VSTMft^~-4y^d4  Saturday March 9  8:00 pm  W.I.S.E. Hall  1882 Adanac Street  Tix: Harry's Off Commercial 1716 Charles St.  Little Sister's Bookstore 1221 Thwiowst.  or by calling the bandline: 290-0556  $5-15 sliding scale / children under 12 free  -   COfV^tVIEFtCf^\t.  DOWOMENEVERYDAYNOHEROSWOMENDOTHISEVERYOAYFIGHTBACKEVERYDAYNOHEROSWOMENDOTHISEVERYDAYFIGHTBACKNOHER  V  <&  w  Popular o,  e»>.  Happy  International  Women's   Day!  Suzanne Westenhoefer  Lesbian Comedian ... and a very funny person to boot!  Sat March 16,1996 • 8pm (doorsopen 7-.30)  Jewish Community Centre • Norman Rothstein Theatre  950 W. 41st Ave. (@Oak Street) Sounds  cpuries  Tickets 515 - 522 sliding scale JDUCT10NS  (pay what you can afford on this scale) non-smoking venues « advance  ...& out from down under...  Judy Small  in conceit  Sat March 30,1996 • 8pm  (doors open 7:15)  W.I.S.E. Club • 1882 Adanac  tickets $12-$16  sliding scale  (pay what you can afford on this scale)  \5pecial guest performer  Tracy Riley  "...best singer/songwriter to come out  of the Canadian North.'  tickets recommended • available at Little Sister's, Urban Empire & Women in Print • info 253-7189  KINESIS  MARCH 1996 Commentary  An alternative federal budget:  Choices can be made  by Diana Gibson  The next federal budget will be coming  out in early March. We can expect little  good news and more cuts to social programs.  In terms of employment, the federal  budget will likely lead to further rollbacks  for women, as many work in sectors worst  hit by those cuts. The wage gap between  women and men is widening and the quality of living for many women in Canada is  deteriorating.  The budget will problably all but signal the final demise of the federal government's promise of a national daycare program; just one more sacrifice to the altar of  eliminating the debt.  On an international level, Canada has  lost ground in the ranking of its standard of  living, according to the Human Development Index (HDI) put out by the United  Nations Human Development Program. In  1994, the HDI rated Canada as the number  one place to live...if you were a man. But  when the situation of women was factored  in, Canada dropped to ninth, a placing  lower than it held three years ago.  The federal and provincial governments continue to preach the gospel of debt  crisis and sermonize that the only way out  is to cut spending on social programs. Is  that the only path?  On the contrary, budgets are about  choices—policy choices—and there are alternatives to the path the federal government is following.  One such "choice" is presented in the  Alternative (federal) Budget developed by  a wide range of social and community  groups from across Canada together with  academics, and prepared by the Canadian  Centre for Policy Alternatives and Choices:  a coalition for social justice.  This budget is full of alternatives:  choices that our government could be making, such as: full employment, a more equitable distribution of income, the eradication of poverty, economic equality between  men and women, protecting basic labour  rights, environmental protection, and the  strengthening of social programs and public services.  Does it sound impossible? Well, it isn't.  The Alternative Budget is based on sound  economics, and was researched and written by respected economists.  The authors of the Alternative Budget  say they recognize the economic realities  Canada is facing and acknowledge the federal government's debt/deficit problems.  However, they say their budget is intended  to tackle the real causes of the debt—high  unemployment, excessively high interest  rates, and an unfair tax system.  The Alternative Budget offers us choices  about the ways to raise revenues, fund social  programs and balance our budgets.  Federal government's  choices  Over the past 10 years, successive federal governments have chosen to cut corpo-  MARCH 1996  rate taxes, maintain high interest rates and  cut social program spending.  High real interest rates have been a  conscious choice by the government and  the Bank of Canada to achieve their goal of  zero inflation.  In a healthy growing economy, moderate levels of inflation are perfectly fine. The  side effects of this choice has been high  yearly budget deficits, chronically high  unemployment, and a generally stagnant  economy.  In terms of budget deficits, high real  interest rates have made it more expensive  for the government to borrow money. It is  these interest payments on the debt which  have caused the budget deficits, not spending on social programs.  If you take out these interest payments,  our revenues have actually exceeded program spending, and social spending has  not increased as a percentage of our overall  economy (GDP).  On the other hand, interest rates and  unemployment have been dramatically increasing in patterns suspiciously similar to  the rise in deficits. This is more than coincidence.  Additionally, a high interest rate acts  as a barrier to borrowing to start new business ventures and for buying cars and  houses or expand businesses. This means  that it directly causes unemployment to  increase and the economy to stagnate. At  the same time, the federal government is  cutting public sector jobs and cutting billions out of funding to social programs in  order to make up for the higher debt service  costs and lost tax revenues.  The politicians say we all overspent, so  we all must tighten our belts-but those who  are now being affected most by belt tightening are not the ones who benefitted from  the overspending.  The wealthiest one percent of Canadians now own or control more income than  the bottom 80 percent, and almost five million people are living in poverty. The gap  between rich people and poor people is  increasing, and corporations have been  making record profits years in a row.  In this year alone, the big five banks  made a combined profit of $5.18 billion.  This, while the federal government announces plans to reduce payments to the  provinces by $7 billion over the next two  years.  The rationale for cutting taxes for corporations and the wealthy is that presumably they will be investing more money in  the economy and jobs will be created. But  this has not happened—those same banks  have been cutting staff and generally, we  continue to have chronically high levels of  unemployment.  What are the  Alternatives?  The Alternative Budget takes a three-  pronged approach to revenue raising: reduce interest rates, increase employment,  and close some of the more outrageous tax  loopholes. The bulk of revenues for this  budget would be raised from growth in the  economy expected to result from the reduction in interest rates and growth in employment.  An one percent reduction in interest  rates would decrease the deficit outright by  cutting the government's debt service costs.  It would also allow the economy to grow,  employment to increase, and social assistance costs to fall.  Under this budget proposal, employment would also be created in a number of  ways: firstly, public sector cuts would be  stopped and reversed; and secondly, social  and physical infrastructure projects would  be funded. These would include funding  for projects like daycare facilities, research  and development and social housing construction.  The Alternative Budget proposes a  number of ways in which the government  could increase revenues: taxing excess profits made by banks, establishing a minimum  corporate tax, taxing interest on overseas  investments of insurance companies, collecting unpaid taxes (estimated at $6.6 billion), taxing wealth transfers at death, and  eliminating deductions for corporate lobbying expenses (estimated at $50 million).  These are just some of the alternatives  proposed in the budget and are based on  the premise that the institutions which benefit from the Canadian economy should  contribute to the public services that help to  sustain that economy. I might add that  those investors and corporations which  benefitted from the overspending that has  caused the debt should be the ones to tighten  their belts.  Choices for social  spending  The Alternative Budget would increase  the number of decent secure jobs'available  for women through employment creation,  accompanied by affirmative action programs. The budget proposes national social investment funds for health care, post-  secondary education, income support, child  care, retirement income, unemployment  insurance, and housing. Federal funding  for all of these programs would be reinstated to pre-1994 funding and benefits  levels, and in some cases they would even  be increased. The Alternative Budget proposes more than doubling the federal financing of child care and ensuring national  standards.  This budget rejects using the family  income test for determining retirement benefits—a test currently being considered by  the federal government and which would  adversely impact women.  The Alternative Budget also would  increase the availability of social and co-op  housing, and emphasis would be put on  accessible community health care and education.  Where do we go from  here?  As an activist, I must end this article  with some ideas about where we can go  from here. How can we use the Alternative  Budget as a tool for discussion strategies to  stop the federal and provincial government's decifit-cutting agenda?  Ellen Woodsworth of Woman to  Woman Global Strategies feels that there is  a need to put together more working groups  around the Alternative Budget to discuss it,  and ensure that the women's agenda is  addressed.  She feels the budget needed a greater  emphasis on women's unpaid work, which  is 60 percent of work done by women. For  the 1996 census, women are being urged to  mark self-employedunder the "Household"  catagory. Still women's unwaged work will  not be counted under labour force statistics. That means women's unpaid labour  will continue to be unrecognized as contributing to the economy.  Other shortcomings of the Alternative  Budget emerge when it is compared to the  Canadian Women's Alternative Budget  which was put out in 1993 by the Womens'  International League for Peace and Freedom (WILPF). WILPF put a greater emphasis on social program spending on specific  programs for women such as battered women's shelters and transition houses, as well  as organizations like the National Action  Committee on the Status of Women and the  Canadian Research Institute for the Advancement of Women. The target spending  for specific programs are noticeably absent  from the 1995 Alternative Budget though  they have been seriously eroded by federal  budget cuts.  The 1995 Alternative Budget is an accessible and practical tool which can be  used to fuel discussions within our own  groups in order to strengthen our agendas.  The groups that wrote the alternative budget  met with Paul Martin, the federal Minister  of Finance and presented this budget. We  need to ensure that he keeps hearing about  it.  The budget proposes tangible alternatives which can be easily translated into  lobby action and used to pressure federal  and provincial politicians for change. When  they say there is no money for daycare, we  can tell them where to get the money; we  can tell them that we want the government  to make different choices.  For more information or copies of the Alternative Budget, contact the Canadian Center For  Policy Alternatives at: 251 Laurier Avenue West,  Suite 804, Ottawa, ON, KIP 5J6; telephone:  (613) 565-1341; or CHOICES 703-275 Broadway, Winnipeg, MB, R3C 4M6; telephone: (204)  944-9408; fax: (204) 956-7071. The Alternative  Budget is also available on the internet at http:/  linfoweh.magi.coml~ccpalccpa.html.  For more information about the Womens' Alternative Budget, contact WILPF- BC at 916 W.  Broadway, PO Box 635, Vancouver, BC V5Z 1K7.  Diana Gibson is a labour activist based in  Vancouver.  15* Movement Matters  Victory in the GAP  campaign  The Maquila Solidarity Network says  that the GAP Clothing Company and the  National Labour Committee (US) signed  an important, breakthrough agreement  on December 15, 1995. In it, the GAP  agreed to accept independent monitoring of the compliance with the company's code of conduct by factories in Central America contracted to produce garments for GAP.  The agreement was reached in part  due to pressures from a letter-writing  campaign targeting the GAP [see Kinesis  December/January 1996].  The monitoring will be of labour  conditions and practices in plants in Central America where GAP clothes are  made. The GAP has also agreed to reinvest in El Salvador if conditions are met  by its contractor—Mandarin International—and the Salvadorean government, which would result in humane,  fair and just working conditions.  In addition, GAP said it will translate its code of conduct into Spanish, and  will have it posted in the plants it hires in  Central America.  As part of the agreement, Mandarin  International said it would meet with  locked-out union officials and other  workers to negotiate and resolve their  differences. This meeting was held, but  resulted only with Mandarin agreeing to  provide the legal severance pay. The  workers were not able to negotiate a  return to work or a recognition of their  legal union.  Although this settlement must be  seen as a defeat for the workers at Mandarin, their organizing drive has put the  issue of human rights in the maquilas on  the political agenda in El Salvador.  According to Charles Kernaghan of  the National Labour Committee, the GAP  is the first major apparel company to  agree to third party monitoring of its  code of conduct.  If you'd like to write to the GAP regarding this agreement, direct your letters to:  Jane Wicks, Canadian Vice-President, The  GAP, #804-170 Bloor St. W., Toronto, ON,  M5S 1T9, or fax: (416) 921-2966.  For more information about the GAP  campaign and other campaigns in support of  women workers, contact the Maquila Solidarity Network, 606 Shaw St., Toronto, ON,  M6G 3L6.  Counting women's  work in the census  Census Day in Canada is Tuesday,  May 14. Since the last census in 1991—  when housewives and volunteers were  told not to answer questions relating to  their "work"—the Work is Work is Work  campaign has been pressing hard to have  the unwaged work of women recognized  and valued in our society. The campaign  is sponsored by BC Voice of Women,  Mothers are Women and AFEAS, Association Feminine d'Education et d'Action  Social.  The Canadian Census does not count  any unwaged work done by women in  their homes or communities, thus creating the economic illusion that those who  aren't paid, don't work and have no economic value. Statistics Canada defines  "work" only as market place activity;  that is, something done for money.  For the 1996 Census, the campaign's  organizers are urging women to make  the census count our unwaged work by  filling in section labelled "Household  Activities" in a way that includes women's activities in the house and community as productive and valuable. In the  Household category, StatsCan asks us to  tell how many hours we spend doing activities, not how many hours we work.  The word work is carefully avoided in  this section. So despite first appearances  and despite media coverage, in the 1996  the basic concept related to unwaged  work has not changed in the 1996 Census.  In contrast to the section on Household Activities, there is a relatively large  section called Labour Market Activities.  Here the word work is used as a synonym  for activities.  To help women fill out the Census,  the Work is Work is Work campaign has  prepared a brochure explaining how to  answer the Household Activities questions so that our work is truly represented.  To obtain a copy of the brochure, for  information, or if you wish to help in any  way, contact: Barbara Little, Brenton-Page  Rd, RR1, Ladysmith, BC, VOR 2E0; tel:  (604) 245-3405; or Maria Abbott, 311 Masters Rd, Victoria, BC, V8S1C9. AFEAS will  produce its own brochure in French.  JOB POSTING  Vancouver Status of Women has an opening for an Administrator/Fundraiser.  VSW is a community-based feminist organization which works on community programs and  services for women, public education and political organizing, and publishes Kinesis. We  have identified as our priority areas: racism, poverty and violence against women.  This position is a full-time (40+ hours), core staff position with a salary of $31,400/year plus  benefits (Medical/dental coverage; 7 weeks holiday peryear). Public office hours extend over  four days a week, however, staff must be available to attend evening and weekend meetings  and events.  Women of colour and First Nations women are strongly encouraged to apply for this  position: please note that affirmative action principles will be in effect for this hiring.  If you are interested in finding out more about this position, please write or call Vancouver  Status of Women. We'll send you a full job description and application deadline dates.  Administrator/Fundraiser Position. Vancouver Status of Women,  301-1720 Grant St. Vancouver, B.C. V5L 2Y6 . Tel/Fax: (604) 255-5511  Employment skills  for women  A skills training program in Vancouver will remain open after surviving  a funding cut from the federal government. The Employment Skills For Women  program, which runs a 12-week career  explorations and job search skills program for women seeking re-entry into  the job market, says it will be able to  continue providing training services at  least until August, and hopefully even  longer.  The program was intended to provide skills training for women in recovery from drug or alcohol addictions, eating disorders, corrections backgrounds,  psychiatric illness, or physical or sexual  abuse. It is the only program of its kind in  Vancouver.  Even though the program will not be  forced to shut down, the funding cut has  resulted in a new restriction on who is  granted admission into the program. Eligibility requirements of the training program have been changed, and now only  those women on social assistance and  who are survivors of emotional and /or  physical abuse will be accepted into the  program.  Employment Skills for Women is located at the Pacific Legal Education Association, 1400-207 W. HastingstSt, Vancouver,  BC, V6B 1K5. For more information about  its program, call: (604) 683-3439 or fax:  (604) 688-3435.  Corrections:  In our February 1996 issue we made a  couple errors. In the table of contents,  the writer of the book review of review  of Daughters of the Red Land by Yan  Li should have been listed as Rita  Wong.  And on page 3—the article on sexual  assault and the courts, "Records open  to disclosure"—we lost some text:  the last line on each of the first two  columns.  The sentence at the bottom of the first  column should read, "The second  case, LLA v. Beharriell, concerned an  appeal by the complainant and two  counselling centres of a court order  requiring them to disclose the  women's therapeutic records to the  accused's lawyers. The counselling  centres had refused."  The sentence at the bottom of the  second column should read,"In their  decision, the majority justices made  clear they believed disclosure will  often be necessary in order to provide  the accused with a fair trial."  Our apologies to the writer and to our  readers for these ommisions.  In our December/January 1996 issue,  we made a few errors concerning  photographs appearing in that issue.  On page 6, the photo on last year's  December 6th vigil in Vancouver  should have been credited as courtesy  of WAVAW, Women Against Violence  Against Women.  And in the story on breast implants,  "Scary stories of silicone and saline"  (page 8), we inadvertently omitted the  names of the women pictured in the  accompanying photo. The woman are  (from left to right): Jean Wilson, Joy  Langan, Linda Wilson and Karen  Gates. The photo was taken by Agnes  Huang.  Aboriginal women's  drop-in  A new drop-in for First Nations  women in Vancouver, coordinated by  the Aboriginal Women's Action Network  (AWAN), will officially start operating  in March.  AWAN, a political action group for  First Nations Women, has been meeting  every two weeks since last November to  discuss issues affecting urban First Nations women.  Among AWAN's projects is an Aboriginal Women's Drop-In, which will take  place every Tuesday at the Vancouver  Status of Women. The drop-ins will feature activities such as: healing circles,  traditional stories, drumming and dancing, conciousness-raising, anti-racism,  Elders' teachings, as well as workshops  on issues such as fetal alcohol syndrome  (FAS/FAE), addictions, single-  parenting, the BC Treaty process, welfare cuts, family violence and PHV/ AIDS.  The Drop-in will be officially  launched with a potluck lunch on Tuesday March 5th, 12:00 to 2:30pm at the  Vancouver Status of Women, Suite 301-  1720 Grant St. All First Nations women  are invited. Childcare subsidies are available.  For more information about AWAN and  the Aboriginal Women's Drop-in, contact  Terri Netsena at the Vancouver Status of  Women, #301-1720 Grant St, Vancouver,  BC, V5L 2Y6; tel: (604) 255-5511;fax (604)  255-5511.  Bed & Breakfast  A Beautiful Place  Centre yourself  in the comfort and tranquility  of B.C.'s Super Natural  Gulf Islands.  Healthy Breakfasts  Hot Tub & Sauna  5 acres of forested  foot paths with ponds  ocean and mountain views  A Memorable Escape  (604) 537-9344  1207 Beddis Road,  Salt Spring Island, B.C. V8K 2C8 Arts  Review of theatre production of Karla & Grif;  Incredible adventure of 2  girls who can't love  by Cy-Thea Sand  KARLA AND GRIF  Written by Vivienne Laxdal  Directed by Bill Devine  A Sea Theatre Production  Last summer I was in Northern  California with my partner attending  her aunt's wedding. The night before  the main event my partner's family  gathered together at a dinner hosted by  the Mormon side of the groom's family. Memories of what happened for us  that evening were evoked recently as I  watched the skillful production of a  rivetting play by Vivienne Laxdal. Ka rla  and Grif not only enthralled me, it also  filled me up with an urgent desire to get  away from the story unfolding in the  intimate atmosphere of the Station  Street Arts Centre.  Based around the [unconventional  •omance plot of young women at summer camp, Karla and Grif tells the story  jf two teens who spent every summer  ogether, but whose very different backgrounds precludes them meeting dur-  ng the rest of the year. For nine years  Karla and Grif meet at the same camp—  in expense Karla's father is willing to  vork very hard for, and one which  Irif's grandmother would hardly no-  ice. At one point upper-class Grif re-  ers to working class Karla as her "little  secret"—a game which becomes po-  ent and dangerous when they make  passionate love the night before sum-  ner camp ends.  American working class writer and  i -ditor Janet Zandy defines class as hu-  nan relations based on economic dif-  erences. This brilliant work reverber-  ites with those differences. We never  ee Grif's wealthy grandmother who  las raised Grif since her parents died.  5ut her wealth and power are reflected  n Grif's deference to her and, most  : ignificantly, by the fact that we know  ■ leep in our bones that Grif would never  i -ver dream of introducing her grand-  nother to a friend who carries a knife  , nd whose father broke her arm during  . drunken quarrel. In fact, Grif never  nentions her friendship with Karla in  ! ter "real life" —a deception painfully  xposed in the play's outcome.  But we do get to know Danny,  Karla's gruff and jaded dad. Played  beautifully by Robert Nasmith, Danny  s not only ensconced in his armchair  vith his remote control and beer bottle  tear at hand, he is also enveloped in  , nd immobilized by an awful guilt. A  tun-lovin' party gal, Karla's mum  \ /ould bring men home from the bar  .: nd Danny would serve them coffee—  .1 gesture of desperation his daughter  v./ould later emulate.  r \  \\i       j§§  *'"':***, \     \^                  mk  >"'.'■ ',.•-■;'■'■  WKm  Kirsten Williamson as Karla and Robert Nasmith as Danny in Karla and  Grif, the award-winning play by Vivienne Laxdal that played at the Station  Street Arts Centre, Vancouver. Photo by Stephen Mitchell.  After his wife deserts them, Danny  tells the social workers to get lost, he  will take care of his own little girl.  Nasmith manages to convey not only  Danny's defeat—his body seems permanently moulded into a stooped over  position—but also his heroism. After  all, he does do his best to love his  daughter even though he is oblivious  to the effect on her of his incessant,  drunken reminiscences about her  mother.  Kirsten Williamson, who graduated from Studio 58 at Vancouver's  Langara College less than two years  ago, plays Karla with a vibrant intensity and unshakable focus. She dominates the stage with her nervous energy, a survivor's dynamism charged  up with humour and a hint of unacknowledged terror.  When she is nine years old, she  discovers a pen knife in the basement  and pleads with Danny to let her keep  it. She carries it with her throughout  her adolescence like a shield of defiance and protection tucked away in  the pocket of her jeans. Karla uses the  knife in the last scene of the play to  force the truth out of Grif and the breath  out of her captive and totally engaged  audience.  What can I say about Grif? Here is  a character easy to dislike and judge—  a central figure handled with a fine  professionalism and unflinching credibility by Cindy Block. Grif is a nasty  nice girl who seems oblivious to her  self-centeredness and demands on  Karla. When she seduces Karla after  drinking too much, the eroticism between the two young women is both  unsettling and satisfying. Finally, finally, after all that flirting and teasing  we witness some sexual release. But  Grif's behaviour the next morning is  unforgivable. She uses her tongue to  cut Karla down in a scene almost too  intolerable to watch. But when she is  left terrified and abused at the end of  the play, Grif's humanity is as palpable  as the blood on her t-shirt.  Vivienne Laxdal is playwright in  residence at Montreal's Centaur Theatre, and the writing in Karla and Grif  alone justifies this success. Her other  work includes Goose Spit, Personal Convictions, and Cyber/Womb, which was  published last year in Canadian Theatre  Review. In Karla and Grif, she offers her  characters both dignity and pathos,  and they remind me of the words from  the jacket cover of Sri Lankan writer  Shyam Selvadurai's book Funny Boy:  "time and time again the true longings  of the human heart come against the  way things are." Homophobia defines  the way things are in Karla and Grif "and  the way things were at the pre-wed-  ding dinner last summer.  My partner's aunt gave out name  tags to everyone just before we entered  the celebration. When I checked mine I  saw she had completely and neatly  erased my connection to her niece.  When we gently protested and tried to  explain our distress, my partner's aunt  told us to get off our soapboxes. We  were expected to keep our relationship  invisible.  Six months later, I watched Karla  hold a weapon against Grif's gross betrayal of their friendship, and the rage  she released ameliorated my own. In  Karla's final moment of righteous [albeit abusive] indignation—when the  creative achievements for Laxdal as a  writer and Williamson as an actor are  most potent—lesbian passion triumphs. I am able to breath more easily  as I return to the warmth of my car on  a bitterly cold night thankful for theatre of this calibre and power.  Cy-Thea Sand is a Vancouver writer,  photographer and teacher. A chapter  from her book Magic in a Metaphor  was published last summer in the  Working Class Studies issue of the  Women's Quarterly, edited by Janet  Zandy for The Feminist Press in New  York.  SUBSCRIBE  ADUERTISE  WRITE  PHOTOGRAPH Arts  Arts  Vancouver's Women in View festival:  A variety on View: a Cave,   cabarets and comedians  by Janet Askin  The 1996 Women in View Festival in  Vancouver, held from January 25 to 28,  featured a range of performers, writers, singers, musicians and dancers. Janet Askin gives  Kinesis readers a look at a few of the View  performances she took in this year.  THE CAVE:  THE STORY OF  A WOMAN'S JOURNEY  Written and performed by Sheryl  Simmons  Trickster Theatre Company  Calgary, Alberta  In The Cave, a one-woman performance piece six years in the making,  Sheryl Simmons recreates and invites  the audience on her long journey to  physical /spiritual health after being  diagnosed with cervical dysplasi, a precancerous condition. On her one  woman journey into the recovery of  her soul, Simmons follows the ancient  myth of Psyche.Simmons is a modern  woman following ancient myths and  creating her own mythology towards a  pattern on wholeness.  Simmons produced an intense, sincere and exciting performance that was  powerful and very well crafted, utilizing slides, paint, fire, water, masks,  movement, music and shadow play.  The set, a cave, was brilliant, enclosed with a black, lightweight tent  material, very cocoon like and evocative of a dark, warm, energy filled place.  At one end, a half-moon shaped light  screen created atmospheres of shadow  and light. A bit in front of the screen,  towards the other end of the set, live  coals and fire made up a hearth. At the  far end of the set, a bed with a cubbyhole above held a piece of canvas that  could be lowered and raised.  Simmons continuously moved  from bed to the hearth to behind the  screen and everywhere in between.  The opening of the play, in which  Simmons sang, hummed, and performed a ritual with hot coals and a  sage, set the tone of the mythical, healing and spiritual things to come. Using  dance and movement, Simmons transformed into a narrative a dream where  Marilyn Monroe comes to her as a  goddess and says, "I am Goddess. I  have breasts, therefore I am."  Immediately after the first narrative, with unusually expert skill and  timing, Simmons draws our attention  to the slide images on the screen. It is  somewhat unusual for me to enjoy a  mixed media form, but this part of her  performance was smooth flowing, with  natural and dramatic transitions, and  with no slide machine noises.  The Cave by Sheryl Simmons was one of the highlights at this year's  Women In View Festival. Photo by Chris Christou.  At one point in her performance,  Simmons dances in her masks and uses  alternating lighter fire flames to draw  the audience into her story of "a woman  who lost and found her way." At another point, naked behind the screen  and seeming to squat on light, Simmons  further recreates for us the feeling of  her teetering on two worlds of destruction—the underworld and her real  world.  The different masks and personae  used by Simmons were as separate  from one another as her soul is from  her body before her journey towards  healing is completed. She explained  that she was at a vulnerable time in her  life, and therefore was more open to  the possibility of a crack in the universe—hence, her new mythology is  born.  As we witness Simmon's metamorphosis and transformation, the myths  of Eros, Psyche and Eve lead us through  four initiation tasks Simmons must per  form: the sorting of seeds, the gathering of fleece, the descent into the underworld, and the collecting of water—all of which are part of her mythical journey.  I love the line, where as Psyche  recounts a portion of the Eve myth, she  exclaims: "I'm gonna close the book on  you Jesus." Like with the Eve myth, The  Cave is about Simmons taking ancient  myths and re-creating them in her own  myths.  In one part of Simmons' healing  journey, the audience gets a glimpse  into the life of a Hollywood diva / twirly  red dress-aspiring child, always trying  to measure up to the societal beauty  myth and the talent exploitation bandwagon. It is empowering to hear another woman's story that says, "I'm not  buyingit!," and that encourages women  to take their power and shed the garbage, expectations and pressures that  are making them sick.  EDITH & FRIENDS CABARET  Edith Wallace, Hillary Peach, Jennifer  Martin and the Ovarian Sisters (Ellie  Harvey and Christine Lippa)  Edith & Friends, one of Women in  View's three cabarets, opened with the  extraordinarily talented Vancouver  singer /songwriter Edith Wallace belting out an a cappella tune  entitled/'Strength of a Woman."  As Wallace sang from the refrain—  "Have you felt the strength when she's  all passion and power and light and the  look on her face sings of beauty and  grace and you feel your heart melt at the  sight," and "She is mother and lover and  angel; she's a storm on the sea when she  calms, you have felt the strength of a  woman as she rocks you in her arms"—  I was struck by her passion, beauty and  grace. Looking around the hushed and  rapt audience, it appeared she had mesmerized many people with the power of  her vocals and her lyrics.  Wallace's songs do not just try to  speak to women because she is a woman;  her songs also try to speak to men and to  the individual. She sings about the ordinary so that people can see the ordinary  in another way, as part of a bigger picture.  Another stand out song for me was  "Choices," a song about peace in the  world—a theme in Wallace's  songwriting. She sings, "It's hard for me  to see, but there is part of you in me,  where there is fire in my anger and my  blood runs cold." Before singing the song,  Wallace asked people in the audience to  look inward and to "see that we all have  the power to set that bomb," whether it's  through an argument with our partner  or our children. Societal change, she said,  has to start with being accountable and  responsible for our own behaviour.  Feelings of aspiration, hope and optimism emanated from Wallace's songs,  and she spoke of music as a "healing in  your life, and as its own entity, a catalyst  for growth." It was a wonderful set by an  impassioned, gifted musician.  Wallace's melodious musical interlude warmed us up for writer/performer  Hillary Peach and her piece, "I want to  see you naked"—a piece Peach described  (tongue in cheek) as 'uni-media.'  It was quite wonderful—a lyrical,  poetic, sensory exploration of life, lusts,  adventures read with passion, song and  a liltingly, hypnotic rhythm.  Take this: "Loretta don't tell those  boys where we've been the weather over  the mountain signifies change you are all  as wet as rain." Or how about: "I want to  see you naked, not for appetite, but because I am full." Or as Peach delivered in  staccato rhythm: "I want to talk about  fire. Fire is death, fire is death, fire is  hearth, fire is heart, fire is heat, fire is  search, fire is virtue, fire is futures of  Jennifer Martin.  lying beside me, your naked virtue in this  earth."  Passion and sincerity stood out in the  way Peach spoke and delivered her piece.  I wanted to hear it all again.  The next performer at the cabaret  was no stranger to Women in View: comedian Jennifer Martin. Martin tickled  the audience's funny bones with all new  stand-up material, including some rewritten material from her hit "Mad about  Barbie," which she first performed at  Women in View in 1994.  "Mad about Barbie" follows Martin  to the store, Barbies on Georgia, off the  escalator and onto the 'little pink, high  heeled footsteps that take us right there,  right into Barbie heaven.' Upon arriving  in the Barbie boutique, Martin immediately has to out-run two four year old  girls in party dresses racing towards the  only pink and white Barbie jeep in the  store. After Martin beats them to it and  manages to squeeze herself into the drive-  able jeep ("Now this is not a jeep for  Barbie and Midge to drive around in. The  is a car for a Barbie connoisseur to possess, a precursor for, say, her very own  grown-up jeep."), the young girls push  her over to the TV section where they  teach Martin how to program a VCR  until they are called back to the Barbie  boutique via the PA system.  I don't normally find Barbie or what  she stands for hilarious in any way, but  the image of Martin, a tallish woman,  frantically racing towards the Barbie Jeep  and wrapping her legs around various  mechanical parts to drive it away was  very entertaining.  Wrapping up the crescendo-building night were the Ovarian Sisters' (Ellie  Harvie and Christine Lippa) fast paced,  witty and improvisational performance.  Harvie and Lippa regaled the  audience with their version of  Theatre Sports games.  In a particularly amusing  vein—an endowment scene  game—Harvie left the hall  while Lippa collected information from a woman in the  audience about her phobia.  When Harvie came back, she  had to guess the woman's phobia as Lippa—as a hilarious  psychiatrist character—tries to  'endow' Harvie with the characteristics of the woman's phobia through a series of subtle  hints. Very funny!  In another game—'arms  expert'—an audience member  provides arms for Harvie as  she and Lippa improvize dialogue. It was an extremely  funny piece.  Once again, I was pleased  with their programming of a  Women in View Cabaret. All  in all, a very enjoyable time.  SWOLLEN TONGUES  a verse play by Kathleen Oliver  read with Karen Hines, Veena Sood,  Carmen Aguirre, Suzie Payne and  Susinn McFarlen  Kathleen Oliver's staged reading of  her first play Sivollen Tongues took my  breath away. A complex, intriguing  and witty work, written almost entirely  in eight line stanzas with four stress  lines (iambic tetrimetre), it is hard to  express the genius of her use of humour  and verse. Sxoollen Tongues is a work-in-  progress. The performance at Women  in View was the first public reading of  the script.  The cast had only one read through  prior to the night of the reading, which  is amazing in itself. When you consider  that it was easy to get happily lost in the  land of this 'neo Restoration Comedy'—  as Sivollen Tongues is introduced by  Women In View's Kathleen Weiss—you  can hardly imagine it being much more  brilliant.  A comedy of 'manners,' Oliver borrows conventions from the time and  place of Restoration Comedy without  being too literal about historical accuracy.  The play opens with Thomas (Veena  Sood) struggling to write testaments of  love as his sister Catherine (Karen Hines)  delivers scathing asides to the audience,  criticizing his lack of prowess. Through  a miscarriage of justice during their  childhood, Thomas was lauded as a poet  by his mother for a poem that Catherine  wrote, and was chastised by his mother  for trying to tell the truth. After their  mother dies, they go to live with their  Edith Wallace.  irents, Lord and Lady Bountiful  (Susinn McFarlen and Suzie Payne). Thomas is encouraged to write, while  Catherine is praised for being his secretary.  Thomas tries to woo his love, Sonya  (Carmen Aguirre), who secretly loves  Catherine. While Catherine and Sonya  cook up a scheme of revenge against the  un-knowing Thomas, Lord Bountiful secretly yearns for Thomas.  In an aside, Lord Bountiful laments:  "Always the understanding one, that's  me. Oh, Thomas dear, if you could only  seen how well I understand you to your  core! For, as I loved your mother, I adore  the echo of her that I find in you. And  though loving a man has been taboo  among the company I've always kept, I  fear that my affection has now crept  much closer to the place that we call  passion. Oh, I will not express it, no: I'll  ration the little slices of my fantasy in  which I fancy he is wooing me. Let me  just listen now, and while he woos, I'll  put myself in lucky Sonya's shoes."  As the Catherine and Sonya plot escalates, they eventually make their escape to Lesbania. The clash of lies, secrets, silence and revenge heats up in  Lesbania, with Thomas following  Catherine and Sonya, and Lord and Lady  Bountiful showing up.  When a letter from Catherine and  Thomas' deceased mother is found, all  the mysteries of Swollen Tongues come to  light.  The difficult form of verse Oliver  used to write Swollen Tongues doesn't  prove to be a deterrent to being able to  follow the action. Swollen Tongues is a  twisty, turny, exciting piece of writing.  Janet Askin likes to see shows.  Christine Lippa and Ellie Harvie of The Ovarian Sisters.  MARCH 1996  MARCH 1996 Letters  Qu'ran egalitarian to  women—Not!  Kinesis,  I am writing in response to an article  published in Kinesis' December-January  1996 issue. This article was a  transcription of a talk given by Riffat  Hassan in Huairou, China [at a plenary  at the NGO Women's Forum] regarding  the "Rise of Conservatism." There are a  number of misleading facts given by  Hassan regarding theQu'ran's view  towards women. She believes that the  Qu'ran, contrary to the Bible, is  egalitarian towards women on the issue  of the origin of women, that is, in the  Qu'ranic version, woman was not  created from man's rib. She also claimed  on several other occasions that the  Qu'ran is egalitarian towards women  without giving any other examples.  I have studied the Qu'ran since I was a  child. I have a quotation from the Qu'ran  Surah An-nisa (the verse on woman). The  Surah (verse) is specifically on the rights  of women under Islam. In part 34 it says:  "Men are in charge of women because  Allah hath made the one of them to excel  the other, and because they spend of  their property (for the support of  women). So good women are obedient,  guarding in secret that which Allah hath  guarded. As for those from whom ye  fear rebellion, admonish them and  banish them to beds apart, and scourge  them. Then if they obey you, seek not a  way against them."  This is only one example of the so  called "egalitarian" attitude of the  Qu'ran towards women. There are many  other parts in the Qu'ran that have a  similar attitude towards women. None  were mentioned by Hassan.  Hassan is against secularism. She is  very open about it. She believes that  there should be a version of the Qu'ran  that fits every woman in the so-called  Muslim countries.  I was born and raised in a so-called  Muslim country. As a teenager I decided  that no religion is logical and became an  atheist. However, when I entered  university, I had to fill out a form to  declare what religion I belonged to. I was  wise and smart enough to write down  Muslim. I knew that declaring my true  belief, which was atheism, would expose  me to severe harassment because I lived  in a country that severely limited the  rights of individuals to freedom of  thought and expression.  Hassan claims that 95 percent of the  women in so-called Muslim countries are  believers, and that you can only talk to  them through the verses of the Qu'ran  and Islam. We should doubt her  statistics. Her statistics are taken by  force. To me, she is a liar and her  statistics are covered with blood and  oppression. I had a younger sister whose  blood is on those statistics and the  speech of Hassan. I read Kinesis seeing  my sister's blood on every page of  Hassan's speech. My sister was a human  rights activist, an atheist, who was  arrested by the Islamic government of  Iran in June 1981. She was executed two  months later. Her name along with the  names of 200 other political prisoners  was published in official papers. Her  charge was "blasphemy and acting  against the government of God."  How would any sane human being  feel after all the atrocities committed by  all the religious and dogmatic  governments throughout the world?  And then Kinesis gives so much coverage  to a woman like Hassan who already has  a platform in Huairou to defend  "Liberation Within Islam."  Hassan is not talking about personal  liberation within religion. If she wants to  believe in the Qu'ran and the  "egalitarian" attitude of the Qu'ran  towards women it is her right to do so.  Of course, I feel sorry for her. But that is  what she wants. Unfortunately, her  argument is very dangerous and not at  all about the freedom to practice a  religion or not. She is trying to say that  all the arguments about the importance  of separation of state and religion are  misunderstandings as far as her religion  is concerned. She has the right to teach  Islamic theology in USA. But we know  that the same right does not exist in Iran  and any other country with a religious  state. Last year, two prominent Christian  priests were murdered in Tehran by the  agents of the Islamic Republic of Iran for  preaching their religion.  After reading Hassan's article, I was  moved to write on the important issue of  freedom of thought and speech. It is  needed here in Canada and it is needed  in every other place in the world. Please  do not intimidate me with bloody  statistics that 60 percent of the society in  Canada is Christian so I should live with  Christian values. And don't intimidate  me with the statistics that say 95 percent  of the people in the Middle East are  Muslims and hence the Islamic laws are  suitable. These laws killed my sister and  tens of thousands of other political  prisoners.  There was a mention on "diversity"  following Hassan's speech [during the  discussion from the floor]. Some women  in Huarou were quite confused on the  issue of "diversity". You cannot silence  people and kill them and then talk about  diversity. Hassan's strategy of "being-in-  the-middle-of-the-road" in my opinion  supports the status quo which is killing  people who have alternative views.  There is no room for diversity when you  silence and kill people for their ideas. We  can only talk about diversity and  tolerance when one side is not violently  imposing its views on the others, even if  those "others" are a small minority.  I was appalled at reading Hassan's  article. And I felt very upset that it was  echoed in a feminist paper like Kinesis.  People like Hassan have enough venues  in which to preach and justify crimes  against humanity. Let Kinesis not be one  of them.  Mina Mojdeh  Vancouver, BC  Kinesis Editorial Board responds: We  take your comments in good faith and  appreciate you pointing out some of the  contradictions in Hassan's position. As  mentioned in the diary and preface to  Hassan's speech, we chose to run Hassan's  speech as it was the most controversial one  made at the plenaries at the NGO Forum.  Happy IWD!  from Co-op Radio  cfRO 102.7rm  Where women have a voice  Monday, 8:00 - 9:00pm:  WomenVisions  For women about women by women. Health, politics, law, spirituality, arts  sexuality and alternative ideologies.  Tuesday, 7:00 - 8:00pm: OBAA  By women of colour for women of colour. Local community groups and events,  interviews and music not heard in the mainstream.  Thursday, 8:00 - 9:00pm:  The Lesbian Show  Friday, 8:00-10:00pm: Rubymusic  12 years on the air, Rubymusic features the best in music by women-old, new,  lost and found.  For a free listener's guide call 684-8494 Monday to Thursday, 10am - 6pm  1 biiniJkiJnig albotui£ "writing lor IrVinesus i    ©  1 Iniere s a cleaaliine.      (§)  IDoii it ns IrViinesiSooo       ©  •255-5499  New titles from Womens Press        +  \r  viyBicv  MY BICYCLE TRIP  Monna L. Dingman  On a hundred-mile bike trip, Drew Collins leaves everything that hurts  behind in a spray of dirt from a back tire. Amid the quiet laps of waves, a  cool ocean mist, and freshly rolled reefers, Drew meets Kate in the  orange light of a beach party campfire and  unleashes a sweltering romance.  But with her bike parked against the side of her  best friend Shelly's bungalow, the dust settles on  the path she blazed not long before, and toking  her brain cells just isn't enough. Drew takes to  her bike again, riding for crisp air, for the  morning sun, and, when she rides hard and fast  and long, for the pain in her legs that hurts  more than her heart — until one night, stealing  away under a dark sky, she goes too far.  $11.95 US/$13.95 CAN Release: Spring 1996  ICED ^  \(*0U \    Judith Alguire  vmm..  ■jj^re i     Women hockey players go pro in a league  of their own! Iced is a fast-paced action  romance with all the highs and lows of  sports for profit. The story belongs to  Alison Gutherie, forty-plus dyke and  coach of the Toronto Teddies. She  shepherds her teams through the  league's first regular season while  carrying on a sparky off-ice  flirtation with Hamilton Hurricanes  gorgeous coach Val Warnica and lusting after  speed skater Molly Gavison. But the heart of the book is in  the play of the game. A must-read for hockey fans, girl-jocks and  anyone with an interest in the power of women's bodies at their  best.   $12.95 pb  IN HER  NATURE  Karen X.  Tulchinsky  Desire, love, hot  sex, cool sex,  relationships,  grieving, surviving,  thriving as a Jewish  dyke — it's all here in  this rich and warm  debut collection of short  stories. From the flirtatious  adventures of lonely Bobby Silverstein  to the in yer face politics of Kayla  Rosenbaum this collection beats with the  heat-seeking energy of women who grab life  by the gut and live it to the max.  $12.95 US/$14.95 CAN Bulletin Board  read    t h i sU  INVOLVEMENT   I   INVOLVEMENT  EVENTS  Bulletin Board listings have a  maximum of 50 words. Groups,  organizations and individuals eligible  for free space in the Bulletin Board  must be, or have, non-profit  objectives.  Other free notices will be items of  general public interest and will appear  at the discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $8 (+$0.56 GST) for  the first 50 words or portion thereof,  $4 (+$0.28 GST) for each additional 25  words or portion thereof and must be  prepaid.  Deadline for all submissions is  the 18th of the month preceding  publication. Note: Kinesis is  published ten times a year. Jul/Aug  and Dec/Jan are double issues.  All submissions should include a  contact name and telephone number  for any clarification that may be  required.  Listings will not be accepted over the  telephone.  Kinesis encourages readers to  research the goods and services  advertised in Bulletin Board. Kinesis  cannot guarantee the accuracy of the  information provided or the safety  and effectiveness of the services and  products listed.  Send submissions to Bulletin Board,  Kinesis, #301-1720 Grant Street,  Vancouver, BC, V5L 2Y6, or fax: (604)  255-5511. For more information call  [604) 255-5499.  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis? We want to get involved with  you too. Help plan our next issue. All women  interested in what goes into Kinesis—whether  it's news, features or arts—are invited to our  next Story Meetings: Mon Mar 4 and Mon  Apr 1 at 7 pm at our office, 301-1720 Grant  St, Vancouver. If you can't make the meeting, but still want to find out about writing for  Kinesis, give Agnes a call at (604) 255-5499.  No experience is necessary. Childcare subsidies available.  CALLING ALL VOLUNTEERS  Are you interested in finding out how Kinesis  is put together? Well...just drop by during our  next production dates and help us design  and lay out Canada's national feminist newspaper. Production for the April 1996 issue is  from Mar 20-26. No experience is nesessary.  Training and support will be provided. If this  notice intrigues you, call us at 255-5499.  Childcare subsidies available.  ABORIGINAL WOMEN'S NETWORK  The Aboriginal Women's Action Network  (AWAN) holds regular monthly meetings at  VSW, 301-1720 Grant St, Vancouver. We  work towards equality and justice for Aboriginal women. Workshops and projects will be  developed for Aboriginal women in the  Eastside. All Aboriginal women are invited to  participate. The next meeting is Mon Mar 4  at 6pm. Fingerfood potluck style. On Mon  Apr 22, a meeting with Sunera Thobani,  president of NAC, is scheduled. The topic  will be "Involvement of Aboriginal women at  the national level." If you have any questions,  please call Terri at 255-5511.  It's Our 2nd  15% Off Everything In The Store  April 9th - Nth  0 wa  <% Mil J 2S  Games, Puzzles & Classic Kids tuff  It's All Fun & Games  1417 Commercial Drive  253-6727  ASSERTIVENESS TRAINING  The Vancouver Status of Women's Assert-  iveness Training Program will be starting  soon. If you would like to volunteer or participate, please call Terri at (604) 255-5511.  VSW PROGRAMMING COMMITTEE  All women are invited to join Vancouver Status of Women's programming committee and  become involved in planning community activities, such as the Women's Film Series and  Single Moms Day in the Park. It's fun. It's  important. It's cool. Interested? Call Terri at  255-5511.  ABORIGINAL WOMEN'S DROP-IN  The Aboriginal Women's Action Network  (AWAN) will be holding a drop-in for Aboriginal women even/ Tues from 12-2:30 pm at  the Vancouver Status of Women, 301-1720  Grant St. Activities such as healing circles,  traditional storytelling and workshops will be  featured. The grand opening potluck will be  held on Tues Mar 5. Come and find out what  AWAN is all about. For more info call Terri at  255-5511.  FUN WITH FINANCE  VSW's Finance and Fundraising Committee  needs new members! We meet once a month  on a Monday evening to coordinate  fundraising events, keep an eye on money  matters, and make sure VSW and Kinesis  are in the good books. Attend our next meeting—call us at 255-5511. Childcare subsidies available.  VSW WANTS YOU!  Want to get more involved but not sure where  to begin? Join us—become a volunteer at  Vancouver Status of Women. VSW volunteers plan events, lead groups, raise funds,  answer the phone lines, organize the library,  help connect women with the community  resources they need, and get involved in  other exciting jobs! The next volunteer orientation will be on Wed Mar 20, 7pm at VSW,  301-1720 Grant St. For more info, call 255-  5511. Childcare subsidies available.  i Urt    ii  \    in jfi  mnf  •* Coming  Out  ••» Grief and  Loss  Emma  Tigerheart  M.S.W.  Lfj M  ^JnkT  * Relationship  Issues  MJu  w  * Childhood  Trauma  COUNSELLING  THERAPY  ^ffj/HSy?  Ii  '• Family  Issues  Sliding  Scale Fees  CONSULTATION  Call  Inquiries  327-4437  Welcome  Vancouver, bc  •r^te! A^ *V!i^  a  Positive Women's Network  provides support and advocacy  for women living with HIV & AIDS  • one to one outreach/advocacy  • drop in centre  • referrals to doctors  • support for family and care providers  • magazine and monthly newsletter  • drop in events  • treatment information  • home visits  • counselling  If you are a woman living with HIV,  you are not alone.  Contact us for more information:  1107 Seymour Street, Vancouver  681-2122, local 200  !Ba*£arajCe!Bi  cAffoJUL BooUtt/Ung Swim  3ox SmJtBu*ins*scs  & <Sttf SmffoyJ.  • Monthly Financial Statements  • Government Remittances  • Payroll, A/P. A/R, Budgets  I Will Transform Your Paperwork!  (604) 737-1824 email:barb.l@deepcove.cc  LESBIAN SEPARATIST GATHERING  A lesbian separatist gathering will be held in the  San Francisco area in June. To find out more  write to SEP2, PO Box 1180, Sebastopol CA  9547-1180. For local info on dyke separatism as  a political strategy write: Rootsisters, PO Box  21588, 1850 Commercial Dr, Vancouver BC,  V5N 4A0.   SUZANNE WESTENHOEFER  Lesbian comedian Suzanne Westenhoefer will  be performing at the David Lam Theatre in the  McLaurin Building at the University of Victoria  on Fri Mar 15 at 8 pm. Tickets at $15 and are  available at Everywoman's Bookstore. Some  sliding scale tickets are available. For more  info contact Nancy Poole, (604) 370-1197 or  Ruth Simkin, (604)537-1996.  BETH BRANT  Mohawk writer Beth Brant will be in Toronto to  discuss from her new book, I'll Sing Till the Day  I Die: Conversations with Tyendinaga Elders  Wed Mar 13, 7-9 pm at the Talking Room  Native Canadian Centre, 16 Spadina Rd.  WALK AGAINST RACISM  The second annual 3 km Walk Against Racism  will take place on Sat Mar 16 beginning at  Surrey Central Skytrain Station at 11am and  finishing at the Surrey Arts Centre. A free community event featuring performances by actor/  singer Leon Bibb and the Vancouver Baha'i  Youth Workshop will follow the walk. For more  info call Eracism '96 at (604) 588-8884.  ANDREA LEBOWITZ  The Paterson Memorial Lecture presents SFU  professor and author Andrea Lebowitz speaking on Drawing-Nature-Writing Thurs Mar 7 at  7:30 pm at the Capilano College Lecture Theatre, Cedar Building Room 148. The lecture is  free. Formoreinfocall Shirley Freund at Capilano  College, (604) 986-1911, local 2369.  GRRRRLS WITH GUITARS  Grrrls with Guitars presents Marjorie Cardwell,  Katie MacColl/Rachel Page and Robyn  Carrigan Mon Mar 25 at 9:30 pm at The  Railway Club, 579 Dunsmuir St, Van. Tickets  are $3 for members and $5 for non-members. For more info call 685-3623.  BIRTHDAY FOR MARY BILLY  A weekend celebration for the 60th birthday  of Mary Billy, publisher of Herspectives, will  take place May 31-June 2 at the North Vancouver Outdoor School in Paradise Valley,  12 miles north of Squamish. The cost is  $138.40 for accomodation and meals. Festivities will include a talking circle, birthday  cake, and readings. For full details contact  Jan Hagedorn, Box 3813, Garibaldi Highlands BC, VON 1TO; tel: (604) 898-5668.  WOMEN AND ENVIRONMENT  SERIES  WomenVisions, on Coop Radio CFRO  102.7FM, will air a Women and the Environment Radio Series called Waters every Monday at 8 pm from Mar 25 until Apr 29.  DEMO AT FRASER INSTITUTE  The End Legislated Poverty (ELP) coalition  is organizing a demonstration to protest  Canada Health and Social Tranfer (CHST)  cuts Mon Apr 1 at 12noon at the right-wing  Fraser Institute, 626 Bute St, Van. The speakers will be SFU economist Marjorie Griffin  Cohen, Helga Kenny of End Legislated Poverty and Ben Swankey of the Old Age Pensioners Organization, and there will be street  theatre performed by the ELPful Players.  Food, busfare and childcare costs will be  provided for those on a low income. For more  info call ELP at (604) 879-1209. Bulletin Board  EVENTS  EVENTS  GROUPS  ANN-ROSEMARY CONWAY  Heritage of Honour: The Sacred Feminine,  an exhibition by Ann-Rosemary Conway, will  open onSunMar3at 2pm at the Nanaimo Art  Gallery, 900 5th St. The opening will include  readings from local woman's history. The  show continues until Apr 7. Gallery hours are  Mon-Sat 10-5 pm and Sun 12-5 pm. For more  info call (604) 755-8790.  SUSAN SCHUPPLI  Artspeak Gallery presents Domicile, new  works by New York based artist Susan  Schuppli. Schuppli's installations explore the  binary structures which equate publicity and  the social spaces of the city with the masculine, and privacy or domesticity with that of  the feminine. The show runs until Mar 16 at  the gallery's new location, 233 Carrall St,  Van. Gallery hours are Tues-Sat 12-5pm.  For more info call 688-0051.  GLORIA MARTIN  A public meeting celebrating the life of American  socialist activist Gloria Martin will be held in  Vancouver on Sun Mar 24, at the Rebel Centre,  2278 E. 24th Ave. Colleagues, family and friends  will honour her through poetry, music and personal tributes, followed by a Southern barbecue  buffet of her favorite foods. The venue is wheelchair accesible. For rides or more info call 874-  2943 or 874-9048.  DEMO IN SUPPORT OF TIBET  In recognition of the 37th anniversary of the  1959 uprising against the Chinese government's occupation of Tibet, the Canada-Tibet Committee and the Tibetan community is  sponsoring a candlelight vigil in Vancouver  Sat Mar 9 from 6-7pm at the Chinese Consulate, 3380 Granville St. And on Sat Mar 10  beginning at 1pm, the groups will hold a rally  at Robson Square followed by a march to the  Chinese Consulate. For more info call (604)  871 -3331. For background on the situation in  Tibet and the local Tibetan community call  Tenzin Lhalungpa at (604) 732-9910.  DOUGLAS AND LAI  Calgary novelist Marion Douglas will read  from her novel Bending at the Bow and  Vancouver author Larissa Lai will read from  her novel When Fox is a ThousandTuesMar  12 at 7:30 pm at Women in Print, 3566 W. 4th  Ave, Van. For more info call (604) 732-4128.  QUEST & HEARTH  Christina Baldwin and Ann Linnea present  their joint slide show Quest & Hearth, which  weaves together the spiritual motifs of the  circle and the quest, on Tues Apr 9 at Women  in Print, 3566 W. 4th Ave, Van. Call (604)  732-4128 for more info.  DYKE WORDS  Dyke Words, readings by local dyke writers,  features Meagan MacLennan, Janet Walker  and Janski on Thurs Mar 14, and Lydia Kwa,  Kathleen Oliver and Sharolyn Lee Thurs  Mar 28 at The Lotus, 455 Abbott St, Van.  Doors open at 8pm. Admission is $1 -4 sliding  scale. For more info, call (604) 685-7777.  FUNDRAISING DANCE  The Vancouver Committee for Domestic Workers' and Caregivers' Rights (CDWCR) invites  you to their fundraising dance Sat Mar 16 from  8pm-1am at Eagle's Hall, 748 Kingsway, Van.  Music by The Dinahmic's Sound with Danny  Lescano. Tickets $10. For more info, call Julie or  Lorina at (604) 874-0649.  THEATRE FOR LIVING  Headlines Theatre and Selkirk College  present Theatre For Living performances in  several locations in BC. The performances,  which explore issues of safer communities  and safer campuses, will be held Tues Mar 5,  7:30pm at the USCC Community Centre in  Grand Forks; Wed Mar 6, 7:30pm at the  Greater Trail Community Centre in Trail;  Thurs Mar 7,7:30pm at the Trafalgar School  Theatre in Nelson; and Fri Mar 8,1 pm at the  Castelgar Campus Gymnasium, Castlegar.  For further info contact Headlines Theatre at  (604)251-2006.  DYKE ART RETREAT  The seventh annual Dyke Art Retreat Encampment (DARE) will be held Jun 30-Jul 7  at Rootworks, wooded women's land near  Sunny Valley in Southern Oregon. Cabins,  tenting space and meals are provided. Cost  is $160-185. Registration is limited. For info  and registration brochure send SASE to  DARE, 2000 King Mountain Trail, Sunny  Valley, OR, 97497.  HEALTH & THE ENVIRONMENT  An Ounce of Prevention, a forum on women's  health & the environment will be held on Fri  Mar 29 at 7 pm at the Robson Square Conference Centre, 800 Robson Street, Van.  Featured speakers will be Dr. Devra Lee  Davis, Dr. Ana Soto, and breast cancer survivor, activist and author Sharon Batt. For  more info contact the Georgia Strait Alliance  at (604) 251-4953 or the Vancouver Women's Health Collective at (604) 736-4234.  SYLVI  Local writer Sylvi will be performing her coastal  rock poem/songs Sat Mar 16, 8 pm at the  South Hill Candy Shop, 4198 Main St. Van.  Admission is by donation. For more info call  (604) 876-7463. Sylvi will also be performing  on Sat Mar 23, 8 pm at Harry's Cafe, 1716  Charles (off Commercial). Admission is $3-5.  For more info call (604) 253-1789.  A WOMAN'S COMEDY  The English Students Society of UBC  presents A Woman's Comedy, a play by  Beth Herst, at the Vancouver Little Theatre,  3102 Main St. The play, directed by Claire  Fogal resurrects the life and times of Aphra  Behn, playwright, poet and pioneer feminist.  Tickets are $9 adults, $7 students. For tickets  call (604) 876-4165.  WOMENSPEAK LECTURES  WomenSpeak Institute presents  Philosophizng Children: Fairmindedfrom the  Beginning, a talk by Capilano College philosophy instructorSusanGardnerThurs Mar  28, 7-9:00pm at the Douglas College Board  Room, 700 Royal Ave, New Westminister,  BC. Admission is $5; students/seniors $2.  Call (604) 527-5440 for more info and to  make reservations.  AUDRE LORDE FILM  At the Crossroads, Canada's freshest Black  women's art magazine, presents the Toronto  premiere of A Litany for Survival: The Life  and Work of Audre Lorde, a new film by Ada  Gay Griffin and Michelle Parkerson. The benefit screening will take place at the Metro  Central YMCA Auditorium, 20 Grosvenor St,  Toronto, Fri Marl 5. Advance tickets are $10  at Different Booklist and Toronto Women's  Bookstore, or$12 at the door. Call (416) 977-  0605 for more info.  LESBIAN PARTNER ABUSE  Have you ever experienced physical, emotional, psychological, sexual, verbal, and/or  other abuse by a lesbian partner? Battered  Women's Support Services in Vancouver is  holding a 10 week support group for lesbians  who have been or are currently in abusive  relationships. Call (604) 687-1867 for details.  VOLUNTEERS NEEDED  Volunteers are needed for a transition house in  East Vancouver for battered women and children. We are looking for energetic, creative  women with time to give for any of these positions: childcare volunteers, volunteer drivers,  or arts and crafts or other activity volunteers.  Call (604) 254-3479 for more info.  WOMENVISIONS  WomenVisions, on Vancouver's Co-op Radio, is searching for women interested in  feminist radio programming. If interested  please call WomenVisions at 684-8494 Monday nights between 8 and 9pm.  LEARNING RESOURCES SOCIETY  Learning Resources Society (LRS) invites  women to participate in regular monthly meetings held on the third Wednesday of each  month at 7pm at the Women's Centre, Room  2730 at Douglas College in New Westminster.  LRS is a non-profit organization concerned  with issues affecting women's ability to make  informed choices about their education and  work. For more info call (604) 527-5447.  GRASSROOTS WOMEN'S GROUP  The Grassroots Women's Discussion Group  in Vancouver has been meeting to make  connections between theory and practice,  and to organize for change. The group meets  regularly. Women interested in joining the  discussion group, please call the Philippine  Women's Centre at (604) 322-9852.  LEGAL CLINIC  Battered Women's Support Services and UBC  Law Students Legal Advice Program are co-  sponsoring free legal clinics for women to be  held alternate Tuesdays, 6:30-8:30pm until  Mar 12. For more info or to make an appointment call (604) 822-5791.  IMMIGRANT WOMEN  The Vancouver Society of Immigrant and Visible Minority Women provides free career and  vocational counselling and referral services  for immigrant women looking for a job. The  Society provides help with resume writing and  interview skills, foreign credentials, Canadian  employer orientation, discussing options, volunteer training/work experience, and referrals. Contact Carmen Frances Chan, Career  and Referral Services Counselor, Tues-Thurs,  9:30am-4:30pm at (604) 731-9108.  FEMALE SURVIVORS OF INCEST  Female Survivors of Incest (FSI), a lesbian  centred self-help support group, meets every  Thurs, 7 pm at the office of the Vancouver  Status of Women, 301-1720 Grant St. FSI  encourages the participation of both bisexual  and heterosexual womyn. For more info,  leave a message forTonya at the Vancouver  Lesbian Connection, (604) 254-8458.  £**A*1, TiUtek ro  WiriU$i H*U - 3f02 yh/tiy &trtit  SUBMISSIONS  CAP COLLEGE WOMEN'S STUDIES  The Department of Women's Studies at  Capilano College, invites interested feminists to submit proposals for Extension Service courses to be offered in Fall 1996. All  proposals should include a brief description  of the course (title, length, preferred day/hrs),  an indication of qualifications to teach the  course, and thefeminist content which makes  the course a suitable Women's Studies offering. Send proposals to Sandra Moe, Women's Studies, Capilano College, 2055 Purcell  Way, North Vancouver, BC, V7J 3H5. For  more info call (604) 986-1911 local 4613 or  255-1640. Deadline is Apr 15.  DA JUICE  De Poonani Posse seeks submissions from  queer Black wimmin for the next issue of Da  Juice. The issue will be all about sex—if we do  it, when we do it, why we do it and with whom.  Send pictures, poems tall tales, songs,  essays...whatevah. New writers and work written in languages other than English are welcome. Send submissions with SASE and bio  to De Poonani Posse, PO Box 156, Station P,  Toronto, ON, M5S 2S7. Deadline Mar 31.  DOCUMENTARY ON FEMINISM  A Vancouver-based filmmaker is seeking  women 18-35 to participate in informal talks—  in person or by phone—for a documentary on  twenty and thirty-something feminists on issues of concern to their generation of women.  To participate or for more info call Celine at  (604) 254-6495.  LOTUSLAND III  Lotusland III, a presentation of Chinese-Canadian artists, writers and performers in Vancouver, is looking for proposals/participation  for their next event in late March. The event  will feature a presention of works and a  roundtable forum discussion. Those interested interested in presenting work, submitting a proposal or volunteering should contact J.J. Lee at (604) 254-1496 or Jeet Kei  Leung at (604) 708-9094. Deadline is Mar  15.  JEWISH WOMEN IN CANADA  The winter 1996 issue of Canadian Woman  Studies will be devoted to exploring the lives  of Jewish women in Canada. Submissions  can be articles, stories, artwork, poetry, autobiographical pieces or photographs. Send  submissions to Canadian Woman Studies,  212 Founders College, York University, 4700  Keele Street, North York, ON, M3J 1P3,  (416)736-5356 fax (416)736-5765. Deadline  is Mar 31.  CALL FOR SUBMISSIONS  Sister Vision Press is seeking pieces for an  anthology of works by women of African  descent speaking about violence in our lives.  How does your race/class/gender/immigration contribute to violence against Black  women? Send submissions to Speaking  About Violence, Sister Vision Press, PO Box  217, Station E, Toronto ON M6E 4E2. Deadline is Sep 1.  QUEER VIEW MIRROR II  Submissions are being accepted for Queer  View Mirror II, an anthology of short short  fiction by lesbians and gay men to be published by Arsenault Pulp Press. Forfull guidelines send SASE to Queer View Mirror II,  1036 Odium Drive, Vancouver BC V5L 3L6  or e-mail jamescjn@descon.mlnet.com.  Deadline is Apr 30.  HOT AND BOTHERED  Submissions of short short fiction are being  sought for an anthology of lesbian erotic  stories, to be edited by Karen X. Tulchinsky.  MARCH 1996 Bulletin Board  SUBMISSIONS  CLASSIFIEDS  "or full guidelines send SASE to Hot anc  Bothered, 036 Odium Drive, Vancouver BC  /5L 3L6 or e-mail kxt@descon.mlnet.com  Deadline is Aug 31.  I  ebrations, banquets to private parties... The  building is smoke-free, wheelchair accessible, on the bus line, and offers non-profit  rates. More info at (604) 879-4816.  WOMEN WITH DISABILITIES  Women's Education des Femmes is looking  'or submissions for a special issue on the  educational needs and concerns of womer  with disabilities. For more info contact the  Editor, Women's Education des Femmes, 47  Main Street, Toronto, ON, M4E 2V6,(416  599-1909  fax  (416)  699-2145,  e-mai  cclow@web.apc.org. Deadline is Apr 1.  BABES IN ARTLAND  Nine weeks of fun, fun, fun, for your young  one! Creative Arts Explores for 3-5 year olds  s a program instructed by Surjit Mehat, a  ocal artist, who will help your child explore a  variety of arts media including: collage, mask-  making, painting, drawing and modelling  The course begins in the spring. Maximum  eight students. Register early. $45. For more  nfo and/or to register call (604) 434-9167  (Killarney Community Centre, 6260 Killarney  St, Vancouver) or fax: (604) 435-9041.  VH               ^HL     ^^^B            *,  MAYWORKS  m       m        *f^  MayWorks, an annual festival ot working  people and the arts, is now taking programming suggestions and submissions from artists, art groups, community organizations  and interested individuals for its 9th annual  festival. This year's festival takes place Apr  28-May 4—around May Day (International  COUNSELLING FOR WOMEN  A feminist approach to sexual abuse, depression, grief and loss, sexual orientation  ssues and personal growth. Sliding fee scale  Free initial appointment. Susan Dales, R.P.C  255-9173.  ebrate the contributions made to society bv  working people. For info or to get involved  call      (604)      874-2906      or     e-mai  emullan@direct.ca.  LYDIA KWA, PSYCHOLOGIST  have a private practice in clinical psychology (Granville Island). I'm afeminist therapist  and I work with clients on a variety of issues  welcome new clients, especially survivors  gays and lesbians, women of colour, artists  and writers. Call 255-1709.  I   f  INTERNATIONAL ANTHOLOGY  Sister Vision Press in Toronto is seeking  Mm  thology of Lesbians, Bisexuals and Gay Men  KARATE FOR WOMEN  wp  of African Descent. The anthology is intended  to make links and cross boundaries of culture, language, geography, history, home,  identity and gender. Sister Vision is looking  for testimonies, short stories, essays, photographs, recipes, interviews, and poetry. Send  contributions to Sister Vision Press, PO Box  217, Stn E, Toronto ON, M6H 4E2. Deadline  is Apr 30.  YOUNG WOMEN OF COLOUR  We want your artwork, photographs, fiction,  prose, essays, interviews, discussions, or  any other works that speak to your experience as a sistah, sister, girlfriend, woman.  This is an exciting new anthology and we  need you to contribute. Send contributions  to: Young Women of Colour, Sister Vision  Press, PO Box 217, Stn E, Toronto ON, M6E  4E2. Deadline is May 30.  CLASSIFIEDS  FAMILY PRACTITIONERS  Joan Robillard, MD, is pleased to announce  that Suzanne Roberts, MD, has joined her  family practice (obstetrics included). Ourprac-  tice is for all kinds of families and people. We  are located at: 203-1750 E. 10th Ave, Vancouver. Tel: 872-1454; fax: 872-3510.  SEEKING BOOKKEEPER  The Surrey Women's Centre Society is seek-  ng tenders for bookeeping from an established, women owned/operated company with  experience with feminist non-profits. Payroll,  accounts payable, monthly statements,  budget support. Please call Cindy at 589-  1868 for more info. Start date: Apr 1.  MOTHER PEACE  Sat-Sun March 2 & 3, Mother Peace Tarot  Women's Weekend with Vicki Noble, co-  creator, author of Shakti Women: Feelings of  Fire. Learn/deepen knowledge of Mother  Peace for healing, vision, change. Until Feb  15, $140/weekend; $85/Sat only. After Feb  15, $165/weekend, $100/Sat only. For more  info, call Sounds & Furies at (604) 253-7189.  HERITAGE HALL FOR RENT  Magnificent restored Heritage Building at 15th  and Main St. in Vancouver. Available for  special events of all kinds. From benefits to  book launches, conferences to cultural eel-  Karate for Women Shito-ryu karate taught by  female black belts. Learn a martial art for self-  defense, fitness, self confidence! At the  YWCA, 535 Hornby St, Van. Mon, Tues,  Thurs, 7:15-9pm. $45/month. Beginner  groups start July 4, August 1, Sept 5, Oct 2.  Call 872-7846.  CLADDAGH HOUSE B&B  Treat yourself to a great Victoria Get-Away.  Wake up to music in your ears, the aroma of  fine food and hearty conversation with your  Irish hosts. Imagine walking by the ocean,  cozying up by the fire, reflexology, massage  and sound sleeps. Take a stroll through Oak  Bay Village for that back in time experience.  Memorable, convenient accommodation at  affordable rates. Contact Maggie at Claddagh  House B&B, 1761 Lee Ave. Victoria. Tel:  (604) 370-2816 or fax: (604) 592-0228.  ISLAND SUBLETS  For sublet on Hornby Island: One bdrm  $350/month for April, May and June. Also  required to housesit cat. Or: one small cabin  $150/month ASAP to September. More info  cail 1-604-335-0442.  SURVIVAL GUIDE FOR WOMEN  The Back to School Survival Guide For  Women (2nd Ed.) is a handbook filled with  women's stories and info on how to make  informed choices about making a career  change and going for further training. Published by the BC Network of the Canadian  Congress for Learning Opportunities for  Women (CCLOW), the guide is free to women.  Donations are accepted from those who can  afford it or from those in training programs  with budgets. Further info 524-0788.  FARM APPRENTICESHIP  Apprenticeship on women's land offered. To  begin anytime; must include October '96.  Spinstervale offers cabin, food, tools, local  transportation, materials & $100/month for  personal expenses. To train for full responsibility of small farm (Oct. '96). Expected to  provide 2-3 hours daily work; will be learning  animal care and milking, maintenance, directing other work exchanges. Option to  pursue projects in construction or gardening.  Call (604)248-8809 or write Box 429, Coombs,  BC, V0R1M0.  CHRYSTOS  Two-spirited First Nations poet Chrystos will launch her latest book,  Firepower, in the lower mainland with readings at four venues. On Wed  Mar 13,1pm, Chrystos will read at the BC Correctional Centre for Women  in Burnaby. On Wed Mar 13,7:30pm, she will read at Simon Fraser University Harbour Centre, 515 W. Hastings. And on Thurs Mar 14, Chrystos  will read at 12:30pm at the First Nations House of Learning at the University of British Columbia, UBC and at 8pm at Harry's Cafe, 1716 Charles  St. For more information on all events call Press Gang Publishers at (604)  876-7787. Photo by Chick Rice.  CLASSIFIEDS  COUNSELLING FOR WOMEN  Counselling services for women, offering individual, couples and group counselling within  feminist philosophy. Hakomi techniques, art  and Gestalt therapy. Sliding scale fee. 304-  1720 Grant St. Call Miljenka Zadravec M.  Ed., Sydney Foran M. S.W., Fran Friesen M.  Ed., Elli Tamarin M. Ed., at 253-0143.  CLEANER  Creative cleaning person will clean your East  Side apartment or house on Mondays,  Wednesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays. My  qualifications consist of a Housekeeping certificate and 15 years' experience. I can also  provide excellent references. My fee is $12/  hour; I am available immediately. Please  contact 253-8463.  TAKING CONTROL  We're sick of 9 to 5 and taking control! Create  financial security without disrupting your current job or career. Join our committed team  who are part of a 13 year old solid, ethical  company that is the fastest nutritional business in North America; with a sincere global  vision and a proven method for success!  Experience the miracle of a harvested wild,  and most dense food on the planet, with  reported benefit such as: Increasing stamina,  energy, relief of PMS, food cravings, anxiety,  and much more. For free info audio tape call  (604) 929-776.  CLASSIFIEDS  DRUM CIRCLE  Join us for a Women's Sacred Drum Circle  with drummer Carol Weaver. Bring drum and  pillow. Location Helen's Court Co-op Common Room, 2137 West 1 st Ave. (at Arbutus).  Drop-in for $8; on-going. More info: 879-  2179 or 929-0776.  WOMEN'S RETREAT  Women's retreat March 2,3 — on beautiful &  quiet Keats Island, facilitated by Margaret  West, counsellor, who brings extensive training in ancient earth teachings, & offers rich  experience in earth-based spirituality. Take  time to nurture self returning to the Feminine  in a SPRING CELEBRATION that provides  healing and renewal. Message 929-0776 or  1-604-886-0240.  COUNSELLING SERVICES FOR  WOMEN  Registered clinical counsellor offers counselling and energy healing. Specializing in  assisting women with their inner journey to  self-empowerment. Unique experience in  both childhood trauma and addictions field,  plus extensive training in ancient earth teachings. Workshops, individual teaching available. Call Margaret 929-0776 (message) or  1-604-886-0240.  MARCH 1996 March 25,   1996  Dear Cousin  his,  So Happy Hon kin' I WO already!  Listen,  I gotta tell you about THE most incredible  thing that happened to me the other day.  There  / Was,  mindin' my own business,  when  BAM!,  out of the blue,  I saw something so  irresistable,  so enticing,  so thoroughly  l-don't-knoW-  What,  that / thought to myself:  "Self,  there is no  Way We can live Without this!" So,  / got it Just  like  that.  AnyWay,  because of this fantastic  thing I  gotta go.  Lots of stuff goinf on,  you know)  Lotfe & movement always,  your kin,  Esis  One year  □$20 + $1.40 GST □ Bill me  Two years □ New  □$36 + $2.52 GST □ Renewal  Institutions/Groups □ Gift  □$45 + $3.15 GST □ Donation  Name.  □ Cheque enclosed   For individuals who can't afford the full amount  Address—  Country   Telephone.  for Kinesis subscription, send what you can.  Free to prisoners.  Orders outside Canada add $8.  Vancouver Status of Women Membership  (includes Kinesis subscription)  □$30+$1.40 GST  Postal code_  Fax   Published ten times a year by the Vancouver Status of Women  #301 -1720 Grant Street Vancouver, BC V5L 2Y6