 SMSeiAL COLLECTIONS  MARCH     19-75  HAPPV   I.WY'75  Vancouver Statueof \A/brti©rv    2QSSW. Fourth Ave.     -TSB-afTfle-T-B      VbiumsV    No. 45  //  v.y*  7l  '3 -S100755  ierials Division  :ain Library  : University of B,  V  yr  looking back....  looking ahead....  Vancouver Status of Women is four years old and this month we are going to indulge in some memories.  Three of the founding members who served on the first executive remember'how it all started'.  Joan Wallace served as President of VSW for the first two years.  It was four years ago, in January,  1971.  That doesn't seem like very  long ago, but to many of us who  were involved in organizing the  Vancouver Status of Women those  pre-Status days seem like another  era.  Our involvement in the Status  of Women has completely changed  our lives. And no matter how exhausted or discouraged we may become, there is no way of turning  back.  It has become a life-time  commitment.  How did it all start? When the  Royal Commission on the Status of  'Women was holding its cross-Canada  hearings between 1967 and 1970,  Pat Thorn, Director of Daytime  Programs at the UBC Centre for  Continuing Education, conceived the  idea of holding a conference on  the Report as soon as it was  published.  She lined up Florence  Bird, chairperson of the Royal  Commission, as guest speaker, and,  in cooperation with the University  Women's Club, a conference was  organized.  It was held at the University  Women's Club and an overflow  crowd of more than 300 women turned out to learn about the Report,  which has been published just over  a month earlier.  Ours was the  first conference in Canada to  follow its publication.  The conference was a great success,  and those of us who were involved  in the planning were elated. As  we had hoped, a spontaneous motion  came from the floor to set up a  permanent organization to press the  government for action on the Report.  It passed unanimously, and a small  committee, headed by June Dunlop,  volunteered to set up an organizational meeting for the following  Sunday.  June spent the rest of  the week on the phone, with the result that representatives of 40  different women's organizations turned out for that first meeting.  A temporary executive was elected, with directions to set up a  permanent organization and hold  proper elections as quickly as  possible. The temporary executive met weekly for several  months and by June we had set up  a speakers bureau (headed by  Ann Marie Sweeney), started a  newsletter (edited by Ann Petrie),  a public relations program that  involved many of us in radio, TV,  and newspaper coverage (Joan  Wallace), and written a constitution (Ann Marie, Rosemary Brown,  and Dorothy Giles).  In addition,  Rosemary Brown had become our first  Ombudswoman and was setting up what  was to become the VSW's most important service.  In May, our constitution was passed  and in June, our first official  elections were held.  It sounds easy, when the story is  condensed into a few hundred words,  but that period was one of the hardest struggles any of us had been  through.  Because our interim executive represented a wide range of  women's groups, from the far left to  the far right, there was a great (cont'd)  deal of conflict over the policy  our fledgling organization should  follow.  There were many long and  bitter arguments - arguments that  helped many of us to become politically mature enough to accept the  fact that conflict is inevitable in  any politically-oriented organization.  Most of us stuck it out, but we lost  some members on the outer edges of  the spectrum, although "lost" isn't  really the right word.  They returned  to their own groups to fight the  battle in their own way.  Which is  as it should be.  We must all fight  in the way that suits us best.  The next year was exhausting.  Most  members of the executive held down  full-time jobs, so our volunteer work  with VSW was done during evenings,  lunch hours and weekends.  But within a year, we had secured our first  LIP grant, opened our office and  were in business full time.  Since  then, membership has grown steadily.  As a founding member, and president  for'the first two years, my involvement in the Status of Women has completely changed my life.  From a life  that was centered on career, family  and friends, I have become not only  a crusader for women's rights, but  a politician (albeit a defeated one).  Four years ago, I started with the  a a a a  naive idea that we would simply persuade the government to implement the  167 recommendations and then return  to our normal lives.  It soon became  clear that even if the government  did implement every one of those  recommendations tomorrow, we would  still not have equal rights.  Why?  Because we would still have no voice  in writing the laws that govern our  lives.  Until we have equal representation in government at all levels  we will remain supplicants, pleading  for favours.  And so, we fight on.  We've accomplished a lot in four years  but we are still a long, long way  from true equality.  Carole Anne Soong was Education Chairperson on the first VSW executive.  It's an interesting exercise to review where VSW and I were four years  ago.  VSW was in its infancy and I  was busy at home with five children,  aged 10-1 year.  What was I thinking when I agreed to run for an Executive position?  Well, once I said  yes, from there on in there was no  turning back.  I remember well the  hours I spent on the telephone organizing the interest groups on daycare,  employment, politics, education, family planning, family law.  All the  energy expended by those dedicated  members and never knowing if we'd  be heard or make any headway.  Unlike today the press cared little  about our activities, we had no  interested politicians in Victoria or  Ottawa, there was no staff or office,  our newsletter was a one page effort  run off on Linda Roger's basement  "press"  and our bank account was  almost non-existent.  How we waited  for that first Department of Secretary of State grant of $1900 and  were we elated when it finally ar  rived!  We could now afford a phone  line for our Ombudswoman Rosemary  Brown and some paper and postage,  tfext came "sweating and swearing",  as we drew up our first LIP and a-  gain waited for a positive reply.  <Vnd it was granted.'  But for myself, it was another decision and commitment to make.  I  took on the responsibilities for coordinating the project and I was shaking in my shoes!  Being away from the  outside world for over ten years did  not do much for one's self-confidence!  I must say thanks here to those  on the Executive and Staff who were  so supportive.  It was a tremendous  feeling to have "a place of our own"  to carry out the work we'd cut out  for ourselves.  Much has transpired since 1971 - and  this newsletter, Kinesis, is indication of VSW's expansion both in membership (from 100 to 1200) and activities.  As for myself, the tables  have been turned and I'm now working  in the same Department of Secretary  of State that gave VSW its first financial boost.  Today in my work, I see a steadily  increasing development of interest  in the status of women all over B.C.  and the Yukon.  In only two short  years the women of the Yukon have  developed such momentum that they  already plan to form a Federation of  of Yukon Women.  Who said the Royal Commission of the  Status of Women report would be long  forgotten in a few months? 1975 has  been designated International Women's  Year by the United Nations.  Let's  use this opportunity to make all Canadians aware of the need to press  for changes in government legislation  and public attitudes re the status  of women. We want action on all the  recommendations in the RCSW.  Make  1975 the year when we see a true  movement toward equality and development of all women and peace  for all  peoples!  Alice James was Research Chairperson on the first VSW executive.  When I was asked to write about my  experiences during the first year  or two of the Vancouver Status of  Women my thoughts strayed back to  1966, when my friends encouraged me  to write, a brief for the Royal Commission but were too timid to join  me in the project.  I also thought  of how doing this plunged me into  studying about women and poverty  and how this in turn lead to activity in various women's groups.  Then came the letters from Laura  Sabia—the Report is coming soon  and it's good—form a group to use  the Report as a basis for action.  Next came the fund raising so that  a few poor women could go to the  conference on the Report of the  Royal Commission on the Status of  Women at Hycroft on January 30,1971  and finally the proposal to form our  organization at that conference.  At the formation meeting two groups  were started, a temporary executive  to set up the organization and a  speakers bureau.  I chose the second  group.  I thoroughly enjoyed our  weekly meetings where we decided what  we should say and how we should say  it.  We then went out seeking speaking engagements.  I did a couple of  T.V. shows and some others did radio  shows too, but we were underwhelmed  by requests for speakers.  Next came the election of the first  permanent executive.  Joan Wallace  and I won the only two contested  positions.  As research chairperson  I soon learned that everyone had a  different idea of what research was  and how it should be done.  In January, 1972 we received a L.I.P.  grant which included a mandate to do  research that would satisfy the Department of Manpower and Immigration ana  would be helpful to our organization.  I felt that with the six researchers  it provided for , it would be possible  to do an attitude survey of greater  Vancouver women on six major areas in  the report.  I presented a plan to a  hastily called executive meeting and  it was approved.  Then came the b.ig  job of hiring.  Ideally Carole Anne  Soong, the project co-ordinator, and  three other members of the executive  were to interview all applicants within two weeks.  I was there for most of  the interviews and other executive members came when they were able to.  We were pleased with the exceptional  skills and knowledge which the applicants had, but after they were hired  we were dismayed at the reluctance  of some to read the Report of the  Royal Commission.  Getting the staff  together was a major problem.  After  much creative conflict (yelling) the  six researchers came up with an excellent questionnaire, but left the  men in the next office in a state of  consternation!  One of the first interviews on the  research project was with a woman  wrapped in a sheet, with a nude male  observing!  During, later interviews  some males were not so friendly and  had to be told that we were asking    <  for the women's opinions, not their's.  One man even announced that his wife  had no opinions and would not let us  talk to her.  Our first male employee  did a very good job of putting the  material we gathered onto cards for  the computer and came back with the  precious print-outs.  With the assistance of a talented writer and many  other willing hands we produced  "Status Anyone?".  We have sold  hundreds of copies of this booklet  and we still get requests for it.  It is hard to say what use we put the  research to but my own opinion is that  we were encouraged by the acceptance  of the idea of women in politics, by  the idea of women in unions and by the  high acceptance of the idea of part-  time work for women. We were surprised  at how easily single, separated and  divorced women could get small amounts  of credit and how seldom they even  tried for larger amounts.  The attitude that day care was a regrettable  necessity to be resorted to only in  the direst of circumstance led us to  consider talking about the positive  advantages of good day care for the  child.  Most of this survey sparked  our interest in exposing sexism in  the educational system.  To end my thoughts on the first two ,  years I would like to remember a very,  happy wine and cheese party which the  executive put at my home in August,  1972. Anyone for more wine and cheese? JOIN  116...  Spring is supposedly'just around the  corner, and spring has traditionally  meant spring cleaning. What better  way to start than by sweeping away  a couple of out of date attitudes,  attitudes which I might mention  plague us all from time to time.  Attitude #1 is the attitude that being an armchair critic is sufficient  and acceptable.  Attitude #2 which seems to be tied  to attitude #1 is the old refrain of  "Let Jill do it." The overwhelming  lack of response to some of our projects such as the parents pressure  group is disconcerting to say the  least.  Believe me, the staff and executive  are all sympathetic to the reasons  women cannot participate fully in  volunteer activities.  However, we  are not sympathetic to the above  attitudes. Want to criticize? Our  door is always open, phone lines too.  But we'll only listen if you're prepared to work along with us.  Let me close with a tribute to all  our fine members who have done just  that, members who have been tireless  in their efforts, members we can always count on, members who have inspired us.  What can I say but "Thank  you."  -Roberta Schlosberg  VSW President  (SPOTLIGHT  Three years ago, when her last child  went off to school, Dorothy Holme  decided to go back to work part-time.  When she got a job in the Fashion  section of a large department store  her husband warned her that approximately half her salary would disappear in their increased income  tax payments.  This did not sound  ver reasonable but sure enough that's  what happened!  Because Dorothy earned $260 more than her "allowance",  her husband had to pay an additional  $100 tax.  Dorothy was actually working for $1.25 an hour.  In disgust she quit the job and decided to find out more about the income tax system. As slie wended 'her  way through the labyrinths of the  system, a flourishing correspondence  grew up with Labour Minister John  Munro and Finance Minister John Turner.  In one of his letters, Munro  mentioned that one of the women's  groups would probably be interested  in the research Dorothy was doing.  So, last June Dorothy looked up  Vancouver Status of Women in the  phone book and came to an Orientation Meeting. At this time she did  not know much about'women's rights'  groups and was in fact rather dis- .  trustful of them. Like many women  in similar positions, she was surprised and pleased with what she  encountered - that exhilarating feeling that you are not a lone crackpot,  that there are other women who share  your interests and feelings!  Chapter 5 of the Report of the Royal Commission on the Status of Women  in Canada deals with taxation and  its effect on women, as do Recommen—  ations 130-133.  These particular  Recommendations have not been acted  on by the federal government. (Two-  thirds of the Recommendations have  not been acted on.')  During the discussion of the situation at the Orientation Meeting, Dorothy agreed to write an article for  the September issue of Kinesis (copies available for a dime from VSW).  Through her research on tax laws,  which grew out of her own personal  experience, Dorothy has become quite  an expert on taxation. Her paper  "Manipulation Through Taxation"  is in the VSW research library, as  is her other paper "Cleavage in Canada - Male/Female".  The papers were  written for a Political Science course  in Canadian Government that Dorothy  took at Douglas College and which  she found crammed full of useful information — great ammunition!  Dorothy found that very few women  she worked with realized how large •  a portion of their wage was being  gobbled up by taxes, and now she  finds that very few women know that  their husbands can claim an educational allowance if they attend school.  $50 for every month that his wife  attends more than 10 hours of classes.  So Dorothy has been working her way  through Political Science, Journalism,  and Women's Studies.  She is now  helping to found a Douglas College  newspaper, and is preparing an essay  on the French-Canadian woman from  early history to the present.  As co-ordinator of the Letter Lobby  Committee for VSW, Dorothy is involved in many issues besides the push  for tax reform. Many more!  She is  responsible for holding monthy meetings of the committee where issues  that need to be acted on are discussed and plans of action devised.  These issues are as diverse as the  need for better birth control advertising, facilities for women who have  been beaten, and the implementation  of a mass screening program for cancer.  Minutes of the meetings are  sent to the 21 members of the committee, many of whom belong to other  smaller women's groups and use the  information in their own newsletters  and group activities.  Dorothy feels that letter lobbying  is an effective means of pressure  and her December 16 Letter Lobby  Committee Minutes concludes with:  "Incidentally, I have finally received a sympathetic response to the many  tax letters you and I have been writing to Ottawa.  Hon. Marc Lalonde  appears to appreciate the position  of the part-time worker under our  present system and wrote me:"The  point you have raised is an import  ant one, and I shall be writing to  my colleague, the Hon. John Turner,  on this subject in the near future."  Won't Mr. Turner be surprised? Dr.  Katie Cooke also wrote:"The Advisory  Council on the Status of Women will  be studying the matter (taxation)  further in hopes of making a recommendation to the government in the  Spring."  I firmly.believe that our letters  (plus the Kinesis article) were instrumental in bringing this matter  to the fore, which just goes to show  that letter lobbying can be effective."  Dorothy Holme is one of the women  who are "keeping the heat on" and  as Ed Broadbent said in the House  of Commons, this is the only way to  get action!  J.L. yomen Agents  There have always been "token" women  in life insurance - perhaps one agent  in a thousand was a woman.  In view  of the frequent spectacular success  of women in this field, the failure  of life insurance'companies to actively  recruit more women is a prime example  of sexist attitudes overwhelming even  the ubiquitous profit motive.  However, there now appears to be an  effort, albeit tardy, on the part of  life insurance companies to recruit  more women agents.  In view of the new interest in women  agents, it might be interesting to  look at just what the life insurance  field can offer.  Well, it offers  equality of earning power, unaffected  by sex.  Since earnings depend on  commission earned by selling life  insurance policies, there can be no  sex discrimination in this area by  the insurance 'company.  Earnings for  a successful life insurance salesperson are on a par with other professions, ranging from $20,000 to  $40,000 per annum.  While women can be successful financially in life insurance, in the field  of promotion, they come up against  the same old prejudice with which we  are all so familiar.  The vast majority of support staff  in life insurance, i.e. typists, bookkeepers, etc.  are, of course, women, and women who  are badly paid even by clerical standards (and that is really low.').  Of  course, the branch managers who are  recruited from among the agents and  who are in charge of both agents and  clerical staff are all men.  There  have never been any female branch  managers, neither are women appointed  to be trainers of new agents.  The  first breach in this traditional  attitude towards women in higher  positions has been made by Sun Life  Assurance Company of Canada, who  have recently appointed a women  trainer.  The usual reaction in the almost  totally male business world towards  a woman life insurance agent is curiosity.  Although this is based in  sexist attitudes (i.e. a woman insurance agent is such an unexpected  phenomenon that she has to be seen)  it is, to some extent, an advantage  for the women in a profession where  that first interview is so important,  and often very difficult to obtain.  The women with whom I discussed this  did not, however, feel that any  decision to buy a life policy was made  or rejected because of their sex.  Once a businessman has made up his  mind to buy an insurance policy, the  sex of the agent does not enter into  it.  The vast majority of life insurance  policies are bought by businessmen,  who wish to protect their wife and  family after death. Here again, the  sex of a female agent can prove to  be a positive advantage.  Businessmen  are prepared to seek advice from,  and listen carefully to women on what  might be needed by their widows,  feeling that women know more about  this subject than men.  Like all professions, life insurance  has its degree.  Undertaken as a  home study course based on correspondence, the Chartered Life Underwriter designation can only be used  by those life insurance salespeople  who have undertaken a three year  course of study covering life insurance ethics and law, business insurance and finance, taxation, psychology  and other subjects which will enable  the life insurance salesperson to give  her clients the best advice and  service.  Women in insurance are in general  more successful than their male counterparts. Women figure regularly in  the National Quality Award group -  salespeople who have consistently  sold high quality life insurance.  There is also a Women's Leaders  Round Table for women who have sold  over $ 1 million of life insurance  in the year.  If one considers the  small number of women presently in  life insurance, the fact that enough  of them sell $ 1 million of insurance,  on a basis regular enough to support  a Leaders Round Table is an indication of the often outstanding success  women enjoy in life insurance.  If your curiosity has been roused  enough to enquire as to the possibilities for you in life insurance,  any insurance company would be pleased  to hear from you.  New ideas are  disturbing even the stagnant waters  of the life insurance companies and  they are beginning to make determined  efforts to recruit women sales agents.  It will be good to see many more  women on the agents' side of the  counter and not on the traditional  clerical side as office servants to  the male agents.  - Pat Evans  This month let's focus on some of the  Royal Commission Report on the Status  of Women which are aimed at improving  the lot of women who work for the federal government.  Rec.  11    We recommend that the pay  rates for nurses, dietitians,  home economists, librarians,  and social workers employed  by the federal government be  set by comparing these professions with other professions in terms of value of the  work and the skill and training involved.  19    We recommend the elimination  of any discrimination on the  basis of sex in the terms and  conditions of employment for  air crew on air lines.  47    We recommend that federal  Crown Corporations and agency  ies with rotational programs  field and head offices  between field and head offices  ensure that women are considered for rotation on the same  basis as men and are not judged in advance on their freedom  to rotate.  62    We recommend that Chartered  Banks (a) make it known that  FOCUS...  they intend to give women  equality of opportunity; (b)  eliminate the practice where  it exists, of requiring a long  longer attachment period for  women than for men before promotion to management; (c) ensure that they have a record  of women qualified for promotion to be considered as vacancies occur; (d) provide more  opportunities for women to  participate in both in-service  and outside training programs  with the objective of their  constituting at least 25 per  cent of those trained by 1975;  and (e) encourage their women  employees to improve their  knowledge and capabilities  through management training  courses and educational courses, such as those of the Institute of Canadian Bankers,  in reasonable expectation  that successful completion  of these courses will lead  to opportunities for promotion.  Because the implementation of these  recommendations depends on different  departments and agencies within the  federal government, probably the bes-  person to write to is:  The Hon. Marc LaLonde, Minister in  Charge of the Status of Women, House  of Commons, Ottawa, Ontario.  Send copies to Prime Minister Trudeau,  Parliament, Ottawa, Ontario, and  The Advisory Council on the Status  of Women, 63 Sparks St., Box 1541,  Station B, Ottawa, Ontario KIP 5R5  - Roberta Schlsoberg  ofy  OPPORTUNITIES FOR YOUTH FUNDS  Opportunities for Youth (OFY), a federal program to employ youth on community projects designed and operated  by the participants themselves, announces that this year's program has  a 27.5 million budgetand is expected  to create 20,000 jobs.  Last summer,  52 per cent of OFY participants were  women and again this year the distribution of funds to males and females will be on an equal basis. letter  lobby  We are taking alot of room for  LETTER LOBBY this month because  we have alot to say.  Our letters  are being read, we are getting  feedback, it's time to pick up  the pace even more.  On January 22 the House of Commons  re-convened and statements were  made by the leaders of all political parties concerning International Women's Year.  Mr.  Trudeau spoke about legislation  to improve the status of women,  mentioning the Omnibus Bill  (presented last fall) and also  mentioning that the establishment  of a Federal Commission of Human  Rights is "being considered".  He also spoke at length about the  need for a change in attitudes  saying "The crucial and necessary  changes are frequently required  in areas where no legislation can  ever be introduced—in attitudes.  Yet it is attitudes that often  militate against equal treatment  against men and women."  (That's a real cop-out Pierre.)  Robert Stanfield recognized  that it is more difficult  for a woman in Canada to achieve  an equal place in the world of  work than it is for a man.  (This fellow is clever!) He  also stated "I would not expect  even this government to overcome this difficulty completely  in one year, let us hope we see  some significant progress in  very tangible ways".  Real Cauouette asked all  members "to note the efficiency  of their office secretary" and  wished IWY success "not in order  that women be better than men,  but that they be treated equally  their male and female employees  throughout Canada." (isn't it  sad to see how some people  always misconstrue the point?)  Ed Broadbent of the NDP was the  only speaker to touch on specifics  regarding women's issues in Canada.  We have repeated key parts of his  speech for you to read, and have  also printed a response that we  sent to him.  And this is where  you come into the picture.  Write your own Member of Parliament (see names listed below)  with a carbon copy to Marc Lalonde,  stating that as far as you are  concerned there are definite  steps the government could take  to 'establish positive legislative and attitudinal changes  for women in Canada.  Quote from  Mr. Broadbent's speech if you  like, although all members  will have a copy of it in  their Hansard of January 22.  Ask for a reply, and state that  your opinion is shared by many  others in your community if you  wish.  M.P.'s name  House of Commons,  Ottawa, Ontario.  Dear    1975 is International Women's  Year, and I, as your constituent  would like to ..see you pressing  for changes in legislation concerning the status of women.  On January 22 Mr. Ed Broadbent,  M.P. for Oshawa Whitby, outlined  ten points concerning status  of women legislation that could  be easily acted upon by the  federal government.  I wish to  draw your attention to those  ten points (Hansard, January 22,  pages 2457-2459).  It is also  very apparent to myself and  others that discriminatory  attitudes do not change until  there is enforcing legislation,  and that this year is the best  one to begin instituting serious  legislation to combat the many  problems.  WHY NOT?  I look forward -to a reply outlining  your plans to mark International  Women's Year.  SPEECH MADE BY M.P. ED BROADBENT  TO MARK I.W.Y. IN HOUSE OF COMMONS,  JANUARY 22.  Mr. Speaker, on this important  human and social question the time  has passed for conferences,  commissions and slick advertising  campaigns.  The women of Canada,  like women all over the western  industrial world, now see themselves  appropriately, as being in a  moral, social and economic sense  subject to the will of others.  It  is, speaking quite frankly, a  male reaction—and I am part of  that reaction—to steps taken by  the women of this country and  others that is finally and  reluctantly, leading to legislative,  social and economic change that  will provide real equality for  women.  Let us not be under any illusion—  and I direct these comments to  the women of Canada—that if they  want real change and real progress,  they will have to keep the heat  on this House of Commons and on  other legislative bodies. No  social group in our history, or  in the history of any other country,  has had their liberation made  for them by others.  They get it  when they create pressure and  force on society to get those with  authority and influence to make  the necessary changes.  I want, in  a very specific way, to make  ten very brief points...it is a  measure of the lack of equality  in this country that the following  ten points can still be called for  at this time:  First., laws are required prohibiting  discrimination because of sex or  marital status in the recruitment,  classification, promotion, dismissal  and advertising of jobs in Canada.  Second, we need child-care centres  for children of all ages, which are  free, community controlled and  available on a 24 hour a day basis.  Third, tough laws, strictly enforced, are needed to provide  equal pay for work of equal value  and to provide incentives to achieve  this objective.  Fourth, changes in labour laws are  required to provide collective  bargaining rights and fringe  benefits for domestic and part  time workers.  Women in our society  find themselves, much more than  men, in the category of part-time  workers.  Fifth, we need amendments to  pension laws to give all women, .  including those who work at home,  the same rights to join and to draw  benefits that are enjoyed by men.  Sixth, we need effective guarantees  that male and female students are  equally entitled to enroll—and  I mean effectively equally entitled-  in any course of their choosing so  that vocations in our society will  be equally available to both  sexes.  Seventh, we need the elimination,  particularly at the elementary  school level, of sex stereotyping  in text-books.  All of us know  the kind of examples which could  be cited that prevail in our  textbooks.  Eighth, we need action taken against  advertising which exploits sex and  demeans the role and place of  women in society.  Ninth, amendments are needed to take  abortion out of the Criminal Code  so that women are free to act in  accordance with their consciences an  and on the advice of a qualified  medical expert.  Tenth, we need the establishment of  sex education and birth control  centres adequately equipped to  advise on family planning, birth  control methods, abortion, pre-natal  and post-natal care, and ways  and means of caring for and  supporting a child in the case of an  unplanned pregnancy.  Mr. Speaker, those are my ten  brief points.  Much more could  be added but I will conclude with  what I said at the outset;  the time for conferences has  passed and the time for action  is upon us.  RESPONSE FROM VSW.  Dear Mr. Broadbent;  We note with interest your ten  point "manifesto" outlined in  Hansard on January 22nd.  We  could not have said it any better  ourselves.  It is our sincere  hope that the New Democratic  Party has committed itself to  these ten statements and will work  (CONTINUED PAGE 6) (CONTINUED FROM PAGE 5)  as hard as possible this year  to see them implemented.  In answer to your comments about  "keeping the heat on the House of  Commons"we can only say this year,  above all other years, the fire  will be incredibily intense.  It does  seem a shame however, that over half  of this country's population has to  create "pressure and force" in order  to be recognized as complete human  beings with complete human rights.'  It certainly does not say much for  "those with authority and influence."  We will be working and watching  for change this year. We have no  other alternative if we are to  grow.  Yours sincerely,  Diana Bissell  Letter Lobby  VSW  B.C. FEDERAL MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT  MP John Reynolds  Airport Inn Room 51  1025 St. Edwards Drive  Progressive/Conservative  Burnaby/Richmond/Delta  MP Mark Raines  6423 Neville St.  Burnaby, B.C.  Liberal  Burnaby/Seymour  MP Ron Huntington  1752 Ottawa-Place  Vest Vancouver,'B.C.  Progressive Conservative  Capilano  IP Jack Pearsall  i047 Gordon Avenue  'owell River, B.C.  liberal  .oast/Chilcotin  MP Donald Munro  lllWurtenburg St. #9  Ottawa, Ontario  Progressive/Conservative  Esquimault/Saanich  MP Alex Patterson  33520 Marshall Road  Abbotsford, B.C.  Progressive Conservative  Fraser Valley East  MP Tommy Douglas  House of Commons  Ottawa, Ontario  New Democrat  Naniamo/Cowichan/Islands  MP Stuart Leggatt  1805 Scarborough Crescent  Port Coquitlam, B.C.  New Democrat  New Westminster  MP George Whittaker  R.R.//5  Kelowna, B.C.  Progressive Conservative  Okanagan/Boundary  MP Howard Johnston  Box 275  Salmon Arm, B.C.  Progressive Conservative  Prince George/Peace River  MP Iona Campagnola  724 - 8th Avenue East  Prince Rupert,B.C.  Liberal  Skeena  MP Hugh Anderson  Box 1163  Port Alberni,B.C.  Liberal  Comox/Alberni  MP Robert Wenman  17081 4th Avenue  Surrey, B.C.  PProgressive Conservative  Fraser Valley West  MP Len Marchand  45 Bayshore Drive  Ottawa, Ontario  Liberal  Kamloops/Cariboo  MP Bob Brisco  865 Burns Avenue  Trail,R.C.  Progressive Conservative  Kootenay West  MP John Fraser  6370 McCleery St.  Vancouver, B.C.  Progressive Conservative  Vancouver South  MP Allen McKinnon  1420 Beach Drive #504  Victoria, B.C.  Progressive Conservative  Victoria  MP Bruno Friesen  1540 Stevens St.  White Rock, B.C.  Progressive Conservative  Surrey/White Rock  **MP Ron Basford  House of Commons  Ottawa, Ontario  Liberal  Vancouver Centre  MP Arthur. Lee  #1-208 East Hastings  Vancouver, B.C.  Liberal  Vancouver East  MP Simma Holt  2249 McBain  Vancouver, B.C.  Vancouver Kingsway  MP Bill Clarke  3338 The Crescent  Vancouver, B.C.  Progressive Conservative  Vancouver Quadra  NOTE: When Parliament  is in session, letters  can be addressed to MPs-  % House of Commons, Ottawa  Ontario, and sent without  postage, On Her Majesty's  Service (OHMS).  **0nly Cabinet Ministers  are addressed as "The  Honourable".  -List compiled by WCWN  WE GET SOME SUPPORT!  Support in our fight to eliminate  sexist advertising has been received from the BC Human Rights  Commission.  Chairperson Remi De  Roo has written strongly worded  letters to the Port Moody Inn  and the Coquitlam Enterprise  about the "Steak and Legs" ad  that we reprinted in our Nov.  issue of KINESIS.  De Roo says  "Sexist advertising is demeaning  to women and contrary to the  spirit of the Human Rights Code  of B.C. which is based on the  recognition of the dignity of  all persons.  Such advertisements  undermine this principle by  suggesting women are merely an  attention-getting device.  We are sure advertisers would  not publish pieces on this level  of crudity concerning racial  or religious groups...therefore 'Ģ  we believe a change in advertising  policy would better serve  business interests as well as  conform to the policies underlying the Human Rights Code."  THANK-YOU MR. DE ROO AND  COMPANY'.!  Now listen to the response  from the newspaper "The  EE&PON&ES  Coquitlam Enterprise".  They  printed De Roo's letter and  followed it with the comment,  "The Enterprise does not feel  it has the right to discriminate  against any female who makes  their (sic) living as executives  or exotic dancers by refusing  to publish their advertisements".  aaargh. Doesn't that make your  hair curl? We are continuing  this correspondence with the  Enterprise from the office, if  you want to join in the fray you  can write Jackie Pleasants,  Editor, The Enterprise, 936  Brunette, Coq.  MORE ON THE PREGNANT STEWARDESSES  On Feb.3rd the VSW Office received  the following press release from  The B.C. Federation of Labour:  The B.C. Federation of Labour today  called on the Federal Government to  intervene and prevent the Ministry  of Transport from passing a regulation barring female flight attendants  from working after 13 weeks of pregnancy.  The following is the text of  telegrams sent to: John Munroe, Min  ister of Labour, Jean Marchand, Minister of Transport, and Marc LaLonde,  Minister Responsible for the Status  of Women.  "Our Federation protests, in the  strongest possible terms, the proposed Ministry of Transport regulation  which would bar female flight attendants from working after 3h> months of  pregnancy.  Passage of such a regulation would  make a complete mockery of the Canada Labour Code and of the government's stated concern for the rights  of women.  Furthermore the prospect of a Government agency such as the Ministry of  Transport showing such blind servility to the wishes of airlines whose  activity it is suppose to govern is  disgusting.  We urge you to take all necessary  steps to insure that the Ministry  of Transport does not go ahead with  its sell-out to PWA and Transair."  THIS WILL AFFECT ALL AIRLINES.  So the battle continues!  If you  haven't written a letter protesting  this defiance of the Canada Labour  Code, now is a good time!  Check the  January issue of Kinesis for details.  oU. CANADIAN ASSOCIATION  IIV OF INDUSTRIAL MECHANICAL  B SALLIED WORKERS  UMOII KP  CATHY WALKER - UNION STAFF .REPRESENTATIVE  The men at a meeting are taken  aback when Cathy Walker walks in  as the Staff ^Representative for the  Canadian Association of Industrial,  Mechanical and Allied Workers Union.  It takes awhile for them to adapt to  the idea, that she is not a secretary  or other subsidiary person.  There  is some discrimination, but she absorbs it and converts it into co-operation.  She feels that in being  forced to accept her position, the  men are encouraged to view other women in factory positions differently  — more on a par with men.  Three years at Simon Fraser and a  'free' home background gave Cathy  Walker the confidence to break from  traditional female roles.  More than  that, she says, she owes her success  to being in the right place at the  right moment.  Growing with the Union meant gradually accumulating information and, therefore, being authentically knowledgeable about its  history, purpose and procedures.  Cathy started as a factory worker,  was elected as representative of the  local, then became president of it,  and, later, staff representative for  the Union.  There is an emphasis on the Union  being Canadian, with all the dues  staying in Canada and not draining  to the U.S.A.  It is affiliated to  the Confederation of Canadian Unions  which has as one of its goals, the  building of a united labour movement  controlled entirely by the working  people of Canada.  is to the workers' benefit to have  various protections.  From day-today Cathy treads a very thin line,  diplomatically weighing concerns.  She has to distinguish between  grievances that do not involve a  principle, and those that do.  Her  daily business involves meetings,  grievances between workers and employers, interpretation of and negotiating contracts.  She says it is like  a game, but the employers have more  balls in their court.  For instance,  they have access to, and funds for,  lawyers.  C.A.I.M.A. does not have  the funds nor stress reliance on  these so-called experts.  Cathy fills  in.  She has to predict the traps in  a contract in relation to the economic future.  Right now there are many  claims due to inflation.  While working in the factory last  year, Cathy was one of the two women -  first to come under the revised Factory Act which involves removal of the  weight limit that a female could lift.  Women were now eligible to post onto  the higher paying jobs which were  formerly held only by men.  Initially  there were some difficulties.  Management placed both women in the most  strenuous jobs possible, which involved lifting heavy reels.  Apparently  even some of the men are obliged to  lift objects too heavy for their  physique.  It is a sad commentary on  the roles we play that when a person  (male or female) needs assistance to  more readily lift something, that  this is not automatically given without loss of masculinity or attack on  the feminist claim of equality.  Cathy finds that people in factories  tend to lack not the capacity, but  the confidence, for writing letters  and articulating their ideas.  In  addition, women tend not to stand  behind issues that would benefit  them in the long-run.. It seems they  are pressured by the daily problems  of combining work and domestic re  sponsibilities.  The husbands may  work in the same factory, but management would not countenance their taking time off for child-care.  Since  children are a part of many people's  lives, and since individual childcare arrangements are always failing,  the women are the ones who stay off  work.  This perpetuates the claim of  women being unreliable and prone to  abenteeism for domestic reasons.  There are more male members in the  C.A.I.M.A.W. than female, and management is able to evade facing the issues of daycare and maternity leave.  Cathy feels society's attitude in  general needs to change before it  will benefit with children.  Ms. Walker has a calm, capable air.  Common sense, and an awareness of  the problems of the rank-and-file,  both men and women, is blended equally with a special concern for the '  problems of women in factories with  domestic responsibilities.  It would be good to see more women  in positions of influence in the  unions - in fact, in positions of  influence everywhere.  When Cathy  Walker starts to meet other women  at those conferences ( including on  the opposite side of the table),  chances are that women will really  start to be heard, and working conditions will finally begin to reflect  the needs of all people in the labour  force.  -Brenda Austin  Cathy feels there is not the same  split in Canada, as there is in the  States, between Union bosses (well-  fattened on Union membership dues)  and workers.  In C.A.I.M.A. contol  by the membership is stressed,including election of the officers,  not appointment*  It is to the employers' benefit to  have a formalized contract, and it  LOCAL #1 (B. C. ) EXECUTIVE; (I97l|)  President  Vice-President  Financial Secretary  ?^cording Secretary  Warden  Warden  Trustee  Trustee  Trustee  Member-,  Cathy Walker  Larry Povolo  John (Pop) Jacobs  Dave Ages  Dave Robb  Bob Kubanek  Sam Rafferty  Tom Warren  Tom Scott  at-Large   (one   from each plant,   except   those  already hav  representative,   as  Trustee  or Warden  (Plant)  Phillips Cables  Cdn. Kenworth  Phillips Cables  Phillips Cables  Cdn. Kenworth  Cdn. Kenworth  Cdn. Kenworth  Phillips Cables  Freightliner  ing a  Fruehauf Trailers  Mainland Foundry  Anaconda Electronics  Les Nemeth  Rae Heighes  Ken MacPhail  NATIONAL EXECUTIVE BOARD  (N.E.B.)  Vice-President  .\  /local\     /local  .   H   N.E.B.   ) (  N.E.B.  CAXH1 WUitl K ^  LOCALN  PLANT ' / PLANT PLANT PLANT  STEWARDS STEWARDS   STEWARDS      STEWARDS  (ONE SHOP LOCAL) (MULTI-SHOP LOCAL)  * Asterisks indicate positions that  are full-time. Note that the  National   President   and   Vice-  NOTES  The above chart is simplified: the number of  locals, plants, staff-representatives etc. have been  reduced to make it easier to understand the basic  structure. At present there are two regions, as indicated. These are: B.C. - Alberta; and Manitoba -  Saskatchewan. When the union expands into other  parts of Canada, other regions will be added.  President, and all the Local  NEB Members, are rank-and-file  workers.  This structure is according to the Constitution  adopted at our last convention, and it has served  us very well in the present period. As the Union  grows, the structure will undoubtedly have to be  modified. When this is done, it will be decided  democratically, by Canadian workers at a  Canadian convention. PIONEER  CHARLOTTE WHITTON  Charlotte Whitton died in Ottawa January 25th.  She was 78 years old.  Ms. Whitton served as mayor of Ottawa  (the first woman mayor in Canada)from  1951 - 1954 and was re-elected to the  office in 1960.  In 1958 she ran as  a Progressive Conservative in Ottawa  West but lost by a narrow margin.  She was a dedicated reformer of the  Canadian welfare system and as Director of the Council on Child Welfare she gained an international  reputation for her work.  She also  served as the Canadian delegate to  the social questions section of the  League of Nations.  Her biting wit and sharp tongue often  left opponents squirming.  She was  fond of quoting Nellie McClung's observation that "whatever women do  they must do twice as well as men to  be considered half as good." Pause.  "This is not difficult." If the times  had been reversed Nellie McClung would  no doubt have been fond of quoting  Charlotte Whitton's statement that  "The nation that fails to enlist the  magnificent resources of its women  is flying on one wing and bound for  a crash landing."  Ms. Whitton was an outspoken and controversial public figure in a time  that was not noted for women in public office, outspoken or otherwise.  She will be remembered for her work  on behalf of women, her capabilities  (and eccentricities!) as a public  official,and for her enormous energy  and enthusiasm.  _J.L.  women's magazines  The November-December 1974 first anniversary issue of Branching Out, a  new magazine by women for women, contains a rundown of the United Nations  Seminair recently hosted by Canada,  reviews of the latest women's books,  women's fiction, women's art, women's  poetry, women's photography.  Available at $1.00 per copy at selected  bookstores, or from Box 4098, Edmonton, Alberta. T6E 4T1  NEWS  The PINE STREET CLINIC has moved to  new, larger premises at 1985 West 4th  Avenue, Vancouver, and is now the PINE  FREE CLINIC.  Free health services  are provided by doctors, public health  nurses, nutritionists and a psychologist.  Hours: Monday to Friday - 9:30-11:30  and - 1:30-3:30  Saturday - 10:00-12:00  Monday and Thursday evenings  open 7p.m. - 9 p.m.  Public Health Nurses Anne Lidstone &  Connie Sanders are available to teach  about V.D., Birth Control, Sexuality  and Communication.  Phone 874-2331,  Local 220.  The Growing Room Collective of Vancouver is pleased to announce a new  magazine by and for Canadian women:  ROOM OF ONE'S OWN, a feminist journal of literature and criticism.  It  will consist of poetry, plays, short  fiction, and criticism of literature  and the arts.  The first issue will  be published in early April,1975,  and there will be four issues each  year.  "Culture"  as we know it always has  been dominated by male standards and  traditions.  Noh, however, women are  experimenting with their own forms  NEWS  The Feminist News Service (FNS) will  hold their first convention March 28  to 31st, in Winnipeg.  FNS represents  women's publications across Canada  and was formed to provide better  communication between women's groups.  The B.C. representative at the convention will be Dryme Dol, Victoria  Women's Centre, 552 Pandora, Victoria  (385-3843) and any group or individual wishing more information should  contact her.  NEWS  Following a question in the Legislative Assembly by Rosemary Brown, MLA  Vancouver-Burrard, as to why attend-  ents in the House were always male,  the Sergeant-at-Arms announced that  "Conforming to the changes in att  itude required of us relating to the  role of women and men in our society,  ...our policy will be to accept applications from persons regadrless of  sex, for employment on our staff."  of expression, and they need access  to publications if they are to share  their unique perspectives with others.  ROOM OF ONE'S OWN will provide an  accessible forum where women can  create and explore — and develop  their own distinctive tradition in  literature and the arts.  Women are  encouraged to submit previously unpublished manuscripts to The Growing  Room Collective.  Subscriptions are $1.50 per issue or  $5.00 per year.  Institutional rates  are available upon request.  Please  send subscriptions and manuscripts  to:  The Growing Room Collective'  #9 - 2520 Prince Albert St.  Vancouver, B.C. V5T 3X1  All contributions and support will  be most gratefully accepted.  NEWS  Widows United, a new organization  recently formed to combat the economic discrimination under which  many widows live.  For example,  pensions often are reduced or ended  upon the husband's death.  Elizabeth  MacPherson, founder and president,  would like to see the group become  a national organization.  Those interested in more information, or setting up groups in their areas, write:  Elizabeth MacPherson, 59 Worthington  Way, Kingston, Ontario, K7K 5C2.  - Reprinted from Secretariat's  International Women's Year Newsletter OMBUDSERVICE  Nancy Conrod has left the office  staff to become Labour Researcher  for the R.N. Ass'n of B.C.  We bid  her a fond farewell with a Friday  afternoon staff party, and look  forward to her continuing appearances at the executive meetings in  her capacity as Vice President.  Miriam Gropper was hired to replace  Nancy and is taking her new position  very seriously—carrying reams  of paper and a pencil to every  phone call she receives!  Seriously  though, both Miriam and Glinda  are involved in a heavy caseload  as well as continuing their work  representing VSW on various committees and boards in Vancouver.  MONEY  United Community Services has  granted us $1500 towards our Audio  Visual Library.  We should hear from  Canada Council towards the end of  March about the rest of the money.  We are beginning to purchase our  "Woman Alive" tapes and will let  you know when they are ready for  loan.  Speaking of money, have you considered forking any over for a  t-shirt or poster? We have a good  supply of t-shirts at $3 (plus tax)  and posters at $1 (plus tax).  Please write or call Judy Bourne  at the office for more information.  You might consider closing the  communication gap between you  and your non-feminist friends  by giving them a subscription  to KINESIS for IWY too—write  to us today enclosing your donation.  WHAT DO YOU THINK   ...about beginning a MEDIA MONITOR  group?  Could do monitoring while  at home, while watching TV, listening to the radio, reading paper  and magazines.  Would compile  information, write letters, do  research. We have some info on  how to get going at the office.  Anyone interested ?  WHAT DO YOU THINK.  ...about beginning a support group  for office and store workers  faced with sexism in their jobs?  Why should women workers have to  accept management memos that state-  "All women in the office are responsible for making the coffee each  morning"? How do you get into  a position that offers you more  responsibility and challenge?  Many women in offices and stores  are too frightened to step up  and complain about their situation  because of the possibility of  losing their jobs, but constant  complaining over coffee isn't  getting them anywhere.  Is anyone  out there willing to start talking  about this problem to other  workers?  Are those of you in  clerical and sales work interested  in learning to think more positively  about your capabilities?  There's  no reason why a support group  can't begin to meet—to learn—  to share—to unite—to grow—to  work towards positive change in  their own attitude and that of  their employer.  It CAN be done,  but you have to want to do it.  Call Diana at the office if  you want more information.  HIGH SCHOOL WOMEN  March 1st all of us are going  to SFU to participate in the  "Choice & Challenge for Today's  Young Woman" workshop co-sponsored  by VSW and SFU Counselling  Service.  On March 22 is the  date of our next office workshop  for High School Women.  The  exact topic has yet to be worked  out but we will be having films  and discussi6n.  Call Nadine at  the office for more details.  NEWSPAPER  KINESIS welcomes-articles,  letters, drawings, cartoons  etc. from members.  If you ever  have any free daytime hours  call Jo at the office if you'd  like to share it with KINESIS.  Have you seen a good movie—read  a good book? how about writing  a review for us? Out of town  members response WELCOME!  Diana Bissell  LETTER LOBBY  Next meeting is Tues, Mar. 11  at 10:30 am in the office.  Letter Lobbyists write letters  to gov't on women's issues and  produce the Letter Lobby page  for the newspaper each month.  Interested in joining us?  Come  to the meeting, or call/write  us and we'll send you the "basic  info package" that will get you  started.  Out of town members  welcome.  VERBAL SELF-DEFENSE  "Are you one of those bra-burners?",  "Hey, with a body like yours why  worry about a career in law!",  "Whaddya mean conditioning no  one has to enter a beauty contest  if they don't want to?"  If you are like the rest of us,you  often splutter and mumble an  answer, or just shout and stare.  At the last Orientation Meeting  there were a number of people who  felt very strongly that a group  should begin to write a booklet  of "handy answers to heavy question:  called VERBAL SELF-DEFENSE. Anyone  who is interested in contributing  their "put-down situation", and  everyone who has an answer or is  willing to work out some answers,  please come to the first meeting  at the office MONDAY, MARCH 10 at  8 PM.  CR GROUP  We now have a strong consciousness raising group meeting weekly  at the office.  We also have some  excellent printed info on how to  get a c-r group going. Write or  call us if you want to receive  this info (25c ea.) Are there  enough people around you interested in beginning a c-r group?  Would you like to add your name  to the new list of people interested in starting one through us?  Call the office.  MEMBERSHIP  Thanks to all of you who responded  to your renewal notices.  Our  policy is to send out renewal  notices for two months after  your yearly membership is up,  and if there's no response from  you we remove your name from the  mailing list.  We can't afford  to send out newpapers when we  don't have membership donations  to cover the costs.  ORIENTATION/OPEN EVENING  Orientation for March will be  Thursday, March 13 at 8 pm.  If  you are a new member, or someone  reading this paper who wants to  know more about what VSW does  and what you can do to help,  please join us at Orientation.  Open Evening for March will be  Thursday, March 27 from 8-10:30 pm.  Open Evening is a drop-in night for  anyone who wants to talk, read,  learn, be there.  Coffee & tea  will be on.  Bring a friend, or  bring an enemy and convert them!  EDUCATION  Nadine Allen, Education Chairperson  in the office has been busy (when  not talking with students) with  meetings of the Prov. Advisory  Cttee. on Sex Discrimination in  Public Education.  She also  says the Vancouver Elementary  School Teacher's Ass'n (V.E.S.T.A.)  Status of Women Brief is an  excellent document, containing  18 recommendations for change.  We did a "Woman Alive" show  on the brief, and Nadine has  written the Van. School Board  urging the adoption of the  recommendations.  Copies of  the brief are available at the  V.E.S.T.A. office at B.C.  Teachers Federation (7th and  Burrard) and letters from  parents to Van. School Board  supporting the brief's stand  are needed.  Just a few  inflammatory facts to egg you  along—did you know that 41 out  of 62 Van. elem. schools' play  areas are segregated by sex?  Did you also know that women  teachers have to complete a  medical form with questions such  as  "Have you ever had or do you  now have any of the following  conditions...painful periods,  tense, jumpy, sick with periods?"  etc.  Nadine knows there are  enough facts in the brief to  get a strong Parent Pressure  group going—she just needs the  parents.  Call her at 736-3746. book  The Canadian Women's Educational  Press has just published Born A  Woman by Rita MacNeil.  This book  is a combination of art forms, combining a collection of Rita MacNeil's  songs with music and guitar chords  and photographs of ten women to illustrate the feeling of being Born A  Woman.  The Women's Press says "Born  A Woman is more than a song book"  more than a picture book, its a celr-  ebration of being a woman as well as  a nostalgic look at what it's really  like to grow up female."  Rita MacNeil has sung at many women's  conferences and meetings across Can-  tv  During March and April "WOMAN ALIVE"'  will be featuring a series of programs  on women musicians in Vancouver. E  Each program is dedicated to one1'  musician with interview situations  in the home, after performances and  during rehersais.  March 12 - Elizabeth Wright, harpsichordist of Duo Geminiani.  March 26 - Ingrid Suderman, soprano.  Channel 10 - Vancouver, Wed. 10:30  - North Shore, Thurs. 8:30  art  The B.C. Federation of Women will  sponsor a public sale and auction  of women's art the evening of March  4 at Vancouver Ms. 2089 West 4th Ave.  Vancouver.  Profits will help to fund  B.C. Federation of Women activities.  FILM  SCENES FROM A MARRIAGE  Ingmar Bergman is a feminist! He  may not say that himself but he  can say, without a trace of conceit, that he is a genius.  His  powers of perception are uncanny  and devastating. His characters"  are not created. Rather, they  exist inbur everyday world.  Bergman zeros in, focuses and leaves  them totally exposed.  In Scenes From a Marriage, Bergman demonstrates the results of the  kind of conditioning that is one of  the worst sore points against which  the women's movement has been fighting and one that is hardest to change.  It is the conditioning that has set  roles with their adherent duties,  obligations, and built-in guilt  should that role be violated or altered in any way.  Once this role is  threatened, that person is left vulnerable and lost.  The couple is Marianne and Johan.  The movie begins with Marianne and  Johan being interviewed as the prime  example of the ideal marriage.  They  are an intelligent attractive couple  from respectable social backgrounds.  They have two children, two cars, a  home in the city, a cottage in the  country, and both have their own  successful careers. Yet even with  this idyllic set-up, their marriage  fails.  ada and plans several appearances  in conjunction'with International  Women's Year.  Born A Woman cost $4.75 and is published by Canadian Women's Educational Press, 280 Bloor St. W., Suite  305, Toronto, Ontario.  Poem  FLESH GORDON  FILM  You may begin by filing this under  "What to do on a dreary winter evening." Or perhaps under "What is the  best entertainment for your dollar."  Now that you have the questions, in  the manner of Steve Allen, let me  give you the answer Flesh Gordon.  Yes, folks, a semi porno comedy has  hit the screen and,amazingly enough,  it is a worthwhile piece of entertainment.  SURVIVAL IN SPLIT-LEVEL LAND  Checkmated lonliness is deflected  in our gaze across the swing set  as we swing over the years  filled with pottery, art  and other Adult Survivor kits  in split-level land.  We fill up green grass hours  with rain-stored thoughts. L ,^  Neighbours stir Instant Friendships  to dispell the tyranny    r JUP  of children under rainy roofs.  We create new steps  for the minute hand's dance  across the kitchen clock.  -Kathy Tyler  From here, Bergman goes into explor  ing the reasons that led up to the  break-up.  Johan has always been  "the man".  He has attained a  position; married a woman who was  not only his peer intellectually  but also beautiful and submissive;  fulfilled all his family obligations;  and was miserable without knowing  why. He has had an affair with a  woman half his age for years before  he finally admitted it to his wife.  He hated himself, his wife and his  mistress yet he couldn't reconcile  himself to the situation and couldn't  make a firm decision. He found himself caught between a lifestyle with  a predetermined set of morals, i.«.,  be faithful to wife, home and duties,,  and another lifestyle that was considered Immoral but desirable/ to him  Marianne was brought up being the  dutiful daughter and later the  dutiful wife. She became the lawyer her father wanted her to be and  the kind of wife and mother that  her mother wanted her to be. Whenever she raised any questions, she  would allow herself to be subdued  without getting any answers.  She  believed that she alone was responsible for the success or failure of her marriage. When her  marriage was failing, she took the  blame on herself.  The failure was  a personal blow against everything  she believed she ought to be.  She  begged for a second chance.  She  opts for the same route that so  many women take.  She goes into  psychotherapy; tries unsucessfully  to have an affair; and finally,  after seeing that none of this is  SPRING  #**  helping ;her, she asks Johan for a  divorce.  It isn't until then that  she begins to be her own woman-and  forces Johan to be his own man*  The entire movie elaborat.es on the  progression of events that two people had to go through to become two  whole individuals.  They had to experience an empty marriage, a brutal  divorce and a slow recovery before  they were able to grow as two separate human beings.  Only after they  separated were they able to develop  the kind of warm loving relationship  that meither of them felt while they  were married. Perhaps it was worth  it to bring them to that level of  awareness and understanding.  That  doesn't say a lot for marriage.  It  is a very rude awakening — an awakening that might have saved them a  lot of grief.  But let me tell you how all this happened.  In the interest of-culture,  a former executive member of VSW (I  won't embarrass her by mentioning  her name) and I, along with two unnamed gentlemen, stumbled into this  sci-fi extravaganza on a chilly winter evening, purely interested in  discovering whether the feminist  view had made it into an X-rated  movie.  In the few moments when I  wasn't howling with delight or staring in amazement at the superb special effects (and I don't mean the  large areas of skin that the makeup  artist had to cover) I was delighted  to discover that there were some men  around that are willing to jest about  what has been the "accepted" role of  the male in this society (witness  Doctor Wang of the planet Porno).  And, of course along with that, the  compromising standard that women must  meet in such a society.  The leading  lady was given lines that most people  ■wouldn't throw at a dog.  But to go back to the beginning,  Flesh Gordon is obviously a take off  on the old Flash Gordon, full of nearly recognizable characters from the  comic strip in the likes **f ©ale  Ardor., Professor Jerk-Of f,etc. The  plot begins when a sex ray touches  the earth bringing about .uncontroll- ,._  ed sexual frenzy. Flesh Gordon is  brought into the *act to divert the  ray and save civilization* He,along  with .Ar.dor and Jerk-Off .attempt to  discover the source of power -and divert it, which brings them to the  placet Porno and into the clutches  of notorious Doctor Wang. And now  the fun begins in earnest in the orgy-  bound castle of Doctor Wang. What  with the plots and sub-plots of sexual politics (to borrow a term from  Kate Millett) we meet the attempts  of various frustrated groups to take  over the control of Porno.  On the  one hand there are the Amazons, a  female lesbian group (this was the  only part of the movie that was a  little too heavy, which made me believe that the views were those of  festivals  While discussing his movie, Bergman said, "There's something in the  institution of marriage that curdles  Monica Mui  EVE-0LUTI0N  March 13 - 24 at Brackendale Art  Gallery-Theatre-Restaurant 6 miles  past Squamish on Whistler Mt. Highway.  Open Fri., Sat., & Sun. noon - 10 p.m.  Brackendale Gallery in co-operation  with Women's Studies Program, Cap  College Is presenting a spring festival of the arts.for everyone, by  and about women. It will include  paintings, sculpture, batik, and  crafts, etc. Also the following programs by women in the performing arts.  {Beginning at 8 p.m. Admission $2.)  March 14 - Ardelle Lister, from  "Reel Feelings" - mixed-media demonstration of role women have played  as artists and objects of art.  March 15 - Wearables as Art Party -  admission free.  March 16 - An Evening of Classical  Music - musicians from Cap College,  music by women composers and role  of women in opera.  March 21 - Women Writers - Gladys  Hindmarch will read from Growing  Within .  Also scenes from a Taste  of Honey will be presented.  March 22 - Shari Ulrich and Friends  in Concert - an evening of wine, women  and music.  March 23 — Evelyn Roth's Moving  Sculpture Dance Co.  CONGRESS OF CANADIAN WOMEN  The Congress of Canadian Women , B.C.  Chapter, are sponsoring an International Women's Day, Sunday, ftarch 9  at the Queen Elizabeth Playhouse Thea-  treii-:fhe program will include two  spefikears, Doctor Margaret 3E, Fulton  i of Women, UBC, and &a|&leen  Ruff, Director of the Human•/■■'Rights •  Commission.  There will also be a  .cultural program of music and dancers and-»any different ethnic groups  will'■■*« wearing their national dress  and participating in arJ International Sake Sale in the lobby. - The program will cost $2 with tea and lunch  and begins at 11:30.  The program  will be open to everyone and invitations are being circulated to a  wide variety of women's groups.  WOMEN'S FESTIVAL  The Women's Bookstore will hold a  International Women's Day Festival  Saturday, March 8 at The New School,  3070 Commercial St., Vancouver, from  10 a.m. to 5 p.m.  There will be films by ISIS, Ariel  Theatre, workshops, entertainment,  and workshops. Day care and refreshments will be available.  Admission is by donation and proceeds  will go to the B.C. Federation of  Women.  For more information phone The Women's  Bookstore 684-0523,  a man who was unable to properly  judge the comic timing of this portion) striving to gain their rights,  and of course the deposed heir of  Prince Perfect and his Gay Caballeros  in appropriately green woodsey attire.  But then I don't want to ruin the  plot for those of you wanting to be  entertained. And, if you're a true  sci-fi nut interested in monsters,  there are organic, humanoid and metal ones to keep you in suspense, not  to mention wonder, in how the effects  were achieved.  Another aspect of Gordon that is such  a relief in these days of people making others offers that cannot be refused, is the total harmlessness of  the entire escapade.  The effect is  not one of violence or bloodshed.  There are fights and there are definite winners and losers but one does  not see people with bullet holes or  smashed up faces. We all know who  the victors are but no one seems to  get hurt.  For all the questionable  ratings that this movie may. get from  critics, I feel it Is "much less harmful than a lot of the violent stuff  being peddled as spectacle these days.  So take your choice when you are out  for a night on the town - a head  flick perhaps, a spectacle, or an  evening of pure entertainment with  Flesh Gordon, guaranteed to send  you home laughing if you are willing  to recognize the sexual hang-ups  that you and your society have.  If  not, perhaps you are better off suffering with Paul Newman watching a  building burn down.  - Diane Ryals  weekend  The B.C. Federation of Women will  hold a "Victoria Action" weekend on  April 18, 19 and 20 in Victoria. The  weekend will include a discussion of  BCFW policy, a women's cultural fair  and a march from Centennial Square  to the steps of the Parliament Buildings where the BCFW recommendations  for women's rights legislation will  be .presented to MLA's who have been  invited to attend the demonstration.  The cultural fair will be held Sunday  April 20, at EsquimauIt Recreation  Centre from 11 am to 4 pm • Space  for booths and displays must be re**  served by March 7. Contact Gillian  Smith,#3- 50 Government St., Victoria  {384-1909)  The convention is open to all B.C.  women and pre-registration is urged.  The cost of $5 covers two lunches  and day care.  Contact Mary Barretto,  2210 West 12 Ave, Van. (736-6621)  For additional information contact:  Billeting - Harice Parkinson, #103-  Resthaven Drive, Sidney (656-4381)  Travel advances for those in need -  Pat Buckley, 1353 West 64 Ave, Van.  C266-0981)  Women in rural areas - Leslie Dixon,  1972 Alderlynn Drive, North Van;  (980-1855)  -excerpted from WCWN, Karen  Richardson Ms. Controversy  While researching my family tree  recently, I was amazed to find reference to my great great grandmother  as "M.S." Scott, on a marriage certificate dated 1866! The entry was  headed "Maiden Surname." Click!  I, like many others, thought the  title was a new word in feminist  vocabulary.  Misinterpretations spring up quickly.  For example, I was surprised to hear  a man say he thought "Ms." meant a  divorcee!  Chauvinists think the term  is a banner of man-haters.  Some  think it refers to a spinster hiding  her singleness.  Others ridicule this prefix because  it reminds them of "m"ultiple  "s"clerosis.  Many officials refuse  to address women this way although  it is the most appropriate title when  a woman's marital status is unknown  to them.  The list of those projecting  their own prejudices onto "Ms." is  endless.  No one seems to bother verifying  their assumptions.  I say, go back  to history (herstory) women.  It's  all there.  Take it back with you.  Let's get it straight.  Miss is a young girl or unmarried  woman.  There is a difference.  Mrs.  is short form for Mistress.  Did you  know that?  Mr. is the abbreviation  of Mister, marital status unrevealed  and irrelevant.  One hundred years ago, M.S. meant  maiden surname.  Colloquially,  "Ms." is used as a non-discriminatory  title which does not reveal marital  status.  To.that extent it is the  female equivalent of the male form  Mr.  Just because a woman uses this nomer,  doesn't mean she is a freak.  It can  be used by any woman, married, single,  lesbian, feminist, right wing,  liberal or otherwise.  - Karen Richardson  WCWN  information  THE WOMEN'S ACTION ALLIANCE  The Women's Action Alliance is an  American group formed to provide useful tools and resources to women who  are working to change their lives.  They have developed'information packets' which provide a basic overview  of a certain issue, referrals to  available resources, and project  suggestions.  Packets currently available are:  How To Organize A Multi-Service Women's  Center  - individuals $1.50 institutions $3.  In addition to detailing the admin--  istrative process of establishing a  center, this packet makes suggestions  for relevant programs and gives ex- .  amples of successful operations.  An Introduction To The Women's Movement  - individuals $2  institutions  $4.  This packet provides basic information on the movement itself, including a suggested reading list, consciousness -raising guidelines (with  suggested additional topics for young  women and black women), a basic directory of national groups and organizations, and a short history of the  movement.  (The reading list, directory, and C-R guidelines can be ordered separately for 75£ each.)  How To Organize A Child Care Center  individuals $1  institutions $3  A step-by-step description of the  actual process of opening a center  with lists of recommended organizations and resource materials.  How To Make The Media Work For You  individuals $1.50 institutions $3.  Includes specific information on how _  to organize a press conference.and  write press releases, and other public relations suggestions.  The Women's Action Alliance states  that the individual prices listed  do not cover actual costs but have  been set low in order that the packets will be available for everyone.  If possible they would appreciate  receiving more - the institution  price is closer to the actual cost.  Order from:  Women's Action Alliance  Department P  370 Lexington Ave.  New York, New York 10017  studies  law  CNR  CBC  The Law Relating to Working Women,  a booklet prepared by the federal  Women's Bureau can be an excellent  discussion starter for meetings and  workshops.  Write for a free copy:  Women's Bureau. Canada Dept. of  Labour, 340 Laurier Ave. West,  Ottawa, Ontario K1A 0J2  - reprintec. from Secretariat's  International Women's Year Newsletter  Canadian National Railways has a study  underway on the status of women within the company.  It's aimed at opening up better career opportunities  for women.  CN now has women working  in some "traditionally male" jobs,  such as marshalling yards.  However,  in its middle managerial ranks, a  1974 poll showed that only 2.2 per  cent were female.  -reprinted Secretariat's  International Women's Year Newsletter  The CBC set up a 6-member task force  on the status of women last June.  Headed by Kay Maclver, they presentea  their recommendations to senior management in October.  The written report will be available early in 1975.  At present, 25 per cent of CBC enploy-  ees are women; 7.5 per cent of the  management is female.  One of the  task force's recommendations — for  an office of equal opportunities for  women — has already been accepted.  -reprinted from Secretariat's  International Women's Year Newsletter media action  Clip and Send  r  REGISTER NOW!  Creative classes in  Self-Improvement  for girls 91© 17!  DISCOVER the way to get good things going!  FIRST  DISCOVERY  beginnings of good grooming  and manners  • Includes 5 great fun-filled sessions. Come on  join in!  • Learn the basics of health and exercise, skin  care and grooming, hair care, fashion,  friendship and manners.  • Plus you'lI receive your'very own First  Discovery clipboard!  DISCOVERY  basics of fashion and beauty  • Come and join in the fun. . .you'll learn by  doing.  • The latest make-up, skin care and hair care  tips.  • Fashion looks that express you best.  • Exercise streamliners.  • Fashion know-hows to enable you to put your  best foot forward on the runway.  • Art of communication: your voice!  .The Vancouver  Su  'Sat., Feb. 1, 1975  ^  Enroll *t th* S<wr» Mora nearcat you: 4750 Wngwray, Burnaby 433-3211,  Richmond Square, Richmond 27M542;  Surrey Place, Surrey 58S-0811; HMalde Centre, Victoria 595-9111  Classes are limited. . .enroll now!  -Simpsons-Sears Ltd.-  REMEMBER - letters carry MDCH more  impact if they are personally handwritten or typed and not just a form  letter clipped from the paper.  Simpsons-Sears Ltd.  4750 Kingsway  Burnaby, B.C.  Re: Self Improvement Classes for  Girls 9-17.  Dear People:  I believe you should review your  policy of offering classes in "self-  improvement" for young girls.  The  idea that a woman's sole aim in life  should be directed at achieving  charm, beauty and ultimately a man  is being questioned by more and more  people.  Exploiting young girls'  anxieties in order to start them on  a life-time pattern of consuming  products of questionable value is  repreensible.  Sincerely,  Send copy to:  Hon. Phyllis Young  Minister of Consumer Affairs  Parliament Buildings  Victoria, B.C.  the glamour game  Insecurity is a theme delicately  played upon by the fashion industry;  it is not, as some would believe,  created by the industry only. As  long as woman remains society's embodiment of human, beauty and sexuality, as long as the onus is on  her, and not the male, to be stylish and alluring, and as long as  she remains frustrated by not achieving creatively in other ways, woman  will be insecure in regard to her  physical appearance.  Heather Petrie, former model:  "Women also work hard at not just  looking good, but looking better  than "her".  And the saddest point  about this is that it is reinforced  by everything from year one - the  little girl on the street with her  mother is complimented by some dear  old lady who says, "Isn't she pretty.  That's how it starts and from then  on it gets worse.  She becomes fourteen and gangly, with nothing there  and too much here and she's reading  glamour magazines.  It's just a vicious game.  The whole scene in fashion magazines is deliberly casual -  sea fronts with rocks and surf and  the inevitable handsome man....It  really makes me angry because there  are teenagers who believe in this.  But that is also an extension of  how the mother would wish to see  her daughter.  The whole fashion  thing is extremely exploitative for  women.  It keeps them consuming instead of producing, by attacking  their insecurity.  The fashion industry makes you feel that there is ,  something wrong with you all the  time and they use this to get to  your head."  Reprinted from THE LACE GHETTO,  Maxine Nunes and Deanna White.  "There was a time when I had tp put  my eyelashes on to go to the laundromat.  I really began to lose myself behind that whole veneer of  make-up.  It was definitely destructive.  Especially if one's personality is unformed, because then  it .takes that much longer to define  who you are. You have all that getting in the way."  "I honestly believe we must reach  the point where our confidence has  nothing to do with the way we look.  Women who tend to feel better when  they are dressed up, as opposed to  just being comfortable, are insecure. international women's yean  un  UN GOALS FOR IWY  On November 7, 1967 the United Nations General Assembly unanimously  adopted the Declaration of Elimination Against Women.  An exhortation  rather than a binding commitment to  make legislative changes, the declaration nevertheless has guided those  who want to implement the principle  of equality for women.  The UN's go  goals for International Women's Year,  partially outlined below, reiterate  the spirit of the 1967 declaration:  EQUALITY  1. To achieve full equality before  the law in all fields where it does  not yet exist.  2. To meet the health needs of girl s  and women equally with those of boys  and men.  3. To extend health services for protection of maternity, mother and child.  4. To promote equality of economic  rights.  5. To promote equality of rights and  responsibilities in the family.  6. To ensure women participate fully  as equal partners in policy formulation and in decision-making at all  levels of government.  DEVELOPMENT  1. To improve women's awareness of  problems of women in underdeveloped  countries.  2. To improve living and working conditions of women throughout the world.  3. To improve conditions of rural  women through training in modern agricultural methods, vocational training, use of labour-saving devices in  the home and through modern child-  rearing methods.  4. To eliminate illiteracy and ensure  equality of educational opportunity.  5. To encourage women to train for  and enter non-traditional occupations.  6. To provide proper counselling for  this and help them find employment.  7. To provide social services for  women.  8. To improve situation of women in  prisons and places of detention.  9. To combat exploitation of women  and girls in illicit trafficking.  PEACE  1. To promote peace efforts of women's  groups to encourage detente in the  world.  2. To encourage participation of women in safeguarding peace to enhance  their status.  3. To facilitate free flow of information on contribution of women in  peacemaking.  4. To recognize value of untapped  resources of women contributing to  national, cultural development and  spiritual values through their work.  For further information or to receive  the UN Bulletin, which reports UN  activities .in B.C. contact:  UNITED NATIONS ASSOCIATION OF CANADA  2524 Cypress St.  Vancouver, B.C.  Lydia Sayle, Executive Director  - reprinted from WCWN  plans changed  IWY PLANS CHANGED!  They listened!  All across the country women have been complaining that  the conferences planned by the federal government for International  Women's Year were a waste of time  and money.  And now Health Minister  Marc LaLonde, minister responsible  for legislation on the status of women, has announced that the government is abandoning plans to hold  four regional conferences on women's  rights.  The government still plans to hold  a national conference on women in  the fall.  And there will still be  $1 million divided among women's organizations, native citizens, multi-  culturalism and language minority  groups.  The government promotion plans will  be re-organized around more flexible  programs appropriate to the needs of  each province.  The $500,000 which  had been set aside for the conferences will be used to establish mobile information units which will  travel throughout B.C., Alberta, Manitoba, Newfoundland and the Yukon  and advise at meetings, distribute  information on women's rights and  present films and slides.  Other  provinces will get federal financial  help for small conferences or 'roving information officers'.  Ms. club  Vancouver Ms., located at 2089 West  4 Ave, Vancouver, is open five nights  a week - Wednesday through Sunday -  from 8 p.m. to 2 a.m., and provides  a place where women of many different interests can meet and relax and  talk.  The March program of events  has just been announced:  Wednesday - films and discussion,  this month focusing on rape and culminating March 26 in a self-defense  workshop conducted by Marsha Enomoto.  Thursday - ^jam nights' - bring your  own musical instruments - and pool.  Friday and Saturday - boogie nights.  Sunday - poetry readings,beginning  at 9 p.m.  On March 8 there will be a International Women's Day Party beginning at  8 p.m.  Admission will be $1, proceeds going to the B.C. Federation  of Women.  A drama workshop will be starting in  April.  If you are interested (no  experience necessary) phone Jane  Buss 681-9945.  For more information about events at  Vancouver Ms. phone 738-5821.  news  Le Devoir, a Montreal French-languag-  newspaper, is now devoting a weekly  column to IWY.  Each Monday, columnist Renee Rowan runs down the latest  news and activities. ' If your local  paper is doing the same, let us know.  (If it isn't - ask WHY NOT?)  - reprinted from Secretariat's  International Women's Year Newsletter.  THE BERGER COMMISSION ON FAMILY  AND CHILDREN'S LAW has begun  releasing their recommendations  to the government.  Keep your  eye on the newspapers for coverage of their findings, call  the Berger Commission Office  at 687-9894 for copies of  the reports, and continue  writing letters supporting  the community of property  proposals as outlined in  the December Kinesis.  No word has been received yet on  the fate of the mass screening  proposal for breast cancer.  Apparently over 2,000 letters  have been sent so far.  if you  haven't told the government  how much you support the mass  screening proposal, dig out  your Dec. and Feb. Kinesis, read  the articles on breast cancer,  and write today. cap college  Discover Yourself  8 sessions beginning Wed. March 5,  9:30 tO 11:30 a.mrat North Lonsdale  United Church.  Fee $10.  This course will concentrate on an  exploration of life goals, expectations and self-image.  It will utilize  communication skills, small group interaction, discussion, and confidence  building techniques.  Maximum enrollment:18.  LECTURE SERIES  A lecture series exploring the contemporary experience of women. Lectures will be Wednesday evenings at  7:30 pm at Argyle Secondary School  in North Vancouver, Room 411-413.  Fee is $6 for the series or 50c a  lecture.  March 5 Freud Exposed.  Ann Thomson will discuss the attitudes of Freud towards women, pointing out the sexism inherent in Freudian thought and analysis.  March 12  There will be no lecture  this week as Margaret Atwood will be  doing a poetry reading in the Cafe  Theatre of Capilano College at 8 p.m.  wotn's  March 19  Women and Art.  Ardele Lister will present a historical picture of women and art, revealing the role women have played both  as artists and objects of art.  March 28 The Present Renaissance  of Women in Poetry and Literature.  Helene Rosenthal will discuss the  contribution made and the particular  viewpoint offered by women in contemporary literature. (Please note:  due to Easter Break this lecture will  not be held at Argyle: place to be  announced later.)  For more information contact Women's  Programs., Capilano College, 2055  Purcell Way, North Vancouver, B.C.  poco high  PORT COQUITLAM SECONDARY COMMUNITY  PROJECTS  WOMAN AND HER HEALTH  A three point examination of health  topics specifically related to women.  Uterine and breast cancer; menopause;  and the woman and her doctor will be  discussed.  Program participants include doctors, public health, and the  Canadian Cancer Society.  Pre- register by phone in the evening after  Feb. 16: 941-5461.  Weds. March 5, 7:30-9:30 p.m.  ywca  The Women's Information Centre of  the YWCA is offering a relaxing  weekend for women on Saltspring  Island, Victoria Day Weekend.  Fcr further information call Kathy  Sopko, 683-2531, Local 230 or 238.  ubc  CONTINUING EDUCATION  U.B.C. DAYTIME PROGRAMS  limited space makes it impossible  lo  give details of all the courses  jffered. Following is a brief list  >f some of the courses.  For more  Information phone UBC Centre for  Continuing Education 228-2181.  >0WER, POLITICS, AND PEOPLE: VISIONS  )F THE BODY POLITIC - a special program for International Women's Year  >resented by the Vancouver University  Jomen's Club *'*  FEMININITY/MASCULINITY:  HOW DO WE  CALL OFF THE GAME?  Betty Roszak, John Allan Phd. Faculty  of Education,UBC, Carol Gordon, Free  lance writer and photographer, Marvin  Lazerson, Phd. Faculty of Education  UBC.  $15.  $12 students.  A CHILD'S WORLD: A WORKSHOP ON WRITING CHILDREN'S LITERATURE  Sam Roddan, author, Pina Granirer,  illustrator, J.J. Douglas, publisher  Coordinator: Marion Ralston, Faculty  of Ed, UBC  $15.  FEMININE PERSPECTIVES I&II: PHOTOGRAPHY WORKSHOPS FOR WOMEN  Carol Gordon, Free lance journalsit  and photographer. $20 & $25.  DEVELOPING POTENTIAL FOR GROWTH AND  CHANGE  Dr. Clare Buckland and Joan Hendry  $25.  Class limited  DEVELOPING CREATIVITY IN THE YOUNG  CHILD - continued  artist and teacher  Harriet Miller,  and guests  $16.  SPEECH WORKSHOP  Dr. Jane Hastings, Maureen Elston,  Sharon Romero  $25.  Class limited.  ENCOUNTERING YOURSELF  Dr. Clare Buckland, Jacie Boyes,  Joyce Frazee  $35.  Class limited.  PROBLEMS AND  WOMEN AND WORK:  PERSPECTIVES  JoAn Lynch and Sonja De Martino  $30.  Class limited.  A GOOD WOMAN IS HARD TO FIND!  - A  SPECIAL WEEKEND WORKSHOP  Keynote Speaker:Dr. Janet Smith -  The Myths and Realities of Business  How They Do and Do Not Apjhly to Women  Workshop Staff: Trudy Buckler, Management Consultant; Eileen Hendry,  Counselling Psychologist, Coordinator  Special Projects, Women's Resources  Centre  Mar.15,9:30a.m.-4:30p.m., Mar.16,  10a.m.-2p.m. Conference Room, Centre  for_Continuing Education  $35.  Class limited.  A two day workshop for women who want  to advance in their careers. This  workshop is aimed at developing the  personal and professional skills and.  attributes necessary to succeed in  management in the 70's.  THE WOMEN'S RESOURCES CENTRE FREE  PROGRAMS  The Women's Resources Centre, located on the third floor of the Vancouver Public Library, 750 Burrard St.,  is an outgrowth of the UBC Centre for  Continuing Education Daytime Programs.  The Women's Resources Centre provides  a number of free programs and ser-'  vices in the Vancouver Public Library.  A complete list of free programs will  be available each month at the Drop-  In Centre.  Beginning in March:  CAREER PROFILES: NOON-HOUR TALKS  in co-operation with Vancouver Public  Library.  8 Thursdays, Mar.6-Apr.24, 12:10-1:00  p.m. Vancouver Resources Centre, Vancouver Public Library, 750 Burrard  For women who want some idea about  what kinds of career areas are available and how one goes about getting  into them. Talks will include:Health  profession's; Travel Industry; Media-  TV, Journalism; Hospitality Industry,  Interior Design; Commercial Art;  Politics.  SPECIAL FREE PROGRAM  Wed. March 12, Vancouver Public Library Auditorium, 12:10-1:00 p.m.  Archbishop Ted Scott will speak on  "Liberation of Women: A Revolution  of the Spirit? the Counselling Service and Women's  rograms, Continuing Studies at Simon  Eraser University and the Vancouver  Status of Women are sponsoring a Car-  SFU &VSW  ser Day for Women in an effort to  present information on the status of  vomen in the professions; to offer  opportunities to meet wdsmen in var  ious careers in the Lower Mainland;  to encourage women to examine new  possibilities in pursuing a vocation'  al interest.  CHOICE  &  CHALLENGE   FOR TODAY'S   WOMAN  PROGRAM  JEn the Chair: Dr. Beatrice Lipinski  Director, Counselling  Service, SFU  Morning  9:30 - Registration  10:00 - OPPORTUNITIES FOR WOMEN -  Shelagh Day, Human Rights  Commission.  10:30 - SEX-ROLE SOCIALIZATION -  Elinor Ames, Phd, Psychology,Dept., SFU.  11:00 - KEYNOTE ADDRESS - Dr.  Pauline Jewett, President  Simon Fraser University  12:00 - Lunch and sharing.  1:00 - CAREER EXPOSITION - meet  with representatives from  various professions and  areas of work including  Law, Medicine, News Media,  /Dentistry, Forestry, Law  Enforcement, Management,  Higher Education, Administration, and others.  Guests will include Constable Joan Rosenberry, Van.  Police, Nini Baird, Cultural Animateur, Shelley  Rivkin, Consumer Advocate,  PRE-REGISTRATION IS ADVISED  Date:  Saturday, March 1, 1975 - 9:30 - 4:00 pm  Place:  East Concourse Cafeteria, Simon Fraser University  Parking:  Closest Parking Lot "B"  Trudy Buckler, Management  Consultant, Vivian Hotz,  Architect, Selma Wasserman  Higher Education, Lolita  Wilson, Administration,  Melissa Eller, Forestry,  and others.  2:00 - FILM -"Modern Women: The  Uneasy Life" (60 min.),  followed by a panel discussion.  3:45 - CONCLUSION  people's   law   school  Learn about your laws through, the  Vancouver People's Law School series  of free legal education classes -  all classes and materials free!  To pre-register call:  681-7532  Course:  LANDLORD AND TENANT  Date:  March 3,4,5  Place:  Kitsilano  Sec. School  2550 W. 10th Ave., aud  itorium  Time:  8-10 p.m.  Instructor  Andrew Croll  Outline:  Discussion of the new  Landlord and Tenant Act  and recent amendments;  Course:    MATRIMONY AND DIVORCE  Date:      March 11,12,13  Place:     John Oliver Sec. School,  Cafeteria  Time:      7:30 - 9:30 p.m.  Instructor: Diana Davidson  Outline:   Legal implications of en  entering a marriage con-  :ract, change of status  and rights, rights and  responsibilities of each  spouse involved in a divorce action with regards  to maintenance, custody  and property.  function of the Rentals-  man's office, rights to  privacy, eviction reasons,  deposits, etc.  Course:  CONSUMER PROTECTION  Date:  March 17,18,19  Place:  King George Sec. School,  Room 210/211  Time:  7:30 - 9:30 p.m.  Instructor:  David Mossop  Outline:  New Trade Practices Act;  various legislation re-  lating to the consumer;  what a contract is, rights  and obligations of a consumer in a contract; warrantees, guarantees, credit  buying and.recourse on  defective goods.  WOMEN AND THE LAW  March 24,25,26  312 Main Street, Courtroom #2  Time:      7:30 - 9:30 p.m.  Instructor: Penny Bain  Outline:   This course will deal  with the whole body of  law which deals specifically with women, federal and provincial.  Course:  Date:  Place:  nfb  The National Film Board (NFB) has a  series of eight 16mm. colour films  available.  Called the "Working Mothers Series", they portray in short  (ten to twenty minutes) studies the  range of working women's experience.  The. NFB also has other films dealing  with the. concerns of women, which  will all be listed in a catalogue of  of all NFB films of interest to women,  now being prepared.  In French, a four-film series, "En  tant que femmes", is also available.  Films are available free on loan  through its 29 regional offices,  which are listed in the white pages  of the telephone book under"N" or  under Government of Canada listings.  NFB does not suppy projection or  screening equipment, but check your  local public library, as many have  film equipment rentals.  - reprinted from the Secretariat's  International Women's Year Newsletter  ^%K^  "I'm afraid by the time I grow up it will,be too  late to be the first woman anything."        SP north shone  n e w fo u nd land  NORTH SHORE NEWS  Come to PUB NIGHT - held at North  Shore Neighbourhood House, 225 East  2nd, North Vancouver, every second  Tuesday.  Following are the events planned by  the North Shore Women's Centre to be  held in conjunction with PUB NIGHT.  Feb.25 - Members of the Bergen Royal  Commission will speak about the Corom-  of Property proposal.  For information phone: Diana Sonderhoff 926-2755  or Janet Blue 985-6875  March 11- Business Meeting.  Film: The History of Women's Rights.  Phone: Andrea Kiss 922-4507  March 25- Daycare on the North Shore  Phone: Pat Tinham 929-4265 or Andrea  Davis 980-8236  THE PUB opens at 7:30 p.m.  mission  MISSION WOMEN'S RESOURCE CENTRE  The Mission Women's Resource Centre  is somewhat operational.  We are  planning a Drop-In Centre Tuesdays  and Wednesdays at the Mission Memorial Centre - 5th and James, Mission,  and a Tuesday evening programme of  speakers, same place.  On Feb.28-March 1 we are sonsoring  a CR. Women's Weekend with group  leaders from Arica in Vancouver.  A.rica theory and practice are directly relevant to the concern of today's  tfomen to become free of social conditioning while remaining deeply  alive and loving.  This weekend workshop, open only to women, offers  practical tools for developing a  healthy body and relieving internal  contradictions and promoting positive  emotions and spontaneous open relations.  Registration fee is on a sliding sc  scale.  For further information contact Myrna Kendall, 826-9286 or Qwen  Tharierre; 826-3634.  yukon  Attention residents of the Yukon:  Your territorial representative for  IWY has changed recently.  The new  rep is:  Jan Speirs  P.O. Box 2703  Yukon Territorial Government  Whitehorse, Yukon  WHAT'S  GOING  ON?  kelowna  Kelowna has a Women's Center!  A LIP  grant has enabled them to employ six  and one-half persons .  The Center  has established itself in a central  location in downtown Kelowna and will  serve as a meeting place where women  can exchange and share ideas, explore  alternatives to expand their present  life styles, discuss their mutual  problems and seek solutions, in a  friendly and supportive atmosphere.  The Center also plans a referral se—  vice and many exciting programs and  workshops.  If you live in the Kelowna area contact Kelowna Women's Center at:  375 Bernard Ave., Room 8, Kelowna.  Telephone: 763-8223.  delta  The Delta Status of Women is pleased  with the success of their new guest  speaker program and warmly welcome  all interested to attend and participate in shaping the future of this  newly formed group.  Meetings are  held every second Wednesday at the  Tsawwassen Library at 7:30 p.m.  The Delta Status of Women is also  holding a "Festival of Arts" on Feb.  28, at St. David's Anglican Church  Hall. 1115- 51A St. in Delta.  The  day-long festival, from 10 a.m. -  3 p.m. and 8 p.m.-10:30 p.m., will  include films, slides, women's art  exhibits, information booths and informal discussions. Film topics will  focus on women's rights, cancer,  stereotyping, employment, sexuality,  pioneer women, family,and more.  Films  and slides have been chosen from the  Women and Film catalogue put out by  ISIS, the B.C. Chapter of Womeii and'  Film which has been touring B.C.  Free daycare will be available.  Parents are asked to bring a lunch  for themselves and their, children;  refreshments will be provided.  For further information phone:  946-9926 or 946-2427.  HUMAN RIGHTS CODE FOR NEWFOUNDLAND  Just before shutting the House down  for the holidays the Human Rights  Code as amended was voted into law.  It has finally come to pass!  Newfoundland Status of Women Council,  back in 1972 under the guidance of  Cathy Clark, worked up a brief which  called for amendments in keeping with  Status of Women thinking.  -Reprinted from NEWSLETTER,  Newfoundland Status of Women  Council, Women's Centre, Rawlin's  Cross, Jan.1975.  terrace  TWO, the Terrace Women's Organization  have succeeded in having the Municipal Council and Mayor of Terrace proclaim 1975 International Women's Year  in Terrace.  Remember the conference on Women in  Politics in Terrace March 1st. See  Febraury Kinesis for details.  vernon  A Vernon Status of Women group has  formed and is applying to the Sec.  of State for funding through an International Women's Year grant to  enable them to establish a Vernon  Women's Centre.  There will be a Capsule College Lecture at the College, March 20, 9:30  to 11:30 , entitled 'Is There a  Point to the Women's Liberation  Movement?'  Free babysitting.  For more information oh the Vernon  Status of Women contact:  Enise  Simmons 545-6247 or Jill Nielsen  545-5273.  surrey  Surrey Inter-Section Society, a nonprofit organization providing consumer and debt counselling services, has  received a $3,600 grant from the Dept.  of Consumer Services.  The announcement was made jointly by Phyllis  Young, Minister of Consumer Services,  and Provincial Secretary Ernie Hall,  MLA for-Surrey. An important part o-  Surrey Inter-Section's new service  will be to give special attention to  low income and single-parent families.  Surrey Inter-Section also publishes  a newsletter for the community they  serve, including Surrey, White Rock  and Delta.  sisterhood  is    powerful the  women's  bookstore  "Non-funded, non-profit.  Begun in  July 1973 and run collectively ever  since by many hard working women  volunteering their time, energy,  minds."  So reads the sign on the  door of the Women's Bookstore,  804 Richards Street.  In a word, the shop is devoted to  books "by, for and about" women,  especially books that most other shops  wouldn't seek out.  The selection is  quite overwhelming, ranging from  health care to politics, from art  books and novels to children's  stories.  As you walk in, some of the  titles stand out as familiar watchwords of the whole feminist movement.  But the amount of new material they  receive each week is ever-growing.  Books are screened carefully before  they are accepted —  they must be  serious about women's-problems and  sympathetic to women's causes.  The  occasional reject (objected to by a  staff member or another reader) ends  up in the "turkey box".  Those, for  20% off, "you read at your own risk."  Children's books are the most carefully examined — even a few that  were on the Kinesis  list are not  said in the  Women's Bookstore.  The  staff feels that this is important  because, after all, the princess-  prince charming fairy tales are where  we got stuck.  There are many pamphlets and magazines as well, reflecting various  literary, political and special in  terest groups.  For example:  Branching Out, The Feminist  Art Journal, Amazon Quarterly  Country Woman, Paid My Dues  (women in music),  Any profits S° into new stock or  to women's groups.  The-store also  refers callers with questions to  the different women's groups in  the city, acting as an information  line.  On Monday nights, it functions as a meeting place for the  Lesbian Drop-In.  Men are welcome  in the store, but the space at the  back with comfy chairs and tea is  reserved for women and children.  The Women's Bookstore is working on  a new catalogue of all their books,  but it is a lot of work and noone  can promise when it will be ready!  Over 90% of  Because of the prohibitive cost of  hard cover books over 90% of the s  stock is paperbacks.  Besides books  there are posters, a few hard-to-find  elsewhere records and feministjewelry.  and post cards and note cards by women artists.  You can order or suggest a book but  you should be able to give the author  and publisher.  There is also a mail  order service for out-of-town women.  The Women's Bookstore is open for  you to drop in and browse 12-5 p.m.  Monday through Saturday, and 12-7  p.m. on Fridays.  804 Richards St.  Phone - 684-0523.  -Susan Levin  VESTA  VESTA.STATUS.OF WOMEN BRIEF  Improving the status of women in education is the purpose of the brief  submitted to the Vancouver School  Board (VSB) on January 20, by the  Vancouver Elementary School Teachers'  Association (VESTA).  The result of a questionaire circulated to all elementary schools in  Vancouver in February 1974, the brief  is the first of its kind to be presented to any school board in the  province.  It summarizes sex discrimination  against female teachers and students  in the Vancouver area and recommends  18 ways the VSB, working in conjunction with VESTA and other teachers'  associations, could improve the status of women in education.  Katherine Mirhady, VSB Chairperson,  described the presentation as "an  appropriate way for us to begin International Women's Year." The brief  was referred to various VSB committes  for discussion and will be examined  again at the-next VSB board meeting.  Highlights of the VESTA recommendations were:  1. Actively recruit women adminis-v  trators.  2. Hold intensive workshops for wor  men to acquire skills necessary for  such posts.  3. Appoint females in preference to  males until equal distribution exists.  4. Endorse women's studies courses  for grades 11 and 12 on a permissive  basis.  5. Develop women's studies curriculum  for elementary grades.  6. Select non-sexist learning material for current use in schools.  7. Integrate boys and girls in physical and sex education and playgrounds .  8. Replace teacher's medical record  outlining menstrual details with doctor's note.  9. Provide all forms and publications  of VSB with optional use of title  "Ms."  10. Make extensive use of part-time  teachers, many of whom are women.  11. Assure temporary teachers equal  financial support and fringe benefits.  12. Initiate in-service consciousness  raising programs for all educators.  For further information.contact:  Maureen Pollard, Chairperson  VESTA Status of Women Committee  105-2235 Burrard St, Vancouver  731-8121, local 235  A copy of the VESTA Status of Women  brief is available free from VESTA.  Reprinted from WCWN,  by Karen Richardson. subscribe!  Letters  position and tto fact that KHBSX8  CMti approxiaataly 13*00  aar yaar to prist aad aail  KINESIS is published monthly by the  Vancouver Status of Women.  Its ob-/  jective is to provide an open channel  of communication between the members  of the organization and to promote  understanding about the changing position of women in society.  Views expressed in Kinesis are those  of the writer and unless specifically  stated do not reflect the policy of  VSW.  SUBSCRIPTIONS:KINESIS is provided as  a service to members of VSW in good  standing. Membership is acquired by  an annual donation.  In determining  your donation we ask you to balance  your own financial position and the  fact that KINESIS costs approximately  $3.00 per year per person to print  and mail.  PUBLICATION DATE: The third week of  each month.  COPY DEADLINE: The 1st of the previous month.  SUBMISSIONS: KINESIS welcomes submissions from members and will consider those from non-members. All  submissions, including letters to the  thw editorial committee, must be  accompanied by the writer's name  and address. Pseudonyms will be used where requested. Where necessary,  the editorial committee will edit  for brevity, clarity and taste.  CORRESPONDENCE: Send to : KINESIS//  Vancouver Status of Women  2029 West 4th Ave  Vancouver 9, B.C.  Telephone: 736-3746  Editorial Committee: Diane Ryals,  Jo Lazenby, Viviane Hotz, Bobbie  Patrick, Monica Mui, Margie Colclough.  Contributors: Joan Wallace, Carole  Anne Soong, Alice James, Monica Mui,  Diane Ryals, Brenda Austin, Pat  Evans, Diana Bissell, Karen Richardson,  Susan Levin, Jo Lazenby  Typing: Margie Colclough, Diana  Bissell, Jo Lazenby  Layout: Jo Lazenby, Nadine Allen,  Diana Bissell  Graphics: Kathy Sopko  Photos.: Bobbie Patrick  Kinesis:  In the summer of 1974 an article  "Health Hazard" by Mrs. Merriam  Doucet appeared in Kinesis.  It was  so alarming that I was moved to write  to Eugene Whelan to see if the Dept.  of Agriculture was aware of the dan-  ers she put forward. After a series  of letters I received the enclosed  memorandum outlining the results of  several months of research by the  Dept. of Agriculture into the allegations put forward by Mrs. Doucet.  I was most disturbed to find her article had been inaccurate, untrue and  exaggerated.  It had upset me when  I read it and wasted a lot of federal  government time and money checking  out the article.  I would like you to forward this  memorandum of information to the  author of Health Hazard.  I have always enjoyed Kinesis but  now read articles tempered by my experience with the Doucet article.  Yours trulyy  Mrs.. Janet Hossack   The information has been forwarded to Ms. Doucet as requested.  We do  aot think that Ms. Hossack should  feel badly about the federal government spending time and money to investigate a possible hazard to public  health.  Also we are not all that reassured by the government response.  -Kinesis  RIGHT ON!  The following appeared in The Vancouver Sun's Letters to the Editor  section.  Sir - That is a very good ad on  page 15 in the Feb. 7 Sun about  paper carriers.  I hope all motorists pay attention to it.  I am a Sun carrier and deliver 88  papers each day.  I like meeting  people and having a bank account.  I am not, however, an independent  businessman as was in the ad.  la  am an independent business person.  Kathryn Prlnz- (age 10)  NEWS  CHESS ANYONE?  The Canadian Chess Federation is  sponsoring the first Canadian Women's  Chess Championship.  This is a qualifying event to the World Women's  Championship, as the Canadian winner  will compete against entrants from  about 30 other countries.  For more  information write:  Mrs. Lynn Stringer  Director Women's Chess, Chess Federation of Canada, 4984 Georgia Park  Terrace, Victoria, B.C. V8Y 2B9  -reprinted from Secretariat's  International Women's Year Newsletter  Who says this isn't women's year  with Maggie Thatcher running for  Conservative leader in Britain and  in our country Flora McDonald also  being considered for the Conservative  leadership.  As for the title 'Ms." we have made  our point, now expect it to be respected.  The same for equal rights.  Let's think adult, not parent.  Stop  scolding and begging but let our  attitude be - we will not take"no"  for an answer.  Sincerely,  Katherine Berg  Kinesis:  Just a note to send greetings and to  say that I very much enjoy your newsletter. Although I am away from Vancouver I find most of the items and  articles contained have application  to the north and do provide some  challenging questions.  Best wishes,  Rhoda Witherly,  Prince Rupert  NEWS  VSW NEWS RELEASE,FEB.13,1975.  The Vancouver Status of Women applauds  the decision of Rosemary Brown to  seek the national leadership of the  N.B.P.  One. of the objectives of  the Vancouver Status of Women is to  encourage women of all political  affiliations to seek office.  Ms.  Brown, who was the Vancouver Status  of Women's first Ombudswoman, has  consistently pressed for women's  rights and has made it clear that  the women's rights issue will form  a major plank in her leadership campaign and will be a major policy concern, if she wins the leadership.  This is forthrightness and integrity  at which we can only rejoice.  ERRATA :  Page 11 of February issue.  Polemics (of the women's conscious5*-  ness) should read"Proxemics..."  Proxemics is a term coined in 1966  by the anthropologist E. Hall, author  of The Hidden Dimension.  It means  the body of observations and theory  concerned with the socio-cultural  structuring and use of space. W^%  omot  OMMJDtffiMV  lit*   m  ...  ^P^  1                              1  Ombudswoman  Glinda Sutherland was elected VSW  Ombudswoman at the General Meeting  January 21st, replacing Gene Errington.  Glinda has worked for VSW since  March, 1973, and has been a member  of the ombuds staff since September,  1973.  Her new position plunges her  even more deeply into the battle  against discrimination - in employment, pay, promotion, and job training; and in helping women with marital and family problems.  She is  pressing as hard as ever for legislative changes to better the position of women.  Glinda sits on the Board of Directors of Vancouver Community Legal  Assistance and is also a member of  the Family Law Subsection and the  Family Law Foundation and the B.C.  Delegates Group to the National  Conference on Women and Sport.  In addition to this Glinda organizes and hosts the weekly WOMEN  ALIVE TV show on Channel 10.  Glinda and the ombudservice received much needed aid with the  hiring of Meriam Gropper earlier  this month.  march  CALENDAR OF EVENTS  MARCH  1  - S.F.U., "Choice and  Challenge for Today's  Woman".  All day.  MARCH  4  - NEWSLETTER MEETING,  7:30 pm, OFFICE.  EVERYONE WELCOME.  MARCH  8  - INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S  DAY.  CELEBRATE IT.'  MARCH  10  -1st MEETING OF GROUP  INTERESTED IN PUTTING  TOGETHER "VERBAL SELF-  DEFENSE" BOOKLET.  PLEASE  SHARE YOUR EXPERIENCES  .  WITH US. 8 pm OFFICE.  MARCH  11  - LETTER LOBBY, 10:30 am,  OFFICE.  FEDERAL ACTION, 7:30 pm  OFFICE.  MARCH 13 - ORIENTATION, 8 pm,  OFFICE.  MARCH 18 - GENERAL MEETING, 7:30 pm  BOARD ROOM, 3rd FLOOR,  YWCA on BURRARD ST.  ALL MEMBERS WELCOME.  MARCH 22 - HIGH SCHOOL WOMEN'S  WORKSHOP, 11-4 pm  OFFICE.  MARCH 25 - FEDERAL ACTION, 7:30 pm.  OFFICE.  MARCH 27 - OPEN EVENING.'  FROM  8-10:30 pm WE ARE OPEN  TO YOU & FRIENDS. DROP  IN TO TALK, READ, LISTEN,  LEARN, ENJOY.