 7&EC94/JAN95 PuH-out photo essfeiffaW^fa' CMPA$2.25  Somen's  sociarN  policy  fightback Inside  KINESIS  #301-1720 Grant Street  Vancouver, BC V5L 2Y6  Tel: (604)255-5499  Fax:(604)255-5511  Kinesis welcomes volunteers to work on  all aspects of the paper. Our next  Writers' Meeting is Jan 3 for the Feb  issue and Feb 1 for the Mar issue, at 7  pm at Kinesis. All women welcome even  if you don't have experience.  Kinesis is published ten times a year by  the Vancouver Status of Women. Its  objectives are to be a non-sectarian  feminist voice for women and to work  actively for social change, specifically  combatting sexism, racism,classism,  homophobia, ableism, and imperialism.  Views expressed in Kinesis are those of  the writer and do not necessarily reflect  VSW policy. All unsigned material is the  responsibility of the Kinesis Editorial  EDITORIAL BOARD  Shannon e. Ash, Lissa Geller,  Agnes Huang, Fatima Jaffer  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE  Caitlin Frost, Anik Hahn, Rose Gilbert,  Karen Backman, Christine Evans,  Wendy Sylvester, Lori Motokado, Lien  Shutt, Amy Chen, Rose Baldry, Moira  Keigher, Marsha Arbor, Elizabeth  Rushton, Dana Sanmiya, Fatima Jaffer,  Robyn Hall, Winnifred Tovey, Wendy  Frost, Dawn Simpson, Lael Sleep,  wendy lee kenward, Leah Ibbitson,  Teresa McCarthy, Coleen Hennig  Advertising: Yasmin Jiwani  Circulation:Cat L'Hirondelle, Jennifer  Johnstone, Linda Gorrie  Distribution:Kumvana N'Gomani  Production Co-ordinator: Agnes Huang  Typesetter: Sur Mehat  FRONT COVER  Miche Hill and the Social Policy Demo  Photo byFatima Jaffer  PRESS DATE  November 23,1994  SUBSCRIPTIONS  lndividual:$20 per year (+$1.40 GST)  or what you can afford  Institutions/Groups:  $45 per year (+$3.15 GST)  VSW Membership (includes 1 year  Kinesis subscription):  $30 per year (+$1.40 GST)  SUBMISSIONS  Women and girls are welcome to make  submissions. We reserve the right to  edit and submission does not guarantee  publication. If possible, submissions  should be typed, double spaced and  must be signed and include an address,  telephone number and SASE. Kinesis  does not accept poetry or fiction.  Editorial guidelines are available upon  request.  DEADLINES  All submissions must be received in the  month preceding publication. Note: Jul/  Aug and Dec/Jan are double issues.  Features and reviews: 10th  News: 15th  Letters and Bulletin Board: 18th  Display advertising  (camera ready): 18th  (design required): 16th  To advertise in Kinesis, please call  Yasmin Jiwani, 251-3755  Kinesis is produced on a Warner  Doppler PC using WordPerfect 5.1,  PageMaker 4.0 and an NEC laser  printer. Camera work by Midtown  Graphics. Printing by Horizon  Publications.  Kinesis is indexed in the Canadian  Women's Periodicals Index,  the Alternative Press Index and is a  member of the Canadian Magazine  PublishersAssociation.  ISSN 0317-9095  Publications mail registration #6426  1 974-1 994  News  Social policy review fightback 3  by Sue Vohanka  Safety on university campuses in BC 4  by Teresa McCarthy  Pro-choice under seige 5  by Erin Mullan  Protesting drunkeness as defence for assault 5  by Agnes Huang  Vancouver's gay and lesbian conference 6  by Shannon e. Ash  Critique: Have Your Say. 6  by Jean Swanson  Proposed immigration policy changes 7  by Agnes Huang  South Asian Women's Centre in Montreal burned 7  by Agnes Huang  Features  The road to Beijing: report from Vienna 10  by Donna Lee  Interview with Fely Villasin: Beijing here we come 11  as told to Donna Lee  New directions in healthcare in BC 12  by Christi Cawkell and Shereen Farag  Centrespread  BC social policy fightback: a photo essay 13  by Fatima Jaffer  Arts  Review: To Be There With You ". 17  by Nancy Poliak  Review: The Words I Know  18  by Naomi Foyle  Review: Emma Goldman 19  by Anik Hahn  Proposed immigration legislation..  Regulars  As Kinesis Goes to Press 2  Inside Kinesis 2  Movement Matters 8  by Carmen Benn  What's News • 9  by Lissa Geller  Paging Women 20  by Minoo Shakibai and Caitlin Frost  Letters 23  Bulletin Board 24  compiled by wendy lee kenward and coleen hennig  The next writers'  meetings are on  January 3 & February 1  @ 7 pm at VSW  #301-1720 Grant St  DECEMBER/JANUARY 1995 Twice a year, Kinesis produces a double issue—a thicker issue that makes the rounds  for two months. But the story of thicker double issues is the story of every issue of this  feminist newspaper—there's never enough space, time or resources to cover all the stories  Kinesis should be covering. Why whine? Well, we never cease to be struck by how much  news-about-women-that's-not-in-the-dailies there is for us to cover.  Take the social policy review fightback, currently one of the biggest, concerted  progressive campaigns going on in Canada [see page 3], for example the demonstration last  month by more than 10,000 students on Parliament Hill in Ottawa. Canada's national  newspaper, The Globe and Mail, ran a small photograph on an inside page, with three lines  of text. The focus was how students had pelted Human Resources minister Lloyd Axworthy  with Kraft dinner and raw eggs. Why? What else happened? Who spoke at the rally? What  was the message? This isn't new (when 100,000 people gathered on the hill to protest the  NAFTA in 1992, The Globe hardly mentioned it.) but it still bears mention.  Take the numerous demonstrations against cuts to immigration across the country?  Read about it? Seen much lately? How many cities were involved?  Take the occupation of a federal Employment Centre office in Vancouver last month  [see pages 14-15] by about 50 representatives from some 25 organizations, representing tens  or hundreds of thousands of people. The local newspaper, The Vancouver Sun decided not to  cover it at all.  The Sun did, however, cover the demonstration that took place in Vancouver the next  day. Only the when and where bore any resemblance to the demonstration Kinesis was at [see  page 3 & 16.] The rest of the story came from the fanciful imagination of some pissed-off  wanna-be-Doug-Collins, who couldn't possibly have been at the demo for more than a few  minutes. He wrote about the "barking Trotskyites, the earnest Jean Swanson (fame at last?);  the rouged and behatted Ragin' Grannies with their tired schtick; radical lesbians (so?);  angry, complaining students; the "long-believed-to-be-dead Communist Party of  Canada"...The story was shot through with factual errors and potshots at jus' about anyone  who takes a progressive breath in Vancouver.  And so the story of this issue goes beyond what's in it: it's the story of what didn't make  it into the paper as well. We've packed in a whole lot about the fightback against the federal  government's proposals to use social programs (immigration, pensions, foreign policy, etc)  as fodder for their deficit-cutting exercises...because the fightback is really against global  restructuring, the not-so-new world order, the corpora teagenda,aboutcolonization of third  world countries, the Free Trade Agreement, NAFTA, G ATT, cheap labour pools in the north  and south, divideand rule, minority rich versus majority poor, the riseof racism, militarization,  violence against women, people with disabilities,...the list goes on.  As Kinesis goes to press, amendments to the Employment Standards Act have just been  announced. The minimum wage in BC is set to go up to $6.50 by March, and to $7 (which will  be the highest in the country) by October. We'll be following up on the changes in our next  ^Thanks  Our thanks to Vancouver Status of Women members who support us year 'round with  memberships and donations. Our appreciation to the following supporters who became  members, renewed their memberships or donated to VSW in November:  Liberty Bradshaw * Barbara Curran * J. Dandeneau * Karen Egger * Christopher  Gainor * Mr. and Mrs. Michael & Connie Geller * Darborah Honeyman * Sandra Howell  * Tamara Knox * Yvonne Laboucane-Yemm * Barbara Lebrasseur * Neil Power * Ronalea  Richards * Wallace Roth * Janet Shaw * Virginia Stikeman * Veronica Strong-Boag *  Sheilah Thompson * Karon Webber * Lynne Werker  We would like to say a very special thank you to the following supporters who have  responded so generously to our annual fall fundraising appeal. The ongoing support of VSW  donors, as well as the support of many new donors, is crucial to the expansion of VSW's vital  services and programs in the face of continued government cuts to our funding. We are very  thankful to:  Catherine Aikenhead * Patricia Albright * Janet Altshool * Sarah Atkinson * Janet  Bell * Jennifer Bradley * Dana Brunanski * Sandra Bruneau * Paula Burgerjon * Pamela  Bush * Shauna Butterwick * Janie Cawley * Christine Cosby * Brenda Dafoe * Nancy  Dickie * Deborrah Dunne * Petra Fachinger * Karlene Faith * Marion Fisher * Jan Forde  * Catherine Fretwell * Carole Gerson * Debbie Goldberg * Maureen Gordon * Jane  Heyman * Rowena Hunnisett * Linda Kemp * D. Kennerley * Bernice Kirk * W.  Krayenhoff * Larissa Lai * Deborah Lerose * Megan Lindsay * M.K. Louis * Diane Malley  * Janet Marques * Lucy Mattel * Diane Mercy * Anne Miles * Leah Minuk * Lolani Moreau  * Macpherson Motors * Myrtle Mowatt * Lou Nelson * Denise Nereida * Eha Onno *  Lorcan Pitcher * Shawn Diana Preus * Massoume Price * Judith Quinlan * Harley  Rothstein * Mary Schendlinger * Eva Sharell * Sima Elizabeth Shefrin * Margaret Shore  * Ginny Stikeman * Geraldine Strother * Carole Tarlington * Pam Terry * Neysa Turner  * Andrea Valentine * Mary Watt * Diane Wiesner * Barbara Wild * Brenda Wong * R.  Elaine Young  Finally, we would like to welcome the new and renewing members of the Recommending Women Club: Catharine Esson* Elizabeth Whynot. The contributions of Recommending Women Club members are a crucial element in the expansion of VSW's vital services and  programs.  Rumours in the air are that federal women's program funding for women's centres  will be cut by 25 percent in the next budget (February) and cut by 100 percent in 1996. We  won't say more, as this is unconfirmed (though hardly unexpected).  Missing from this issue is part two of our coverage of Quebec women on the sovereignty  (and other) issues promised in our last issue. We apologize: some of our coverage is  complete, but vital parts are lacking due to various circumstances.  Last month saw a mini international victory for Cuba, which is suffering the consequences of 30 years of an illegal economic, commercial and financial blockade by the United  States. A United Nations resolution aimed at ending the US's embargo against Cuba was  passed by a vote of 101 to 2, with 48 abstainers. Only the US and Israel voted against the  measure. Of note is that US-friendly countries, such as Canada, Mexico, Brazil and Thailand,  voted for the resolution, against the US.  Still on Cuba..there have been numerous demonstrations across Canada and the US  through the Fall protesting the US embargo. In November, a caravan of solidarity activists  marched across Canada and the US, collecting food, medical and school supplies. The  caravanistas then flew to Havana from Montreal to deliver the supplies. They also attended  the World Conference in Solidarity with Cuba that was held in Havana last month.  We just learned that the South Asian Women's Community Centre in Montreal was  set on fire late in October [seepage 7]. The fire was deliberately set, and it is unclear whether  it was aimed at the women's centre, the AIDS organization it shares the building with, or  both. And as per usual, there was no news about the fire in the mainstream dailies.  We've also heard that The Wotnanist, the Canadian women's newspaper based in  Ottawa, has ceased publication (it's been a year since their last issue, and we wondered what  was happening). The staff has been laid off until the paper's publishers work out the financial  and womanpower issues required for the paper to resume publication. We'll follow up.  Amongother November happenings were: a conference and the annual general meeting  of the Indian Homemakers Association of BC, which also celebrated its 34th anniversary.  The theme for the conference was "Strengthening and Uniting Our Elders With Their  Traditional Families." We were unable to attend, as we had booked the weekend for our  annual planning meetings, but heard from women who did make it that it was a heartening,  inspiring and practical conference.  Also in November, was a conference for women working on the issue of new  reproductive technologies (NRTs), organized by NAC and DAWN Canada and held in  Vancouver. The weekend-long, invitation-only event brought together women from across  Canada with the objective, among others, of developing concrete policy recommendations  regarding future action on the use of NRTs in Canada; and strategies and mechanisms to  address feminist/disability/social concerns on the issues of NRTs.  November 29 was the international day of solidarity with the Palestinian people,  sponsored by the United Nations. On December 4 in Vancouver, the Canada Palestine  Association and Middle East Peace Action Coalition are holding a public discussion on so-  called peace in Palestine: "15 Months After the Handshake: What has changed," at 7 pm at  Britannia Community Centre, L2, at Commercial Drive and Napier.  The printing presses call—and there are more-than-usual pages to print this month so  we're off. Our new year's wish? More resources to produce a thicker Kinesis every month.  (And they (who?) say feminists don't dream!)  'Tis almost the holidays...an especially special time at Kinesis because we  get to shut down shop for almost the  whole month of December for much  needed rest! It's been quite a year, and  we have lots to reflect on before we're  back in January, revitalized, energized  and ready to take on the new year!  Some of the fruits of recent projects  at Kinesis can be found in this issue. Our  type size is larger and easier to read.  And catch our ads on page 23-we continue to try to increase our subscription  base and we hope our gift of a set of  postcards by six Canadian women artists will inspire you to give Kinesis to  someone/group you care about as a  present this year. We really need and  value your support. Kinesis could not  afford to continue to publish without it.  Also new this month is the Kinesis  Advertizing Coordinator. Yasmin Jiwani  comes to us from the National Film  Board's marketing office in Vancouver,  and has some terrific new ideas for potential advertizers, deals for our ongoing, long-time advertizing supporters,  and much much more. Yasmin's also  written (and we hope continues to) some  great articles in Kinesis over the last few  years. Welcome, Yasmin, it's great to  have you on board! Oh, and Yasmin  wants us to let anyone interested in  advertizing in Kinesis to give her a call at  251-3755.  New production volunteers (the  exacto-knife wielding, blue-pencil waving women) this issue are: Caitlin Frost  (from The Wotnanist), RoseGilbert, Dawn  Simpson, Christine Evans, Wendy  Schuster, Lien Shutt, Amy Chen, Elizabeth Rushton and Dana Samiya.  New writers this issue are Donna  Lee, Fely Villasin, Christi CawkelL Sherin  Farag, Minoo Shakibai, Anik Hahn and  Caitlin Frost.  That's all from us this year. Thanks  to all the volunteers who made Kinesis a  dynamic and productive place to be! We  couldn't do it without you!  If you're interested in volunteering  for Kinesis in the new year, call Fatima  or Agnes at 255-5499. The next Writer's  Meeting is on Tuesday, January 3, at 7  pm at VSW, 301-1720 Grant Street, Vancouver, BC See you in 1995!  DECEMBER/JANUARY 1995 >* * :«i=*--; acrasB :■:-.*- ■vs*jrjww. ask; ss ,v;«v;«.*av^ *:: ;•:•-  News  Protesting sham consultations on social policy reform:  BC women fight cuts!  by Sue Vohanka   Women's groups and other popular  organizations are working together to stop  the federal government from trashing  Canadian social programs.  And you could hear the anger and see  the determination, as hundreds of people—women and men, seniors and students, immigrants and workers and unemployed—gathered to protest in Vancouver November 16 [see photos, page 16].  After an invigorating noon-hour rally  outside the downtown hotel where "consultations" on social policy review were  taking place, many people went inside  and took over the afternoon session of the  federal government committee's hearings.  The government's consultation process is a sham, speakers told the rally.  During two days of hearings in Vancouver, for example, only a handful of popular groups—16, out of 520 requests—were  invited to speak.  "I'm mad as hell that the people of  Canada, and students, and women are out  here, excluded from a process, a bullshit  process," said Miche Hill, of the National  Action Committee on the Status of Women  (NAC).  "Whose country is this, anyway? It  belongs to the women of Canada, to the  people of Canada, not corporations, not  the Royal Bank," she said. "This is the  same crap as NAFTA, as global restructuring."  She urged people to keep organizing  actions, like the November 15 occupation  of a Vancouver UI office [see centre pages,  this issue]. "We'd like to see that happen  right across the country," Hill said. "Get  out there. Keep the fight going. Get angry"  "The consultation process is a con  job," said Jean Swanson, of Vancouver's  End Legislated Poverty, and current president of the National Anti-Poverty Organization.  "This government is radically changing our social programs so millions of  Canadians will end up as the working  poor," she added. "This government is  forcing unemployed people into endless  counselling, training, and education programs when what we really want is a job."  The federal government's proposals  for social policy review include massive  cutbacks in funding post-secondary education, elimination of universal child benefits, and the continued erosion of the  rights of people on welfare and unemployment insurance. The government is  also conducting separate reviews of pensions, foreign policy and defence spending, and immigration policy.  "The government has separated these  reviews even though we know they are  absolutely connected," said Nandita  Sharma, of the B.C. Organization to Fight  Racism, and Women to Women Global  Strategies.  "What the government has in mind  with all these review processes is creating  a society where only a few are seen as more  valuablecontributorswhileothersareseen  as parasites who are disposable," she  added.  The government wants us to fight one  another, and to believe the lies that immigrants area drainon our society, a burden  on our social programs, and criminals,  Sharma said.  "We know that immigrants make a  valuable contribution to our society," she  said. "Twenty percent of the gross domestic product is created by their labour.  We know each and every immigrant  by Sue Vohanka  When people took over a federal government committee's social policy  review hearings in Vancouver November 16, Lena Warrington was among  the dozens who spoke out.  Warrington belongs to various women's groups which applied to speak  to the committee but got turned down. When she came to Canada as an  immigrant in 1951, she didn't speak English. "Canada was wonderful. I am  so sad to see it sliding backwards in the past few years," she said.  She described how she could put herself through school at the University of BC in the 1960s. "I am so sad that my daughter can't do that. My son  can't," she told the committee.  (The government is proposing post-secondary education cuts that  would at least double tuition fees paid by students, and a "completely  flawed" loan program that student leaders say means it could take as long  as 36 years to pay off a loan.)  After Warrington graduated, "one phone call got me a job as a high  school English teacher," she said. She married and had two children, but her  husband was damaged by the war, and when the marriage broke up,  Warrington chose to go on welfare for five years to raise her kids. She did  volunteer work during that time, for transition houses and other groups.  She went back to school, for upgrading, and she's still paying off the  student loan she took out when interest rates were at 16 per cent. She sent  out a stack of applications for teaching jobs, without success.  "There are huge waiting lists to get on the substitute teaching list," she  said. Warrington spent five years trying to get on. She's trying to get contract  work from groups working with immigrant women and visible minority  women, she said.  "You are in high competition for stupid little six-month training jobs that  leave you nowhere," she said. "I'm dealing with women who can't find jobs  after they've put time into training. This has been heartbreaking for me."  Warrington is unemployed now, and on UI. "I read your questions," she  told the committee, referring to the government's discussion guide on social  policy review. "I hate this blaming the victim," she said.  "I would like a job. I would be happy to pay the taxes to help those not  as privileged as I, to help those in need," she added. "I would love to pay off  my student loan from 1981, if I only could."  makes both an economic and a social  contribution to this society.  "Immigrants are not to blame for the  signing of the free trade agreement which  eliminated 500,000 jobs. Immigrants are  not to blame when the government gives  hundreds of billions away to corporations," she said.  Sharma ended her speech with a challenge that was loudly cheered by the 500  participants at the rally. "We will defeat  any government that attempts to take  away our dignity, and our rights, and our  social programs. We are not fooled by  their strategies to divide and defeat us.  The people—united—will never be defeated."  Margi Slone, of the Public Service  Alliance of Canada, said social programs  are not responsible for the debt and the  deficit. (Only two per cent of the deficit is  caused by spending on social programs.)  "We have to stand together, side by side,  lock arms and don't let them break us."  Nothing changed when Liberals were  elected instead of Tories, Slone added.  Public sector workers still face constant  downsizing—"thereare not enough workers to do the work"—while a lot of senior  bureaucrats who got patronage appointments remain on the public payroll, shuffled into new titles.  "If the government thinks they are  going to separate seniors from the young,  drive a wedge between seniors and the  rest of society, they are wrong," said Elsie  Dean, of the Burnaby Seniors Network.  When representatives of 60 different seniors' organizations met November 5, Dean added, they condemned  . cutbacks and called for jobs.  After a few more speeches (from  student, labour, and tenant representatives) and a few more songs (from Ginger Group and the Raging Grannies),  many people went inside the Sheraton  on Robson Street to confront the parliamentary committee.  "They tried to slip NAC in and slip  a few other groups in to speak at the last  minute, and we told them to stuff it,"  NAC's Hill told Kinesis.  Others took advantage of the spontaneous opportunity to speak to the  committee when the hearings resumed.  Two women protestors kept an impromptu speaker's list. Dozens of people, many of them representing organizations which had asked to speak but  were denied invitations, expressed their  concern and anger.  One of them was Ellen  Woodsworth, of the Action Canada  Network BC, which organized the rally  outside. The ACN is a broad-based  coalition of more than 220 organizations, including women's groups,  churches, environmental groups, gay  and lesbian groups, first nations, seniors, labour and others.  "I represent a strong popular movement here," she told the committee.  "What the Liberal government is proposing is exactly what the Mulroney  government was doing. The people of  Canada are not ignorant," she added.  "What has happened to you? Have  you bought the American dream?"  Woodsworth asked. "Do you want  the riots on the streets? People sleeping under bridges?"  She pointed out that 10 years ago,  we would have had royal commissions, instead of public hearings that  excluded most of those who asked to  speak.  "Don't stop at two days [of hearings in Vancouver]. We need a royal  commission. We need to be able to  present to you our proposals for vastly  expanded social programs,"  Woodsworth said.  "We need a decent health care  program, not one that just serves the  wealthy. Not a two-tier system," she  added.  "We do not want cuts. We know  there is a tremendous amount of  wealth in this country." Woodsworth  mentioned Hibernia, and the Alcan  Kemano project to drain the Nechako  river despite the struggle led by the  Cheslatta people.  "People are organizing,"  Woodsworth told the politicians.  "You're just seeing the tip of it now."  Sue Vohanka lives in Vancouver.  DECEMBER/JANUARY 1995 News  New NDP initiatives:  Safer campuses for women  by Teresa McCarthy   Women on student campuses in BC  are pleased that a new BC government  initiative will focuson making campuses  safer for women but are concerned that  it may turn out to be yet another "band-  aid solution" to the issue of violence  against women on campuses.  The goal of creating Safer Campuses  for women and all members of campus  communities is the goal of a new Skills  Now provincial training plan initiative  announced by the BC government at  Simon Fraser University (SFU) in  Burnaby late last month.  While the program will be administered by the Ministry of Skills, Training  and Labour, Women's Equality Minister Penny Triddy was also on hand to  announce the funding, pointing out,  "Women have the right to feel safe in  their homes, workplaces, and communities."  Priddy said the Safer Campuses program will build on work already done  by many colleges and universities to  improve safety and protect access for  women.  Under the program, all public post-  secondary institutions in BC are eligible  to receive up to $55,000 (for a total of $1.5  million across the province), to develop  safety prioritiesand to implement physical safety improvements on campuses.  Participatinginstitutionswill be required  to commit funds to the program as well.  Standing committees on each campus  (drawn from campusconstituencies such  aswomen'scentres,students,and health  and safety offices) will develop action  plans outlining needed safety improvements and oversee these changes on  campus.  Carolyn Porter, a student and member of SFU's Personal Safety and Security Committee, which has been working on these issues for some time, spoke  after the program's announcement. "This  announcement comes as an affirmation  to those of us who live with concerns of  safety issues in our community."  Porter sees the Safer Campuses program as a challenge to "broaden the  spectrum of what campus community  security means so we can all enjoy the  feeling of security." She says physical  changes,suchasbetterlightingand safety  patrols are not enough, but that universities and the provincial government  must make a commitment to making  universities a place where women can  feel safe expressing their opinions or  MUNRO • PARFITT  LAWY ERS  quality legal services in a  woman friendly atmosphere  labour/em ploym en t,  human rights,  criminal law and  public interest advocacy.  401-825 granville street,  Vancouver, b.c. v6z 1 k9  689-7778(ph)      689-5572 (fax)  into long-term solutions such as education for men about sexism and advocacy  around violence against women. She  says this program "doesn't equate women's safety with women's equality," and  until this and the onus of responsibility  for men's violence is taken on by men,  things won't change.  The emphasis on women's physical  environment without addressing women's equality is a common element in  ...physical changes, such as better lighting and safety patrols are not enough...  - Carolyn Porter  taking part in a peaceful demonstration  without being labelled as disruptive.  SFU student and activist Indrani  Rin Ghosh agrees with Porter, saying  that physical changes alone won't make  post-secondary institutions safe for  women. Ghosh says that women aren't  afraid because there isn't adequate lighting on campuses, they're afraid because  thereare men on campus who are potential perpetrators of violence against  women. She adds that making some  spaces safer for women simply pushes  perpetrators to find their victims elsewhere.  Ghosh questions the provincial government's decision to once again put the  onus on women to use only the spaces  deemed safe, while putting no resources  DR. PAULETTE ROSCOE  NA TUROPA THIC PHYSICIAN  HOMEOPATHY  COUNSELLING  DETOXIFICATION  HYCROFT MEDICAL CENTER  108-3195 GRANVILLE ST.  VANCOUVER, B.C. V6H 3K2  731-4183  barbara findlay  B.A. M.A. LIB  s delighted to announce  :hac she is now practising lav  vith the law firm of  Smith and Hughes  321-1525 Robson St.  Vancouver  phone 683-4176 ■  Smith and Hughes offer a full range of  legal services to the lesbian, gay and  bisexual communities of Vancouver.  Initial consultations ere without charge.  most governmental safety initiatives,  such as last year's Vancouver City Safer  Cities report, which primarily focused  on physical, structura 1 changes (like more  street lights), and not with the issue of  violence against women itself.  Miche Hill of the Vancouver Status  of Women says she sees a similar weakness in the Safer Campuses program. "If  they're admitting there's violence on  campuses, they should be using money  to address the problem of violence itself."  Bonnie Agnew, of Vancouver Rape  Relief also stresses the importance of  addressing women's safety as a women's equality issue. She says universities  and colleges need to actively support  feminist programs and work with existing women's equality groups on campuses, like women's centres, to increase  regard and respect for feminism and for  those women who are working for women's equality. She says campus safety  and equality requires "a critical mass of  women in every single class, department, and faculty" of post-secondary  institutions.  This is the kind of change that SFU's  Porter hopes can be achieved through  the Safer Campuses standing committees. She hopes that physical safety improvements will be used as a starting  point by committee members to tackle  the broader issues of safety for "all students and staff, regardless of age, gender, ability, ethnic background or sexual  orientation."  Teresa McCarthy works on SFU campus.  f  visit the new  \  Q*  ^  in the OXFAM office  ISIOVU OPEN!  Choose from a wide selection of beautiful handcrafts  not featured in the Bridgehead catalogue. Samples  of catalogue merchandise will also be displayed.  Bridgehead is an Alternative Trading Organization  (AT0) owned by OXFAM-Canada whose purpose is  to foster equitable trade with the developing world.  2524 Cypress St. (at Broadway) 736-7678  Store Hours: Tuesdays, Thursdays & Saturdays  9:30 to 4:30 until December 22  Join us for our annual Open House  and sale of Bridgehead and  locally-produced crafts  Friday, December 2 from 4:00 to 8:00 pm  Saturday, December 3 from 9:30 am to 4:30 pm  oxfam  Canada  To make a donation^please send a cheque to  OXFAM-Canada, 2524 Cypress St, Vancouve, BC, V6J3N2  or call toU-Jree, 1-800-466-9326  >l  DECEMBER/JANUARY 1995 News  BC's new protections for clinics...:  ...after the  violence  by Erin Mullan  The November 8 shooting of a Vancouver doctor who performs abortions  has forced both the province and the  media to address the on-going harassment at abortion clinics by anti-choice  protesters.  Clinic staff have long warned of escalating abuse and intimidation by anti-  abortionists, including the assault of an  Everywoman's Health Centre staff member last summer. Pro-choice activists have  fearfully watched the explosion of anti-  abortion violence in the U.S. and repeatedly called on the government to act.  Following the near-fatal shooting of  Dr. Romalis by an unknown assailant,  the provincial government announced  new measures to help protect health care  providers and women seeking abortion  services. These include the formation of  a new police Criminal Harassment Unit,  funding for improved security measures  at the clinics, and support in strengthening existing civil injunctions, which do  not provide adequate protection from  harassment.  Pro-choice activists welcomed the  announcement, which was made jointly  by the Ministries of Women's Equality,  Health, and the Attorney General.  Violence against women:  "We're relieved that the government, through inter-ministerial collaboration, has sent a loud and clear message  that vandalism, intimidation, stalking,  harassment and assault will not be tolerated in a democratic society," said Joy  Thompson of the B.C.Coalitionfor Abortion Clinics. "We hope that the team  approach will insure thatviolenceagainst  health care providers will be given as  much priority as organised crime and  criminal gang activity."  The med ia spotlight on abortion clinics in the wake of the shooting has created some awareness of the harassment  faced by staff and clients. However, much  of the coverage still portrays the issue of  abortion as a debate between two extremes. Few in the mainstream media  question why a tiny but vocal minority,  who abuse and intimidate those involved  in a legal medical service supported by  the vast majority of the population, merit  so much media attention.  On November 19 several hundred  people braved the cold and heavy rain to  attend a rally held in downtown Vancouver in support of health care providers and safe access to abortion services.  Speakers included representatives from  the DisAbled Women's Network, the  National Action Committee on the Sta-  Rallying for choice in the rain  tus of Women, the B.C. Coalition for  Abortion Clinics and the Elizabeth  Bagshaw Clinic.  A statement read by a staff member  from the Everywoman's Health Centre  summed up the thoughts and feelings of  many at the rally.  "With these first bullets, our worst  fears have taken on a shade of reality  that we hoped never to see. Throughout  history,byherbs,coathangersorvacuum  curettage women have always had abortions. We always will. While terrorism  won't stop abortions it will make them  more dangerous, so what changes is  safety and access.  "Attheclinics we participate in keeping abortion safe and accessible by providing the service. You participate by  being here today, by your donations,  your letters of support and your lobbying. If women are to continue to have  safe access to abortion, if we are not to  yield to terrorism we must have courage: the courage that is shown by you  speaking out for choice, by women exercising that choice, and by those who in  their daily jobs keep the clinics running."  As Joy Thompson says "constant  vigilance is the price of reproduction  freedom." Access to reproductive health  in B.C. is unequal and especially difficult for rural women. Worldwide, a  woman dies every three minutes as a  result of an unsafe backstreet abortion.  For those who want to support women's  right to choice:  • join the B.C. Coalition for Abortion Clinics, 219-1675 West 8th, Vancouver V6J 1V2. Tel: (604) 736-2800  • write the provincial government  in support of protecting the clinics  • send donations to the coalition or  to the clinics  Drunkenness is no excuse  by Agnes Huang  Two women's groups working to  end violence against women held a press  conference in early November to express their outrage following the acquittal of an Alberta man charged with severely beating his wife. On November 3,  Justice JH Mackenzie ruled that Carl  Blair was not guilty of assaulting his  wife because he was too drunk to know  what he was doing.  But WAV AW (Women Against Violence Against Women) and the Battered  Women's Support Services (BWSS) say  that by accepting the Blair's defense of  "extreme drunkenness", the trial judge  is sending a very chilling message to  women who have been raped or assaulted by men.  "It's just a sanction for drunkenness  and a huge alibi [for men who assault  women]," says Heather Cunningham of  BWSS.  Zara Suleman of WAV AW, a rape  crisis centre, adds that the decision  shows just how clear the power imbalance is between men and women in the  law. "When women drink, it'sopen game  on whether or not they can be beaten or  killed, but when men drink it's now  considered a defense so men can potentially get off on those crimes." she says.  In his decision, Justice Mackenzie  ruled that Carl Blair was intoxicated to  the point that he could not form the  "criminal intent" required to find him  guilty of assault. The judge based his  he was too drunk to have formed "criminal intent" when he raped the woman.  In Blair's case, Mackenzie accepted  the testimony of an "expert" who said  that Blair was in a drug and alcohol  Mahshid Esfandiari and Zara Suleman of WAV AW  decision on a recent Supreme Court of  Canada ruling that ordered a new trial  for a Montreal man convicted of raping  a 65 year old woman who was in a  wheelchair. The Supreme Court said  that Henri Daviaut should be allowed to  introduce evidence at trial to prove that  induced state during the beating and  was acting out violent scenes "like a  robot," and therefore was not responsible for his actions. Blair had been on a 30-  hour drinking binge and had taken a  number prescription drugs before assaulting his wife.  Heather Cunningham says the two  court decisions put the blame of rape  and assault on alcohol and not on the  men who rape and assault women.  "[There is already] the myth that alcohol  causes battery or assault, and I think  that's going to be intensified by [the  legitimation of the "extreme drunkenness'] defense," says Cunningham.  WAVAW's Mahshid Esfandiari  adds the decisions re-affirm the pattern  of blaming women for male violence  against them. She worries that the decisions will lead to even less reporting of  rape and assault—already only one in  ten sexual assaults are reported.  WAV AW has received a lot of phone  calls from women concerned that the  state of intoxication of men who rape or  beat them will be used against them in  court if they lay charges against the men.  And although contrary to what some  people think, Janet Freeman of BWSS  says acceptance of the "extreme  drunkennes" defense does set a very  dangerous precedent for women who  try to get their rapists or batterers convicted of their crimes. "It will not be  used only in the rarest of cases," Freeman says. "Obviously it's going to be  normalized just as quickly as possible  and every defense lawyer is going to  jumponitbecauseit'saperfectdefense."  DECEMBER/JANUARY 1995 News  Vancouver: December 9th Coalition conference:  Lesbians on social policy  by Shannon e. Ash   Over 50 women and men gathered  in Vancouver on November 19 to discuss social policy and the federal government's review from lesbian, gay and  bisexual perspectives.  The day-long discussion was sponsored by the December 9th Coalition, a  coalition of individuals and groups supporting lesbian and gay rights. The Coalition isoneof the fewgroups which was  able to present its views at the federal  social policy hea rings held in Vancouver  November 16 and 17 (see story, page 3.]  Opening statements at the conference encouraged people to come up with  their own visions for social policy and  not be constricted by the government's  framework of cost-cutting. Social policy  issues such as health and immigration,  ostensibly outside the government's review, were on the table.  One common concern was gaining  access to rights and recognition for lesbian and gay families while wanting to  avoid enforced dependency—for example, one partner being denied benefits  because of the other's income. A Vancouver woman was denied social assistance because her partner had a good-  paying job, and a Victoria person with  AIDS lost medical benefits because his  partner was expected to pay them. However, their partners cannot deduct these  support expenses from their income tax.  The proposal to make Unemployment Insurance dependent on partner's  income could extend this discrimination.  UI also discriminates in that a lesbian cannot qualify for UI if she leaves  her job to follow her partner to another  location.  Lesbians should be included in social programs consistently, and programs should recognize individual autonomy, were the conclusion arrived at  by those discussing these issues.  Theconference used smaller groups  to discuss the many issues: income  (in)security, education and training,  human rights, (im)migration, children  and youth, old age, and health.  In the Income (In)security group,  where all but one in attendance were  women, the question of how poverty  specifically relates to lesbians was discussed. Lesbians are generally poorer  than women in general, when relationships are factored in; women with support from male partners are better off.  Lesbians can face discrimination  when seeking work, or in keeping work,  if we are "out." We may lose family  support—financial support, or the option of living with our families. Lesbians  fighting custody battles may be burdened with debt: Rose Brown of End  Legislated Poverty (ELP) spoke of how  being poor and a lesbian was used against  herduringher own custody battle. Many  lesbians are also single mothers.  Ellen Woodsworth, one of the meeting organizers, notes that most women  on welfare are raising children, and need  support and well-paying jobs, not just  training. The discussion group on children stated that child poverty can only  be addressed by focussing on the families, noting that lesbian families are particularly affected by poverty.  Woodsworth also pointed out that  proposed public sector cuts—an esti  mated loss of 40,000 jobs—are in areas  that employ many women, such as  health, social services, and training.  "These are jobs that women [and therefore lesbians] overwhelmingly have."  They are among the few jobs where  lesbians get decent pay, protection from  firing,' and good benefits, says  Woodsworth, and by and large, only  public sector unions have same-sex  spousal benefits.  Meeting participants came up with  a range of recommendations, strategies,  and points for further discussion. A social policy committee was formed and  there are plans to make the day's proceedings available for those who did not  attend the meeting, and to get feedback  from more members of lesbian and gay  communities. A written submission must  still be made to the government's social  policy review.  For more information on the De-  cember 9th Coalition, call (604) 683-4176.  Shannon e. Ash is a regular writer for  Kinesis.  Having your say...within limits  by Jean Swanson  The title says Have your say but the  questions in the Liberal government's  workbook on social security review are  manipulative and leading. The following is a brief critique of the government's attempt at "consulting" the public on changes to Canada's social programs.  • In the section on "Employment  Programs," question two asks people to  rank the "employmenttools" they'd find  most useful if looking for work. The  "employment tools" people can select  from include: job counselling; information about the job market; upgrading  basic skills; classroom and workplace  training; and incentives for employees  to hire unemployed workers. What's  missing from these options? A job!  • On unemployment insurance, people are only given questions about the  government's two options. There's no  option for actually increasing UI benefits or expanding coverage to include  more people.  • Question two in the "Learning"  section asks pleasantly: "Do you agree  or disagree with this statement: The federal government should put some of the  cash it transfers [to provinces for post-  secondary education] directly into the  hands of students through an expanded  system of loans and grants." What's  missing from this question? Only the  doubling or tripling of tuition as provinces scrape to pay costs of reducing  federal revenues.  Jtfalt^  ...in changing  Canada's  social programs.  • One question is designed to elicit  responses that oppose universality:  "High and middle income parents  should receive less money and low income parents should receive more  money through the Child Tax Benefit."  What about the option of preserving  universality and taxing high-income people more?  • Another question is posed so that  respondents will agree that people on  welfare should be able to use welfare to  top up low-wage work. It is not mentioned that increasing the minimum  wage could have the same poverty-reducing effect without costing taxpayers  a cent.  •Question two in the section "Security" assumes people have a lot of information they may not have. "Do you  prefer a Guaranteed Annual Income?"  There are as many versions of GAI as  there are Canadians. Another option is:  should "Provinces [have] more flexibility without national principles?" This  question is really about the Canada Assistance Plan which includes the legal  right to income when in need; the right  to an amount of income that covers basic  requirements, the right not to have to  work or train while on welfare. How  many people would know that checking  this option would put them on the side  of ending the legal right of citizens to  income when in need? "It sounds really  pleasant to me," said women's activist  Donna Clark. "And that's about the only  thing I have to go on."  So...what should we do about the  government's workbook? We could fill  it out, adding our own options and writing appropriate comments where nc  lines are provided. Or, The Nationa  Anti-Poverty Organization will have its  own workbook, which tries asking questions that will be meaningful to people  struggling in poverty. You can call N APO  at 613-789-0096 for a copy.  DECEMBER/JANUARY 1995 News  Proposed new immigration laws:  Racist agenda  reconfirmed  by Agnes Huang  Not that anyone really expected the  Liberal government to bring in any positive changes to Canada's immigration  laws, but now activists have confirmation that the government has fallen in  line with the right-wing Reform Party  agenda of blaming immigrants—particularly people of colour immigrants—for  the economic woes in Canada.  On November 1, Immigration Minister Sergio Marchi tabled in Parliament  hisgovernment's plans to revamp Canada's immigration laws. The proposals  include:  •an overall reduction in the  number of immigrants allowed in  next year from  250,000 to 200,000.  (This figure is below the immigration level of one  percent of the total  population the Lib-  orals had promised  in their election  "Immigrants  should not be made  to pay for  the government's  failed economic  policies."  litera-  campaign  ture.);  • reducing the  proportion of immigrants allowed in through the family  class category/and re-defining "family  members" to restrict those who qualify  for admission under that category;  • requiring immigrants to pay user  fees for language classes and immigrant  settlement services;  • a greater emphasis in attracting  immigrants who will "contribute an economic benefit" to Canada;  • requiring sponsors to post a bond  guaranteeing their sponsored relatives  won't use Canada's social security system; and;  • making knowledge of English or  French a more critical eligibility requirement.  Many feminist activists say Marchi's  proposals are part of the racist backlash  against immigrants coming from countries in the South. "Canada appears to  have conceded to this extreme right-  wing Reform Party agenda of trying to  exclude immigrants who are of a different colour, of a different origin, [and]  who sound different," says Shree Mulay  of the South Asian Women's Community Centre in Montreal.  Reducing the proportion of immigrants allowed in under the family class  category as well as narrowing the definition of who is eligible under the family  class particularly targets people of colour immigrants. Most women who come  to Canada from countries in the South  come in through this category.  "Given the [proposed] cuts to family class, there's not a question that this  Sunera Thobani  is really an attack on having immigrants  from third world countries," says Sunera  Thobani, president of the National Action  Committee on the Status of Women. She  adds that Marchi had already made it  very clear several months ago that his  government wants to increase immigration from European countries.  Marchi's proposal to limit automatic  eligibility under the family class to  "spouses and dependent children,"  putting parents and grandparents in a  separate category, will also have a very  negative impact on women. Thobani says  a lot of immigrant women rely on the  support of their extended family to enable  them to work outside the home. "I  think the proposals  Marchi's making  will ensure that immigrant women remain second and  third class members  of this society," she  says.  Shree    Mulay  says that the proposed immigration  laws reinforce the  racist myths that  immigrants [from  third world countries] are a "drain on Canada's social system" and do not contribute to the Canadian economy.  Cenen Bagon of the Vancouver Com-  mittee for Domestic Workers' and  Caregivers' Rights (CDWCR) says that it  is totally inaccurate to characterize immigrants as a burden on the social system  and the economy. She says the govern-  ment'sproposalssuggestthatonly wealthy  English and French-speaking people from  European countries are welcome to come  to Canada. Bagon notes that despite the  fact that domestic workers provide an  vital economic contribution to the Canadian economy, they are very clearly  targetted by the right-wing as being a  drain.  Domestic workers had expected the  government to cancel the Live-in Caregiver  Program (LCP)—which allows women to  come into Canada to work as domestics.  And although the government did not  cancel the Program—as Marchi had suggested they would when immigration  policies were leaked in September (see  Kinesis October 1994]—the government  did make it more difficult for domestic  workers to get into Canada by imposing  restrictions on employers in termsof their  eligiblity to hire domestic workers.  Essentially, Bagon says, the government has found a more subtle way to  restrict the number of domestic workers  who can come and work in Canada as  domestics. And she adds domestic workers still expects the government to do  away with the program eventually.  Demonstrating in support of domestic workers in Vancouver  In October, a week before Sergio  Marchi announcement of proposed  changes, the CDWCR held a forum in  Vancouver to discuss the LCP, and  held a rally to protest the targetting of  domestic workers through racist  immigation laws.  Sunera Thobani says it is critical to  see the connection between all of the  government's "reforms" now happening in this country—immigration, social  policy, medicare—and the government's  deficitreductionstrategies. Thobani says  the government is scapegoating immigrants for Canada's economic recession.  "Immigrants should not be made to pay  for the government's failed economic  policies."  South Asian women's  centre set on fire  by Agnes Huang  An arsonist has left South Asian  women in Montreal without the only  community centre in the city in existence for them. In the early morning of  October 25, someone broke into the  office of the South Asian Women's  Community Centre (SAWCC), piled  up some files and chairs, and lit a  match.  Although the fire was putout fairly  quickly, the Centre's classroom area  was destroyed and the rest of the office and the Centre's equipment suffered extreme smoke damage.  No one has been arrested for the  arson. But most women connected  with the Centre believe that the fire  has to do with the fact that the Centre  is a women's centre and/or a South  Asian women's centre, says Sadeqa  Siddiqui, coordinator of the Centre.  The SAWCC started up in 1981  and has remained the only service and  support organization in Montreal for  South Asian women and their families. The Centre provides many services for South Asian women including, French and English language  classes, counselling for battered  women, lawyer referral, and immigration and job counselling.  Since the fire, the SAWCC has  been operating out of a temporary  space while their office is renovated  and repaired. They have also received  support from different community  organizations who have donated their  offices and classrooms so the SAWCC  can continue offering their language  classes. Siddiqui says that they expect  to be back into their old space in early  December.  Although the Centre continues  providing most of the services it did  before the fire, Siddiqui says the fire  has created double work for the office  staff who now have to be both at the  Centre and at the temporary space. As  well she says, the Centre is currently  unable to take on many new requests  from women for support because they  have less time and fewer phone lines.  The fire has also left women involved in the SAWCC very concerned  about the safety of the staff and of the  women who use the Centre. The  SAWCC is hoping to be purchase a  security alarm system and a door intercom and would appreciate any and  all donations. If you are able to contribute to the Centre, please send donations to the South Asian Women's  Community Centre, 3600 Hotel de  Ville, Montreal, Quebec, H2X 3B6.  DECEMBER/JANUARY 1995 Movement matters  Movement Matters is designed to be a  network of news, updates and information of special interest to the women's movement.  Submissions to Movement Matters  should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double spaced and may be  edited for length. Deadline is the 18th  of the month preceding publication.   I  NIF goes national  The National Film Board (NFB) program, New Initiatives in Film (NIF) is  going national to enable Aboriginal  women and women of colour to bring  their stories to local screens nationwide.  NIF was created by Studio D of the  NFB in 1990 as a five-year program to  provide professional development and  filmmaking opportunities to Aboriginal  women and women of colour. Thisyear,  NIF will provide over $300,000 in direct  support and training to 32 film and  videomakers.  Now, for the first time, NFB studios  nationwide join in the effort to expand  training opportunities for Aboriginal  women and women of colour. Also participating are Studio B, the Camera Department and NFB centres across  Canada.  "This is an exciting year in the evolution of NIF," says NIF Program Producer Claire Prieto, a filmmaker whose  credits include the documentary Black  Mother Black Daughter.  "When Studio D started this program four years ago in Montreal, the  goal was to help Aboriginal women and  women of colour avoid ghettoization  and share their talents with the wider  filmmaking community. To do this effectively, we needed to involve producers in as many regions of the country as  possible."  For more information on NIF, contact your local NFB office. Offices are  located in: Vancouver; Edmonton; Winnipeg; Toronto; Ottawa; Montreal;  Moncton; Halifax; London, England;  Paris, France; and New York, USA.  Counting  BC women in  The Ministry of Women's Equality  announces the second edition of Women  Count: a statistical profile of women in  British Columbia.  The contents include statistics on  education, employment, earnings, child  care, violence against women, and  women in influential positions. These  statistics confirm there is still a lot of  work to be done in these areas. Lacking  in the second, as in the first edition, are  adequate statistics on women of colour  and Aboriginal women.  Statistics compiled in the section on  violence against women report that approximately one in two women in British Columbia is a victim of sexual assault in her lifetime, and that women  who are victims of violence in BC are  less likely to tell someone about a sexual  assault. The booklet also reports that of  women in positions of influence, only 25  percent of the Members of the Legislative Assembly of British Columbia are  women. Further, the statisticsreport that  women make up just 20 percent of  tenured faculty positions at universities.  For copies of Women Count, contact  the Ministry of Women's Equality, 2nd  Floor, 756 Fort Street, Victoria, British  Columbia, V8V 1X4, or call (604) 387-  3600 or fax (604) 356-1396.  LEGIT is  three years old  LEGIT, the Lesbian and Gay Immigration Task Force, is three years old in  December. The organization, which  works towards ending discrimination  against same-sex couples in Canada's  immigration policy, was founded in  Vancouver in 1991 by co-chairs Chris  Morissey and Douglas Sanders. Currently, only immigration laws in Australia, New Zealand, the Netherlands,  Sweden, and Denmark allow for open  lesbian and gay partner sponsorship for  immigration.  In January 1992, Morrissey filed a  constitutionalchallengearguingthatthe  immigration regulations discriminated  against her on the basis of sexual orientation, denying her the right to sponsor  her partner, Bridget Coll. In October  1992, Coll was granted permanent resident status as an independant applicant  in an attempt by the government to  sidestep the court challenge.  In December 1992, LEGIT members  filed complaints with the Canadian  Human Rights Commission against Canadian immigration laws that do not  allow for sponsorship of same-sex partners for immigration. A favourable ruling would require the government to  stop its present discrimination against  lesbians and gays.  In spring 1993, LEGIT became aware  of a change in the Immigration regulations regarding humanitarian and compassionate (H&C) exemptions. Until  February 1993, all applications requesting an exemption on H&C grounds had  to be approved by the Minister. The new  regulation delegated this decision making authority to include Immigration  Program Managers at Canadian visa  offices. And in June, the Immigration  Department sent all Program Managers  a telex advising them that they may use  their discretionary authority to apply  H&C consideration to applications based  on gay and lesbian relationships. This  means Program Managers have the legal authority to re-unite same-sex partners on H&C grounds, if so inclined.  This discretionary, "backdoor" approach to enabling same-sex partner  immigration has been somewhat successful—LEGIT knows of over 50 couples who have filed successful applications over the past year: many are lesbians and gay men, partners of Canadian  citizens and permanent residents who  have not been able to acquire status in  Canada in the past.  However, LEGIT is still lobbying for  changes to Canada's immigration policy  to openly recognize same-sex couples.  You can help by writing to Sergio Marchi,  Minister of Immigration and. to your  Member of Parliament asking her/him  to change Canada's immigration policy  to recognize same-sex couples^ If you  would like to start a support or lobby  group in your area or would like confidential immigration information, please  contact LEGIT at P.O. Box 384, Vancouver, BC, V6C 2N2;  Sexual assault and  the criminal system  The metro action committee on public violence against women and children  (METRAC) has published a booklet  called Sexual Assault: A Guide to the Criminal System. The guidebook was written  for METRAC by Kathleen Gallivan and  Susan Bazilli with input from the Toronto Rape Crisis Centre/Multicultural  Women Against Rape, the Assaulted  Women's Helpline,and Vancouver Rape  Relief and Women's Shelter.  The guidebook's contents include  the harms and hazards of sexism, racism, and classism in the system and how  these affect reporting sexual assault; what  sexual assault is according to criminal  law; getting support after the assault  from rape crisis centres and women's  centres; teenagers and support issues;  third party reports; and problems with  the police.  The booklet also addresses issues  such as media coverage and information on protecting your privacy and  publication bans, laying charges, court  preparation, court process, victim impact statements, compensation, civil law  suits, and getting action. As well, this  book provides women with space to  record information in checklists of needs  and questions to be addressed. To order  the Sexual Assault Guidebook or any  other resources, for more information,  or for a library appointment, contact:  metro action committee on public violence against women and children  (METRAC), 158 SpadinaRoad,Toronto,  Ontario, M5R 2T8, Tel (416) 392-3135,  fax (416) 392-3136.  Lesbian group  in Brazil  A new group called Estacao Mulher  (Woman Season) has been formed in  Brazil with an office in Sao Paulo and is  calling for support.  In a statement, women in the group  write: "We decided to form such a group  because lesbians throughout the world,  mainly in the so-called Third World, are  completely ignored in statistics and in  any research carried out by governmental or nongovernmental health departments.  This leaves lesbians unassisted with  HIV/AIDS, sexually transmitted diseases, drugs, and many other problems  due to the prejudice against homosexuals in our society. This is even more  serious because Brazilian health policy  is not that organized.  "Estacao Mulher intends to gather  multidisciplinary professionals such as  psychologists, lawyers, sociologists, and  medical doctors to provide women, especially lesbians, with the complete assistance they need, in a way that they can  feel free to express their own problems  without being afraid of the stigma of  Brazil's homophobic society."  Estacao Mulher needs financial support and information. They do not ex  pect that the Brazilian government will  provide any financial support so they  would like information about funding  and publications other groups issue.  Contact: Estacao Mulher, Caixa Postal  62 631, CEP 01295-970, Sao Paula—SP,  Brazil.  Lesbians  at Beijing 1995  ILIS, the International Lesbian Information Service, i s gathering stories of  lesbians from around the world for a  booklettobedistributed at the4th United  Nations World Conference on Women  in Beijing, September, 1995. The booklet,  which will also contain contact addresses  for lesbian groups, is funded in part  through a grant from the Global Fund  for Women.  ILIS has also been presenting workshops on fundraising and preparations  for Beijing, which will be repeated for  lesbian activists at the Beijing conference.  In Beijing, there will be space pro  vided for lesbian events such as workshops on lesbians' legal status in different countries, a tribunal where lesbians  could present their stories about human  rights abuses, and a film festival.  If your group is planning an event at  Beijing, please send information to the  coordinating committee: Lesbian Rights  Advocates, P.O. Box 217, Rajdamnern  Post Office, Bangkok, Thailand, Fax (662)  477-1776.  Since every participating country  will be making a report about the position of women at Beijing, ILIS urges  lesbian activists and groups to lobby  their governments for lesbian issues to  be included in these governmental reports.  Lesbians who want to attend the  Beijing NGO Forum (for community  groups, professional associations, women's networks, and so on) should start  planning and fundraising now. Groups  must register by April 1995 and the  registration fee is $50 US. Forms are  available from the NGO Forum on  Women, Beijing'95,211 East 43rd Street,  Suite 1500, New York, New York 10017,  USA, or by calling (212) 922-9267, or  faxing (212) 922-9269.  NGO Forum organizers are raising  money for travel scholarships for  women who have no resources to go to  Beijing and can be contacted about the  "Send a Sister to Beijing Campaign" at  the same address.  In order to attend the NGO Forum  and /or the Beijing conference, a valid  visa from the People's Republic of China  is necessary. Women who believe they  have been denied a visa because they are  lesbians should contact the NGO Forum  on Women immediately.  DECEMBER/JANUARY 1995 What's News  by Lissa Geller  Right-wing poster  boy strikes again  Following a complaint by the Canadian Jewish Congress (CJC), the BC Human Rights Council has agreed to pro-  ceed with a complaint against newspaper columnist, Doug Collins.  This is not the first time complaints  against Collins have been laid with the  Human Rights Council.  Collins has used his podium at The  North Shore Neius to take aim at various  progressive groups including women,  lesbians and gays, people of colour, Vancouver's Black community, immigrants,  refugees, unions, and others. In a 1991  column, he even took a potshot at Kinesis,  calling us a "Marxist-Lesbian rag," among  other things.  The CJC's complaint will however  be the first heard by the Human Rights  Council under new amendments to the  BC Human Rights Act which recognize  more severe sanctions for people perpetrating hate literature.  The CJC laid the complaint against  Collins' column last March in The North  Shore Neivs in which he attacked the movie  Schindler's List, (about the Nazi Holocaust during WWII) as "hate propaganda." Collins claimed that "what happened during the Second World War is  not only the longest lasting but the most  effective propaganda exercise ever."  CJC spokesperson Michael Elterman  notes that, "Doug Collins has been writing articles for years which the CJC believes to beanti-Semitic... this column has  gone beyond the acceptable limits of  public discourse."  Meanwhile, The North Shore News  once again says it has no intention of  stopping publication of Collins' column.  Publisher Timothy Renshaw says that,  while some people may think Collins is  an anti-Semite, he doesn't think so and  intends to continue to provide him with  his "freedom of speech."  RU486 back  in the news  RU486, also known as the abortion  pill, is undergoing clinical trials in Canada  for the treatment of breast cancer and  may eventually be used asa once-a-month  birth control pill.  The pill, which uses large doses of  anti-progestin to induce abortion up to  nine weeks gestation, has been used to  end unwanted pregnancies in numerous  countries including France, the UK, and  China for some time.  Its use in North America has been  opposed by anti-choice groups and, as a  result, RU486 is only available for clinical  trials in Canada.  The World Health Organization  (WHO) is currently studying the minimum dose needed to induce abortion  and the effects that the drug may have on  breast cancer and some forms of brain  cancer. WHO spokesperson Peter Van  Look pointed out that RU486 has a variety of uses, only one of which is abortion.  "It's unfortunate this has become known  as the abortion pill, because it's capable  of much more than that," he said in an  interview, citing its contraceptive and  anti-cancer properties.  It will be four to five years before  the current studies on Canad ian women  will provide any evidence of the effectiveness of RU486 on breast cancer, and  another 10 years before doctors say  they will be able to absolutely rule out  any link between current hormone replacement therapies for post-menopau-  sal women and breast cancer. Some of  these hormone replacements are similar to the chemicals in RU486.  Prince Rupert women  Take Back the Night  Over 150 women and children took  part in Prince Rupert's first Take Back  the Night march held on September 22.  Participants joined others from across  Canada and around the world by march-  ing in the dark of night to express the  anger and frustration faced by women  and children who are not safe in their  own communities.  The march was followed by hot  drinks and fiery speeches, and served  to raise awareness of safety concerns  shared by women throughout the  world, including smaller communities  like Prince Rupert. The match was  organized in part by the Prince Rupert  Transition House.  Quebecchild  support action  By the end of 1995, Quebec will be  the only province in Canada which deducts child support payments directly  from pay cheques, regardless of  whether the payee is in arrears or not.  Under new proposals which are  forthcoming, custodial parents would  not be forced to chase after payments  since the province would garnishee  them from pay cheques.  This move is being heralded as a  major step forward for women, who  are largely the people collecting support. Quebec Status of Women minister-Jeanne Blackburn says the new  proposals will affects some 110,000  Quebec families and 200,000 children.  About 55 percent of Quebec parents  who should be paying child support  default on their payments; the vast  majority are men.  Back by  Popular Demand  Women's and other equality-seeking groups are cheering the federal government's decision to officially reinstate the Court Challenges Program in  Canada.  The program was created in 1978 to  allow groups seeking to fight Charter  cases before the Canadian Supreme  Court to apply for funds for expensive  legal fees and other costs.  The program contributed to a variety of important legal victories for  women including the legal battle to  return treaty rights to First Nations  women and the 1988 decision which  struck down laws criminalizing abortion in Canada. It was one of many  programs axed by the previous Conservative government in February,  1992.  "The new program is great news for  LEAF (the Women's Legal Education  and Action Fund)," says West Coast  LEAF representative Joyce Burpee.  "Without the program in place, the danger was that...only those with money  were able to influence Charter decisions  and shape the development of the Charter of Rights. Now, because money will  be available again, equality-seeking  groups will be able to once again have a  voice in shaping future law in Canada  with respect to the Charter."  The contribution agreement which  reinstates the program also creates a  non-profit organization to administer it  and provides $2.75 million for the funding of federal test-cases under the equality section of the Charter of Rights and  Freedoms, and for federal and provincial  test-cases under the language provisions  of the Charter and the Constitution.  Downtown Eastsiders  stop Casino  Residents and supporters of Vancouver's Downtown Eastside are rejoicing at the government's decision toquash  a mega-casino project in thearea. "Whenever you have a communi ty based oppo-  sition to a mega developer and you win,  it's a major victory," says John Shayler,  spokesperson for the Carnegie Community Action Project.  In May, it looked as though the government was going to allow developer  VLC Properties to build Las Vegas-style  casinos in Vancouver. But then the  Carnegie Community Centre Association hired Shayler to coordinate massive  opposition to the project. Shayler and  the community spent countless hours  on the phone talking to legislators and  citizens, writing letters, organizing petitions and conducting media interviews.  A large rally was staged on August 7th  which focused attention on the tremendous changes which would take place if  the development went ahead. Finally,  the government made its decision in  early October not to proceed.  Members of the downtown eastside  are now meeting to discuss kinds of  development that might be appropriate  for the area. "A public place, a market,  maybe a First Nations Cultural and Historical Centre, maybe a recreation facility," says Shayler.  Access to parks for  low-income people  For a long time now, people in Vancouver who were on welfare or had low  incomes have been entitled to a Leisure  Access Card (LAC) which entitled them  to free access to swimming, skating, and  skate rentals at all parks board facilities.  The only problem with the policy has  been that not too many people knew  about it and, as a result, not too many  people were able to use the LACs to  access park facilities.  However, at a recent meeting of the  Parks Board, a motion was passed that  would require the parks board to make  peopleawareof their eligibility for LACs  and extend free admission to people on  welfare to all facilities and services offered by the Parks Board.  The Park Board voted to put notices  into welfare cheques notifying people of  their entitlement. However, the Parks  Board then put off voting on a motion to  increase access to leisure facilities for  low income people.  For more information on this issue,  please contact Michelle at End Legislated Poverty at 879-1209 in Vancouver.  Anti-choicer  sentenced  Staff at the Everywoman's Health  Clinic and other abortion clinics in Vancouver are disappointed following the  relatively light sentence handed down  to anti-choice agitator Gordon Watson.  Watson was convicted of contempt  of court when he continued to harass  clinic patients and staff after being ordered not to. He was sentenced to 21  days in jail and one-and-a-half years  probation. However, his sentence has  been stayed pending his appeal of the  conviction.  "We are disappointed in the 18-  month period of probation, we'd hoped  the court would make an order keeping  him away from us for at least the next  three years," says clinic spokesperson  Joy Thompson.  To Thompson and the other  caregivers at abortion clinics, the incarceration of Watson was not asimportant  as keeping women safe. This is particularly true in light of the shooting of a  Vancouver obstetrician who performed  abortions last month (see story, page 5.]  The case against Gordon Watson  has been carefully documented by clinic  staff. In August, as staff attempted to  videotape Watson harassing women at  the clinic, Watson struck the woman and  intimidated staff and patients.  Watson goes on trial for striking the  woman in January and also faces another charge of contempt in connection  with harassing and intimidatingwomen  at another abortion clinic in Vancouver.  Parental leave  for New Zealanders  The Service Workers Union in New  Zealand, representing a large number of  women workers, has started a "12-Weeks  Paid Parental Leave Campaign." Under  current labour laws, women are entitled  to 14-weeks maternity leave and male  workers are provided two-weeks paternity leave. However, the leaves are  completely unpaid and cause substantial hardship for women.  New Zealand remains one of the  few western countries that does not provide some form of paid maternity leave  nor did it ratified a 1952 convention of  the International Labour Organization  which called on nation states to provide  14 weeks of 100 percent paid maternity  leave.  DECEMBER/JANUARY 1995 . Feature  Pre-Beijing '95 conference in Vienna:  The call to action  as observed and written  by Donna Lee   Towards Beijing  At an international conference in  October in Vienna, Austria, women came  together to work on the draft Platform  for Action of the Economic Commission  of Europe. The Platform for Action is  one framework paper to be addressed  bygovernmentsofcouptriesat the Fourth  United Nations World Conference on  Women in Beijing, September 1995 (see  Kinesis, Nov. 941.  Women participants at the conference represented countries from western, central and eastern Europe, as well  as Canada, the United States, and Israel.  About 1,700 women attended the nongovernmental organization (NGO) forum at Vienna, of which 34 were from  Canada. Twenty-one Canadian women  funded their own trips, 12 were funded  by the Canadian Beijing Facilitating  Committee, and one was a government  official.  My participation in Vienna was subsidized by the Canadian Beijing Facilitating Committee (CBFC), an organization funded by the federal government's  Canadian Preparatory Committee  (CPC), which is chaired by Status of  Women Canada. I was selected by some  CBFC members at the National Consultation of the CBFC conference in Winnipeg-  Before I get into the details of what  happened in Vienna, the who, what,  how and why of the CBFC needs to be  clarified. Although the process for the  formation of the CBFC has been characterized as "democratic," the nomination  and election of CBFC members had more  to do with time and money constraints.  As well, few women knew such committees were being formed to organize for  Beijing. (The China-Canada Young  Women's Project is another "organization" formed and funded early this year  to facilitate young women's participation in Beijing but by August, still lacked  the participation of young women of  colour and young Aboriginal women).  TheCBFCiscomposedofl7women:  six are representatives elected by national women's groups; six are repre-  sentativeselected by provincial/territorial organizations and five were appointed by the 12 elected members.  The role and mandate of the CBFC,  as redefined at its Winnipeg conference,  is "to facilitate Canadian Women's  NGO's participation in the process to-  wardsBeijing. This willbedone through  outreach to NGOs, by providing linkages, networking and feedback."  The CBFC's role is also to lobby on  behalf of women's groups in terms of  process, access and representation, and  to share information about Beijing with  other women's groups. Six members of  the CBFC also sit on the governmental  CPC, which has 25 members including  the NGO representative on the official  government delegation, Madeleine  Gilchrist.  To date, the CBFC has met a few  times as a whole, and organized the  national consultation in Winnipeg to find  out what women in Canada think about  the existing draft Platform for Action.  In Winnipeg, 18 workshops were  held on issues such as violence against  women, education, media, poverty,  youth, human rights, and women's  sexual autonomy, resulting in analyses,  recommendations and demands for a  document called the Call to Action. The  Call to Action is everything NGOs identify is lacking in the United Nations'  Platform for Action.  The Winnipeg conference was the  first national conference I've attended.  About 140 women participated. Although many women were frustrated  because of lack of services to ensure  access—including no translation for deaf  and hard-of-hearing women, indigenous  women, and women whose first language is not English or French—there  were some highlights.  The Women's Sexual Autonomy  workshop—conducted by four women,  three of them lesbians—resulted in challenging recommendations. Participants  discussed women's inequality due to  our vulnerability to sexual coercion; how  lesbians, divorced women, single moms  and women not attached to men are  punished through violence; and the economic, social and legislated policies that  benefit women who have sexual rela  tionships with men. We decided that a  fundamental recommendation for the  Platform of Action—which does not currently recognize lesbian rights be lesbian rights.  In the Violence Against Women  workshop, some of the recommendations were:  • that the level of violence against  women be used as a major indicator of  thestate'scompliancewithhumanrights  instruments;  • that stable funding be provided to  autonomous women's self-organized  groups to affect international decision  making;  • that an Optional Protocol to the  (United Nations') Convention on the  Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against Women be adopted which  would provide for the submission of  complaints from individual women or  from feminist groups on violations of  the rights protected by the convention;  • thatimmigrationlawsbeamended  to eliminate the vulnerability of immigrant, refugee women and domestic  workers.  There were many more recommendations articulated by workshop participants that I do not have space to  recount here. For further information,  contact the CBFC at 613-563-2550 (voice),  613-563-1921 (TTY), 613-563-8658 (fax);  or call me at Women Against Violence  Against Women Rape Crisis Centre  (WAVAW/RCC) at (604) 255-6228  (voice), 254-6268 (TTY), 255-3579 (fax).  Interview with Fely Villasin:  Accessing the boy's room  as told to Donna Lee  Fely Villasin is a vice-president of the  National Action Committeeon the Status of  Women, the NAC representative on the  Canada Beijing Facilitating Committee, and  a front-line worker at INTERCEDE, an  organization for domestic workers in Toronto. Fely also participated at the conference in Vienna. Unlike me, she stayed for the  lobbying process that took place in the  second week.  Donna Lee: Could you tell us a little  about what happened in the second part  of the conference?  Fely Villasin: The non-governmental  organizations (NGOs) finalized a document summarizing the more important  highlights that came out of the first week  of the conference. This was submitted  for presentation to the governmental  conference to let them know what the  main issues and demands of NGOs were.  The governmental conference is the  formal conference, with plenaries and  delegates making presentations. There  isalsoa committee, withdifferent representatives as well as governments, that  meets formally to draft and come up  with a final document for the ECE (Economic Commission of Europe) for the  European region.  In past international conferences,  NGOs have managed to make use of and  access the formal process to intervene  and to lobby the different governments  to ensure that the language [in official  documents] reflect the demands of the  NGOs.  However, at this conference, the first  three days set aside for lobbying was  spent in a frustrating and intense struggle to get access to the drafting committee. Physical ly, the location was far away  in a different building. We were also  given "security" as the reason for the  NGOs not being allowed to come to the  drafting committee.  These three days of struggle have an  important political significance, in terms  of the access of NGOs to what the governments are doing and to keeping doors  op en. The NGO women were concerned  that, i f we were unable to win unlimi ted  access to that drafting committee, it  would set a bad precedent for the 1995  United Nations World Conference on  Women in Beijing.  We know there is already a problem  in Beijing of the buildings [for the governmental and NGO conferences] being  geographically distant from each other.  This is significant since, at international  conferences over the last three years,  women have made good use of the interaction of NGOs with their governments  at such international settings. It was  significant at the Environment & Development Summit in Rio, and especially  during the human rights conference in  Vienna last year, where the language  which has significance to the lives of  women has become institutionalized in  UN documents. This then serves as the  basis for NGOs to hold governments  accountable for their actions.  When we finally had access to the  governmental conference, the issue  (which somewhat parallels what happened in the NGO conference,) was the  lack of representation of women of colour, youth and of course, lesbians.  The women of colour, made good  use of media time as well as the government plenaries to make presents tionson  the disappointing lack of representation. [We also addressed] the fact that  the overarching issue of racism...and  global economic restructuring brings  women of the north and south closer in  terms of the problems we're facing today.  Joyce Rankin, a NAC representative, made an oral presentation to the  government conference on the issue of  lesbian rights. The group of women who  did the workshop on Migrant, Refugee  and Displaced Women presented both a  written statement, which would become  part of the UN documentation, and an  oral presentation. I spoke on behalf of  the 57 women from that workshop. NAC  president Sunera Thobani made the oral  presentation on behalf of the Economic  Restructuring workshop.  Lee: You were talking about concern  over the lack of access. Originally, the  NGOs had five days to lobby the governments, but you said three days were  taken up in fighting for access. In other  words, 60 percent of the lobbying time...  Villasin: ...was spent in struggling,  trying to lobby the governments just to  give us unlimited access.  Lee: Could you tell us more about  the process of that struggle, of having to  tell them that you have every right to be  there. Who did you talk to?  Villasin: The Canadian delegates, for  example, had to talk to the Canadian  governmental representatives to let them  know this was a huge concern and to  demand they do something. For example, when I was talking to Louise  Bergeron-deVilliers [of Status of Women  Canada], I asked her if it was possible to  ask the Canadian ambassador to Vienna  to bring it up on that diplomatic level, to  10  DECEMBER/JANUARY 1995 Feature  At the Vienna conference  The Vienna conference included  about 12 workshops. The ultimate purpose for the subgroups and workshops at  the conference was to create a 12-page  (and only 12 pages) document which  would outline "recommendations"  NGOs have regarding UN documents,  such as the draft Platform for Action. In  other words, this was the only space we  had to make our vision known to government officials who would be attending  the United Nations "official" part of the  Vienna conference. Our vision, outlined  in the document called the Call to Action  also forms the basis for groups to lobby  the governments that will gather at the  UN conference in Beijing in 1995.  The workshop on Indigenous Women  was cancelled without a publicized reason, but indigenous women, such as Ida  Vincent from Nova Scotia, got it happening again.  The Vienna conference as a whole  seemed underfunded (What are governmental bodies trying to tell us?) as interpretation was not provided outside of  plenaries—bear in mind, this is an international conference. This led to much  frustration as women could not understand each other. Translation devices  were provided at speech time but not  during workshops, when the bulk of  women's work was being done.  I attended the Human Rights/Violence Against Women workshop, and  joined the working group on Lesbian  Issues. In the latter, the two recommendations (we were limited to two) were:  • "Governments should expressly  recognize that the rights of lesbians, single women, and all women who are not  attached to men are fundamental components of human rights and that lesbi  ans have the right to recognition as  families and to live without fear of discrimination, harassmentor persecution.  • "Governments should commit  themselves to eliminating heterosexual  bias in education, economic and social  policies, and legislation in order to ensure that all women enjoy sexual autonomy and freedom from coercion.  The particular ways in which government policies and societal norms impact on lesbians,  single women, and  all women who are  not attached to men,  should be addressed in each critical area of concern  and strategic objective outlined in the  Platform for Action."  Considering all  nine participants in  this workshop were  lesbians, one would think that the process in coming to these NGO recommendations would be fairly smooth. It was  anything but. Some women were concerned that government officials would  not address such demands, and we  should tailor our recommendations to  be more appealing. Fortunately, the  outcome of the workshops reflect our  rights as women to ask for what we  want/need /deserve,  In the lesbian working group and at  the conference as a whole, it seemed  racism was seen by white European  women to be found only in North  America; that racism is not an issue in  Europe. However, in Europe, people of  colour tend to be limited to taking low-  paying service jobs such as street clean-  ...[Vienna] was  the only space  we had to make  our vision known  to government  officials...  ing and we have seen the recent election  of an openly neo-nazi political party in  Vienna, among other expressions of the  growth of the racist right in Europe.  One incident tha t stood out for me in  Vienna took place at the Canadian Embassy when NGO representatives—  about 30 of us—met with Status of Women's Sheila Finestone and some of her  staff—Valarie Raymond, JackieClaxton,  Louise Bergeron-De Villiers—as well as  two men, one of  whom was the UN  ambassador.  For some  women, this was a  space to schmooze;  for others, it allowed  for potential lobbying. Finestone, a Liberal member of parliament, talked to us  about partnership  and how important  it is for NGOs and  governments to work together in this  process. She switched from English to  French as she spoke, and some women,  who are fluent in both languages, pointed  out that Finestone was not translating  precisely.  There were no translation devices.  Women spoke up requesting translation, but werenotaddressed. NAC president Sunera Thobani twice asked  Finestone to translate what she was saying because it was important for everyone to be able to understand. Finestone  eventually responded: "This is a bilingual country—go back to school."  (Thobani commented afterwards she  found it interesting to be described as a  uni-lingual anglophone when she is fluent in five languages.)  What struck me was that while  Thobani had spoken out and challenged  Finetsone for her decision not to allow  translation for the NGO women, most of  the (white) women in the room did not  seem to get it. During the mix-and-min-  gle that followed, I found it exasperating  to see women requesting Thobani's support as president of NAC, some sympathizing with Thobani as the "victim" of  Finestone's bad behaviour, yet refusing  to acknowledge what had just happened  in the larger group-that Thobani had  taken Finestone on. Certainly, some of  the NGO women seemed more interested in having photographs taken with  Finestone.  All in all, the Vienna conference was  an interesting scene. Canada and the  United States were lumped together with  countries of the north—the so-called industrialized countries—yet Japan was  not included while Israel was. Many  women noted that it would have been  more significant to put Canada together  with countries such as Mexico and those  in South America and the Pacific Rim,  since our economic policies directly affect these countries. Another point of  note is that most women are having to  fund themselves to attend these meetings—regional, national and international. Who is really able to attend?  For further information about the  Beijing process, get on to the CBFC database! The numbers have been listed  above, and the mailing address is Canada  Beijing Facilitating Committee, 151 Slater  Street, Suite 408, Ottawa, Ontario, KIP  5H3.   Donna Lee is a rape crisis ivorker at  Women Against Violence Against Women  Rape Crisis Centre in Vancouver.  take steps as ambassador to resolve this  problem.  Interestingly, the pressuring for unlimited access was taken up most by the  US government. A US diplomat came to  the NGO women's caucus to announce  that [on Thursday] we had access to the  governmental conference. So although  [the Canadian government] seemed concerned, it was the US government that  took it seriously and took more pains to  actually hear the lobby of women.  Lee: How did you feel about losing 60  percent of access time to the drafting  room?  Villasin: In effect, I feel the struggle  for access was a victory because, underlying the issue of access was that of the  concern of women from non-governmental community organizations having a  real voice in the UN.  So far, the role of the NGOs has been  very political, in termsof interacting with  governments, in terms of lobbying, and  so on. In all the preparatory conferences,  there has been unlimited access. So for  this to be happening in the European  region was like [telling us] this was a  sham. It was not something any right-  thinking person could swallow.  [This question of access] is the same  concern we should all have around how  we organize towards Beijing, about  whether we are organizing just to get  there, or organizing to get there to really  let governments know what women think  and to make governments act. So it was  a political struggle on many fronts and,  for me, the most significant part of that  struggle is that against what you and I  have seen of the trend to a more de-  politicized approach to this work in the  United Nations. That is why I see the  struggle as a victory [of] having unlimited access, being able to lobby governments, being able to let them know  what we think and strengthening the  words in the documents.  Lee: What do you think of the fact  that the Vienna conference brought together countries of the so-called north-  -Canada, the United States, western,  central and southern European coun-  Lee: What do you feel were the major  issues dealt with at Vienna?  Villasin: Well, racism is an  overarching context for the way the global economy is being restructured to the  prevailing economic order that disadvantages women of colour and other  minorities, whether they are in the north  or south.  I think the teeny-weeny victory of  being able to put sexual orientation in  the language of [the European region's]  Platform for Action is something that  "The linking of economic  and human rights is something  that needs to be built on..."  tries, Israel-basically the 'industrialized' countries, yet Japan wasn't there?  Villasin: I think it's clear the US and  Canada were not [categorized] in the  region that includes the whole of the  Americas, but instead in the advanced,  industrialized countries [region]. I don't  think this division comes naturally. I  think what seemed to be the rationale  was the fact that this [region] would  contain most of the Group of Seven  countries. It might be too much a stretch  of the imagination to have Japan [be  part of this region].  What was important was the effort  made, especially by women of colour,  to go beyond the north and link the  problems of women of the south to  what is happening in the more advanced, industrialized countries today.  can be built on. The effort of all the  lesbian activists going into ensuring this  one word, "sexual orientation" will get  into a UN document is significant.  The linking of economic and human  rights is something that needs to be built  on as well.  There is so much enthusiasm to build  on these things. With the rise of palpable  racism in Europe that we all felt, I believe networking is especially important.  In terms of NAC, the basing of our  international work on firm anti-racist  terms is an important lesson, whether  you're doing work on the economy or  human rights or migrant's rights. It seems  easy to separate women in the north  from women in the south—work in solidarity with women from the south yet  not see women from the south in our  backyard. NAC has been wise in making  sure we look at the international experience not as separate from what we're doing in Canada but as an extension and a  broadening of our work.  Lee: What do you see as important  steps towards preparing for the Beijing  conference in September 1995?  Villasin: We have to make sure there  are resources to be able to organize young  women and women in general to the World  Summit for Social Development that will  deal with women's poverty in Copenhagen in March 1995. The Vienna conference  is a guidepost on the path to Beijing. It's  important to organize where you are [in  Vancouver]. We began our networking in  Vienna. Certainly, in NAC, we have affirmed that we need to inform with our  own member groups so that they know  what's happening as they're marching toward Beijing. We have begun producing  inserts in [the NAC publication] Action  Noio, making the links with the Social Summit in Copenhagen. As usual, our problem is resources.  Lee: Could you tell us how individual  women can participate in this process?  Villasin: Individual women can participate by working for women's human  rights and working to improve the lot of  women. I don't know what the word is but  [taking me as an example,] I have just  come back from Vienna and have to immediately organize around the possible  abolition of the Live-In Caregivers Program by the Liberal government. There is  the continuity—you think globally, and '  you act locally.  DECEMBER/JANUARY 1995  11 Feature  BC's New Directions in Health:  A structure without values?  by Christi Cawkell  and Shereen Farag  New Directions in Health is the name  of the BC government's plan to regionalize health car—instead of decisions  being made from Victoria, it is designed  so that regions may decide their own  health care priorities. How will New  Directions affect women in Vancouver?  Will the community groups it purports  to hear be able to make decisions regarding its health care needs in reality?  New Directions: the structure  There are currently 21 "Health Regions" in BC: the Vancouver Health  Region is further divided into 13 geographic communities. Under New Directions, these communitieswillbeamal-  gamated into six. Each region will have  a regional health board and each community will have a community health  council. The Vancouver interim regional  health board members were selected in  early December and the six community  health councils will be formed by April  1995.  Oneof the roles of the regional health  boards is to allocate funds equitably  between the variouscommunities of that  region. Vancouver's regional health  board will be comprised of 15 members,  two-thirds local representation, one-  third appointed by the Minister of  Health. The community health councils,  set up to enable public input into decision-making, are to take care of services  specific to neighbourhoods.  In June 1993, after some community  consultation, an interim regional steering committee, with 15 members, was  formed. The steering committee derives  its focus from 13 neighbourhood planning committees, and seven designated  "communities of interest"—women,  First Nations, children and youth, frail  elderly, multicultural groups, people  with disabilities, and mental health.  The steering committee's mandate  is to propose how the regional system  should be governed, as well as define  the role of the community health councils in the overall process of change. The  committee's proposed model for governance was circulated among 2,000 people, of which onehundred responded in  writing. While the feedback was generally positive, community groups expressed dissatisfication with someareas  of change directly affecting their constituencies.  The final report of the interim steering committee recommends that Vancouver form one regional health board  and six community health councils; formulate a Mental Health Plan; and encourage further study.  Aside from sponsoring forums for  community groups to formulate responses to proposed changes in the New  Directions plan, the New Directions office is devising a draft framework for the  formation of standing committees, with  a mandate of ensuring continual input  and feedback from the seven designated  communities of interest. Sharon Martin,  regional coordinator with New Direc  tions in Vancouver says that, for example, a Standing Committee for women  will formalize the voices of women and  allow concerns to be brought directly to  the Vancouver regional health board. In  this way, according to Martin, "New  Directions is starting a process of linking  the formal health care sector with the  informal grass roots sector," she says.  New Directions and women:  The Vancouver Women's Health  Collective (VWHC) played a leading  role in planning, organizing and facilitating a forum on women and health  care, which took place in May. Women  from diverse backgrounds put forth their  issues and offered solutions.  A group of women from the forum  prepared a report summarizing the proceedings. In the report, health is redefined as "the extent to which people can  and so on, whatever the form of the  system.  McKay adds that "Treating women,  multicultural groups, First Nations, the  disabled, and the elderly as special interest groups is ignoring the fact that  these people are the core of the health  care system." She points out women are  affected by the changes to a large degree  because women tend to use the health  care system most, are largely employed  within the health care system, and are  the largest proportion of informal unpaid caregivers.  McKay is concerned that, through  New Directions, the government is attempting to "download" government  responsibility for health care to communities without providing adequate resources. The government's focus is on  getting people out of the hospitals and  into the communities, says McKay, but  \%  SEFa^r  AFTER  fulfill their needs and goals, and change  orcope with their environment, acknowledging the important contribution made  by food, income, housing, social support and personal safety."  The socio-economic factors affecting health are thus emphasized, and  suggestions addressing them are also  made. The forum report emphasizes the  need to move from crisis intervention to  crisisprevention in health care. "We have  to deal with health issues before they  become disease issues," says Julia  Brooke, a volunteer at the VWHC and a  contributor to the report.  Community groups are concerned  that New Directions could adversely  affect communities in various ways.  VWHC's Raine McKay points out that  New Directions has not incorporated  the recommendations of the women's  forum on health, but instead is focussing  on structure, with policy to be formulated later. This, McKay warns, poses a  danger of creating a structure without  values. And while communities have  received some funds to enable their input into the process, McKay points out  that as long as the structures of the  system don't shift, you merely reinforce  the existing structural sexism,  homophobia, classism, racism, ableism,  graphic by Dawn Simpson  there is no provision for paying community caregivers, who are primarily  women, to support this increased workload. In this equation, "women are the  invisible economy."  Chris Gainor, Communications Officer with the Hospital Employees Union (HEU) agrees. As well, Gainor points  out that health care workers will not  have a voice on the new regional boards  being created. "With the conflict of interest guidelines, anyone who makes a  living out of the health care system can't  sit on these boards. This shuts out  caregivers and union members and I'm  concerned the elites of the community  will be moving into the spots on the  regional boards and community health  councils."  However, Gainor says a positive  step is that the government has signed a  Labour Accord that guarantees employment security alongside the restructuring. The Accord ensures downsizing in  employment is dealt with through attrition, a shorter work week, and early  retirement instead of lay offs.  Gainor says the root cause of the  changes in BC's health care system have  been precipitated by the federal government's cutback in transfer payments to  provinces across the country and that  what is happening in BC is possibly less  disruptive than in other provinces.  Eileen O'Brien, acting chair of the  Women's Health Forum Committee,  agrees that it is important to note that the  government's restructuring agenda is  not health care reform but getting communities to take less money and take on  more responsibility. O'Brien says she is  concerned that, with its decreasing  budget, will New Directions be able to  maintain its standards for protecting  marginalized individuals, as well as  ensuring women's voices are not only  heard, but listened to?  She is also apprehensive about the  pace of New Directions and the speed of  change. "We're being asked to plop into  their committees without having had  the time to organize ourselves," says  O'Brien. She adds that she did not want  to see the New Directions Office decide  how, where and when women's voices  will be heard. "I want to make sure  there's a seperate feminist voice," she  says.  ...will New  Directions...ensure  women's voices are  not only heard but listened to?  Libby Davies is the New Directions'  community organizer for the Downtown  Eastside. She stresses the importance of  having both the neighbourhoods and  the eight communities of interest working in parallel to put forth their health  needs to the Region. She believes the  New Directions, despite some imperfections, has great potential in providing a  community-based health system which  finally meets the needs of those who  have been previously excluded.  Davies also feels that decision-makers are genuinely interested in promoting and facilitiating community participation in implementing the new structures for our health care system. She  encourages all women who are interested in health planning and creating  healthy communities to get involved in  order to make their agendas happen.  Given that the New Directions' Vancouver office is only a year-and-a-half old, it  is difficult to fully assess its impact at  this point. Certainly, the emphasis on  community involvement is a positive  step toward realistically assessing the  health care needs from the users standpoint. However,if the government wants  to ensure support for New Directions  from the community groups, it needs to  take criticisms from these groups seriously and act on them.  Shereen Farag and Christi Cawkell work at  the Vancouver Women's Health Collective.  They wanted to inform women about the  current restructuring of the health care  system and promote women's involvement  in the process, to ensure their voices are  listened to.  12  DECEMBER/JANUARY 1995 jO wow6** *  _        ~*C!Hl*        _  ___.   * v\»o*o essar-  by Fatima Jaffer  You're not going to read or hear much about it in the mainstream,  but women and other socially disadvantaged people are getting together in every province across Canada to fight the federal government's proposed dismantling of social programs [see Kinesis, Nov.  1994.]  Early thisyear, individual women and women representing organizations in BC came together to form the BC Women's Social Policy  Review Coalition. In September, the first national women's conference  on social policy was held in Regina, where over 250 women agreed to  bask principles for social policy reform.  Back in BC, women from various progressive sectors came together  through October and November to raise awareness around the proposed cuts to social policy. In this pullout photo-essay, Kinesis records  some of the key fightback actions that took place in Vancouver [as well,  see pages 3,6 & 7.]  Women from various organizations spent a weekend making colourful  banners for social policy review actions in October. Later that month, the  banners were displayed in the downtown core while activists leafletted  passers-by. This is a detail from a banner made by women from the University of British Columbia's (UBC) women's centre.  CWsSl\c* W36-MM  All photos taken  iS NOT  by Fatima Jaffer.  Thanks to Lael  COST 8£H£f!C'AL  Sleep for tran  ■  scribing speeches,  rar  and to Lien Shutt  WW  and Winnifred  |w  Tovey for help in  design and layout.  Left: Loud statement! Jackie Larkin and Shayna Hornstein carrying the NAC-BC (National Action Committee on the Status of  Women) banner following the leafletting downtown. The Social Policy Review Coalition joined women from the Vancouver  Committee for Domestic Workers' and Caregivers' Rights (CDWCR) and others at a forum on domestic workers and Immigration policy in a downtown hotel. The women then marched down Vancouver's Howe Street to the Vancouver Art Gallery for a  rally protesting the proposed cancellation of the Live-in Caregivers Program and other cuts to immigration. Right: Banners of  the CDWCR and the Association of Spanish-speaking Women.  DECEMBER/JANUARY 1995  KINESIS November 15  On November 15, about 50 activists occupied an Employment centre on Fraser Street  in Vancouver. The occupation, which lasted  about four hours, was to draw attention to   If  high unemployment in Canada andproposed   k  cuts to social programs.  Once in, we put up a huge banner and tried to be as orderly as we could,  so as not to interfere with the work of the UI office. The workers at the  Office were supportive, as they had been informed of the inmpending  occupation half-an-hour before we entered. So were most of the people  using the centre. It was hard to ignore us-we took up a lot of space and  our spirits were high!  Nandita Sharma spoke on behalf of Woman to Woman Global Strategies and  BC Organization to Fight Racism.  We need to keep in mind there are several review processes underway right  now. They are reviewing our social programs, but there is also a review of foreign  policy and defense spending under way; there is a review of immigration as well.  What all these reviews have in common is the creation of a society in which a very  few are seen as valuable and contributing members, and the vast majority of us are  being portrayed as parasites and disposable people.  What we are here to tell the Liberal government today is we are not going to be  fooled by their divide-and-conquer strategies. We are here to tell the Liberal  government that we are serving notice that, once they hit women, once they hit  people of colour, once they hit immigrants, once they hit workers, and once they  have hit the poor, they have hit a rock!  We will absolutely not allow this to happen—they are not going to cut our social  programs.  We gathered at 8:30 am on  November 15 at a parking  lot close to the Fraser  street UI office. The location and form of the action  had been kept a secret  until the night before but   I   some mainstream media had got wind of it and were there with TV cameras to record us going into the UI office. We had planned for word of the  occupation to be sent to the media and planned to hold a press conference at the UI office at 10 am.  Organizations represented included NAC-BC, Vancouver Status of  Women, UBC Women's Studies, Simon Fraser University Women's Centre,  BC Coalition to Fight Racism, Woman to Woman Global Strategies, Downtown Eastside Residents Association, Council of Canadians and the  Action Canada Network.  Unions represented were: Canadian Union of Postal Workers; Canadian  AutoWorkers; Vancouver District Labour Council; Public Service Alliance  of Canada; Hospital Employees Union; Communications, Energy and  Paperworkers Union; Canadian Brotherhood of Railway and Transport;  and the United Fishers and Allied Workers Union.  will not bring the economic viability  which this city and this country needs.  What we need are jobs and job creation strategies—there is nothing in this  "White Paper" that the [Human Resources ministry] has created to address this core issue. There is nothing in  the paper that creates jobs, nothing in  that paper that says we will provide  higher education to the people. In fact,  they simply turn it around and want to  create a lack of opportunity for people  to access higher education, a debt for  the students. That is something we will  not accept.  They talk about wanting to address  unemployment issues...well, what did  they do? They want to cut unemployment benefits, they create a two-tier  system, where in fact they will simply  download their responsibility onto junior levels of government like the provincial and municipal governments. At the  end of the day, who gets hurt?—the  people who [the government] purports  to represent.  The government talks about wanting to address child poverty. There is  nothing in this [proposed social program review] that comes up with concrete solutions towards addressing this  issue.  It is time for the government to get  the message from the city of Vancouver—we will not accept the "White Paper" and we will certainly not accept it  with our hands down.  fenny Kivan is a Vancouver City  Councillor for COPE.  One message I want to bring forward to the federal Liberal government  is that their social policy reform policies  are something we protest against in the  city of Vancouver. [The proposed reforms] will not help the citizens of Vancouver: it will not help Canadians, and it  14  DECEMBER/JANUARY 1995 Occupiers scribble on banner: the overall message is-no cuts to social  programs, immigration and pensions; tax the corporations!  Barb Daniels is with  the Downtown Eastside  Residents Association.  You would think that  before the Liberal government destroys this country  as it now exists, they would  consult with the people they  are supposed to be representing. This is not what is  happening. What is, in fact,  happening is they have an  agenda, they know what  they want to do, their plans  are made and what we are  going to get in Canada is  what we see in the States—  increasing violence, increasing poverty, and increasing  homelessness.  What we need to say,  and what AiiyorJhy'scorn-  tfe  (  mittee does not want to  hear, is that low-income  people in this country cannot tighten their belts any  more—they can't even afford belts. Middle-income  people in this country cannot afford to tighten their  belts—they are on their last  notch. This [time of policy  reviews] is a great opportunity for people in this  country who have made  vast amounts of wealth under the existing systems of  social programs and economic policies in this country to make a contribution—"come on, Royal  Bank—how about that billon dollars? Let's have it!"  Following the press conference, some occupiers leafletted outside and within  the centre, while others... well,...Right, below: SFU students crack down on  school assignments. Left,  below: Kinesis' Agnes Huang  and activist Lynne Wanyeki  pore over the item most worth  buying The Vancouver Sun  for: the crossword puzzle. As  well, we spent the remaining  hours at the centre sharing  information, strategies and  lunch; some talked to the  media on cellular phones,  almost all read.../C/'nes/s.  Burma Lockett is  a fish plant worker,  with the United Fishers and Allied Workers Union. She spoke  ivithKinesis at the occupation.  I am here to oppose the cuts to the UI.  We are seasonal workers, so [under the government's proposed  changes to UI,] if we  collect more than once  in three years, or three  times in five years, we  are "chronic users," or  "second-class citizens."  We would work  year round if wecould,  but we can't and it is  not our fault. People  do not want to be on  UI. I have 29 years seniority and now I am laid off and will likely not go  back to work until March, when the herring comes back in.  Up to 1986, we used to work year round at our plant but now, all the  ground fish goes across the line [into US waters]. With the General  Agreement on Trade and Tariffs (GATT) taking away our protection, we  can't take our fish in the country, it can go directly across the line now. So  we go on UI because of bureaucratic decisions on everything from  NAFTA to the GATT ruling.  I am tired of everyone blaming the people. It's frustrating because I  work hard, I earn my own living, I don't go on welfare, and I feel sorry  for those that have to because they don't have a choice. All these cuts to  UIC are just making it worse. It is taking the debt load off of the federal  government and putting it onto the provincial government.  I collect UI every year, maybe only for two or three months, depending on when the fish come in. I don't have control over when those fish  want to come into our plant. So the changes are going to affect a lot of  people. You have to have worked more weeks for less pay from UI, and  it lasts less time. They are talking about retraining people: what are they  going to retrain these people for? There are no jobs out there.  We have so many people in my plant right now who don't speak  English as a second language: what are they going to do? We have an aging  work force: who is going to hire them? I went to look for a job at 40 years  old, and I was told I was too old—so what is going to happen to people  who have spent 25, 30, 40 years in the fishing industry? Because they  collect UI, the government is going to retrain them? What are they going  to train them to do and who is going to hire them?  I want them to back off and leave our UI rights alone. The government  does not pay into it; it is the employers and the employees. The federal  government should keep their nose and their hands the hell out of it.  I think the government should start of f with cutting some of their own  benefits. Working class people work all our lives for a pension, yet  politicians only have to be in office six years and are paid a whopping  pension. If they want to cut costs, start taxing the rich and leave the poor  alone, because we can't get much poorer. There are a lot of single women  out there who are single parents, scraping the barrel trying to make ends  meet. If they go on UI or welfare, they are treated like second-class  citizens. That kind of garbage has got to stop. The poor are getting poorer  and the rich are getting richer on the backs of the working people.  Anthea Whitaker  spoke on behalf of students from colleges and  universities. Two students held paper sacks  over her head as she  spoke.  Over my head is  the student debt. This  [social policy reform]  proposal says: "The  corner stone of a better  job and a better market  is education." So what  do they do to make  better education? They  cut the transfer payments to provinces. What do they do to make  it easier for us to go to school? They say, "You will have to go into  more debt." They say, "If students are more accountable for  their studies, they will do better in school." Well, I don't think  so. With debts like these hanging over our heads, none of the  students will ever be able to pay their loans off.  Their so-called "income contingency plan" means that students, after finishing university, will get service jobs at $7.50 an  hour and pay debts for the rest of their lives. This coalition of  people is saying no more cuts to education; change the tax  system; and we won't watch our social policies programs be  reduced.  DECEMBER/JANUARY 1995  15 the He*"!'  For full story of the demonstration outside the government's hearings on social policy in Vancouver, see  page 3.  November 16  We started off with about  100 people at noon. Half  an hour later, there were  about 500 of us at the  rally held outside a  downtown hotel where  the hearings were  underway. Spirits were  high; the speakers were  inspiring; the solidarity  songs were great; we  were so many; we  blocked the road and  many stayed all day!  Miche Hill spoke on behalf of the  National Action Committee on the Status of Women (NAC) British Columbia.  As an organization which has fought  for the equality of women for the last 25  years, NAC is putting [Human Resources minister Lloyd] Axworthy, [Finance minister Paul] Martin, and [Prime  Minister Jean] Chretien on notice—we  will not support any reform of social  programs unless it is gender-based with  an analysis that supports women in this  country who are the poorest of the poor;  supports a system in this country where  equality is the most important issue;  and supports full employment, which is  what we want. That is what they promised us; that is what we are demanding.  We want full child-care, we want a  country and a society where people are  treated with respect and where we have  decent jobs and decent wages. We are  putting them on notice today—the  women of this country will not put up  with any cuts to social programs.  Ellen  Woodsworth of  Action Canada  Network, which  organized the  demonstration,  holds a placard  as Nandita  Sharma of BC  Coalition to  Fight Racism  speaks. Margi  Sloan of the  Public Service  Alliance Canada  is in the middle.  The Raging Grannies cheering the speakers on after doing a number, getting the  crowd to sing along to ....Solidarity forever? Also performing were the Ginger Group,  an ad-hoc group of women who played and sung a number of songs, some old, some  seemed to have been written specially for the social policy fightback.  Jean Sivanson spoke on behalf of  End Legislated Poverty.  Canadians reallyneed to know what  is in [Have Your Say, the government's  social policy reform paper] and not from  the point of view of the Canadian government but from the point of view of  the devastation this book is going to  wreak on our country [see a critique of  Have Your Say on page 6].  The stuff in this book is going to  make poor people poorer; it is going to  make unemployed people poorer; it is  going to make students poorer; it is  going to make workers poorer; it is going to take rights from every single Canadian—that being the right to income  when they are in need. It is going to pit  people on welfare against people on  UIC against working people.  The stuff in this book is going to  force poor people and unemployed people to compete fiercely for the jobs that  people already have and undermine  wages and working conditions. The stuff  in thisbookispart of harmonizing ourcountry with the United States and even with  Mexico. This book destroys the social programs that keep us from having to work  for the wages that people have in Mexico. We have to make sure everyone in Canada  understands this and puts a stop to this so called "reform."  16 KIN  Following the rally, most of the crowd pored into the hotel rooms where  the government's committee's social policy review hearings were being  held. After chanting for some time, some of us left; others stayed into  the evening to have their say.  5 DECEMBER/JANUARY 1995 Arts  Review: To Be There With You:  An exceptional Reid  by Nancy Poliak  TO BE THERE WITH YOU  by Gayla Reid  Douglas & Mclntyre, Vancouver 1994  At their best, short story collections  are like superior boxes of chocolates.  While some morsels are exquisite and  others merely good, we are more or less  fulfilled throughout the feeding. Fulfilled, and a little wired.  I don't usually fancy short story  collections—even the best. The problem  isn't between me and the stories. It's  between me and my metabolism. Just as  a dose of candy can skew the day, good  writing gives me the shakes. I'm lucky to  muster the calm to read twelve, fifteen  pages a day. An entire volume of good  This is Reid's first collection, although individual stories have been  noticed and rewarded with literary  prizes. The 1993 Journey Prize went to  "Sister Doyle's Men," reprinted here.  For a reviewer, this story offers a chance  to list some of Reid's evident themes:  Australia (the land, the white inhabitants); war (in this case, WWII); family  dynamics; Catholicism; personal and  political movements; love and sexuality.  "Sister Doyle's Men" also exhibits  Reid's architecture, the designs and materials she favours: small rooms, occupied by tangible episodes and dialogue;  or filled with mood, memory, drifts of  consciousness,heedlessof time. Her language is intense, uncluttered. She is  very funny, physical and subtle. Alto-  writing is frightening: like a little girl  who spends too long inside her  hallowe'en pillowcase, I can spin off my  axis with an almost bio-chemical excitement.  Fortunately, I had two months to  read Gayla Reid's collection, To Be There  with You. Two months pacing the book,  slowly, quickly filling with a story (they  are mainly discreet, yet something  builds) and then resting. During the  reading and the resting, I never shook  Reid's presence. Not her, really, but the  abundance of her creation.  gether, these small rooms expand with  the heat of Reid's observations and intelligence to become very large places indeed.  Of course, lists and descriptions can't  capture the experience of the stories. Let  merry.  Reid isn't a story-teller in the conventional senses. Not that her writing is  experimental. She hasn't dispensed with  character and setting, or leaned far into  language-in-and-of-itself. In her stories,  you are certainly among people—their  thoughts and gestures, their sensual and  ethical  strivings. And  you are certainly amidst  the geographic  world—wind  soil fish shrub  wave—characters in their  own right and  players, too, on  the human  stage. As well,  Reid finds her  people inside  the wash of  large historical  and institutional forces,  and tracks their  attempts at resistance, and  their submissions.  But for all  the substance of  her story-telling, Reid  doesn't take  you by the hand  or lead you  down an orthodox, narrative  path.        The  power of her writing goes beyond an  intriguing tale, a deft observation, a well-  turned phrase. It resides in imagination.  Gayla Reid  eye, of intuition and passion. (She also  has a dry hilarity.) Her stories impact,  not because you necessarily recognize  You will read through  nun's underwear, Australian desserts  and doggerel, Mahler's Fifth  and scuba diving  Reid's imagination unfolds on several levels. At first there are the stories  and characters themselves, emotionally  intricate, often travelling wide distances  of place and time (the itinerary in "Passport" includes Budapest, Sydney, Chicago, Chianh Mai, Spokane, Bien Hoa).  Her skills are considerable. Reid obviously draws from her own pages—she's  Australian-born, raised Catholic, politically engaged—but this is not warmed-  over autobiography. This is the sensitivity of a writer who imagines other lives,  other terrains, deeply, and delivers them  with intimacy and detachment.  It's almost an old-fashioned talent,  startling beside the confessional tone of  much contemporary fiction.  On another level, the writing sinks in  with a weight that exceeds plot or emotion. It is like looking at a fascinating  photograph. First you are drawn by the  visual force of the scene; then you become conscious of the photographer, the  original intelligence that fashioned what  you see. For me, this is when the shaking  begins. Reid has intelligence in spades:  the intelligence of memory, of heart and  yourself or empathizeor are'educated,'  but because you become gripped by  another's vision, absorbed by what she  found absorbing.  As for the stories themselves—the  plots could be recounted but I'd rather  not. The lead characters are generally  white children of the 1940s to 1970s,  often tangled in the Vietnam war and  leftie politics, often also tangled in their  bedsheets. (A complaint: I grew tired of  Reid's recurring and unvaried theme of  heterosexual infidelity, aka screwing  around.) There are powerful depictions of Catholic girlhoods, of women's  friendships, of love in many keys. You  will read through nun's underwear,  Australian desserts and doggerel,  Mahler's Fifth and scuba diving. You  will feel the slowness of childhood, the  acceleration of age.  Reid is a former editor of this newspaper. She started writing fiction in her  40s. No doubt that's a very good story,  too, in league with the contents of To Be  There with You.   Nancy Poliak also ivrites really slowly.  DECEMBER/JANUARY 1995 Arts  Review: The Words I Know;  Poems of  courage  by Naomi Foyle  THE WORDS I KNOW  By Cathy Stonehouse  Press Gang Publishers,  Vancouver, BC, 1994  This accomplished first collection  moves with marshalled  limpidity  through a childhood scored and scorched  by incest. Softly illustrated by the poet's  brother, The Words I Know is a book to  cherish for its insight, subtle crafting  and na ked courage. The speaker's resurfacing memories and emotions find elemental mirrors in the moon, the sea,  her father's work in the mines of Northern England, and the  livesof other women.  Mexican     painter  Frida Kahlo, in particular, figures haunt-  ingly as a mortal icon  of female creativity in  the crucible of great  personal    suffering  and heightened political awareness.  Cathy Stonehouse was born and  raised in Northwest England, and came  to Canada in 1990 to study for an MA in  creative writingat the University of British Columbia, where thisbook was written. Her father had been a collier [DEFINE], until closures ensured "the turf  grew thick above the mineshaft." Upon  his death, the writer's "memory/the  glinting seam" began an arduous haul to  consciousness.  The poems that open the book document an all too familiar world of knowing. In a long erasure of childhood and  love, a family circles the barely thinkable  fact of a father's brutality.  These vignettes unfold tremulously  at first—"something is missing" and because "the view I have yields broken  sentences," the narrator compresses her  fear and hurt into poetry.  ...an all too  familiar world  of knowing...  But with the father's death, a girl's  perspective doubles to encompass the  grown woman's, and a harsh new note  of realization is struck. The book acquires:  "the stones' sharpness,  who are counting the brown  knuckled hands of the waves  tha t open like yours to fill every  crevice  and never give up."  "Illuminations," engorged with  Rimbaud-like metaphors of sea wreckage, fantastic flights of escape "through  the eye of the ceiling" and the terrible  detail of the sexual violence Stonehouse  underwent at the age of six, is yet as taut  and understated as a  cutting wire at the  throat.  Throughout The  Words I know,  Stonehouse maintains this tension between a child's abject terror and the  adult's recourse to  the precision and intricacy of language. Her occasional ventures into the poetic paragraph, however, convey a fluid sense of immersion  in rhythm and image, promising a rich  prose style in her upcoming novel. Other  sequences in the book probe her relationships with her mother, her lover,  and women as diverse as woman flyer  Amelia Earhart, and Gioconda Belli,  Nicaraguan poet and militant activist.  The only poem I find jarring in the  collection is "Pictures of reader's wives"  in which over-identification colours the  writer's judgement of pornography in a  way that does not allow room for a  consideration of the issue of consent. On  the whole, however, it is heartening, and  perhapsnot unexpected todiscover that  the trauma this writer has undergone  has imbued in her a strong sense of  EastsjcIe DATAGRAphics  1460 CommercIaI DrIve  teI: 255-9559 tax: 25^5075  New! Artist's Starter Sets  Acrylics, Oils, Watercolours and  more...  Unique gift ideas for the holiday  season.  Call or fax and we'll send you our monthly  flyer of great office supply specials.  The Words I Know  C AT H Y   S T O N ¥. H OIIS E  responsibility to other struggles, including her father's redundancy.  It is not surprising to learn, then,  that the final sequence "The enormous  exit," speaks not only to Stonehouse's  sustaining attraction to Kahlo's biography and self-excoriating portraits, but  also displays an acute awareness of the  distances between the two women. In  "The two Fridas," Stonehouse writes:  "You weep everywhere, in books, on  cards, on calendars,/ your crying heals  me;" but "Stand separate" opens with  the recognition that "your body is not  mine/no more than England's/loneliest white coast/ can signal home," and  ends, "I turn my ships around."  While Kahlo's famed tenacity was  inextricably intertwined with her colonized country's history of resistance,  these poems zero in on the more intimate aspects of her struggles—the miscarriages and lengthy hospitalizations,  the amputation of her leg, her obsession  with death. Here, humiliation, pain and  anger sow hard but fertile grounds of  comparison with the ordeal of child  sexual abuse.  I, like Cathy Stonehouse, a white-  skinned Western writer, thought The  Words I Know asserted cross-cultural  sorority with other women both sensitively and judiciously. But the radical  unmooring that incest has accompl ished  upon this poet seems to have created an  orphaned perspective that paradoxically  finds its most familiar refuge in the risks  of writing itself.  "each poem a loose road  that turns, switches  and leads me to  another strange landfall."  Naomi Foyle is a British Canadian writer  just recently moved to Vancouver after  three years in Brighton, England.  Introducing Amplesize Park's  own line of clothing  New hours:  Mon, Tues, Thurs 11-6  Fri 11-7  Sat 10:30-4:30  Closed Wed & Sun  Quality consignment  clothing  Size 14... plus  Amplesize Park has moved to:  1969 Commercial Dr.  Vancouver, B.C.  Sarah-Jane (604) 251-6634  DECEMBER/JANUARY 1995 Arts  Review: Emma Goldman:  Friendly, but critical  by Anik Hahn   EMMA GOLDMAN:  SEXUALITY AND THE  IMPURITY OF THE STATE  By Bonnie Haaland  Black Rose Books, Montreal, Que,  1993  A friend asked me why, when I  could have chosen some recent poetry  or some new exciting fiction, did I decide to do a review of a book on a figure  as dusty as the 19th-century-born feminist anarchist, Emma Goldman. I  couldn't give my friend a full answer,  except to say that the Goldman legend  sparked my curiosity. Although I am  not very familiar with the work of  Goldman, my interest in her has long  been spurred by her reputation as "anarchist queen," as an advocate of free  love, as "the most dangerous woman in  America,"...the list goes on.  With my friend's puzzlement in  mind, I began to wonder if Emma  Goldman, after coming in and out of  vogue in different activist circles  through-out the 20th century, was simply not relevant to women in the 90s. But  in Emma Goldman: Sexuality and the  Impurity of the State, Bonnie Haaland  attempts to make Goldman relevant to  contemporary society by examining  Goldman's ideas on women's emancipation in light of recent feminist debates  on "difference vs equality," as well as  the potential of sexuality's pleasures vs  its dangers.  Most of Haaland's discussion of  Goldman's ideas takes the form of a  friendly, but critical perspective. In an  essay entitled "The Tragedy of Women's Emancipation," Goldman writes  that "the right to vote, or equal civil  rights may be good demands, but true  emancipation begins neither at the polls,  nor in the courts. It begins in a woman's  soul." Haaland agrees with "many contemporary critiquesof the bureaucratic/  legislative realm, or what Goldman refers to as the 'state,' after having experienced many of its alienating and  depersonalizing consequences," but remains cautious about Goldman's view  that women's emancipation would be  achieved through the unhindered expression of women's "instincts."  Haaland argues thatGoldman'sendorse-  ment of the private realm over the public realm risks placing women in the  realm of "instincts" and "desires" and  supporting the bel ief that women have a  different "nature" from men. This belief, Haaland points out, "has been the  basis upon which women have been  separated and oppressed."  However, Haaland does not dismiss Goldman's view of women's emancipation, rather placing it i the context of  Goldman's anarchist philosophy.  Goldman wanted the end of the state  and a restructuring of society into a  decentralized network of smallcommu-  nities. Goldman's "placement of women  on the side of desire and instinct is  representative of her placement of all  human beings—male and female—on  that side of the divide, and her rejection  of the public sphere as a possible climate  for inner growth and true emancipation."  With respect to issues of sexuality,  again Haaland is cautious about accepting Goldman's ideas whole heartedly.  Goldman advocated for women's right  Goldman's views on sexual liberation are also problematic for Haaland  because they do not "include a critique  of perhaps the most basic 'man-made'  arrangement—complusory heterosexu-  ality." In the chapter, "Emancipation,  Feminism and Same-Sex Relationships:  Goldman and the Interconnections,"  Sexuality and the  Impurity of the State  to birth control, to marriage for love  rather than reproduction, and to sexual  pleasure, and she put sexuality issues on  the agenda of the anarchist project at a  time when most of her fellow anarchist  thinkers failed to see "the contradictions  between the principles of anarchism and  the principles of patriarchy."  Haaland explains that Goldman  "championed the cause of sexual freedom while ignoring the ways in which  sexuality might negatively effect women's lives." Referring to a taxonomy of  sexual theories developed by British social construction theorist Jeffery Weeks,  Haaland delves into some of the limitations of Goldman's ideas on sexuality.  According to Weeks' categories,  Goldman can be classified as a libertarian essentialist. Because essentialists  view sexuality as "outside of, and opposed to society," in the word s of Weeks,  "the real problems of defining alternatives and constructing new forms of  relating, are ignored."  Haaland explores some of the reasons  for this shortcoming in Goldman's ideas,  discussing what Blanche Wiesen Cook  refers to as the "historical denial of Les  bianism," as well as the force of the ideas  of sexologists such as Freud and  Havelock Ellis.  In its focus on Goldman's ideas  rather than on her life, Haaland's work  stands out among other literature on  Goldman which is largely biographical.  However, Haaland seems to demonstrate that many of Goldman's ideas on  women's emancipation are problematic  in today's intellectual climate. Nevertheless, I found Emma Goldman: Sexuality and the Impurity of the State to be an  interesting work, not so much because  of the relevance of Goldman's ideas, but  ...what I find  most valuable about  Goldman today,  is not her ideas  so much as  what she did  with her ideas...  rather because of the way it emerges as  a discussion between various feminist  perspectives.  But what I find most valuable about  Goldman today, is not her ideas so much  as what she did with her ideas, that is,  her life. In spite of Haaland's adroit  theoretical discussion, Goldman remains  most firmly imprinted in my mind as the  woman who would take a good book to  read to her speaking engagements in  case she should get arrested and sent to  jail; as the woman who, when told by the  federal marshall that she could not speak,  as planned at a rally, strode out on stage  with a handkerchief stuffed inhermouth,  and "brought down the house;" as the  woman who was deported from the US  in 1919 for setting up No-Conscription  leagues and organizing anti-war rallies.  Anik Hahn recently moved to Vancouver  and is a first time xoriterfor Kinesis.  Want to know where to find Kinesis in BC?  Vancouver:  Pick up your next issue of Kinesis at any of these places.  DECEMBER/JANUARY 1995 Arts  r^^H  fJM  m  e  ■  -&-J0  n\  L  \w  o  Want to reviewfeminist books? Here'syour chancel This regularfeaturebrings you short  descriptions of recent books we've received for revieiv. If you think you 'd like to review one for  Kinesis, give us a call at 255-5499. If you revieiv a fiction or poetry book, you get to keep it.  Non-fiction and reference works are passed on to the Vancouver Status of Women's Resource  Library. Potential reviewers or feminist readers, there's sure to be something to interest you  in this crop of exciting new titles from feminist publishers around the world.  by Caitlin Frost          Pearls of Passion: A Treasury of Lesbian Erotica, Edited by C. Allyson Lee and  Makeda Silvera. Risque, exciting, daring and dangerous, this collect ion features the erotic  poetry and prose of more than 25 lesbian writers. A celebration of passion and lust, these  explorations by amorous lesbians of colour will transport you to every page of sensual delight.  C. Allyson Lee isa third generation Chinese-Canadian wet coast lesbian who writes and plays  music. Makeda Silvera is a writer and editor, born in Jamaica and currently living in Toronto.  (Sister Vision Press, Toronto, 1994.)  The Other Woman: Women of Colour in Canadian Literature, edited by Makeda  Silvera. This collection showcases the. literary works of women of colour in Canada. Itprovides  a view into thegrozving body of writing and critique by emerging and outstanding scholars  in Canada, examining themes of race, class, gender/sexuality, displacement and alienation.  Makeda Silvera is a writer, editor and publisher. Her previous publications include Silenced,  an acclaimed collection of oral histories of Caribbean domestic workers in Canada; Growing  Up Black, a resource guide for black youth; and two collections of short stories, Remembering G and Her Head a Village. She is also the editor of'Piece of My Heart, an anthology  of writings by lesbians of colour. (Sister Vision Press, Toronto, 1994.)  1995 Everywoman's Almanac, by Women's Press. The theme of the 1995  Everywoman's Almanac is Disabled Women: Our Strength is Tribute to Our Struggles. As  well as being an exellent appointment calendar, it is an empowering collection of inter-  viezus and artwork brought together through  the time, energy, and creative talents of many  disabled zvomen and non-disabled allies.  The\2 women featured exemplify the political practice of making links in their personal  lives and the political work between issues of  ableism (blatant and systemic discrimination against disabled people), racism, sexism,  homophobia and heterosexism, and  antisemitism. They are leaders of consumer  movements, artists, poets and athletes. They  are ivriters and advoca tes. (Women's Press,  Toronto, 1994.)  We came all the way from Cuba so  you could dress like this?, by Achy  Obejas. This first collection of short stories  byAchyObejas takeson thevoices of lesbians,  gay men, immigrants people zvith AIDS and  junkies. They are stories about uprooted people, of women and men struggling with the false  and truepromises of a veryNeio World. The title story quotes the exasperation of a Cubanfather  whose daughter embraces the very culture he presumed to come all the wayfrom Cuba togive  her. (Cleis Press, Pittsburgh, 1994.)  Happily Ever After by Stacy Chandler. Self published by Speculators Inc, Michigan,  this absolutely happy and fun little pink book shares the "lessons of lesbian life and love" as  discovered by Stacy Chandler and her lover Pookie. It ivas written for the "amusement and  enjoyment of lesbians" and isfilledzvith great little "laugh out loud" stories andpieces of advice  on relationships ranging from "Meeting Ms. Wonderful" and "Meeting the Family" to  "Phobic Body Parts" and "Chocolate Covered Helicopters". In the zoords of the author, "Buy  this book...Help feed a lesbian." (Vancouver, 1994.)  My Aunt is a Pilot Whale, by Anne Provoost Translated from Flemish by Ria  Bleumer. In this novel, Anna's cousin Tara Myrold moves from Cleveland to Cape Cod. Tara  only zvears red T-shirts because red means "stop". She gathers cork bottles to send messages  to Europe. She drazosfish and tells strange stories. Anna is perplexed by Tara's unusual  behaviour, until the day zvhen a pod ofzvhales beaches. The tzoogirls experience the entire rescue  operation and through the difficulties zvith the small pilot whale, Baby, Tara begins her story.  A relevant novel for both children and adults, this book shares the story of a survivor of child  sexual abuse. (Women's Press, Toronto, 1994.)  Women and Economics: A New Zealand Feminist Perspective by Prue Hyman.  Thisbookprovidesathoroughandcriticalexaminationofeconomicpolicyfromtheperspective  of a committed feminist. It explores the impact of economic policy on zvomen, focussing on the  past ten years. An overviezv of feminist economic atmlysis isfollozved by chapters on the history  of equal pay in Neiv Zealand, and the issues surrounding. International comparisons provide  a widerframezvork. Prue Hyman is an associate professor in economics at the University of  Victoria. She has also been a policy consultant for the Ministry of Women's Affairs and a  member of the National Housing Commission and the National Advisory Council on the  Employment of Women. (Bridget Williams Books, Auckland)  Life Without Instruction, by Sally Clark. This is a play about a zooman's struggle  for freedom, identity and dignity. Set in the late-Renaissance this play is based on the true  story of a young woman zvho is raped by her art teacher. Through the trial, she is forced  to endure torture and public humiliation,  but emerges in the end as both a strong and  independent zvoman and a talented painter.  Playzvright Sally Clark is the author of I  seven plays. She has received a Chalmers j  Azvard and the Special Prix du jury at the  Henri Langlois International Short Film  Festival. (Talon Books, Vancouver,  1994.)  The Very Inside: An Anthology  of Writing by Asian and Pacific Islander Lesbian and Bisexual Women,  Edited by Sharon Lim-Hing. This is the  first major collection of essays, interviezvs,  poetry and prose by Asian and Pacific  Islander lesbian and bisexual zvomen. The  contributors originate from or identify their  lu.'.'.ige in Asia—from South Asia to j  Southeast Asia, to East Asia. The array of  visions and voices are challenging, tender, ]  intellectual, passionate, exploratory, and  erotic. Sharon Lim-Hing zuas born in Kingston, Jamaica. OfHakka (Chinese) origin,  her family moved to Florida, USA zvhen  she zuas tzvelve years old. (Sister Vision I  Press, Toronto, 1994)  The Black Diamond Ring, by Patricia Seaman. This collection of short stories  explore thepleasures and pains ofyoung contemporaryzvomen. Stories rangefrom humour  about theprice ofzvotnen's panties in "Facts about Shiners," to the zvitty resistance of the  zvaitress in "Don't Call Me Honey." Patricia Seaman has published short fiction and  article across Canada, and is a contributing editor zvith Alphabet City. (The Mercury  Press, Stratford, 1994.)  Stopping the Violence Against Women in Relationships: A Resource  Inventory, by Helen Douglas, Mary Ann Murphy, Claire Budgen, and Joann  Leake. Prepared for the Province of British Columbia, this neiv Canadian publication is  an interdisciplinary inventory of materials on violence against zvomen in relationships. It  provides an annotated listing of approximately 1,500 print and media resources published  primarily since 1990. It includes information on zvhere to access material produced  throughout Canada, theUS, and internationally. It alsoprovides an overviezv of zvorkbeing  done in the field, including training programs, community-based initiatives, teaching  materials, research studies, reports, articles, books, audio-visual aids, bibliographies and  special projects, produced by community groups, researchers, and governments attempting to stop the violence. (Province of British Columbia, Victoria, 1994.)  Dread Culture by Masani Montague. This novel revolves around Sheba, a  Caribbean zuoman, and her brother Johnnie, zvho immigrate to Canada to join their mother  and her neiv family. Dread Culturefocusses on the frustration and betrayal, hypocrisy and  violence that beset today's youth, as Johnnie is convicted for the murder of a man he has  never seen before. The exploration of the character of Sheba gives an insider'sviezv into the  life of a traditional Rastafarian woman as she grapples zvith sexism and zvith the role of  zvomen in the church and the community. Author Masani Montague is a zvriter,  playzvright and community zvorker, active in the Rastafarian and Black community in  Toronto. (Sister Vision Press, Toronto, 1994.)  Woman to Woman, by Aida Santos and Giney Villar. Tzoo Filipina lesbian  feminist activists produced this collection of poetry and prose in English and Tagalog. (It  is available for US$10 (plus postage) from Aida Santos, WEDPRO, 154-A Set.  Limbaga cor 11th Jamboree, Quezon City, Philippines.)  GIVE HER  WHAT SHE WANTS  Risque, exciting,  daring & dangerous...  This collection brings together the titillating poetry and prose of more than 25  lesbian writers. This collection explores  the subtle complexities, intense intimacies and sensual tenderness of amourous  lesbians of colour, celebrating the place  of passion desire, and lust.  Edited by C. Allyson Lee  and Makeda Silvera  Get her a copy at your favorite  local bookstore.  PEARLS  OF PASSION  ■.'':■■■•'                  ■■::-  B  DECEMBER/JANUARY 1995 Arts  by Minoo Shakibai  Starshine by Ellen Schwartz. Starshine Bliss Shapiro has a problem: her name. She  might not get to go on the camping trip because of a squabble with her parents. But by using  her hobby-spiders and with the help of her best friend, Julie Wong, she might figure out a way  to go on the trip. If only her younger sister doesn't foul things up. Starshine is a book for  girls and women. Ellen Schwartz lives in  Burnaby, BC. (Polestar Book Publishers,  Vancouver, 1994.)  Starshine at Camp Crescent Moon  by Ellen Schwartz. In the sequel to  Starshine, the young hero of the book is on  her zvay to summer camp for the first time,  eager for adventure and hopeful about finding a rare spider believed to be extinct. But  she is also anxious about be ing homesick, and  zvorried that no one will like her if they find  out she has a fondness for spiders. (Polestar  Book Publishers, Vancouver, 1994.)  Breathing Each Other's Air by Florence McNeil. This haunting story—part  mystery, part journey of self-discovery—  follozvs the zvork of Elizabeth Morrison, an  academic completing a biography of an enigmatic woman zvho drozvned off the coast of  BC in 1915. Conflicting versions of the acci- ^■M&~*  dent mix zvith unresolved issues in Elizabeth's life—her father's death, her abrasive HP*" - •  relationship zvith her mother, her failed marriage—as Elizabeth attempts to sort out past and present, truth and imaginings. McNeil,  zvho zuas bom and raised in Vancouver and currently lives in Delta, BC, has published zuorks  that include nine books of poetry, four novels, a play, and one book of non-fiction. (Polestar  Book Publishers, Vancouver, 1994.)  All Fall Down by Wendy Lill. A drama surrounding an inquiry into child abuse at  asmall-tozun daycare, All Fall Down isaplayabout witch-hunting in thelate 20thcentury.  The rumours and whispers in the community—every suspicion of the unusual, theeccentric,  the unexplained—are added to thegrozuing body of evidence that evil is afoot in the daycare  center. Wendy Lill has written for radio, magazines, film, TV and the stage. (Talon Books,  Vancouver, 1994).  new and  gently used books  Fei  Philosophy ■ Poetry  Native - General  Open daily 11am -7pn  Coffee Bar  1020 Commercial Drive  Vancouver BC V5L 3W9  (604) 253-1099  Bonnie Murray  Cynthia Brooke  The Frontiers Of Love by Diana  Chang. Set in Japanese-occupied Shanghai  in 1945, The Frontiers of Love passes  effortlessly in and out of Asian and Western  fields of reference to explore the issue of  cultural identity in a city dominated by  Western colonialism. Chang, the daughter  of a Chinese father and Eurasian mother,  zuas born in Neiv York but spent some of her  childhood in Beijing and Shanghai. In Frontiers, she uses psychological portrayal, historical narrative and sociological observa  tion to achieve a view of a city both liberating and oppressive, national and international.  Chang is the author of five novels and three collections of poetry. (University of  Washington Press, Seattle, 1994).  Menstrual Realities and Menstrual Myths by Dr. Dianne McGibbon. This book  is the result of 25 years of clinical experience and Western medical research relating to  women's reproductive and menstrual concerns. It is intended as a resource book and  diagnostic diary. Dianne McGibbon zuas born in Toronto in 1937. Her mother provided her  early training in drazving and painting. She elected Fine Arts as part of her pre-medical  training at the University of Toronto. (Unicorn Press, Toronto, 1993.)  Deejay & Betty by Anne Cameron. Donna Jean (Deejay) and Betty Fiddick are  ordinary zuorking women. At first they don't know each other. They're about the same age,  bothgrozuing up in lozu-rent neighbourhoods in small BC cities. Both are caught in painful,  abusivefamily relationships—Deejay'smotherhasazueaknessforjunkandviolentmen,and  Betty gets left alone at home zvhen she isn't being raped by her stepfather. Both grow up angry,  tough, smart, compassionateamd  honest. When their paths cross in  the middle of a sexual assault case,  they are ready to end the cycles of j  abuse and pain together. (Harbour Publishing, Madeira Park,  1994.)  The Invitation: A Memoir  of Family Love and Reconciliation by Joan Haggerty. Based  on the true story of a young Canadian woman who gave up her second child for adoption to a French  couple she had just met in London  in the 1960s. Today open adoptions are more recognized in family law, but Kathleen, Loesic and  Jean Paul, talking things out in a  small flat in London in the 1960s,  had nothing to go on but their wits \  and their trust in each other. The j  book is meant to appeal to anyone  who has ever forged a family outside of societal bounds. (Douglas I  & Mclntyre, Vancouver, 1994.)  Other Words for Grace by  Margaret Christakos. Lmfa>dpu- j  ems tell the story of the coming of I  age of a young girl in the 1970s.  Beginning zvith metaphors of the  body's pleasures and perils, the narrative spirals outward into the realms of social experience  and popular culture. From childhood games to the dire fashion of puberty, from Wuthering  Heights to Fantasia, Grace strains past familiar ciphers of white femininity, wagereing the  consequences of her own au tonomy, seeking a voice separate from her mother's, and connected  to other women. Margaret Christakos is the author of 'Not Egypt, and her poetry has been  published in journals such as Prism, Tessera, and Room of One's Own. (Mercury Press,  Stratford, Ont, 1994).  VANCOUVER  WOMEN'S  BOOKSTORE  315CAMBIEST.  VANCOUVER, B.C. HOURS:  V6B 2N4 MONDAY - SATURDAY  TEL: (604) 684.0523 10 AM - 6 PM  ANNE CAMERON  Deejay  n ■■..,..  El  V  WOMEN  IN PRINT  BOOKS & OTHER MEDIA  Discounts for  book dubs  3566 West 4th Avenue  +  Vancouver BC  Special orders  Voice   604 732-1128  welcome  Fax       604 732-4129  10-6 Daily ♦  12-5 Sunday  PARAGRAPH  OCTOPUS BOOKS  1146 Commercial Dr.  Vancouver, B.C.  253-0913  An alternative bookstore in the  east end for new and used  books by local and international women authors as well as a  large selection of cards and  feminist magazines.  y>f/JjC     if\    Western Canada's  lfffiff4££*-V       Lesbian & Gay  Ci^CTI                     Bookstore  f    %*~    Art Emporium  %y                                                Open Daily 10am to 11pm  Our Books/Our Issues  Gay Fiction  Lesbian Fiction  Our Magazines & Journals  AIDS/Health  Humour  Erotica  Queer Theory  Feminist Theory  Biographies, Essays, Poetry  Religion & Spirituality  Art & Photography  Community  1221 Thurlow(at Davie), Vancouver, B.C.  Tel:(604)669-1753 or   Fax:(604)685-0252  ANNOUNCING  PARAGRAPH'S SHORT  FICTION CONTEST  DEADLINE JUNE 30. 1995  S350 FIRST PRIZE  S14 entry fee includes  one-year subscription  for detailed RULES send  SASE to:  PARAGRAPH CONTEST  137 Birmingham Street  Stratford, Ontario  N5A 2T1  DECEMBER/JANUARY 1995 KJ±J_L£JLS  CELEBRATING 20 YEARS  1974-1V94  And what better wag to^HH^H^than to bug Ljourselt...op  a friend...ora women sorganization ljou d liketosupport...the  [Bthat lasts all Ljear round - a subscription to«ffl    M  Canada's oldest national English-language teminist news-  Continents of Women by  paper  And...with each qitt or new subscription to ixinesis bought  before March 8th (International Women s Dag), IXinesis  will   send   gou   a f^A set  of   IXinesis 20th  Anniversaru,  dS i^   featuring the work of six women artists trom  across Canada!  So don't wait! Each subscription makes a difference. Support gour feminist newspaper todag.  Oh Give Me a Home by Gltanjall  me Woman by Shirley Bear  Send this ad with your check or money order to:  ■Kinesis  I-301-1720 Grant St  ■ Vancouver. BC  |V5L 2Y6  I One year (individual): $20 (plus $1.40 GST)  I Two year (individual): $36 (plus $2.52 GST)  | Institution/Group rates per year: $45 (plus $3.15 GST)  9U.   We can't reproduce the colours here but trust us - it's  stunning! 16 colours on a white  t-shirt.  4> Artwork by Laiwan  0 Sizes are M, L, XL, XXL, XXXL  ♦ Costs $20 (plus $2.50 for  postage)  SEND OFF FOR  YOUR KINESIS 20TH  ANNIVERSARY  T-SHIRT TODAY from:  Kinesis  301-1720 Grant St  Vancouver, BC  V5L 2Y6  KINESIS  DECEMBER/JANUARY 1995 Letters  Kinesis loves receiving mail. Please  get your letter to us by the 18th of the  month.  If you can, keep the length to about  500 words. (If you go way over, wemight  edit for space.)  Hope to hear from you very soon.  Love,  Kinesis  Response  to Linkletter  Kinesis:  I am writing in response to Julie  Linkletter's letter to Kinesis, published  in the October 1994 issue of Kinesis.  I agree with Julie about the importance of The 99 Federal Steps and I commend Lee Lakeman and Rape Relief on  the work they did on this document.  I was, however, offended by the  insinuation that somehow rural women  are incapable of being articulate about  our own issues around violence against  women in our own communities. Julie  also suggested that it is difficult to include rural women. I gather she does not  realize that there are long established  feminist groups in many small communities throughout the country. Transition houses, women's centers, status of  women groups in unions are all accessible by telephone for consultation.  Women who are victims of violence  and feminist women's groups have to  cope with the additional disadvantages  of geographical distance from the more  comprehensive services available in urban centers and from the decision-making processes which often occur in our  absence but then impact us in ways in  which people in urban areas have no  understanding. To suggest that because  it is more difficult to involve rural women  (long distance telephone charges) and  therefore (because we aren't articulate  anyway), urban women should not be  bothered seeking our recommendations  about our own lives is to suggest that the  women's movement endorse the systems which have traditionally disenfranchised the half of women of British  Columbia who live outside of greater  Vancouver. This is unacceptable.  Maureen Trotter,  Quesnel, BC  Conference  organizers respond  Kinesis:  Lys Souvienne/Radical Survivor's  letter, titled "Survivors Excluded" [see  Kinesis, Nov. 94J questioned the political  integrity of the Making It Manageable  conference [subtitled Working with Dissociation, Mind Control and Ritual Abuse]  held in Vancouver this September. As  the primary conference sponsors, we  are puzzled by many facets of this situation.  We wonder why it was necessary  for Radical Survivors (RS) to deceive the  readership by denying our correspondence (dated 12 and 21 September, 1994).  We wonder why Kinesis chose to print  RS's letter when they possessed documentation which established its inaccu  racy and defamatory nature? We wonder why the RS group has targeted the  only conference in western North  America (1994) which focused on ritual  abuse from a feminist perspective and  analysis. Not in attendance, their letter  contains many wrong assumptions  which are stated factually. We wonder  why Kinesis would solicit a response  from an Abstract Review Committee  member (BWSS), and leave those most  directly targeted unaware and consequently silenced?  Perhaps Kinesis is unaware that the  sponsors, Pamela Sleeth and Daniela  Coates, are respectively a survivor, pioneer and feminist counsellor in the area  of childhood sexual abuse since the early  1980s, and a ritual abuse survivor/pioneer who since 1989 has educated internationally on ritual abuse from a feminist/survivor perspective. Is it possible  that Kinesis is unaware that, as grassroots feminists, we have at our personal  and professional risk been "on point"  for this issue over the last many years,  enduring focussed harassment by offending groups, which has included attempts to discredit our voices? We have  continued despite surprisingly little support from either the local feminist and /  or professional communities. In our time,  the "bandwagon" has come and gone.  We are still here.  Why should Kinesis knowingly facilitate RS putting themselves in a position to publicly stumble and be politically embarrassed? Was it a false sense  of political (patronizing) expediency or  correctness? Whatever the reason, it was  an ill-advised decision. We can call upon  you to reconsider and examine those  motives and choices.  Connie Chapman provided an articulate and thoughtful response to the  question of survivor visibility. We ask,  who benefits and what value is realized  when individuals who have survived  ritual abuse (or any other form of abuse)  are publicly defined according to the  violent actions of perpetrators, rather  than all that they are within and beyond  being a "survivor?" Isn't labelling survivors as such simply entrenching the "us"  and "them" construct? Isn't it "walking" those politics to simply accept abstracts, involvement and registrations  by survivors because they are peers to  their counterparts (professionals). Why,  wewonder did Kinesis knowingly choose  a misleading heading: "Survivors Excluded."  It is not useful to knowingly enable  one voice (or many) to promote the misrepresentation of facts. It is not helpful  to provide a forum for sisters to expose  their naivete. None of this furthers us.  These decisions and actions can only  facilitate this issue's discreditation and  socially sanctions the discrimination directed at all who work towards ending  ritual abuse: survivors and professionals alike.  Let us find a better way to be heard  and to speak the many truths and perspectives we have within us.  Pamela Sleeth & Daniela Coates,  Sponsors and Co-ordinators,  Making It Manageable,  Vancouver, BC  [The Editorial Board responds:] Where  possible, taking into account deadline  pressures and space availability, Kinesis  makes an effort to let feminist organizations that are mentioned in letters know  of the letters and respond. Kinesis is,  however, under no obligation to inform  groups in advance. Kinesis also reserves  the right to publish only a representative  sampling of the opinions expressed.  As Souvienne's letter focuses on the  feminists her organization knew were  participating in the conference—representatives from Battered Women's Support Services and the Cowichan Women  Against Violence Against Women—  Kinesis contacted these groups and offered them an opportunity to respond in  the same issue. One of the conference  organizers heard of the letters, and asked  for an opportunity to respond. We refused because of deadline pressures,  space availability and because we felt  the letter we had already received in  response from BWSS adequately addressed the concerns raised in  Souvienne's letter. We suggested the  organizers respond in our December/  January issue.  Kinesis  sensationalizes?  Kinesis:  I am writing to comment on the  letter published in the November, 1994  issue of Kwsis, written by LysSouvienne  of Radical Survivors in Victoria.  Souvienne directs much bitterness  at a healing movement which has grown  from the experiences, and committed  work of those who have been subjected  to, and affected by, some form of historic  abuse. Souvienne goes a step further  and heapsblame, misjudgment and false  al legations on the organizers of an excellent conference held in Vancouver in  September 1994, on dissociation, mind  control and ritual abuse. Considering  that Souvienne did not attend the conference, and apparently has no knowledge of the well recognized and well  respected organizers, makes herassump-  tions all the more foolish. Whatever the  grounds of her anger are, they do not  belong on the conference or on those  hard working women who put the conference on.  Souvienne paints a false picture of  therapists getting rich from the exploitation of historically abused people. This  same rhetoric is used by the backlash  movement which charges that a giant  industry has been created by therapists  who work in the field of recovered  memories. The shared notion here is  that survivors are the victims of therapy,  controlled and manipulated by a self-  serving industry. Souvienne arrogantly  discredits everyone when she polarizes  survivors in opposition to the "so-called  professional helpers."  May I remind her that the healing  movement is to be credited to those  people whobroke the silence and named  the abuse publicly, and therefore  changed the knowledge and approach  to healing. Survivors are therapists, doctors, researchers, counsellors, front-line  workers, authors, speakers and everything else. Survivors, out of the pain of  their experiences have been motivated  to change the direction and structure of  the mainstream psychiatric institutions.  This is what healing is about; changing a  negative, painful experience into something positive and reclaiming power in  the process. Not recognizing this keeps  survivors invisible, discredited and distempered.  Ritual abuse, mind control and dissociation are new areas of awareness.  Most of society wants to deny that such  serious forms of abuse exist. Souvienne  is right when she points out that traditional mainstream mental health institutions have treated survivors as "too dam-  aged" to look after themselves. Survivors are stigmatized and discriminated  against. Souvienne is wrong when she  attempts to link the conference organizers to mainstream institutions. The feminist organizers of the conference have  promoted models of wellness and empowerment. It is ironic that Souvienne  sees fit to publicly condemn and reprimand these women and talk about accountability in the same letter. If  Souvienne were to practise accountability, she might have researched the conference and the organizers in advance of  the event, and made an informed choice  and opinion based on real findings.  Why is Kinesis supporting this attack? Why are women dragging down  other women? What has happened to  sisterhood? Are we easy targets for one  another's anger? Women are victimized  by other women within the women's  movement, and we need to start talking  about this.  Am I to assume that Kinesis is  practicing a form of journalism that sensationalizes anger, fear and misunderstanding like the sleazy tabloids do? Or  is there something else behind the decision to publish and promote with the  bold heading "Survivors excluded from  conference," such as unfounded and  erroneous attack on the organizers of a  conference which has courageously and  honestly dealt with the issue of ritual  abuse, mind control and dissociation.  Can we try to practise power in positive,  sharing ways please? Perhaps Kinesis  might have reported on the conference,  reviewed it, published the findings,  quoted the speakers, helped to break the  denial, fear and silencing around ritual  abuse.  Within the women's community I  like to think thatpositive journalism will  sell more papers than the promotion of  negative, damaging false charges. Let's  work together, examine how we use our  anger, and re-learn supportive ways!  Rosemary Doughty  Burnaby, BC  [The Editorial Board responds:] Kinesis  neither supports nor condemns the opinions expressed in the Letters section of  the newspaper. The choice of headline,  like others in Kinesis, is intended to summarize the main opinion conveyed in  the letter, not as an endorsement of the  opinions expressed in the letter. Kinesis  did not receive any advance information of the conference that would have  allowed us to plan coverage of the conference.  International Women's  Is Just around  Day  our March IWD issu  DECEMBER/JANUARY 1995 Bulletin Board  Bulletin Board listings have a  maximum of 50 words. Groups,  organizations and individuals eligible for free space in the Bulletin  Board must be, or have, non-profit  objectives.  Other free notices will be items of  general public interest and will  appear at the discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $8 (+$0.56 GST)  for the first 50 words or portion  thereof, $4 (+$0.28 GST) for each  additional 25 words or portion  thereof and must be prepaid.  Deadline for all submissions is  the 18th of the month preceding  publication. Note: Kinesis is published ten times a year. Jul/Aug  and Dec/Jan are double issues.  All submissions should include a  contact name and telephone  number for any clarification that  may be required.  Listings will not be accepted over  the telephone.  Kinesis encourages readers to research the goods and services  advertised in Bulletin Board.  Kinesis cannot guarantee the accuracy of the information provided  or the safety and effectiveness of  the services and products listed.  Send submissions to Bulletin  Board, Kinesis, #301-1720 Grant  Street, Vancouver, BC, V5L 2Y6.  For more information call 255-  5499.  EVENTS  EVENTS  EVENTS  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis? We want to get involved with  you too. Help plan our next issue. Come to  the Writer's meeting on Tues Jan 3, 7pm at  our office, 301 -1720 Grant St, Vancouver. If  you can't make the meeting, call 255-5499.  No experience is necessary, all women welcome. Childcare subsidies available.  CALLING ALL VOLUNTEERS  Are you interested in finding out how Kinesis  is put together? Well...just drop by during our  next production dates and help us design  and layout Canada's national feminist newspaper. Production for the Feb issue is from  Jan 19-25. No experience is necessary.  Training and support will be provided. If this  notice intrigues you, call Agnes at 255-5499.  Childcare subsidies available.  VSW WANTS YOU!  Want to get more involved but not sure where  to begin? Join us-become a volunteer at  Vancouver Status of Women. VSW volunteers plan events, lead groups, raise funds,  answer the phone lines and help to connect  women with the community resources they  need, organize the library and other exciting  tasks! Come to the committee meetings:  Finance/Fundraising, Mon Jan 23, 6 pm.  The next volunteer potluck and orientation  will be on Thurs Jan 19, 7 pm at VSW, 301 -  1720 Grant St. For more info, call Jennifer at  255-5511. Childcare subsidies available.  POLITICAL ACTION GROUP  The next Women of Colour and First Nations  Women's Political Action Group meets once  a month. For more info please call Miche at  255-5511.  SEXUAL HARASSMENT SUPPORT  The Sexual Harassment Support Group  meets twice a month at the VSW, 301 -1720  Grant St. For more info call Miche at 255-  5511.  FEMINIST NETWORKING  Meets once a month. Call Miche for more info  at 255-5511.  VSW OPEN HOUSE  Calling all volunteers, past and present;  members and supporters! The Vancouver  Status of Women is having an Open House  and Volunteer Celebration Mon Jan 9 from  7-10pm. There will be food and music. The  party will be held at the VSW 301-1720 Grant  St. For more info call 255-5511. Please  RSVP by Jan 5.  OUR STORIES  The Vancouver Status of Women presents  our stories, a film and video series by, for and  about women at Cafe deux Soleils, 2096  Commercial Dr. On Tues Nov 29 at 8pm  Motherland and The Great Wall of Tradition  will be shown. And on Tues Dec 6 at 8pm  Women Who Kill and Long Time Comin' will  be shown. Admission is free. Childcare subsidies are available. For more info call 255-  5511.  NUTCRACKERS  Vancouver's Rainbow Concert Band, Canada's first lesbian and gay band, invites you to  an evening of uncensored seasonal music  and comedy Mon Dec 19 at 8pm atthe West  End Community Centre, 870 Denman St. All  proceeds to go to the Little over's Defense  Fund, the Gay and Lesbian Centre, and the  Don Cocks memorial. Tickets are $5 at Little  Sisters or the Book Mantel.  JUSTICE NOT CHARITY  Justice Not Charityevents will be held on Sat  Dec 17 in Nelson, BC and in Vancouver. The  Nelson event, sponsored by the Nelson Anti-  Poverty Action Group, will feature speakers  on social program cutbacks, and the Ad Hoc  singers. The Vancouver event will also be  fundraiser for End Legislated Poverty. For  locations and more info call Elizabeth Caron  at 354-3969 in Nelson and ELP at 879-1209  in Vancouver.  DAY WITHOUT ART  In support of the 1994 World AIDS Day  Focus on Families, the Vancouver Art Gallery is holding a Day Without Art, an international day of mourning and action, Thurs  Dec 1. The VAG's events start at noon with  "Time Stands Still", three minutes of silent  street action outside the VAG, 750 Hornby  St, to observe the lives lost to AIDS. For other  event info call 682-4668.  VENUS ENVY  Venus Envy, four wacky and talented gals  from Seattle, will perform in Vancouver Tues  Dec 13 at 8pm at the Vancouver East Cultural Centre, 1895 Venables St. Venus Envy  will welcome in the holiday season with songs  from their album /'// Be A Homo For Christmas. Tickets are $12-16 and are available at  Little Sisters, Bookmantel and Women in  Print. For more info call 253-7189.  HIRONDELLE  Financial    Services  Wanted lor small company located downtown: person with flexible work  style for permanent part time position. Must know accpac/Bedford/Lotus 123  and basic dos.  Send hand-written cover letter and resume to:  LFS P.O. Box 287-7101-C 120th St. Delta, BC, V4E 2A0  POSITIONS AVAILABLE  The Vancouver Status of Women has 3 positions available under  a Job Creation (UI Top-Up) grant. Applicants must be on unemployment insurance.  Applicants should have an interest in working with a feminist  community organization and a general knowledge of feminist  issues. The positions start February 6, 1995 and end on May 26,  1995.  1. Marketing Assistant - Kinesis to conduct a series of subscription drives to  increase the circulation of our newspaper, Kinesis. Applicants should have an interest  in sales and marketing; knowledge of direct mail techniques is desirable.  2. Program Assistant to research and develop new popular education materials to  be incorporated into the VSW Assertiveness Training Program, recruit and train  volunteer facilitators and set up the necessary systems to maintain the program on an  ongoing basis. Experience leading groups and some knowledge of assertiveness is  required.  Good organizational skills would be an asset.  3. Researcher/Writer to research and write a directory of ethical women's  businesses and work with the finance and fundraising committee to plan and implement  a sponsorship drive as part of the annual fundraising campaign for VSW. Applicants  should have an interest in fundraising, good research skills and some writing experience  would be an asset.  Deadline for applications: Thursday, January 26th, 4 p.m.  Please send applications, specifying position(s) in which you  are interested, to: VSW Hiring, Suite 301 - 1 720 Grant St.,  Vancouver, B.C. V5L 2Y6. For more information, call 255-  5511 (after January 3, 1995)  Catting all volunteers, past  and present; members  and supporters!!  VSW's Open House  and Volunteer Celebration  Monday Jan. 9, 1995  from 7-10 pm  at 301-1720 Grant Street  Vancouver, BC  Come join us to celebrate Cast years achievements. See you at the party!  The Vancouver Status ofWomen Presents:  our stories  Film and video series by for and about women including:  LONG TIME rf  <OMIN     'Ģ  x.L\vm y  FREE at Cafe Deux Soleils  2096 Commercial Drive, Tues at 8pm Nov 29 and Dec 6  Childcare subsidies available, for more info call 255-5511  DECEMBER/JANUARY 1995 Bulletin Board  EVENTS  EVENTS  EVENTS  EVENTS  SOLSTICE CONCERT  Join musicians Sue McGowan, Sharon  Costello and Carol Weaver for a Full Moon  Winter Solstice Concert Sun Dec 17 at La  Quena, 1111 Commercial Dr. Door opens at  7:15pm. Tickets are $5-10 atthe door.  JOELLE RABU  Alto singer, Joelle Rabu presents material  from her latest recordings Sun Dec 4,7pm at  the Vancouver East Cultural Centre, 1895  Venables St., Van. The event is a benefit  concert for Planned Parenthood Association  of BC. For tickets and info call 731-4252.  CHAMBER MUSIC FOR KIDS  Children ages 6-16fromthe Vancouver Academy of Music will perform a mixed repertoire  of chamber music on Sat Dec 10 at 2pm at  the Vancouver East Cultural Centre, 1895  Venables St. Afterthe performancetheyoung  musicians will answer questions from interested audience members. For more info, call  254-9578.  GARDEN ART  Still photos taken from Louie Ettling and Ellie  Epp's video, we made this, a video about the  Strathcona community garden, will be shown  Nov 30-Jan 3, atthe Vancouver East Cultural  Centre Gallery, 1895 Venables St. This exhibition of stills will be open to viewing 12-5  weekdays and 2-6 weekends.  SOCIAL POLICY FORUM  The Social Planning and Research Council's  annual policy forum, Canada's Social Safety  Net: Searching for Social Justice, will be held  Sat Dec 10, 8:30-4:30 at the Sheraton Inn  Plaza 500, 500 W 12th Ave, Van. The forum  will be a place to discuss the federal government's proposed social safety net reform  package. Cost is $40, and subsidies are  available. For info and registration call Loralee  Delbrouk at SPARC, 736-8118.  MARUSYA BOCIURKIW  West Coast Women and Works present a  reading by Marusya Bociuriw, the author of  The Woman Who Loved Airports, Fri Jan  13, at 7:30pm at 219-1675 W 8th, Van.  Admission is free and there will be refreshments. Limited childcare subsidies available. For more info call 730-1034.  WOMEN'S ART FESTIVAL  The first annual Focus on Women Arts  Festival m Victoria will take place Feb 2-5.  The festival will feature music, theatre, visual  arts and film by women. Anyone interested  in volunteering for production or wanting to  participate call Jennifer Lord at (604) 383-  2663.  NORA KELLY  Mystery writer and author of My Sister's  Keeper, Nora Kelly, will talk about how  feminism reshapes the tradition of crime  writing. Fri Jan 27, 7-9:30pm at #219-1675  W 8th, Van. The reading is sponsored by  West Coast Women and Words. Admission  is free for members and sliding scale $2-5  for non-members. Limited childcare subsidies available. For more info call 730-1034.  RECENT ACQUISITIONS  Recent Acquisitions: Four Women, an exhibition of the work of four women artists who  Position Available  Kinesis Editor  Kinesis needs an Editor beginning May 1. The Editor works with  an Editorial Board and is a full-time staff person at the Vancouver Status of Women.  The Kinesis Editor:  • oversees the publishing of a feminist tabloid newspaper, 10 times a year;  • solicits, writes and edits articles;  • recruits and assists volunteer writers;  • keeps abreast of issues, debates and news relevant to a feminist newspaper;  maintains contact with women's and community groups;  • works closely wiUi production, advertising, disu ibution and circulation coordinate rs.  Qualifications  • editorial, writing and copy editing skills, and familiarity with feminist journalism;  • an ability to work collectively;  • broad-based knowledge of women's issues and organisations;  • an ability to work under deadline pressure;  • knowledge of production techniques;  • organisational skills  Women of colour and First Nations women are strongly encouraged to apply.  Affirmative action principles will be in effect for this luring.  Salary: $31,200 plus benefits  A full job description is available. Drop by our office or call (604) 255-5499.  Send applications to: Kinesis Hiring, #301 1720 Grant St., Vancouver, BC  V5L2Y6, or fax it in to: (604) 255-5511.  Deadline for Applications: March 15  graduated from the Vancouver School of  Applied and Decorative Art in 1929 will held  from Dec 17-Feb 12 at the Vancouver Art  Gallery, 750 Hornby St. The exhibition features sculptures by Lilias Farley and Beatrice  Lennie, and drawings by Irene Hoffar Reid  and Vera Weatherbie. For more info call 682-  4668.  REDNECKS & CITY SLICKERS  Rednecks & City Slickers, an exhibition of  work by artists Marianne Nicolson, Suzo  Hickey and Jeanne Rogowski will run until  Dec 17 at The Pitt Gallery, 317 W Hastings  St. Van. This exhibition is a look at the  tensions between rural and urban life. For  more info call 681-6740.  YOUTH THEATRE  The Vancouver Youth Theatre Society  presents three plays, Teen Parents, The  Acting of Art and scripts from The Teen Age,  Dec 8-10 at the Vancouver East Cultural  Centre, 1895 Venables St. Thesethree pieces  combine music, painting, and dance for a  thought provoking examination of issues  important to youth. Tickets are $10. For  reservations call 254-9578.  WOMEN AND BUSINESS  Women Wanting to be an Entrepeneur, a 13  week training program for women interested  in business, will run from Jan 3 until Mar 31.  This program is for women on UIC and who  have a business idea. The program will be  held at 203-888 Burrard St, Van. For more  info contact Roma McGill-Bowen at 685-  CECILIA BOISIER EXHIBIT  Reflective Places, an exhibition by artist  Cecilia Boisier, will be held at the Alliance  Francaise Auditorium 6161 Cambie St Van  until Dec 16. For gallery hours and more info  call 327-0201.  NATIVE WOMEN'S AWARDS  The Professional Native Women's Association (PNWA) presents the Blanche  MacDonald Memorial Dinner & Urban Society Annual Christmas Party: Goldfeather &  Silverfeather Awards, Thurs Dec 15 at the  Coast Plaza Hotel, 1733 Comox St, Van,  from 5-10pm. The awards will be presented  to outstanding citizens in the Aboriginal and  non-aboriginal communities. Tickets range  from $15-50. Please let PNWA know of any  children that will be attending. For more info  call 873-1833.  WOMEN AND PEACE  Women, War and Peace: The Vision and The  Strategies, an international conference that  will bring together women from around the  world to share their experiences as activists,  will be held from Dec 29-31 in Jerusalem,  Israel. Women interested in participating  please contact Erella Shadmi, 4/11 Dresner  St, Jerusalem, Israel, 93814. Or contact by  phone (2) 718-597 or fax (2)259-626.  ANNE FRANK EXHIBIT  A photo-documentary, Anne Frank in The  World 1929-1945: An International Exhibit to  Promote Understanding, will be held until  Sun Dec 11 at the Vancouver Holocaust  Education Centre at 50-950 W 41st Ave,  Van. Tickets are $2/students and seniors  and $3/adults. For more info call 264-0499.  CORNELIA WYNEGAARDEN  The Fragility of Origins, a multi-channel video-  based installation created by Vancouver artist Cornelia Wynegaarden, will be exhibited  until Fri Dec 16 at the Front Gallery, 303 East  8th Ave, Van. For gallery times and more info  call 876-9343.  ARTISTS WORKSHOP  The Canadian Artists Network: Black Artists  in Action is holding a skills development  workshop for artists of all disciplines Sat Dec  3 in Windsor, Ontario at Artcite Inc, 109  University Ave W. For registration and info  call CAN:BAIA at (416) 369-9040.  GROUPS  CALL FOR MEMBERS  Desh Pardesh, af ive day festival/conference  of works by South Asian artists, activists and  cultural producers, is seeking members for  their Festival Organizing Committeefortheir  next festival to be held in May. For info on  how to get involved contact Desh Pardesh,  96 Spadina Ave, Ste 607, Toronto, Ontario,  M5V 2J6 or call (416) 504-9932.   IWD 95  The next International Womens Day organizing committee meeting will be held on Dec  9 from 7-9pm at the Vancouver Status of  Women, 301 -1720 Grant St. All women welcome. For more info call Claire at 322-8630.  MATURE LESBIANS  Are you starting or continuing the coming out  process? Are you looking for friendship and  support? Come out and join us for lunch; and  help us plan some social activities. We're  "Just Out". Please call Geri at 278-8497  (evenings).  LESBIAN SUPPORT GROUP  The South SurreyAVhite Rock Women's Place  will be holding a lesbian support groupThurs  eves on a bi-weekly basis starting in mid-  Nov. For more info, call Trisha at 536-9611.  WOMEN? WORK  SCREEN       J>rtTNT  Making a Postive Impression  for Our Community Since 1984!  (604) 980-4235  KARATE for WOMEN  Mon., Tues., Thurs. 7 pm  Fitness, self confidence,  self defense  ASK ABOUT BEGINNER GROUPS  D2H3 734-98I6  INA DENNEKAMP  Piano Service  • Piano and Harpsichord  Tuning  • Repairs and  Reconditioning  Sexual Assault  Published by The Montreal Health Press, a women's collectiv  'Trie most up-to-date information on  sexual assault: how to handle an assault,  prevention, the social context.  DECEMBER/JANUARY 1995 Bulletin Board  GROUPS  INTERCEDE MOVES  INTERCEDE, the Toronto organization for  domestic workers' rights, has moved. Their  new office is located at 234 Eglinton Ave E,  Suite 205, Toronto, Ontario, M4P 1K5. Their  new phone number is (416) 483-4554 and  new fax number is (416) 483-9781.  OUT ON SCREEN  Out on Screen, a Vancouver lesbian and gay  film/video festival, is having a programming  committee meeting Mon Dec 5 at 7pm at the  Out on Screen office at 1131 Howe St, Van.  For more info call Laurel Swenson or Ken  Anderlini at 685-1159.  EXCERISE CLASS  Wantto get healthy at lunchtime? Come and  try a women's moderate stepf it class at Trout  Lake Community Centre, 3350 Victoria Dr,  every Mon, Wed, and Thurs at 12pm. Cost  is $3.  LESBIAN MOTHERS GROUP  A lesbian mothers group in Utrecht, the  Netherlands, is'interested in corresponding  with other lesbian mothers aroundthe world.  Letters can be in Dutch, English, French, or  German. Please send letters to J. Nieboer,  Padangstraat 42, NL-3531 TC Utrecht, the  Netherlands.  VLC ON THE MOVE  The Vancouver Lesbian Connection is currently negotiating on a larger, wheelchair  accessible space. The VLC needs help to  renovate, clean, paint, pack, move, unpack,  and celebrate! Dec and Jan. If you are able  and willing to help please call the VLC at 254-  8458 as soon as possible.  VLC WORKING GROUP  As a result of the public forum held in October, a working group was suggested as a way  of working with the Vancouver Lesbian Connection on issues of accessibility and racism.  The first meeting will be held Tues Jan 17 at  7pm at the VLC, 876 Commercial Dr. Any  lesbian interested in working with this group  is encouraged to attend.  SUBMISSIONS  DESH PARDESH  Desh Pardesh, afive day festival/conference  of works by South Asian artists, activists and  cultural producers is seeking participants for  their next conference May 10-14. Please  send a CV, proposal, and samples of workto  Desh Pardesh, 96 Spadina Ave, Ste 607,  Toronto, Ontario, M5V 2J6. Deadline is Mon  Jan 24 at 5pm.  YOUNG WOMEN  New Moon, a magazine for girls and their  dreams, is looking for juvenile non-fiction  (300-600 words)foryoung women ages 8-14  yrs, especially profiles of young women doing interestingthings. Pays $15-50. Forguide-  lines write to New Moon, Box 3587, Duluth,  Minnesota, USA, 55803-3587.  SUBMISSIONS SUBMISSIONS SUBMISSIONS  PINAY LESBIANS  We are a group of Pinay lesbians working  towards our visibility. We want you to be a  part of this groundbreaking work. If you have  written stories, essays and poetry or have  illustrations, drawing, graphic; comics, journal writings, etc, we want to hear from you.  Deadline is Jan 31. Send submission to  SisterVision Press, c/o Pinay, PO Box 217  Stn E, Toronto, Ont, M6H 4E2. Include name,  telephone number and address.  JANET LICHTY  B.A., M.Ed. Counselling Psychology, R.C.C  COUNSELLOR  1-296 W18 Ave, Vancouver, B.C., V5Y 2A7  872-2611  BLACK LESBIANS  At the Crossroads, a Black  magazine, is an interdisciplinary journal seeking submissions on the queer Black arts  scene. The journal is looking for essays,  articles, interviews, news, profiles, visual art,  poetry and fiction from dark lesbians and  bisexual women. Send submission with a  SASE to: PO Box 317 Stn P, Toronto, Ont,  M5S 2S8. For more info, call (416) 538-4296.  Deadline is Feb.  QUEER SUBMISSIONS  Queer Glances, Queer Moments, an anthology of lesbian and gay short stories, is  currently accepting submissions for an anthology of short stories (750-1000 words) by  lesbians and gay men. The book will be an  album of snapshots that reflect the spectru m  of lesbian and gay life experiences. For more  info and submission guidelines write to #1002-  1340 Burnaby St, Vancouver, BC, V6E 1R1.  Submission deadline is Mar 31.  WOMEN'S POETRY  West Coast Women and Words presents  their 1994 Poetry Contest for Women. The  theme is Women Moving(e.g. self or belongings in space or time). Prizes up to $150 and  publication in spring '95 edition of W&W  newsletter. Deadline is Dec 15. For more  info, call (604) 730-1034 or write to West  Coast Women & Words Poetry Contest, 219-  1675 W 8th Ave, Vancouver, BC, V6J 1V2.  IRISH POETRY MAGAZINE  A new Irish lesbian/feminist/queer poetry  magazine starting up in Dublin is seeking  submissions of unusual, original, shocking  and unexpected poetry in English from lesbians internationally. Please send submissions  to E. O'Shea, PO 3327, Dublin 8, Ireland. To  have submitted material returned, include a  SASE and international reply coupon.  WRITING FOR YOUNG WOMEN  Green Dragon Press, a small feminist press  that focuses on providing educational support, is seeking fiction and non-fiction for  ages 8 and up on women's history,  multicultural themes and equity issues. Send  submissions to 136 George Street S, Ste.  Deadline for entry is Jan 31. Send submissions to Herspectives c/o Mary Billy Box  2047, Squamish BC, VON 3G0.  LESBIANS AND MEN  Women's Press iscallingforshortfiction and  poetry submissions (max 5000 wds) for their  anthology by lesbians about the men in their  lives—brothers, fathers, lovers, sons, friends.  Women's Press encourages a diverse mixof  women to write about their (good and bad)  relationships with the men in their lives.  Deadline is Jun 30. Send all enquires and  manuscripts with a SASE to: Countering the  Myths from Within and Outside, Women's  Press, 233-517 College St, Toronto, Ont,  M6G 4A2.  FRINGE FESTIVAL  The Fringe, Vancouver's theatre festival, is  accepting submissions for its 11th annual  festival Sep 7-17. Send or bring in person  submissions to 18-2414 Main St, Vancouver, BC, V5T 3E3. Mailed applications are  accepted on a first-come, first-served basis.  Walk-in applications may be brought in on  Wed Jan 5. Deadline for submissions is  Marl. For more inf ocontact Joanne Maratta,  tel (604) 873-3646 or fax 873-4231.  CONTEMPORARY ART EXHIBIT  The organizers of Work in Progress: Vancouver Artists in their Studios and L'Atelier  are calling for submissions from Vancouver  artists for Currents, an exhibition of contemporary art, to be shown from Feb 25-Mar 25  in Vancouver. Interested artists, working in  any medium, are asked to submit a CV, a  brief artist's statement, 10-20 labelled slides,  and a SASE to Currents, 7-1715 Gravely St,  Vancouver, BC, V5L 3A9. For more info call  872-0318. Deadline is Dec 31.  WOMEN IN SPORTS  The Summer 95 issue of Canadian Woman  Studies/les Cahiers de la Femme, will explore gender equity and inclusion in sports,  recreation and physical activity. Invited are  essays, research reports, true stories, poetry, cartoons, drawings and other artwork  which address the experiences of women  and young girls in sport living in all regions of  Canada. Deadline for submission is Mar 31.  Send submissions to Canadian Woman Studies, 212 Founders, York University, 4700  Keele St, North York, Ont, M3J 1P3. For  more info, call (416) 736-5356 or fax, (416)  736-5765.  EUROPEAN WOMEN  The Fall 95 issue of Canadian Woman Studies/les Cahiers de la Femme, will explore the  lives of women in Central and Eastern Europe in a global context. CSW/cf is seeking  articles from feminist scholars and grassroots activists in Central and Eastern Europe  as well as from western contributors who do  research on women's issues in Central and  Eastern Europe. Deadline for submission is  Mar 15. Send submissions to Canadian  Woman Studies, 212 Founders, York University, 4700 Keele St, North York, Ont, M3J  1P3. For more info, call (416) 736-5356 or  fax, (416)736-5765.  Co-op Radio  CFRO 102.7 FM  Listener Powered!  Community-Based!  Where women have a voice  Monday, 8:00 - 9:00pm:  WomenVisions  For women about women by women. Health, politics, law, spirituality, arts  sexuality and alternative ideologies.  Tuesday, 7:00 - 8:00pm:  OBAA  By women of colour for women of colour. Local community groups and events,  interviews and music not heard in the mainstream.  Thursday, 8:00 - 9:00pm:  The Lesbian Show  Friday, 8:00 - 10:00pm: Rubymusic  12 years on the air, Rubymusic features the best in music by women-old, new,  lost and found.  For a free listener's guide call 684-8494 Monday to Thursday, 10am - 6pm  902, Toronto, Ont, M5A 4E8.  j  i     Uou don't have to finance  I I    ^ what you don't support  v^                     • Lower interest rates on loans  to co-ops and societies  ^                  • Term deposits     • RRSPs  i                       • Chequing accounts and  POETRY CONTEST  Herspectivesis holding itsfirst Annual Poetry  Contest with the theme of sister/friends, or  any other subject you think is worthy. Entry  Fee is $5 per poem or $10 for three. Prizes  range from $25-75, and winners will be pub-  ished in the April 1995 issue of Herspectives.  i  ^v/f Operine  VS   Banton  \k     Counsellor  202 -1807 Burrard St.  Vancouver, BC V6J 3G9  Tel: (604) 736-8087  Jt"                     other banking services  y^SB^      A full-sayice credit union dedicated  $&  ~_^J^^ to community economic development/^Mtj^K  CCEC Credit Union  °2250 Commercial Drive, Vancouver, B.C., V5N 5P9  Telephone  254-4100  DECEMBER/JANUARY 1995 Bulletin Board  CLASSIFIEDS  SHIATSU WITH A DIFFERENCE  For pain relief, stress management or as a  complement to therapy, Astarte's focus on  body-awareness will help you gain insight and  tools to further your healing process. Call  Astarte Sands 251-5409.  COWGIRLS 'N GHOST TOWNS  Winter holiday for lesbians. Come this winter  to sunny and warm Arizona. Travel by van  with a small group of cowgirls like yourself to  see Arizona's Old West, ghost towns, Spanish mission, Native American ruins, spectacular scenery, and the cultural legacy of Mexico,  Arizona's southern neighbour. Tour includes  accomodations in upscale or historical hotels,  horseback riding and cook-outs, Sedona jeep  tour, and 'Welcome to Arizona" reception with  local lesbians. Eight departures Nov-Feb. A  special invitation is extended to Canadian  lesbians. Out'n Arizona Dept 85285. Tel: (800)  897-0304.  LYNN MATHERS MSW  I am a registered social worker and therapist  in Maple Ridge/Abbotsford. I have a general  private practice working with individuals, couples, families and groups. I have experience  with addictions, grief, sexual and physical  abuse, infidelity, pregnancy loss and general  life concerns. Fee: $70-$86 per hour. For  appointment call 463-3026 or 852-4818.  SCHOLARSHIP ASSISTANCE  Scholarship assistance is required by a local  woman to study process-oriented psychology  at the Process Work Centre in Portland,  Oregon. Prospectus and applicant information available by writing in confidence to Scholarship, Box 937, Ganges, BC V0S 1E0.  CLASSIFIEDS  Bed & Breakfast  A  Memorable  Escape  Centre Yourself  in the comfort and tranquility  of Canada's beautiful, natural  Gulf Islands  5 acres of forested foot paths  trails with ponds  ocean and mountain views  Decadent Breakfasts  Hot Tub  A private retreat  (604) 537-9344  Mail: R.R.#2, S-23, B-0, Ganges, B.C. VOS 1E0  GENERAL PRACTITIONER  Joan Robillard, MD, Obstetrics, General  Practitioner for all kinds of families is now  located at 203-1750 East 10th Ave, Vancouver. Phone 872-1454. Fax 872-3510.  THE ART OF HANDKNITTING  Rediscoverthe lost female art of handknitting  while enjoying the beauty and quality of our  100 percent natural fibre yarns: wools,  mohairs, alpacas, cottons, linens, and silks.  Patterns, kits, and how-to books—whether  you're a beginner or an expert, we have  somethingforyou. Catalogue and complete  yarn samples $4 (refundable with purchase).  Elann Fibre, PO Box 771, Cranbrook, BC,  V1C 4J5. Toll free fax/voice mail: 1-800-  426-0616. Visa accepted. All female owned  and operated.  POTTERY SALE  Jane Williams is holding her Christmas Pottery Sale on Sun Dec 11th this year. Come  along to 1242 Lakewood Dr in East Vancouver between noon and 5pm for a wide  selection of functional earthenware at reasonable prices. Seconds are also available.  Call 255-8173 for more info.  WOMEN'S CRAFT FAIRE  The first annual Women's Arts & Craft Faire  will be held Sat Dec 3 from 11 am to 5pm at  the Heritage hall, 3102 Main St. A Pre-  Solstice/Christmas shopping extravanganza  with some of BC's finest craftswomyn. Followed by: "Another Evening of Dyke Culture", 8:30-11:30p'm featuring San  Franciscan lesbian comic and musician  Monica Grant, popular singer/songwriter  Tracy Riley and Inclognito: Womyn Cloggers.  Advance tickets required $8-$12 at Women  in Print, Little Sisters and Bookmantel. A  Sound & Furies production. For more info  call 253-7189.  STUDIO SALE  Artists Claire Kujundzic and Sheila Norgate  announce a Studio Sale, featuring something for every budget: art cards, t-shirts,  originals, prints, paintings and more Fri Dec  9 from 6-9pm and Sat Dec 10 from 1 -5pm  at 800 Keefer St. (at Hawkes). Call 251-  5314 or 689-4099.  BASEBALL COACH  Volunteer position: Experienced woman  baseball coach needed for predominantly  women of colour lesbian baseball team  playing in competitive division of the Lesbian League in Vancouver. Season runs  approximately April-August. Contact 255-  6506 for further details. Reply before Dec  20.  December 6th Events in Vancouver  A number of events will be held in Vancouver Tues Dec 6 to mark the fifth  anniversary of the murder of fourteen women at Ecole Polytechnique in  Montreal, and in the memory of all women who have lost their lives through  male violence.  Women Against Violence Against Women (WAVAW) will hold a candlelight  vigil on the Georgia St side of the Vancouver Art Gallery from 6-8pm. The  vigil is wheelchair accessible and there will be sign language interpreters.  For childcare and general info call 255-6228; TTY/TDD 254-6268.  The Douglas College Women's Centre and the New Westminster School  District will hold a brief ceremony beginning at 11:45am in the concourse at  Douglas College, 700 Royal Avenue in New Westminster. For more info call  527-5148.  The National Film Board will premiere The Vienna Tribunal: Women's Rights  Are Human Rights Dec 6, 8pm at the Pacific Cinemateque, 1131 Howe St.  Directed by Gerry Rogers (picured above) the film documents the courage  of thousands of women who came forward to tell their stories of rape, torture  and repression at the 1993 UN World Conference on Human Rights in  Vienna. The film will be followed by speakers from Amnesty International,  WAV AW and the Vancouver Status of Women. Admission is free. For more  info call 666-3838.  creative and critical contributions to current debates  within women's community, theory and subcultures  % theory, poetry, interviews, art and more!  A   FEMINIST  QUARTERLY  FIREWEED  OF WRITING, POLITICS, ART & CULTURE  J0U& issues on Class (#s 25 & 26), Asian  Canadian women (#30), Jewish women  (#35) and Sex & Sexuality (#s 37 & 38) will  be important additions to your bookshelves  and much appreciated resources!  ^ICTVIilTlirTIIWfrllllHI'Will-lflr-l  Recent/^z/^?/^ include: #4#/6s Language:  the politics of language across cultures;  #43 Rice Papers: writings and artwork by East  and Southeast Asian Women in Canada;  #42: "Sister-Sluts and Slut Condemnation" and  a panel discussion on "The Politics of Desire."  Available through INLAND BOOK COMPANY (203) 467-4257 (Canadian Magazine Publishers' Association in Canada).  or directly from Fireweed, P.O. Box 279, Station B, Toronto, ON, M5T 2W2, (416) 504-1339.  .^V-would love to send you a sample issue! Call or write us at Fireweed.  If your stuff ain'  .ellin' floe,  call 255-5499.  t ick up the phone am |  we 11 let you know,  our ad space is cheap,  muck .lough!  Take your pick of  witk longer runs come  nice surprises.  Oave some cash, a«  miss tke kus,  put an advert  in Kinesis.  DECEMBER/JANUARY 1995 We stormed the ill centre,  took no prisoners, held a press conference,  then paused for lunch  ...endsome fabulous reading)material  someone  Hey, I'd even  pay for this!"  —smart feminist  activist at  Vancouver UIC  occupation,  Nov. 15, 1994.  One year  □ $20 + $1.40 GST □ Bill me  Two years □ New  □$36 + $2.52 GST □ Renewal  Institutions/Groups □ Gift  □$45 + $3.15 GST □ Donation  □ Cheque enclosed      If you can't afford the full amount f  subscription, send what you can.  Free to prisoners.  Orders outside Canada add $8.  Vancouver Status of Women Membership  (includes Kinesis subscription)  □$30+$1.40 GST  Name_  Address—  Country   Telephone.  Postal code_  Fax   Published ten times a year by the Vancouver Status of Women  #301 -1720 Grant Street Vancouver, BC V5L 2Y6