 <7  {'ñ† June 1992 Free Press Festive?gp^ conations a^st*2-25  News About welcome even   if you  ive experience.  TISING:  3irgit Schinke  OFFICE: Jennife  Kinesis Is published 10 times  i year by the Vancouver Stains of Women. Its objectives  are to be a non-sectarian feminist voice for women and  work actively for social  specifically combat-  rn, racism, homopho-  Tiperialism.  ;x pressed   in   Kinesis  i of the writer and  ;cessarily reflect VSW  signed material is  onsibility of the Kine-  I Board.  RIPTIONS:   Individual  tions to Kinesis are  year (+ $1.40 GST)  ii can afford. Mem-  i the Vancouver Sta-  i is $30 <+ $1.40  what you can afford,  subscription to Kine-  ill in your or-  back cover). For more  ion,   call   (604)   255-  SIONS: Women and  elcome to make sub-  . We reserve the right  and submission does  rantee publication. If  submissions should  be typed double spaced and  must be signed and include  an address and phone number.  Please note: Kinesis does not  accept poetry or fiction contributions. For material to be  returned, a SASE must be included. Editorial guidelines are  available on request.  ADVERTISING: For information about display advertising  rates, please contact Kinesis.  For information about classifieds, please see the classified  page in this issue.  DEADLINE: For features and  reviews: the 10th of the  month preceding publication.  News copy: 15th. Letters and  Bulletin Board listings: 18th.  Display advertising—camera  ready: 18th; design required:  16th.  MEANS MOVANT  Vancouver prochoicers rally after Toronto clinic  razed 5  Talking through the rage in LA  Mayworks festival highlights .  INSIDE  $  0*  Native women and the constitution: Still fighting for  seat 3  by Miche Hill  BC women and the constitution 3  by Agnes Huang  BC child protection: Women and children first? 4  by gllchrlst Russel  Arson Destroys Harbord Clinic 5  by Fatima Jaffer  "No means no" under attack 5  by Lissa J. Geller  Campus violence: She's not a victim 8  by Sherry Preston  Federal politics: Who's Betty Baxter?: an interview..9  as told to Agnes Huang  Breaking the silence on polygamy 10  by Deb Palmer and Luanrie Armstrong  The LA uprising: Talking through the "insanity" 12  by Kim Williams, Monica Buchanan, Mercedes Baines,  D. Lydla Masemola and Janisse Browning  Labour arts forum: Art with an attitude? 14  by Janet Nicole  Workers kick class: Videos in review 14  by Harriet Fancott  Visibly Queer: Lesbian sexual imagery in film 15  by Kathleen Oliver  Concert review: Two Nice Girls 15  by Kathleen Oliver  Speaking Dreams: in review 16  by Robyn Hall  Writing the Circle and Claiming Breath: in review... 17  by Michelle LaFlamme  Review: Red Flower of China 18  by Lisa Valencla-Svensson  Free Press Festival: A many splintered thing? 19  by Celeste Insell  Panel discussion on women and writing 19  by Charmalne Saulnler  Kinesis is indexed  Canadian Women's Periodi  cals Index, and the Alternativ*  Press Index.  the  iis is produced on an  IBM PC using PC Tex and an  LC-800 laser printer. Camera  work by The Peak. Printing  by Web Press Graphics  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status of  Women, 301-1720 Grant St.  Vancouver BC V5L 2Y6  Kinesis is a i  Canadian Magazi  Association. ISSN C  Second class mail 4 Movement Matters  \X\X\XXXX\XX\XXN\XNXN\X\\X\\\N\^^^  Movement  Matters  listings information  Movement Matters is designed to be  a network of news, updates and information of special interest to the  women's movement. Submissions to  Movement Matters should be no  more than 500 words, typed, double-  spaced on eight and a half by eleven  paper. Submissions may be edited for  length. Deadline is the 18th of the  month preceding publication.  by Ria Bleumer  Summer Institute  for Union Women  The Summer Institute For Union Women,  which is usually held in the western United  States will take place this year at Simon Fraser University in Vancouver from  July 12-17. Canadian and American trade  union women will be comparing experiences as workers and the different problems and strategies their respective unions  have adopted to achieve social and economic  equahty for members.  The theme of the school, Pohtical Action  for Union Women, will provide the unifying thread for the various workshops. Workshop topics include the crisis in health care  and free trade, negotiating child care and  ending violence against women. The school  also offers specific skills-building courses,  ranging from making women's committees  work, public speaking, assertiveness training and producing effective newsletters.  Course instructors include union staff, university labour educators, officers, regular  members and community activists.  The school is open to union women in  British Columbia and the United States  from Idaho to Cahfornia. As accommodation at Simon Fraser University is limited,  priority will be given to American registrants. The cost of registration for students  staying off campus is $342.40, which includes fees for tuition, all school activities,  entertainment and meals.  Interested trade unionists should contact  their union or Mary Rowles at the B.C. Federation of Labour, 4279 Canada Way, Burnaby, BC, Tel: (604) 430-1421, Fax (G04) 430-  5917.  Feminist Literature  in Braille  The Womyn's Braille Press (WBP), a  non-profit organization, was founded in  1980 by six bhnd women in Minneapolis.  WBP produces feminist literature on tape  and in Braille for readers who are blind,  partially sighted, or who, for other reasons, cannot read print. Operating largely  on a volunteer basis, WBP's board consists  of both disabled and non-disabled women.  In addition, women contribute as volunteer  readers, Braille transcribers, and on special  projects as needed. WBP is funded through  subscriptions, donations and small grants.  As an organization founded and guided  by disabled women, WBP demonstrates  that the feminist movement, which seeks  freedom for all women, must include the  participation of women with disabihties.  Literature's central role in today's feminist movement and ideas of feminism have  enabled many women, disabled and able-  bodied, to grow and make profound changes  in our hves.  While none of the available library services for the bhnd make it a priority to  provide books by Women of Colour, by  lesbians, on writings on violence against  women, women's health or radical femimst  theory, WBP seeks to close this information  gap and exists because it beheves it is essential that all women have access to this literature.  Women's Braille Press suppUes taped Uterature as weU as Uterature in BraiUe and in  large print to subscribers in North America,  Europe and AustraUa. They circulate several feminist periodicals on a regular basis  and, on average, send 40 taped books and  periodicals to subscribers each week.  WBP needs volunteers and financial support. Their work continues largely through  donations from individuals. For more information contact: Womyn's BraiUe Press,  P.O. Box 8475, Minneapolis, MN, 55408-  0475, USA, Tel: (612) 872-4352.  ^  GLC cutbacks  mean layoffs  Vancouver's Gay and Lesbian Centre  (GLC), the oidy centre of its kind in BC, is  in the midst of a funding crisis, resulting in  cutbacks of services and the layoff of centre  coordinator Mary Brookes.  The GLC is funded and administered by  the Pacific Foundation for the Advancement  of Minority Equahty (PFAME), a registered  charitable foundation that supports recreational, social and support activities in the  gay and lesbian community.  While the GLC depends on volunteer  support for much of its staffing, day-to-day  operations and fundraising activities were  performed by two staff members. The current funding shortfaU has meant the layoff  of Brookes, with the fundraising operation  restricted to half-time to the end of July.  Said GLC Board Vice-Chair Bryan Fair,  "it's no understatement to say that the  layoff could mean a serious reduction in  the deUvery of services to the community."  PFAME says the expansion of services at  the GLC has meant increased costs that  could not be covered by current revenues.  PFAME Board Chair Ken Smith says  "the provincial government's decision to  discontinue the Pull-tab lottery program,  along with increased costs for additional  services, has left us in a near-deficit position." Fair says the layoff of the centre coordinator wdl result in lower revenues because  of decreased fund-raising activities and a  halt to fee collection from groups using the  GLC.  Located in Vancouver's West End, the  GLC provides a range of support services  and a stable and safe environment for gays  and lesbians. Services include counseUing,  an information switchboard, social activities, a legal chnic, food bank, peer groups,  hbrary and AIDS education.  For more information, support and/or  memberships to the GLC contact: The Gay  & Lesbian Centre, 1170 Bute Street, Vancouver, BC, V6E 1Z6, Tel: (604) 684-5307.  Corrections  In our May 1992 issue, we forgot to credit  Fatima Jaffer for her story on the "NDP  chUdcare initiative" (page 5). Credit for the  centerspread graphic for "Talking About  AIDS" goes to an unknown artist (page  10-11). We misspeUed OUne Luinenberg's  name in the call-out for "Talking About  AIDS" (page 11).  Inside  Kinesis  WeU, The Big News of the month, the  year, the century ... is the annual Kinesis  raffle and benefit. Mark your datebooks for  the evening of June 15 at La Quena (1111  Commercial Dr.). Tickets, available at the  door, are shding scale ($2-6).  We've got cheap munchies and sippies  for sale and plenty of entertainment. See  Bulletin Board for more details. And if  you want a chance to win some faaabulous  prizes, drop by the Kinesis office and buy a  few raffle tickets. (Okay, okay, we'll also be  seUing raffle tickets at the event—and some  nifty door prizes too!)  Another Editorial Board member has  flown the coop. Sandra GiUespie has moved  to New York to seek fame and fortune.  We're going to miss her keen eye for detaU  and those funky leopard skin glasses. She's  been a committed member of Kinesis' production crew for a couple of years now, and  probably needed a dose of a less hectic pace  of Ufe in the Big Apple.  If you've ever been interested in how the  Ed Board works at Kinesis, we have an information and 'celebrity' photo wall in the  Kinesis production room. Check it out.  Better yet, check it out whUe proofing and  pasting. To volunteer on production, call  Anne at 255-5499.  Speaking of production, it's time to  say heUo to this month's new production volunteers—Jennifer Russell, Johanna  deNissa, Mabe Elmoe, Chistine Harrison,  Manisha Singh, Tama Evans and Camie  Kim.  Also, lots of heUos this issue to the  dynamic, new voices of writers Gilchrist  RusseU,   Sherry   Preston,   Lisa  Valencia-  Svensson, Kim WUliams, MicheUe La-  Flamme, Lydia Masemola, Deb Palmer,  Janet Nicole, Robyn HaU, Celeste InseU,  Charmaine Saulnier, Lynne Wanyeki, and  Brenda Wong. Interested in seeing your  name here? Drop by the next writers' meeting on June 2. See Bulletin Board for details.  Organization of the Incredible Kinesis  Writer's Program is coming along weU. In  fact, we're aU set to provide five instructional sessions over July with a view to providing women with some of the tools (and  other nourishment) necessary for feminist  news writing. MicheUe LaFlamme, Patty  Gibson, Esther Shannon, Michele VaU-  quette, Kim Bolan, Sue Vohanka, Jackie  Brown, Grace Cameron, Agnes Huang and  Karen Gram are among the eager contributors to the Writer's Program curriculae.  Registration for the Program has now been  completed. However, we're hoping to turn  the Kinesis Writers' Program into an annual event.  A volunteer is needed to write the  "What's News?" section of Kinesis. It's a  great exercise in feminist journalism. You  basicaUy rewrite press releases, news stories  and scraps of paper with a twist—Kinesis  puts women front, centre, at the heart and  focus of the story. Yeah, where we belong.  CaU Fatima at 255-5499 for detaUs.  And finally, Kinesis is pursuing making itself avaUable in alternative forms to  visually-impaired women [See Movement  Matters, page 2]. This is going to involve  a lot of ground-work to set up and anyone  with suggestions or wUUng to work on the  project is encouraged to contact Christine  at 255-5499.  Many thanks to aU the women who helped organize VSW's Single Mothers' Day in the  Park and helped stuff envelopes for our direct maU fundraising:  Darlene • Ria Bleumer • Donna Cho • Christine Cosby • Ceciha Diocson • Anne Fil-  ipowsla • Theresa Healy • Miche HiU • Tory Johnstone • Josie Kane • Lana Krause •  Eileen Louie • Jazmin Miranda • Johannah Pilot • Chris Rahim • Jennifer RusseU • Carlo  Sayo ♦ Charlene Sayo • Frances Suski • Lisa Valencia-Svensson • Eleanor Warkentin •  Sally White • Kim WiUiams  Our thanks also to Vancouver Status of Women members who support us year 'round  with memberships and donations. Our appreciation to the foUowing supporters who became members, renewed their memberships or donated to VSW in May:  Barbara Bell • Manuela Bizzotto • Eleanor Brockenshire • Inez Curl • Catharine Esson •  Barbara Eyles • Karen Hansen • Katherine Heinrich • Cheryl Heinzl ♦ Josie Kane • Pia  Kuni • Judith Lynne • Angela Page • Janet Patterson • Gayla Reid • Guhstan Shariff •  Alice Starr • L. Treleaven • Mary Woo Sims • LiUian Zimmerman  FinaUy, we would Uke to express our gratitude to those who have responded so generously to our fundraising appeal this month:  Sabina Altenhaus • Jo Coffey • Pam Cooley • Marlene Coulthard • Don Crane • GaU  Cryer • JiU Gould • Pamela Greenstock • MaryUn Hay-Roe • Agnes Huang ♦ Anne Klop-  penborg • Inger Kronseth • Joan Lawrence • Francesca Lund • Karen Malcolm • Jacinthe  McCurdy • Joan Meister • Jane Munro • Margaret Ostrowski • Robin Rennie and Christine Waymark • Catherine RusseU • John Shayler • Lucy Stephens • Sheilah Thompson  • Louise Tolzmann  Do typos turn you into  a raging monster?  There is a vocation for  you - proofreading  Kfnesis.  Please call  •V fcflH#fl4M--l  2 KINESIS    June 92 News  Native women and the constitution  Still fighting for a seat  by Miche Hill  As far as the Native Women's Association  of Canada (NWAC) is concerned, the results  of the latest negotiations between the federal and provincial constitutional committees and the four national Native organizations do not bode weU for Native women.  "Most of the provinces insisted that  the Charter be in ef feet [to self-governments]," said Sharon Mclvor, spokesperson  for NWAC, in an interview.  "But right now they [four male-dominated Native organizations, the Inuit Tapirisat  of Canada, the Assembly of First Nations,  the Native CouncU of Canada and the Metis  National CouncU) are busy trying to amend  the Charter, sections 3 and 6, section 25,  and especially section 35 ... and put in an  interpretive section which says that nothing in the Charter wUl supercede traditional Aboriginal governments. They're taking away the protection for Native women."  she said.  Recent constitutional committee talks  held in Vancouver saw some agreement  on the outline of Native self-governments.  While conference participants are quick to  point out many areas are far from being  decided, one thing was agreed upon—that  the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms apply immediately to Native government.s with the condition that Native governments, like their provincial and federal  counterparts, retain the right to opt out of  parts of the Charter under certain conditions.  The male Native leaders disagree with  having the Charter apply to Native self-  government because, they say, the Charter  is no use to Native women, and the Charter  does not protect v  AFN First Nations Circle on the Constitution  MeanwhUe, the Assembly of First Nations  (AFN), which represents status Natives in  Canada, recently released its report on  the First Nations Circle on the Constitution based on Native hearings held across  Canada in the past six months. The report  rejects the idea of applying the Charter to  Native self-government because "the problems the Charter is designed to overcome  are not, on the whole, the day-to-day problems that Aboriginal women confront ...  it cannot protect a woman from violence,  it cannot force her leaders to Usten to her  problems or help her ... it cannot find her  a job."  The.report also points out that traditional Aboriginal society "has no need of  feminism, for the simple reason that women  held real power in it [Aboriginal society]."  They argue that by applying the Charter  to self government, Native women would  be asking another government to look after their interests, probably through the  courts, and that, they say, would be a non-  aboriginal way of solving disputes.  While the report does, however, agree  with NWAC on the need for an Aboriginal  charter, it ignores NWAC's concern that,  untU such a charter is developed to the full  satisfaction of Native women, the Canadian  Charter should apply.  Mclvor, who is also a member of AFN's  consitutional team, said that the other commissioners claimed they didn't have enough  information to make recommendations on  the Charter issue. She added that the other  commissioners said that none of them had  the chance to review the final draft of the  report before it was released.  One of the key recommendations in the  report—that Native women be equaUy represented in aU decision-making processes—  is being ignored in this latest round of negotiations.  Amendments to Charter  As Kinesis goes to press, Mclvor says federal and provincial government representatives and the constitutional committees ol  the four national Native organizations are in  a working group in Toronto, making recommendations for amendments to certain sections of the Charter.  She said that NWAC had requested involvement in the working group, but wen  turned down. They were told, once again.  that their submissions must go through tht  AFN's constitutional working group anc  that full participation in the constitutional  working group would not be possible.  Mclvor said one of the groups in the  working group, the Inuit Tapirisat of  Canada, is "pretty much on side with us  [NWAC]" because the Inuit Women's Association is well represented in their delegation.  The fact that the National Action Committee on the Status of Women (NAC) is  now one of the "technical advisors" to the  Native CouncU of Canada is not necessarUy good news for NWAC. NAC supports  NWAC's position on the Charter, but "they  [the Native CouncU of Canada] should have  come to us," said Mclvor.  According to NAC's Shelagh Day, "[NAC]  has been supporting NWAC's position aU  along. We didn't go into the meeting without talking to NWAC first. Neither one of  us [groups] is happy with this situation."  "It's pretty discouraging. [The constitutional working group] is going in the opposite direction from what was decided at  those constitutional conferences [about full  participation of Native women in decisionmaking]."  For a right to a seat  In the meantime, NWAC is getting ready to  appeal a recent federal court ruhng that rejected NWAC's bid for equal funding and a  seat at the constitutional negotiating table.  The appeal date is June 11, and Mclvor  says "We want a seat at the table and  recognition as a separate group ... and, of  course, money." The four male-dominated  Native groups have received $10 miUion  to fund their participation in the constitutional process. "They have up to 20 technical advisors per group," says Mclvor. And,  because of the lack of sufficient funding, she  adds, NWAC doesn't have any technical advisors. At present, "there's no way to get access to the table at aU," said Mclvor. "And  we have so much to contribute."   Miche Hill is becoming a regular Ki-  esis volunteer writer, despite herself.  BC women on the constitution:  Designing a constitution  by Agnes Huang  Women in BC have taken a step to ensure that our voices are heard in the Constitutional debate. In early May, 55 women  gathered at the Faculty of Law of the University of British Columbia to discuss the  concerns of women in the current Constitutional round.  The one day conference was coordinated  by the West Coast Legal and Educational  Action Fund (LEAF), the UBC Faculty of  Law, and the UBC Centre for Research in  Women's Studies and Gender Relations.  The three organizing groups initiated the  conference idea proposing to the provincial  government that a consultation series be set  up to provide a forum for women's views  on Constitutional issues. Initially, the proposal involved meeting with women across  the province in a number of locations, but  due to time and financial constraints, the organizers settled on holding a day- long conference in Vancouver.  The goal of the working session was to  bring together women in the community  with knowledge of the Constitutional issues  to bring women's perspectives to the attention of the province's special committee on  Constitutional matters.  Veronica Strong-Boag, Director of the  Centre at UBC, says the whole dialogue on  the Constitution seems to exclude women's  interests. "The conference was organized  to remind the provincial government that  there are women who want to say something  about the Constitution."  Although attempts were made to include women from grassroots women's organizations, a representative cross-section  of women in BC was not achieved. Almost  all of the participants were from the Lower  Mainland and the majority of the working group was composed of academics and  professionals. The absence of women from  poverty, lesbian, single mothers, domestic  workers and health groups, among others,  was noticeable.  The conference time was divided into five  workshop sessions on: Aboriginal Women's  Issues, Economics and Property Rights, the  Canada Clause and a Social Charter, Devolution and Decentralization, and the Senate  and the Courts.  Recommendations  Although confined to discussing the proposed Constitutional issues—which do not  necessarUy reflect the interests of Canadian  women—participants in each of the working  sessions came up with a number of strong  resolutions.  The recommendations regarding issues  concerning Aboriginal women had to be  qualified in the absence of Chief Wendy  Grant, BC regional chief of the Assembly of  First Nations (AFN). Grant was invited to  the speak at the conference but was called  away at the last minute to attend a meeting with Prime Minister Brian Mulroney.  Kathryn Teneese of the Ktunaxa First Nations spoke in place of Grant, but did not  appear as a representative of the AFN.  The recommendations adopted by the  working group reflected the views of  panehst, Teressa Nahanee of the Native  Women's Association of Canada (NWAC).  NWAC is currently disputing the position of  the four male-dominated national Aboriginal organizations, including the AFN, on a  number of issues (see Kinesis above).  The conference supported that Aboriginal women have 50 percent of the Aboriginal representation at the Constitutional  talks. The working group also supported  NWAC's position that the Charter of Rights  and Freedoms continue to apply to Aboriginal people after their right to inherent self-  government is recognized.  Discussion of property rights and economic union was less complicated. The  working group urged the provincial government to strongly oppose entrenchment  of property rights in the Constitution—  women's organizations continue to stress  that property rights have nothing to do with  the Constitutional debate. Another recommendation was that an economic union and  common market be left out of the Constitutional package, and be treated as an intergovernmental issue.  The working group agreed that the  Canada Clause and Social Charter as proposed not be included in the Constitution, and that further discussion of a Social  Charter involve consultation with Canadian  women.  Noting growing support for the decentralization of federal powers, conference participants urged that the federal government  retain authority in initiating new national  programs to prevent the erosion of social  services offered to Canadians.  Regarding changes to the Court system,  the working group recommended that gender balance in the Courts be entrenched in  the Constitution, and that there be no fewer  than four and no more than five women (or  men) on the Supreme Court of Canada at  any one time.  The working group also urged the federal government to reinstate funding to the  Court Challenges program. The program,  cancelled in March, was used by some disadvantaged groups to challenge discriminatory legislation in the Courts. An example  was funding for LEAF's submission to the  , Supreme Court of Canada which led to the  upholding of the federal pornography law in  the recent Butler decision.  In addressing Senate reform, conference  participants stressed that reform should at  least provide for equal numbers of representation of women and men and that the Senate should include persons from tradition-  aUy disadvantaged groups. If these changes  are not included, the Senate should be abolished.  Strong-Boag hopes the provincial government wUl Usten to these recommendations and wUl be better informed about  women's concerns in the Constitutional debate. Judging by the record of governments  in consulting with women, we aren't holding our breath.  KINESIS SSSSSSSSS^  NEWS  BC child protection:  A panel for your thoughts  by gilchrist Russell  The Courage to Heal—perhaps the  most widely recognized book on women surviving an agonizing experience—physical,  emotional, and sexual abuse—horribly familiar to a vast majority of women. Often these abuses continue in our Uves but,  for many, they start and hve on in our  chUdhood memories. The most vulnerable amongst our population, the least able  to protect themselves and articulate their  abuse or neglect, are our chUdren. What recourse to protection does a child, have?  The state attempts to offer protection  against abuse or neglect of a chUd through  legislation in the Criminal Code of Canada.  As a response to a crime already committed, this is obviously a reactive strategy to  the offense.  In BC, the FamUy and ChUd Services  Act authorizes social workers to intervene  in family situations, by providing support  services in order to preserve a disintegrating family unit, or to apprehend a chUd who  is in need of protection.  Joan SmaUwood, the province's Minister of Social Services, recently appointed a  community panel to review chUd protection  legislation in BC. Panel members Michael  Eso, Patsy George, Freda MacLeUan and  Brent Parfitt were in Vancouver for three  days in AprU to solicit input from interested  parties. PubUc submissions were made to  the panel, and panel members also scheduled private meetings with other community agencies.  The fact sheet in the press kit tells us  that, in 1990-91, there were 31,429 investigations of possible chUd abuse or neglect—  a 5-percent drop from the previous year. As  a result of these investigations, 3,183 chUdren were removed from their homes (apprehended) and an additional 2,456 chUdren  were admitted to the Ministry of Social Services' (MSS) care with parental agreement.  Not surprisingly, most of the speakers at  the panel hearing I attended were women  active in community services—social workers, welfare advocates, foster parents and  staff from battered women's shelters. As  caregivers, these women gave insightful and  passionate accounts of their experiences  with the issue of chUd protection.  The depth and diversity of their presentations broadened the issue of chUd protection, going beyond actual abuse or neglect  of children to discussion of the many areas  of social services implicated in ensuring protection against abuse and neglect.  The panel identified issues of concern  such as the increase in the number of one-  parent famiUes. Over the past ten years,  this number has grown by almost 38 percent, with a 56 percent increase in one-  parent famiUes on income assistance over  the same period of time. Panel members,  however, failed to acknowledge that women  predominantly head these households and,  without recognizing tins context, the facts  point a blaming finger at women—women in  low-income positions are vulnerable to the  vagaries of protecting their chUdren from  abuse and neglect.  Nancy Drewitt and Stephanie Chaytor of  the Wife Assault Coordination Committee,  a MSS sub-committee, said research shows  that "chUdren who witness violence in the  home show Uttle difference from chUdren  who themselves are abused."  Current statistics also show that 80 percent of offenders and 60 percent of women  who find themselves in abusive relationships have witnessed their mothers being  battered. The sub-committee research also  found that " ... chUdren from violent  homes are at risk and mothers do not have  sufficient support to ensure their chUdren's  safety ... ."  [Drewitt and Chaytor say] women are  afraid their chUdren will be apprehended if  MSS becomes involved. Often women on income assistance are below the poverty Une.  This may compromise their abihty to parent weU and force them back into violent relationships. They recommended raising income assistance rates to the poverty Une  and that MSS provide preventative care for  the chUd. They also recommended that vis  itation rights for a threatening father with  access to a chUd be enforced outside of the  home in a semi-pubhc space, so that mother  and chUd are not alone with the father.  Abusers with access wUl continue to abuse,  they said.  Jade MacLaren, a Social Worker with 19  years of experience, emphasized apprehension be used as a last resort. She said 50  percent of chUdren social workers deal with  are from famiUes that voluntarily request  intervention. She also said parents approach  MSS to place a chUd in care but resources  are not avaUable to meet this demand.  In the event of apprehension, a chUd is often pressured by the family to return. MacLaren said stronger legislation and better-  trained workers. She told of abused girls  who go to criminal court only to find out  that, perhaps because they did not come  forth sooner, their cases are weak and  charges are dropped. Provincial legislation  gives workers the authority to investigate  a reported abuse or neglect in the parent's  home but does not require the parent to  produce the chUd. And because the criminal code requires proof of the incident beyond a doubt, Maclaren reports that many  children in the province of BC die each year  without convictions against their abusers.  MacLaren also told the panel that social  workers, who do not beUeve chUdren need  protection, are involved in the dehvery of  this social service. She called for more suitable individuals, with the compassion required for chUd protection services, and for  better training and more support for social  workers dealing with stressful and demanding situations.  Regina Shulty spoke on behalf of foster  parents and foster chUdren, as one who has  been both. She said she was taking a break  from parenting and has become part of an  ever-growing support group for adult foster  children. Now in her 30s, Shelty recounted  some of her experiences as a foster chUd.  Some of the homes she was sent to were unsafe places because of older abusive chUdren  or the foster parents, she told the forum,  and there were times when her Ufe in the  s abusive than in her  foster home was n  original home.  Child apprehension is a traumatic event  with debiUtating repercussions for both  family and child. In a city Uke Vancouver,  with its diverse cultural communities, it is  paramount that assessment for protection  be culturally sensitive.  MSS said it is committed to assisting  First Nations communities with developing  protection services for their own chUdren.  Elizabeth Po presented the panel with her  thoughts on the need for culturaUy appropriate assessments of immigrant famiUes,  the challenges of language barriers, and how  important it is to place immigrant chUdren  in need of protection with extended family  members or within a network of friends.  KeUy Maier, a social worker and a feminist, responded to the panel's request for  written feedback by elaborating on her concern with the definition of a chUd. If the  panel recommend any legislation, she wrote,  it must be made clear that a fetus is not a  chUd in the event of, for example, medical  intervention practices that consider the unborn fetus to be a 'patient in its own right'  and lead to "fetal apprehension" for reasons  called 'medical'. In another scenario, Maier  adds, "refusing a caesarean section ought  not to invoke cluld protection measures ...  so to omit such specific language leaves the  door open to the misuse of the legislation  and the abuse of pregnant women."  Maier notes in particular the interpretation of section (1) which states: "a chUd"  means a post-partum person under 19;  that "apprehend" specificaUy refers to a  postpartum cluld, not an unborn fetus;  and "in need of protection" means in relation to a postpartum child.  The panel wUl prepare a public report on  its findings by October 1992.  gilchrist Russell is my mother's maiden name and I am foiiunaie in that, for  all the racist and misogynist abuse in  her life, she committed herself to doing  her best to raise and protect her three  children.  Not Just Another Banner  The very commonplaceness of it was disturbing.  In a city filled with images of women beckoning to consumers, it was yet another case of women's  sexuality being traded off for profit. So not surprisingly, what created the stir was less the ad  itself than its sponsor—Co-op radio, the community radio station held by many to be a bastion of  progressive politics.  Originally conceived as a promotional boost for Co-op's annual fundraisii  banner (see photo left) was going to be an 'in your eye' image, draping o  storeys, dwarfing Pigeon Park residents and passing-traffic on Hastings.  The image does indeed demand attention—  shyly towards her viewers, eyes downcast,  radio, with Co-op's dial numbers.  20-foot high image of a  In her shoulder is a radi.  On such a large banner, the opportuni  with the viewer—we are allowed to star<  her, her nudity and her femaleness are  m is unmistakable. The \  at her unchallenged. She  sed as a prop.  a-thon, the huge  an unclothed, turning  , behind her, a larger  t given equal footing  tion to images around  The image also relies on the viewer to accept 'classic' images as 'art', instead of looking at why her  vulnerability and her thin body have historically been hailed as 'beautiful' by some. The 'classicism'  itself is despairingly ethnocentric in that it draws from Greek-western culture, inappropriate in itself  in an area and for an audience that is largely non-white.  The consensue of those who attended a forum at Co-op Radio to address the issues of sexism raised  by the banner was that the banner did not represent Co-op Radio. The mistake was unintentional.  Co-Op's reasoning was that, because decisions aren't made by a consensus of the hundreds of  volunteers at Co-Op but are often passed quickly by one or two people, things slip through.  The important thing, the forum agreed, was  image—not merely that every member be nc  commitment to discuss ideas. The forum to d  and it discussed the need to encourage greate  to recognize the sexism inherent in the banner's  i-sexist, but that they be anti-sexist, and share a  scuss sexism was part of an effort to discuss ideas,  ibout sexism within Co-op Radio.  It's a start, but a small one  who showed up at the for  Co-Op radio.  Despite a commitment to a  im, the issue seemed to hav  ntinue fighting  just slid by n  iexism from the five w  any of the programm  Corinne Bjorge is a Vancouver-based writer and activist.  4   KINESIS     JUne92 News  /<m####m?###sm2^#  Arson destroys Harbord Clinic:  Condemning the violence  by Fatima JafFer  It didn't take long to get us together.  A couple of hours after news that Dr.  Henry Morgentaler's Harbord Street abortion clinic in Toronto had been destroyed  reached Vancouver in the early morning of  May 19, women who had supported, fought  for, worked for and provided services to  guarantee women's rights to reproductive  choice took action,  "We knew people would be shocked, horrified, scared, angry ... that we needed an  opportunity to come together and be together. We called aU the people who had  ever provided security for the chnics, all  the health care givers who worked in [Vancouver's freestanding cUnics], aU the women  who had ever supported the cUnics ..."  said Joy Thompson of the BC Coalition for  Abortion Clinics (BCCAC).  About 400 women and men showed up  outside the Vancouver Art GaUery the day  after the explosion at the Toronto chnic.  Thompson, referring to an immediate response by a spokesperson for a Toronto-  based anti-abortion group, Choose Life  Canada, said "they said 'maybe it was an  act of God' ... WeU, we don't need law  enforcement officers to tell us who is responsible ... or do pigs have wings?" "So  why is [the anti-choice minority] so sUent.  Why aren't they condemning this act of violence," she added.  The Harbord Street cUnic has been the  focus of anti-choice harassment since its  opening in 1983. Pickets patrolled the chnic  for almost five years before the chnic got an  injunction prohibiting them. As recently as  January 24, there was an attempt to firebomb the chnic.  Ontario Health Minister Frances Lankin  said the government had been warned of  growing threats against abortion cUnics,  "iealth care givers and their patients before the bombing, as weU as of plans by the  Canadian anti-choice minority to bring in  US advisors to step up attacks against the  pro-choice majority. But the explosion and  gasoline fire that destroyed Morgentaler's  chnic went far beyond the government's expectations, said Lankin.  On May 20, the Ontario government announced that they wUl spend $420,000 over  the next two years to help increase security  at abortion cUnics. The money wUl also go  towards helping groups fight harassment in  the courts, and to monitor and report harassment to the government. Morgentaler  welcomed the government's promises and  said the arson attack was the work of "obsessive, fanatical, reUgious extremists who  are adamantly opposed to the rights of  women, especially the right to control their  own reproductive choice."  At the start of the raUy in Vancouver, lo  cal members of Operation Rescue climbed  up behind some of the organizers and security volunteers, holding up a large sign  in ycUow, with wording in red: "Boom! So  long and Good-bye Henry Morgue&DoUar"  for the duration of the raUy. However, they  failed to provoke the crowd and the raUy's  overriding message was deUvered: we wUl  con tinue to "stay loud, vocal, in the streets  and not faU in to being a sUent majority."  "Protecting the cUnics is a core-funding  priority." The freestanding cUnics in Vancouver, Everywoman's Health Centre and  Elizabeth Bagshaw, receive no funding at  present for capital costs. "We have demanded," said Thompson, "that [the Attor  ney General and the BC government] take  the responsibihty for that core service which  is called 'protection'."  Rape shield law:  "No means no" under attack  by Lissa Geller  Women who rejoiced at amendments to  the sexual assault laws proposed in BiU C~  49 may be pleased that the federal government's sexual assault bUl is now at the  committee phase in the House of Commons.  However, despite aU-party support for it  in the Commons, the proposed law is encountering significant opposition from male-  dominated groups across the country.  The proposed law provides strict guidelines on when a rape victim's sexual past  is admissible and also includes a definition  of consent that clearly states it is no longer  a defense "that the accused believed the  complainant consented where ... the accused did not take aU reasonable steps ...  to ascertain that the complainant was consenting." This wording— which simply, put  means 'no means no'—was hailed as a victory by many women's groups across the  country earlier this year.  Bill C-49 came about foUowing the August. 1991 Supreme Court decision which  struck down Section 276 of the Criminal  Code, known as the Rape Shield law [see  Kinesis, Feb 1992 and Kinesis Sept 1991].  While women's groups express concern  over Justice Minister Kim CampbeU's contrary refusal to deal with judicial sexism,  they support the bUl as an important step  in legislating against sexual assault-  Opposition at the committee level has  focused primardy on this 'no means no'  clause. Critics charge that the clause translates to 'reverse onus' that makes a man  guilty unless he can prove he reasonably believed a woman was consenting.  Susan Brown of the National Association  of Women and the Law (NAWL) says that  this is pure "fear mongering". "It's just not  a possibility [that BUl C-49 is unconstitutional]. It is not a case of reverse onus at  all," she says.  BiU C-49 essentiaUy legislates that men  must take responsibiUty for their behaviour  and actions. However, whUe the Rape bUl  wUl require male offenders to do more than  merely say they thought their victims were  consenting, the onus wUl be, as in any case  of !nw, on the judge and jury to decide  whether the accused's beUef that his sexual  partner consented is reasonable.  Defense lawyers, including the Ontario  Criminal Lawyers Association, say the provision could violate Sections 7 and 11 of  the Charter of Rights and Freedoms and a  challenge could defeat the legislation at the  Supreme Court level  An editorial in the Globe and MaU claims  "the law would leave Uttle room for that  most ambiguous of human acts: seduction."  Yet, many women point out, seduction is a  two-way street. While women seduce their  partners too, they do not rape. The argument that BiU C-49 eliminates seduction  becomes ridiculous in this context.  Opponents of the bUl also claim CampbeU is attempting to use the Criminal Code  as an instrument of social reform. The  Canadian Bar Association's Richard Peck  calls the bill "... an attempt to legislate  in the area of human relations." One concern, according to Robert Wakefield of the  Ontario Criminal Lawyers Association, is  that, while "everybody is in favour of a reeducation ... what we're worried about is a  program that puts the slow learners in jaU."  But these opponents of the bill are simply being melodramatic, says Jane ShackeU, a Vancouver lawyer and representative  of LEAF. "This is not a question of education. Men know when a woman isn't consenting but they and their lawyers have used  the defense in the past (that they thought  she was consensual) because they knew they  could get off."  The fact that the Canadian Bar Association and the Criminal Lawyers Association  have spoken out against Bill C-49 is merely  testimony to how male-dominated and patriarchal the legal profession in Canada is,  ShackeU says.  Unfortunately, this attention has served  to undercut some legitimate concerns a-  round Bill C-49 being raised by some  women's groups in Vancouver.  NAC President Judy Rebick cautions  that the bill, in its preamble, does not rec  ognize the particular vulnerabUity to sexual assault and prejudiced treatment in the  judicial system of immigrant women, lesbians, First Nations women, prostitutes, elderly women, women of colour and chUdren.  A representative of the National Organization of Immigrant and Visible Minority Women points out that the bUl's preamble fails to recognize the racism in the poUce and judicial system women of colour  face when reporting sexual assault. Eunadie  Johnson says many women of colour hesitate to call poUce or lodge sexual assault  charges because of that racism. As weU, Liz  Simpson of the Disabled Women's Network  (DAWN) says disabled women are twice  as likely to be sexuaUy assaulted and calls  for recognition of the need for special protection under the law. Nicole Tanguay of  the Native Women's Resource Centre in  Toronto states, "it is not safe for a First Nation women to complain of rape in a system  that is male and white. There is one law for  men and no justice for women."  Kim CampbeU's refusal to establish a  mandatory gender and race bias program  for the judiciary, has contributed to a reluctance on the part of women's groups to  wholeheartedly support BiU C-49.  IronicaUy, groups Uke the Canadian Bar  Association and REAL Women see BiU C-  49 as caving in to a femimst agenda.  McanwhUe, much of the femimst community stiU awaits the combination of legislative and judicial reform that wUl make their  lives safe from sexual assault.   Lissa Geller is a regular Kinesis cori-  tributor living in Vancouver  KINESIS SSS<i5^^s^^^^  WHAT'S   NEWS?  Lesbian rights  shot down  by Ria Bleumer  Lesbians and gays working in the pubUc service are stiU without rights foUowing  a parliamentary committee's veto of a bill  that would outlaw discrimination against  them.  The lesbian and gay rights proposal, supported by New Democrats and Liberals,  ght to change the Pubhc Services Act to  include protection for lesbians and gays employed in the public sector. But the amendment was shot down by Progressive Conservative members on May 20 in a 4-3 vote of  a parliamentary committee.  New Democrat Joy Langan sees the veto  proof of Prime Minister Brian Mulroney's "hollow and shallow" promises. Lesbians and gays have been waiting for the  federal government to Uve up to its 1986  promise to make discrimination against  gays and lesbians Ulegal. And just last  month, Mulroney told the House of Commons that the 1960s purges against lesbian  and gay civU servants was "one of the great  outrages and violations of fundamental human Uberty" and that he opposed any form  of discrimination against any Canadian.  The four Conservative MPs who defeated  the proposal were reluctant to discuss the  issue. They remained sUent as they voted  against it, refusing to respond to Langan's  pleas for a debate. "It's Uke talking to  a void," she said. Conservative MP Ross  Stevenson said the proposal was rejected because the government is discussing a similar  amendment to the Canadian Human Rights  Act (CHRA).  The question now remains whether or not  the inclusion in the CHRA of sexual orien-  TRIVIA  18  Interviews, theory,  experimental prose and  After Readings with  a special focus on  collaboration between  lesbian writers and artists  tation as a prohibited grounds of discrimination wUl meet a sinular fate.  While Justice Minister Kim CampbeU  has said she supports the amendment, she  faces powerful opposition from some members of her caucus. Some are morally opposed to protection for lesbians and gay  men. Others have said that if sexual orientation is written into the Act, a section defining the "traditional family" should be included to protect "family values." The federal government is worried that legal protection of lesbians' rights wUl make it impossible to prevent claims by lesbians for  "spousal benefits."  MeanwhUe, as Kinesis goes to press, lesbian groups in Vancouver are meeting to  discuss and prepare a community position  oil the kind of protection lesbians would  Uke to see reflected in government legislation. This wUl lead up to the 2nd Pan-  Canadian Conference on Gay and Lesbian  Rights scheduled to take place in Vancou-  ver in October.   Ria Bleumer is a volunteer writer living in Vancouver.  Language training  cuts target  immigrant women  by Kelly O'Brien  The hardest hit casuaUties of the i  cuts in federal funding to government job-  training programs appear to be women and,  in particular, immigrant women.  The cuts single out programs which include ESL (English as a Second Language),  and largely those combining ESL with job-  training. These programs have been replaced by a new government program, LINC  Eastside DataGraphics  1460 Commercial Drive  *-===_ tel: 255-9559 fax: 253-3073  Computer Training  • Introduction to MS-DOS  • WordPerfect 5.1  • Desktop Publishing  • Lotus 1-2-3  Specializing in on-site training for small groups and customized  training schedules. Beginner and intermediate instruction available.  Please call for rates.  ,<^^>~ Union Shop  (Language Instruction for Newcomers to  Canada).  Announced by the Minister of Employment and Immigration, Bernard Valcourt,  on January 7, 1992, this program, initiated  without input or consultation from immigrant and visible minority groups, is scheduled to be in effect by June 1st.  The $80 miUion that the government is  transferring from ESL language training  funds to LINC does not include job-related  language training. According to the government, the program is designed to ensure timely assistance and increase language  traimng opportunities by opening it up to  a broad range of immigrants, regardless of  status or ehgibiUty for the labour force.  Because LINC is not avaUable to citizens  the program directly discriminates against  those immigrants who have been in the  country long enough to claim citizenship  but have not yet acquired basic communication skiUs. The government is assuming a  lot, claims Shah. "If you're a citizen, you  should be able to speak the language."  Those who are not ready to participate  in the program immediately, according to  ESL instructor, Priti Shah, wUl be the im-  migrant women. Shah says women usuaUy  wait longer before they access language programs because, whUe the men are the bread-  earners for the fanuly in the first few years,  "the women usuaUy stay at home and look  after fanuly for the first few years."  In the past, ESL programs included  chUcare aUowances. ESL instructor, Ramin-  der Dosanjh, is concerned that immigrant  women with school-aged chUdren will not be  able to participate in LINC. While the government wUl give priority to agencies that  provide chUd minding for preschool-aged  chUdren, chUd care aUowances for school-  aged chUdren is not avaUable.  LINC also lowers the level of language  traimng. It only provides for the basic level  of competency, says Dosanjh. Although the  initial reduction in the program from 24  to 20 weeks has changed to aUow participants more time to meet the basic language  requirements, the traimng provides for a  much lower level than that students receive  at present.  LMRT (Language Market Related Training), which combines ESL with job training,  has been aUocated oidy 20 percent of the total budget for language training. This program gives priority to Unemployment Insurance (UI) recipients and is only avaUable  to individuals whose occupations are in demand. Training programs for people not collecting UI have been gutted. Consequently,  job training assistance for women, particularly immigrant and racial minority women  who are not yet in the work force, do not  qualify for LMRT. Presently, oidy 14 out of  every 100 women who need traimng are able  to use federally funded traimng programs.  These cuts to traimng programs will widen  this gap even further.  Dosanjh beUeves that privatizing language training, by funding agencies that  submit the lowest bid, wUl lower the quality of instruction. The government stated  that it wUl investigte the track record of the  agencies that have applied for LINC funding, but, as yet, there are no mechanisms in  place to monitor programs.  Many questions remain unanswered on  the new government strategy, including  standards for assessing training needs, measurement of language competency and the  future of the Combined SkiU [language and  job training] Program. As Kinesis goes to  press, community groups are stiU meeting  to develop strategies to deal with the cuts  and to ensure that community participation  when answers to these questions are discussed by the government's decision-making  bodies tliis summer.  inister \X/isdom  A Journal for the Lesbian Imagination  in the Arts and Politics since 1976  Great issues full of terrific dyke writing and art  agitate, soothe, inspire, move us to reflection and action:  #35 On Passing  #36 On Surviving Psychiatric  Assault/Creating Emotional  Well-Being in Our Communities  #37 Lesbian Theory  #38 Lesbian Relationships  #39 On Disability  #40 On Friendship  #41 Italian-American Women's Issue  #42 Open theme (12/90)  #43/44 15th Anniversary  Retrospective (6/91)  #45 Lesbians & Class (12/9!)  To get this great work sent to your  home, your office, your friends —  SUBSCRIBE NOWI  Name   Address    City   State & Zip   Subscription rates  I yr, 4 issues  $17 1 year, $30 2 years  International: $22 (SUS)  Single issues: $6 (postage inc.)  Free on request to women In prison and  POB 3252 • Berkeley, CA 94703 • USA  mmmmim    % m  KINESIS WHAT'S   NEWS?  by Lynne Wanyeki  A case of  mistaken  mastectomy  A woman from Shannon, Quebec has filed  a $1.5 miUion lawsuit against two doctors  for unnecessarily performing a mastectomy  on her left breast. According to her lawyer,  the two doctors wrongfully diagnosed a cancerous tumour, removed her left breast,  learned of their error, but faded to inform  the woman of their mistake for six years.  Over the six years, the woman was subjected to many post- operative examinations and was hospitahzed four times for  reconstructive surgery on her breast. She  and her husband also decided against having more chUdren because they feared a recurrence of the cancer. The woman found  out about the the doctors' mistake in 1988,  when she happened to look through her  medical file at their office.  MeanwhUe, a study of American women  and breast cancer treatment released on  May C found that mastectomies—the removal of breast tissue—are usuaUy not required in the early stages of breast cancer.  The study suggests that lumpectomies—  removal of a tumour with minimal adjacent  breast tissue—combined with radiation are  just as effective as radical surgery.  Roy Clark, a radiation oncologist at  Toronto's Princess Margaret Hospital and  the main researcher in the study, says "this  study adds weight to the argument that a  questionable number of American women—  up to 75 per cent in some areas—stiU undergo unnecessary radical surgery." He adds  that 20 to 35 percent of Canadian women  with breast cancer receive mastectomies.  Women get  history month  Women's history wUl be recognized for  the first time ever in Canada. October  1992 has been designated Women's History  Month, and wUl coincide with celebrations  for 125 years of Canadian confederation.  The announcement was made by Mary  ColHns, federal minister responsible for the  Status of Women, at an event celebrating  International Women's Day in March. October is a significant month for Canadian  women as it also marks the annual commemoration of the Persons Case, which resulted in the official recognition Canadian  women as "persons" on October 18, 1929.  Women's organizations and women in the  academic community pushed for the idea  of a celebration of women's history as a  means of publicly recognizing the contributions and achievements of Canadian women.  "I envisage Women's History Month as  providing an opportunity for all Canadians to acknowledge the accomplishments of  women working together to help buUd our  nation," CoUins declared. "The recognition  and appreciation of women's historical contributions wUl also remind us that the initiatives of the present are buUt on the accomplishments of the past."  Women's groups, the academic community and other non-governmental organizations are being invited to pursue initiatives  to research and share women's history. For  more information, contact Ninon Bourque,  Status of Women Canada, at (613) 995-  4112, or the Canadian Women's History  Month Committee, 893 Leshe, Victoria, BC,  V8X 2Y3.  Abortion debate  continues in  Ireland  Irish women have yet to secure the right  to control their fertUity despite a Supreme  Court ruUng that overturned a High Court  injunction preventing a 14-year-old rape  victim from going to Britain for an abortion. While the Supreme Court ruled that  abortion woxdd be legal in Ireland in certain circumstances, the Court left it to the  government to legislate the matter. Three  of the five Supreme Court judges also stated  they would grant injunctions against women  traveUing abroad for abortions not legal in  Ireland.  The uncertain legal chmate has left Irish  women more subject to private injunctions.  In early May, a man requested poUce help in  preventing his ex-girlfriend from traveUing  to Britain because he suspected she was going for an abortion. The Director of Pubhc  Prosecution has advised the man to seek a  private injunction in the High Court.  The Irish government is also trying to entrench its anti-choice legislation by securing exemption from European federal law,  which would come into effect when the European Economic Community is formed.  Liz O'Shea, of the Dublin Abortion Information Campaign, condemned the government for sacrificing the basic rights of Irish  women. "Instead of taking any action such  as legislating on abortion in Ireland or immediately holding the referendum on information and travel so that we would know  what our legal and civU rights and privileges are, the government has attempted to  marginalize an important constitutional is-  "It matters httle whether the High Court  grants or denies an injunction in this [above  mentioned] case. The precedent has been  set. Anyone, a family member, a neighbour,  -g A _|_   Consignment  J-^l1-!-  Clothing  "Clothes Shouldn't Hurt"  Specializing in size plus fashions  Recycle your wardrobe for cash  4235 Dunbar Street  Vancouver, BC  222-1895  Ask about our " home shopping"  service  a rapist can now seek an injunction against Wflllf IIV1 f\T\  a pregnant woman," O'Shea declared. "We "CMUIIVJ UI I  are being threatened with compulsory preg-       fhp NPh  The DubUn Abortion Information Campaign can be contacted at PO Box 3327,  Dublin 8, Ireland. Tel: 011-353-1-535867.  Women lab rats  test cancer drug  Women's groups in Canada and the US  are criticizing an upcoming study on breast  cancer prevention that requires healthy  women to take the drug, tamoxifen. Researchers are calhng the study the first drug  trial of it s kind.  The study requires 16,000 women, 35  years or older to serve as guinea pigs in the  experiment. Half of the women wUl be given  tamoxifen regularly over a five-year period.  The other half wUl be given placebos. Breast  cancer rates wUl be compared in the two  groups. About 1,600 Canadian women are  expected to be part of the study.  Cancer researchers say the study wUl test  whether the drug tamoxifen can prevent  breast cancer before it begins in women who  have no obvious symptoms but who are considered at high risk of getting the disease.  Tamoxifen, the most widely prescribed cancer drug hi the world, is currently being  used to treat patients with advanced breast  cancer.  Women taking tamoxifen are not free  from risk. Several, and sometimes fatal, side  effects have been hnked to the drug, including hot flashes, vaginal discharges, and  leg blood clotting—where clots sometimes  travel through the veins and lodge in the  lungs. Tamoxifen is also suspected of increasing the risk of endometrial cancer,  uterine cancer and Uver cancer.  Researchers claim that tamoxifen works  to prevent tumours from spreading from  one breast to the other by depriving cancerous tumours of the estrogen they need for  growth. Researchers also say that the drug  may assist in protection against heart disease and bone fractures in post-menopausal  women.  But drugs, especiaUy those affecting hormone levels, should be taken with caution. Another synthetic hormone drug, di-  ethylstilbestrol (DES), banned in 1971 has  now resurfaced as a treatment for estrogen-  responsive breast cancer. DES was found  to be hnked to cancer, birth defects and  disabiUties. DES was given to more than  half a miUion women during pregnancy between 1941 and 1971. Female chUdren of  women given the drug—DES Daughters—  were later found to have numerous unusual  and rare forms of cancers.  End Legislated Poverty (ELP) held a  Walk on the Rich in downtown Vancouver on AprU 24. The walk brought together  about 50 demonstrators and a crew from a  National Film Board, who are producing a  film on the feminization of poverty.  ELP volunteers staged three slats along  the course of the walk. The first performance, "Mulroney takes money from the  poor to give to the rich," exposed how taxes  deferred by big corporations are being paid  for by workers.  "Bus shelter or tax shelter," performed  at a bus shelter, focused on the exodus  of Canadian corporations across the border  since the signing of Free Trade Agreement.  The actors noted that the federal government's efforts to prevent such movement—  by keeping corporate taxes low—adversely  affect people in need, by lessening the  amount of government money avaUable for  social spending.  ELP's final piece, "Banks rod in dough  and give crumbs to the poor," staged in  front of ScotiaBank, pointed to the irony of  phUanthropic actions by the banks. While  banks tout their own benevolence, charitable donations from the banks amount oidy  to minimal percentages of their profits.  CeciUa Diocson of the Vancouver Status  of Women and the Phihppine Women's Centre expanded on the issue during her talk  after the last skit. Diocson said "the circumstance that drove the BrazUian poor to  break into supermarkets is the same circumstance that causes longer Uneups in Canadian food banks and forces FiUpino women  to work as domestic workers abroad [in  Canada]. This circumstance is known as international or global capital."  Diocson pointed out that banks play a  major role in the movement towards global  capital and that this movement has lead to  the creation of global poverty.  "It is high time that we start thinking  globally in order to properly situate the  economic crisis that we are facing today.  We cannot think in isolation anymore," she  ended. "The environmentalist cry of 'think  globally and act locally' should be the appropriate slogan of this decade."  Lynne Wanyeki is a first-time Kinesis writer who has just moved to Vancouver from Fredericton, NB, where  she completed an Arts Degree in Political Science and French. Kenyan-  born and bred, she is of mixed Gikuyu  and English-Canadian blood. She has  worked in community media for the past  three years and is a feminist, lesbian,  and neo-Marxist.  'LJou don't have to finance  ^ what you don't support.  • Lower interest rates on loans  to co-ops and societies  • Term deposits     • RRSPs  • Chequing accounts and  other banking services  A full-service credit union dedicated  to community economic development^  CCEC Credit Union  2250 Commercial Drive, Vancouver, B.C.  Telephone   254-4100  KINESIS SSSSSSSK*^^  NEWS  Campus violence:  She's not a victim  By Sherry Preston  Last September, Langara college student  Kim Anda Jarzebiak made a bold move.  She wrote an article under a pseudonym  about being violently raped in the summer  of 1991. The article was published in the  Langara student newspaper, The Gleaner.  Jarzebiak recaUs writing her story for  both personal and poUtical reasons. "It was  cathartic—therapeutic I guess—to get it  out on paper" she says. "I also wanted to  share my experience with other women."  But the article set off a chain of events  which has turned her hfe upside down and  embroiled her in a struggle requiring even  greater courage than it did to tell her story  in the first place. The scenario has become  an aU-to-farmliar one on university and college campuses across the country [see Kinesis, Feb., 92].  two men were instructed to apologize in  writing to Jarzebiak and get counselhng. To  date, neither man has apologized and only  Meheriuk has attended counselUng.  The media attention Jarzebiak's case received worked both for and against her.  It required aU the pressure she and others could mount to make even minimal  progress. Also, as Jarzebiak points out, "I  have tremendous name and face recognition  in the city. People say to me, 'Geez you look  familiar, aren't you...?' I don't know if they  are going to be supportive or hurtful. That's  very frightening. It was a big choice for me  to talk to people about the threat because it  invariably led back to the original incident.  "As for the fear I felt from the rape  threat," says Jarzebiak, "it was Uke the fear  I experienced during and after my rape. At  first, it was used by the reporters as shock-  value, but after it was reported so many  "If you can't educate yourself,  you shouldn't be educating others.  I'm happy he resigned."  -Kim Anda Jarzebiak  An immediate response to Jarzebiak's  story was a rape threat published in the  classified ads section of The Gleaner  by students David Lunquist and Mark  Meheriuk. This was foUowed by severe, ongoing harassment on and off campus, from  name-caUing to death threats.  "For a whde, I was scared to leave the  house. I had to move from a house I was ready happy in to one a lot smaUer. And with  so many people treating me Uke the enemy,  it is a paralyzing type of fear," Jarzebiak  says.  MeanwhUe, college administrators were  slow to take action against Meheriuk and  Lunquist. When they did, it took the form  of a relatively mild slap on the wrist—the  times, it lost its shock-value and became  almost common-place. That was very, very  horrible."  In her struggle for redress, Jarzebiak met  obstacles every step of the way. She repeatedly approached both the Vancouver Community CoUege administration and the Ministry for Advanced Education, headed by  Tom Perry, urging them to take action, with  little result. Jarzebiak's many calls to the  college about the current status of her case  have gone unreturned. It took a meeting between Jarzebiak, Langara principal David  Cane and his lawyers to open the Unes of  communication. In short, she has been given  the run-around.  "I think I'm owed a lot more than an  apology for what I've gone through," Jarze-  September 91 • Jarzebiak writes article for The Gleaner under a pseudonym about her  rape experience in summer of 1991.  October 91 • David Lundquist and Mark Meheriuk (members of The Gleaner collective)  threaten Jarzebiak with rape in the form of a classified ad in "The Gleaner." • Jarzebiak  files sexual harassment complaint with Langara CoUege.  December 91 • Women at Langara organize a raUy and march demanding safety for aU  women on campus and the expulsion of Mark Meheriuk and David Lundquist. • Male students take over pub-night, play music with misogynist lyrics and later break into and trash  Langara's women's centre in response to the march and raUy. • Meetings occur between  Tom Perry, Langara administration and a women's steering committee regarding consequences if Meheriuk and Lundquist fad to adhere to punishment. Jarzebiak was not invited  to participate.  January 92 • Jarzebiak retains Charlene Smith as legal counsel. • Langara principal,  David Cane, writes open letter to the college saying he is saddened that Jarzebiak "found  it necessary to leave Langara because of what she perceives as ongoing harassment of her by  a number of men." • Mark Meheriuk and David Lunquist instructed by college to write of  apology to Jarzebiak and go for counselUng. • Neither Meheriuk, nor Lunquist have apologized to Jarzebiak. Lunquist is subject to further punishment for refusing to get counseUing (a 2-week suspension in AprU foUowing two appeals).  March 92 • Langara student union stages occupation of Principal Cane's office, demanding his resignation. Cane calls in poUce and has students arrested. Minister for Advanced  Education, Tom Perry, calls for an investigation by provincial ombudsperson. In meeting  between the Langara Student Union Executive, Minister Perry and John Cruikshank, Vancouver Community CoUege (VCC) president Cruikshank says pohce action was "heavy-  handed" and nothing wdl happen to the students involved. On the same day, Cane calls a  press conference saying the students wdl be suspended and charged criminaUy.  April 92 • Jarzebiak and lawyer, Charlene Smith, file complaint against VCC with BC  Human Rights Commission. • Anita Braha of BC PubUc Interest Advocacy Centre becomes co-counsel for Jarzebiak.  May 92 • Cane announces his resignation as principal of Langara campus of VCC.  June 92 • Ombudsperson's report due.  June 92  biak says. "I lost a year of education. I am  now scrambUng to make up for that year.  I have a fear of going back to school now.  I am studying by correspondence for a few  months before I go back because I'm not  sure I can face a classroom situation or be  in a crowded hall again." -  "No one has asked me what the physical, emotional, and financial ramifications  of this have been. Neither Langara nor the  Ministry have encouraged or assisted me in  continuing my education. I'd Uke to know  if they're just planmng to forget about me,  or if they ever are planning to apologize. I  think they definitely at least should have  inquired after my weU-being, should have  shown some amount of compassion instead  of treating me as some annoying, persistent  problem.  "I am an intelhgent, strong woman and  I'm tired of being patronized and ignored.  Fighting this has been Uke a full-time job  and, every time I stop fighting, they get the  broom out again to sweep it under the carpet. Until they address me as a person, I'm  going to have to continue fighting."  In mid-February, Jarzebiak appealed to  the Langara Student Union Executive to  support her demand that Cane resign as  principal of Langara. The Executive passed  the motion, hands down, along with a resolution to uphold it pro-actively. This decision resulted in occupation of Cane's office  in March, where Cane called in poUce to arrest student protesters.  On May 6, Cane resigned as principal of  Langara. Many, including mainstream media, were quick to make the connection between his resignation and the students' sit-  in as weU as the perseverance of Jarzebiak and her supporters—women's groups,  sympathetic reporters and students, via the  Women's Centre.  Jarzebiak views Cane's resignation as "a  small victory" and says. "It's kind of Uke a  classic tragedy, he brought about his own  demise. I don't understand how he could  have ignored aU the advice he was given,  from women's groups, from Rape Relief,  from women on campus and from myself.  He had the resources to deal with the issues of sexual harassment oil campus effectively for the first time in Canadian college  history and he didn't.  "A person who cannot learn has no place  being the principal of a college," she adds.  "A person who cannot evaluate their ideas,  evaluate their responses, evaluate their positions, take criticism and be open to new  ideas has absolutely no business in any form  of education. If you can't educate yourself,  you shouldn't be educating others. So I'm  happy he resigned. I think it was the appropriate tiring for him to do."  Despite the strength and perseverance  Jarzebiak has shown throughout her case,  some people insist on seeing her as a 'victim.'  "A lot of articles that have been written  about me depict me as the victim or the  helpless person that things happen to. They  don't mention the fact that I am an incredibly brave person and I fought really hard for  this. I wouldn't mind if someone did an article on Kim Anda the survivor. If you want  to write an article about me, that's fine, as  long as the article is about my fight and  my struggle, not about things happening to  me and me as a stationary object that has  no power and can't affect change. I do have  power and I'm not stationary," says Jarzebiak.  Sherry Preston is a student at Langara CoUege.  Many of the problems Kim Anda Jarzebiak encountered arose because Langara did not  have an adequate harassment poUcy or clear procedures for her to foUow. In February last  year, harassment officer Catherine Thompson began work at VCC. Together with a committee made up of "aU the formal, constituent members of the college," Thompson has  worked to revise the old pohcy and to establish a process for implementing it. The new  pohcy includes two resolution options—mediation, if both parties consent, or a hearing.  Overall, women on campus seem satisfied with the new and improved pohcy. Lily Petrovic, former student executive member at Langara says "A poUcy is only as good as the  person who implements it and I have full faith in Catherine Thompson—she really cares  about people."  When asked about Jarzebiak's case, Thompson referred me to a public relations officer  because, she said, she was not on campus at the time of the incident. /////////////////////^^^^^  ///////////////////^^^^  FEATURE  Federal poUtics:  Who's Betty Baxter?  As told to Agnes Huang  Betty Baxter is seeking nomination  in the New Democratic Party for the  Vancouver Centre riding. She is a former member of Canada's national volleyball team and a partner in Learning Works, a small business developing learning materials and training  programs. An active New Democrat;  Baxter chairs the Nominations Support Committee of the Women's Rights  Committee, serves on the federal riding executive, and is a member of the  NDP's Lesbian and Gay Caucus. The  nominations are scheduled for the end  of June. If Baxter is successful, (which  seems likely—to date, she is the only  candidate), it pits Baxter and the NDP  against Progressive Conservative justice minister Kim Campbell, the present  MP for the riding, who is expected to  seek re-election to federal office.  Agnes Huang: You have been very successful in both sports and business. Why did  you venture into the poUtical arena?  Betty Baxter: Working in sport leadership and in business has shown me that  I have the skids necessary for working in  mainstream areas. I can work in groups of  both genders and in groups that have a lot  of difference in terms of class and racial  background. I can present new ideas in a  non-threatening way.  A few years ago, I thought these are skids  I should use in other places. Partly, my  sense of self hes in seeing I have an impact. So I take on big projects ... I feel  fairly grounded in what I stand for and in  my work impact, I need to be visible. That  made me think I could have an impact in  poUtics.  However, the more radical I became in  my feminism, the more I thought 'who  wants to'. My choices were either to completely opt out of the poUtical system or to  try and change it. I stiU think it can undergo  some radical change, if there are enough of  us on the inside to puU out the appropriate  bricks.  Agnes: Was there a particular incident  that influenced your decision to go into politics?  Betty: Being fired from a national coaching position for being a lesbian in 1982 was  dominant in shaping my pohtic. It really  challenged my thinking that when you try  hard everything wdl be perfect. I realized  there was oppression here. The first place  I went to learn more about oppression was  the women's movement. I had a pretty superficial, academic knowledge of oppression  prior to that.  Agnes: This is the first time you are running for poUtical office. Why are you going  for the top—for ParUament?  Betty: You go where your heart is. Because I have been an international athlete  and have spent 20 years of my Ufe representing Canada around the world, my image of what I want goes beyond making a  better neighbourhood. That is part of it. It  is about what Canada is in the world, where  Canada can make change and how we, as  Canadians, can keep our hfestyle and the  quality of our hfe. I think we have a quality  of life that is quite different from the United  States, quite different from Europe. It is  much better in many ways. In some ways,  it is a kind of patriotism. I think Canada  is a unique and wonderful place. It is not  about the Uttle pieces, it is about how aU  Betty Baxter  the pieces go together. That made me think  that it is federal poUtics I am interested in.  Agnes: How do you envision using political office to bring about social change  and to bring about the advancement of disadvantaged groups in society, in particular,  women, lesbians, people with disabiUties?  Betty: In poUtical office you have a  chance to impact on the making of laws.  That is the most powerful. Laws govern our  Uves. You have a chance to publicly speak  out in a way that has meaning for people.  You have a chance to be a part of getting  public input, to find out what the issues are  and to make recommendations for government pohcy, new laws and how we spend  our collective money.  It is problematic when people get power  and then become afraid to stay true to their  grassroots poUtics or lose them and become  seduced by the power of being 'there'. Of  course I do not want that to happen to me.  One of the benefits of having contacts, particularly in the women's community, is that  they can act as a watchdog. That is the only  way to make [power] meaningful and not  lose myself in it. If I want to stay true to  myself, I have to keep contact with the community and let it serve as a support system.  Agnes: What are the most important issues for women and for lesbians?  Betty: Issues for women are issues for lesbians. Lesbians have the additional oppression of not being recognized as having basic  rights—the primary issue is around human  rights.  The primary issue for women is one of  economics. Poverty is what keeps women  where they are. Power in our society is  about gender and money. Women and work  and the kind of compensation women are  able to make for the work they do is central.  The other issue for women is violence. Both  issues are about freedom in our homes, on  the street, in the work place.  Agnes: Are you currently active in the  women's movement on a grassroots level?  Betty: I am in the women's rights committee in the Party. I'm not actively involved in the grassroots community. For  the last year and a half, my involvement  has been in my company [Learning Works]  which is a feminist company. We do work  for women.  Agnes: How do you see your relationship  with the women's movement?  Betty: Ten years ago, when I was fired,  I felt hke I had lost my community. I went  to the women's community because I am a  lesbian. The women's community feels Uke  a home to me. I am not at the forefront  of a lot of issues within the women's movement but I identify with them. My identity as a feminist and a lesbian is shaped  by working with other women in a certain  way that wdl empower us more in the world.  I know what the shape of the work that  has been done is in because of the work I  have done and the hnks I have with people  who work in the movement. I have tremendous respect for people who do front Une  work. Twenty years ago, the women's movement was struggling with class issues. The  same thing is now happening around racism  because women can understand oppression.  There is something about the way women  work together. We are more open to looking at problems and to taking responsibihty  for our own part in creating problems.  Agnes: How wdl you make yourself more  accessible to the women's movement?  Betty: I want to meet with many groups.  I would hke to set up forums for discussion. I  want to facUitate public discussion on the issues, not just women's issues, but a number  of issues. For example, [I want to] organize  a series of public discussions about violence  against women. That would provide information about the current support services  that are avadable, about directions government has been going in funding and about  strategies that groups want us, as candidates, to take forward. My first job is to get  nominated in the party, but also to budd a  connection with the community.  Agnes: Kim CampbeU, Minister of Justice and current MP for Vancouver Centre, is a strong foe—she has garnered a lot  of support and respect from many different  people and groups in this riding, including  women and gay men. Where do you think  your support wdl come from? How wdl you  defeat Kim CampbeU?  Betty: Kim CampbeU's support is not  necessarUy solid. She has support because  she is seen as a powerful person. If I stay  with the issues and show the community  that I understand the issues the community wants put forward—and I think they  are radicaUy different from the conservative  agenda—a gap [in CampbeU's support] wUl  be created. There is a whole strategy around  showing where she has not done what the  community needed her to do. Regarding gay  and lesbian issues and women's issues, especially around violence, she has not responded to the community's needs. CampbeU is initiating eight court cases against  gays and lesbians at the same time as she  is putting herself forward as an advocate.  In exposing that, some of her support wdl  come over. There is a lot of support in this  riding for the NDP. Providing the Party  stays on top of good pohcies, there should  be a fairly solid block of support.  Agnes: Are you worried about alienating constituents for whom issues concerning  women and lesbians are not primary?  Betty: Provided that I am prepared to  talk about the economy, environment, the  Constitution and native land claim issues,  people cannot marginalize me. My support  within the Party is certainly not just from  the women's community.  Agnes: The federal and provincial governments have aU promoted the Une of  fiscal responsibiUty—meaning funding cutbacks and restraint. What do you think are  the funding priorities on a national level?  Betty: Over the past 10 years, corporate  taxes have stayed minimal whde personal  income taxes have gone up. Because of Free  Trade, acquisition of Canadian companies  by American companies has gone sky high.  As a result, Canadian companies are becoming minimized and shutting down. The  funding priority is to give people service  cope with that situation. You cannot go out  and explore new projects if people are  being taken care of. You have to put funding  back into things Uke the transfer payments  to the provinces for health care, higher education. You have to start showing that we  are, in fact, eroding the future by not doing  that. There has to be a shift in prioriti  We have to stop the mechanisms that have  let the money drain away. We have to stop  Free Trade and keep companies in Canada  by adding value to the product they produce  and through regional specialization. Taking  care of people means social programs: education, health promotion, universal health  care. At the same time you have to rebuild  the economy based on what Canadians do,  not on what Americans do.  Agnes: So do you support the abrogation  of the Free Trade Agreement?  Betty: Absolutely. The Free Trade deal  is kiUing us. We have to have trade relations  with Mexico but in a way that respects our  employee's abihty to earn a Uving wage, our  standards around the environment.  Agnes: Pay equity is an important  issue for women. The provincial NDP  governments recently elected in Ontario,  Saskatchewan and BC have yet to address  pay equity using the excuse of fiscal restraint. Do you support pay equity initiatives? How would you propose they be implemented?  Betty: Yes, I support pay equity initiatives. Implementation comes back to implementing priorities. It has to be top priority. Because pay equity is very expensive, it  is tough to get implemented in new governments. I would discourage any group I was'  working with from going the route of doing  a job evaluation process which costs a lot of  money. We have studied the issues for a long  time. Now it is time to put some money into  [pay equity initiatives]. We might be able to  start the process of implementation. At the  end of the process, the issue wdl be at a par.  The implementation has to be gradual, but  certain.    Thanks  to Ria Bleumer for hours  (days) of transcribing.  KINESIS Polygamous group in BC:  Breaking the silence on polygamy  by Deb Palmer and Luanne Armstrong  Women are breaking sUence about the oppression, mind control and abuse they suffer  in a polygamous group in Creston, BC—a group that encapsulates the patriarchal myth of  the benevolent father-figure presiding over his wives and chUdren, exercising dominion and  control, and extracting reverence and obedience. It is a group that has carried this myth  to its extreme—and the ones who suffer its consequences are the women and chddren.  Since '45, a smaU group of people in this southeastern comer of BC have successfuUy  defied Canadian law prohibiting polygamous marriage. They have created a rural, communal hfestyle, with an outwardly peaceful facade. But Ufe in the group, according to women  who have left it, is based on compulsion, coercion and the subjection of its women members. And untd recently, the group has been either ignored or tolerated by its neighbours,  residents of the nearby town of Creston and by local, provincial and federal authorities.  Many people in the local community say the group should be left alone to live as it pleases.  The Bountiful Polygamist group consists of approximately 450 men, women and chddren, directed sociaUy, economically and rehgiously by a group of five men, four of whom  live in the United States. One of these, Rulon Jeffs, is the 'prophet' of the group. Winston Blackmore is the leader of the Canadian group. The group is a breakaway sect from  the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (LDS), descendants of Mormons who left  when the church gave up polygamy in 1890. Any member of the LDS Church who has  hved polygamy since then has been excommunicated. The Creston group is aligned with  communities of polygamists in Colorado City, Arizona, Salt Lake City, Utah, and a couple of smaU communities in Idaho. There may be as many as 30,000 to 50,000 members of  polygamist sects throughout Canada, the United States and Mexico.  The Canadian group was formed in '45 when Ray Blackmore, Harold Blackmore, Eldon  Palmer and Dalmon Oler converted to polygamous Mormonism and left Alberta with their  famiUes to hve near Creston. The property they hved on was owned individuaUy in the beginning, but since '65, the property was turned over to a US-based corporation called the  United Effort Plan which presently controls aU of the group's debt-free property. The Creston leader, Winston Blackmore, is one of the trustees. The people in the group are tenants in homes they budd at their own expense.  Blackmore also owns several local companies, which employ most of the male members  of the group. Women who aren't required to care for chddren in the homes work in the  government-funded private school, which aU the chddren of the group attend. The group  leader requires 'voluntary' donation of the women's ChUd Tax Credits. A few women work  outside the community—three were sent to become nurses and several others work for a  local Homemakers Association.  Women in the group are the property of the group leader before marriage, and of their  husbands after marriage. They are conditioned from birth to serve the leaders and their  husbands. They are told by their leaders that their task is to "raise up pure and holy spirits, like calves in a staU."  Young women are given in marriage at ages 15 or 16 to men who may be much older  and have several wives. The women have large famiUes. One man, for example, with six  wives has 47 chUdren. The chddren receive little individual attention, since their mother is  usuaUy either busy working or with a new baby. The father distributes what attention he  can among a very large group.  In all of the famiUes, some or aU of the 'sister wives' must help support the families, as  the husband is often uneducated and is Unuted and controlled by the group leader in his  abihty to earn a Uving. Even with the women and men's combined incomes, the standard  of hving is often weU below the poverty Une. Because the parents are either absent or exhausted from working long hours, and often under severe emotional stress, the chddren's  physical and emotional needs are often neglected.  Frustration, coupled with a distorted sense of morality and sexual boundaries, translates  into destructive and devastating sexual control by the men of the women and chUdren of  both sexes. Rape, incest, and sexual molestation occur. In the closed and isolated environment of the community, the leaders collect information about the abuse and use it against  both victim and offender, further increasing their control. No action is taken against the  offender for the crime, outside of a token probationary action—unless some sUp in the  secret-keeping system occurs and outside agencies are informed.  Since  '45,  The problems become even more acute as families go from one wife to two to three or  more, and as the chddren reach their teenage years. The sheer number of complicated situations and human needs becomes greater than anyone's ability to cope.  But these emotional and physical lacks are justified in the minds of the adult group  members by the constant repetition by the leaders that 'the sacrifice of all this is required  if you are to be accepted by the Lord, and a member of the Lord's elect.'  Emotional breakdowns are interpreted as possession by evil spirits and held up as examples of the results of questioiung and disobeying the leader and the prophet. Psychological counselhng and counsellors are considered evil and unnecessary. The people are told  they should therefore be immune to any 'gentde'—the community's term for outsiders—  weakness.  Since there is httle that the men who are not leaders control in their hves, sexuaUty  and the powers of procreation are very important. The men fulfil their calling by bringing more pure souls into the 'True Church', i.e. polygamous Mormonism. Young men are  taught that they must respect as weU as work for the leaders or they will not be given  wives. The men have absolute power over their wives unless they are in disgrace with the  leaders, in which case, the women must remove their aUiance from the husband and take  direction oidy from the leaders.  I-4?.  W  a small group of people in this Southeastern  corner of BC have successfully defied Canadian  law prohibiting polygamous marriage. They have  created a rural, communal lifestyle, with an  outwardly peaceful facade. But life in the group,  according to women who have left it, is based on  compulsion, coercion and the subjection of its  women members.  "For time and all eternity"  In '88, Deborah Palmer left the community after reporting several incidents of sexual abuse  to the poUce and the Ministry of Social Services. Her story dlustrates the difficult and often desperate Uves of women in the group. She was molested by one of the group leader's  sons when she was four. This and other kinds of abuse continued untd she was 15 years  old. At 15 she was married, 'for time and aU eternity,' to the 57-year-old then leader of the  group. She became his sixth wife. He died of leukemia in 1974 after five years of marriage,  leaving her with one daughter.  She was then married to another man, 40 years older than her, as his fifth wife. He was  offended at being told to marry a woman who already 'belonged' to someone else 'for time  and aU eternity'. There was also intense poUtical conflict between Deb's father and her new  husband. She gave birth to two sons by him, but he was so emotionaUy destructive to her  and to his second wife, that in '82 she had a complete breakdown, and attempted suicide.  She had left him twice and been sent back 'in the name of God' by the prophet in the US.  After begging and pleacUng, she was finally given a 'release' from this husband, a form of  divorce. In '82, she was married to her third husband. He was ten years older than her and  was initiaUy kind and understanding.  By this time, Deb had begun seeing a counsellor in secret—a difficult process when she  was being so closely watched. She was painfuUy and slowly begun to question the group's  beUefs.  Then, in '86, her husband molested her daughter. He also sexuaUy assaulted Deb. She  informed leaders in both Canada and the US about these incidents but they told her to  keep quiet about it. Deb finaUy told her counseUor and Social Services about her daughter's abuse. When she told them about her experiences in the group, she realized that she  too was a sexual abuse survivor. While she was still reehng from discovering this, she found  she was pregnant with her seventh chUd. She was in mcredible pain from being sexuaUy  assaulted herself by her husband, and her doctor finally recommended she go to a psychiatric ward.  When Deb left the hospital, an aunt in Calgary who had never been a member of the  group found her a place to Uve, came to Creston and helped Deb to leave with her chUdren. Accessing schools and creating a new Ufe for herself and her chUdren was difficult.  AU her Ufe, she had been taught to put aU responsibiUty for decisions in the hands of the  group leader.  Once in Calgary, she and her chUdren began receiving counselUng. A sexual abuse awareness team at her son's school beheved he had also been molested. When she informed the  authorities, her husband was tried on seven counts of sexual assault. Six of the charges  were dropped. He received a suspended sentence for assaulting Deb.  During '88 and '91, she was also quietly approached by several members of the Creston  group who were seeking help. As a result, one of her half-brothers was convicted for the  rape of one of her half-sisters. He was sent to a counselUng program in Vancouver, but is  now back with the group.  As a result of her husband's trial, local, provincial and national media carried stories on  the Creston group. In several of the stories, the smUing group leader was quoted as saying he supported the equahty of women and that women in the group have free choice in  marriage.  Reaction to the publicity from the Creston community was defensive. Letters in the local paper defended the group. Creston is a smaU, conservative community. The group is  also protected by an 'old boys club' mentality among the local men, some of whom openly  express admiration or envy for the polygamous men.  They had a particularly negative reaction to two pieces in the media—one which printed  the detaUs of the sexual assault and the other, a letter from an ex-member of the group,  Ruth Perrin, which stated that the group was a dangerous cult. Perrin denounced the  group's practice of marrying girls aged 14 or 15 to old men—such a marriage had been  forced on her at 15. She also expressed deep concern for her relatives in the group, who  are controlled by the group's leaders.  Since leaving, Deb has written many letters to the ministries of women's equahty, social services, education and the Attorney General's office in the BC government. She has  asked for an investigation into the education the chUdren are receiving at the group's private school. Educational assessments on her own chddren, done in Calgary, indicate that  they were two and three grades behind. However, the Ministry of Education has so far  stated that the school fulfills aU the necessary educational requirements.  She and Ruth Perrin took a presentation called, 'Polygamy is not a Victimless Crime'  to the May 1991 conference on Women in a Violent Society, held in Banff. Over a thousand petitions were signed and sent to the Attorney General's office, asking that action  be taken. So far, no further charges have been laid against anyone in the group. In October, 1991, the Attorney General's office said it was considering laying charges of polygamy  against two men in the group. Since then, there has been no further comment.  Deborah Palmer is presently living in Lethbridge, raising her children, going to  school and writing a book about her life in the group. Luanne Armstrong is a feminist, writer, teacher, community organizer and a rural woman living in Boswell,  B.C.  Diverse forms of marriage and family are  practiced by different reUgions and different  cultures aU over the world. In the United  States in 1879, the Supreme Court ruled  polygamy dlegal. In his decision, the Chief  Justice stated that "whde laws ... cannot  interfere with mere rehgious beUef and opinions, they may with practices." He added  that aUowing rehgious organizations to go  against sociaUy established norms would  make "professed doctrines of rehgious behef  superior to the law of the land."  The Canadian law against polygamy is  based upon this American precedent. The  assumption in such a ruhng is that North  American social norms are white, Judeo-  Christian, heterosexual, and monogamous  and wdl remain so.  The Creston group has the characteristics both of a cult and an abusive family.  Its exercise is based on the continued ex-  ploitation, oppression and sexual coercion  of women. Although the leader of the group  has stated that women can choose whether  or not to marry their designated husbands,  in what sense can a 15 or 16-year-old girl  raised in this group be said to have a choice?  Incidents of sexual abuse and sexual assault are 'dealt with' within the group. It's  difficult for women to access any kind of information or support.  One can only speculate whether the surrounding community and the provincial and  local authorities would be so extraordinardy  tolerant towards this group if its members  were non-white, or wore bright coloured  robes, or had rehgious practices that were  not based on Judeo-Christian origins. People in Creston seem to have bought the prevailing myth of this group as a large happy  family. In particular, Creston people mention that the chUdren always look so clean  and weU dressed and that the group prac-  BL2304mi r4k  Creek  tices high moral standards.  At this point, the group seems to exist  in a legal vacuum. Although they are nominally breaking the law against polygamy,  this law would have to be tested under  the Canadian Charter of Rights. If the law  forbidding polygamy was struck down, it  could conceivably make it possible for members of the Church of Latter Day Saints, or  other cultural groups or reUgions to practice polygamy.  Deb, and other women Uke her who have  managed to leave the group, have difficulty  finding counsellors and other helpers who  understand the nature of what they have  survived. A blanket of secrecy, denial, and  misunderstanding continues to exist around  this group. This sUence continues to hurt  these women by denying the reality of the  abuses they experienced and continue to experience.  ° KINESIS  KINESIS The LA uprising:  Understanding  the rage  by Kim Williams, Monica Buchanan, Mercedes Baines,  D. Lydia Masemola and Janisse Browning  On April 30, the acquittal of four white police officers in the videotaped beating of a black motorist, Rodney King, spurred three days of protest in Los Angeles, California. The verdict and the 'explanations' following the jury's decision  further illustrates a larger trend in North American society to invalidate the fears  and concerns of people of colour. The LA situation evoked the need for discussion,  and for healing.  On May 12, five women got together in Vancouver, to talk about the anger and  the hurt, and about racial tension in Canada and in the US. Monica Buchanan is  a mother, a student and a Black woman; Kim Williams is an African-American  student, working towards a Masters degree in political theory at the University  of British Columbia; Mercedes Baines is a theatre artist of mixed heritage, born  and bred in Vancouver. She is currently working in various media towards balancing her blood lines. D. Lydia Masemola is a South African woman, living in  Victoria, currently working on a TV production about immigrant and refugee issues. Janisse Browning is an African-Canadian writer with First Nations ancestry, based in Windsor, Ontario. She has recently left Vancouver to cycle her way  east across Canada.  Monica Buchanan: This whole week I've been flunking that I'm crazy. I want to buy  a ticket, go anywhere. But where do you go when this is your home, when there's nowhere  to go to?  Mercedes Baines: Am / crazy because I want to get out of here? I mean, this feeUng  of isolation. I almost see it as saying we need each other to say, "No, you're not crazy, we  aU agree with you, that what you've experienced is not right. It doesn't feel right to us, so  you're not the oidy one."  I think networking is important so that you're not isolated in your house in Port Moody,  or your house in Vancouver, thinking that you're the oidy one this happens to.  D. Lydia Masemola: Yes, it can be a social strength.  Monica: Talking about LA, about the isolation and about thinking that one is insane—  about insanity and the insanity that's going on in LA. Are we saying then that African-  American people, or African-Canadian, or whatever, that we, as a nation, are aU insane?  How does white supremacy rationahze this insanity that they're talking about? What  we're feehng and the way they're classifying us? I mean, one of the things that most struck  me was the reference to the people who started demonstrating in LA as 'hooUgans' and  'looters'. They're not real people. It's as if, once you set them up as apart, as 'the other',  then they're not a part of LA, they're not people that belong to that city or belong to  society—they're the 'other'.  Mercedes: The thing I saw on TV was that aU the reporters were white, with the Black  background, which really made it seem Uke 'otherness'. He's the world, this reporter is the  reality, the calm rational reality, and that's chaos behind him.  Janisse Browning: That's interesting because I saw some Canadian Press, or Associated Press photo of these two innocent-looking young Black women walking down the  street with their arms full. Then you read the caption and it says something about them  looting a store. You see that and start making the associations—that we may look innocent, but we're aU potential looters, or we're aU potential criminals.  Mercedes: Given the chance!  Janisse: Given the chance! I was walking down the street after a demonstration here  in Vancouver and I saw pohce cars going by, or cops on motorcycles, and they would do  double-takes at me. I knew it was just because I was Black, and they were looking for  'trouble'. You become a target, just by virtue of being dark-skinned.  Kim Williams: When I first heard about LA, I just sort of barricaded myself in my  home. I really didn't want to talk to people about it, I was so angry. And then after a day  or two, I had to go [to the university] and it was as if they were waiting for me—because  I'm Black, in Political Science, and I'm American, they were immediately hke, 'What do  you think? What are you feehng?', as if I were on trial or something. They asked me over  and over again: "Why are they tearing their homes apart?  Why are they destroying their community? Why? But that's where they hve, that's their  home, that's where they shop, that's where they raise chUdren, Why? Why are they doing  this?"  It was as if this reaction was something they just couldn't understand, something so totally beyond their experience. They didn't understand how you could be in such a rage.  Maybe they just didn't understand, I don't know. After these conversations, I had to go  home and barricade myself in my apartment again. I was in such a rage.  Mercedes: They're asking you to be the spokesperson for aU the Black people in the  United States, and speak for the Black history of the last several centuries, do you know  what I mean? "In five minutes, can you explain that to me?" WeU, where do I begin? No  wonder you wanted to barricade yourself. Just hand them a book!  Janisse: I'm just so amazed how, aU of a sudden, racism is everywhere in the media.  You could chart it on a beU curve—it becomes a trend, and then it tapers off sooner or  later, and it won't exist anymore. But we 've been talking about pohce violence and racism  and aU these issues for aU of our Uves.  Monica: FU tell you what happened to me the day after the riot broke. I went to Kentucky Fried Chicken to buy some chicken. I was standing in the store, and there was this  white man who came up. He said, "Oh, hi!" and "Where are you from?" and whatever.  When people ask me where I'm from, my answer is starting to get worse. Over the years,  I used to say things hke, "What do you mean—where I hved last, where I hked most, or  where I'm Uving now?" But now it's just, "Fuck off!"  Janisse: Me too!  Monica: So I turned to him, and I said, "Listen, I think it's a good idea for you to get  your food and get out." And he said, "See, see, she's racist, she's racist! You're prejudiced,  you're prejudiced against me!"  I said, "I think it's good idea for you to leave." And talking about the rage that you  felt, Kim, the rage I felt when I watched TV and saw the fires and everything. It's the kind  of rage that for me is hard to understand. I can't even explain it. It felt Uke my ground  was slutting underneath, hke I don't know who I am or what I am. Everything is shifting  around me so fast, and my response is just rage.  And this man is standing there, aggravating me, and every hair on my body stood up.  I had my four-year-old son with me, everybody is standing in the store, looking on, and  he said, "That's why all that's happening in LA." I started walking out of the store and  the man started to say something. I got outside, looked around and saw a bottle and some  other things, and I thought, "if this guy comes out of the store, I'm going to beat him to  pulp, I'm just going to walk up and beat him to pulp!" Anyway, it's not very difficult to  see how people can be going about their business and get drawn into this tension of this  social problem.  People keep saying that they don't understand how the people could get so upset. They  don't understand the rage, they don't understand how they could get so angry over one  thing. It's not one thing. It's years, it's everything, aU the oppression. I've been hving in  Canada for ten years and I don't think it's just the one thing the man said, and I don't think  it's just watching the LA incident—it's ten years of this racial oppression. Every morning  I get up and I cannot change the colour of my skin, and every day I walk out of my house  and I am oppressed and persecuted as a woman of colour hving in Vancouver. It's not oidy  Vancouver—Toronto, Calgary, wherever I've hved—it's the same kind of thing. And the  kind of rage that you experience and what makes you react is the budd-up over the years.  Janisse: It's different for me in some ways, I guess, because I've hved in Canada aU my  life, and we've been here for generations. I don't know if I've become de-sensitized to it. It  still bothers me but I just tune out. It's as if you can't really be yourself, you can't really  be your whole person when you walk out the door.  "...all of a sudden, racism is everywhere  in the media. You could chart it  on a bell curve-it becomes a trend  and then it tapers off."  - Janisse Browning  Lydia: I'm finding, lately, a lot of my Black friends are feeUng an incredible frustration with hving in this society and always being the odd person out. If you express your  anger, people say, "Why do you have to be so angry?" I hear that so often, and it's amazing. I think that so many Blacks in Canada and the US are incredibly frustrated and I  think what happened in LA was a way of showcasing that frustration. We've been fighting  against racism for so long, it feels hke an unwinnable war, because we may win in one way  and then it regresses again. Then you have this jury of ten who release pohce officers who  were clearly guilty, and it's just incredibly frustrating.  I find that a lot of white people who consider themselves 'radicals' just do not understand that—the significance of having to always fight, fight, and then lose, lose. Sometimes  you win, but a lot of times it's a losing [battle] and it's incredibly frustrating.  Monica: I'm glad you brought up the jury, Lydia, because when I read there was one  Hispanic and one Asian on the jury, I thought they set it up that way so that they could  say it [the acquittal] couldn't be racist, that those officers were acquitted because "see, it's  not an aU-white jury—we have one Hispanic-American, and one Asian-American." This is  the way that they do it. They always get a token person who has no power ...  Janisse: ... and set them up.  Mercedes: The other part of the set up was that no one ever got to see anyone but the  pohce officers. What they got was they were "really good poUce officers." They never got  to have any kind of feehng for the person who was beaten by these men.  Kim: I think for me, growing up in the States, I was just angry. And this past week I've  realized that I've been angry my whole hfe, just consumed by this rage. I thought back  to my hfe, to every day, getting up and thinking, in the shower, "today, someone is going  to say something to you. You're going to go to class, you're going to drive your car, and  you're probably going to get puUed over today, because it's happened before." When I was  talking to people, I wanted them to be me for just a httle whde, to get in my car and be a  college student and attempt to drive to class, and have a cop pud you over for no reason.  Monica: I can understand what you're saying, Kim, but this kind of anger is newer for  me because I oidy moved to Canada ten years ago. IronicaUy, the sad thing for me is that  I was not exposed to Canadian society. I did not know, for example, that the model that  South Africa used for the Blacks is modeled from Canada, from the reserves that were  budt for Natives.  2 KINESIS J-e92 I did not know that they were actually selUng slaves in Canada. When I found those  things out, I thought, how could you be so bhnd? And then I have my children to bring up  here. What aggravates me is that the racism that we encounter in Canada is not overt, it's  very subtle, it's hidden, and there is a conscious decision made somewhere up high to promote Canada as this great humanitarian society. I had no knowledge of the kind of racism  that one encounters here. When I emigrated to Canada ten years ago, I thought I was going to a safe, decent place.  Mercedes: And that adds to the feehng of craziness. I've talked a lot about the subtle  racism that goes on here. It's so difficult to explain to someone who's never experienced  it, in other words, white people. This subtle stuff adds to making you feel crazy. Because  no one is saying the "racist" thing, no one has done the blatant thing that you can point  to and say, "that's what it was." It's just everywhere. It's Uke a tune that not everybody  can hear, but there are some people who can hear it, and once you hear it, you hear it  everywhere. It does make you feel crazy, insane.  Janisse: What really gets to me, and I've heard this many times, is that it's 'the Blacks.'  As if we're the creators of the problem. Our ancestors were kidnapped and brought here,  and raped, and mutilated, and kiUed, and demoralized, and dehumanized. And they say  "it's the Blacks?"  It's the whites! It's a case of whose frame of reference we are looking at these problems  from? It's very affirming for me to be here with you women today because you're reinforcing my frame of reference. We come from different positions and experiences but at least we  realize that it is a problem we are unfortunately going to have to deal with. But it's not our  problem. What I hope readers get out of this conversation is that it's their problem too.  Monica: It's their problem first and foremost and they have the power to resolve this.  They have to start waking up. I think that there can be no more sitting around, passing  off things as a problem for 'the Blacks.' I think they also have to have some kind of social conscience which makes them reaUze they're accountable. If not, then we have to force  them to be accountable and make them do something about it.  Lydia: I think that if it takes more LA's, then so be it because this society has got to  start hstening and start looking at our needs. Racism is a white problem and they're going  to have to deal with it themselves. We're not here as Black women to teach white people  about racism. They have to gain their own consciousness as members of the oppressive or  privdeged group. That is so essential, and I find a lot of whites really reject that because  they see us in a victimized role aU the time. "Oh, you poor soul, you've suffered so much  racism," when they should start looking at it as "weU, it's my problem, I'm a member of  the oppressive group, and I have to do a self- examination. Again, this is where the battle  becomes so hard, because so few whites are wiUing to do that, wdhng to look at it that way.  Janisse: Not to ask us, "What can we do?" But to do their homework.  Lydia: Exactly, Janisse, because they're always asking us to teach them. Blacks, Asians  and First Nations peoples do the homework first and then they teach it to white people.  And I think if we can start changing the roles then perhaps we move along a more positive  path. It's been really tiring to be involved in the struggle.  And now I see a lot of people, including myself, shifting the focus of the community,  [where it has become] "let's empower ourselves even further." Some of us have gained  strength in spite of our oppression. And I think that's why there is a tendency for Black  women to be very strong because we've suffered a lot of pain, we've suffered a lot throughout our Uves, and much of it is due to racism. In our communities we have to strengthen  ourselves, and after the LA riots, there has to be some form of empowerment for our chddren, so they can be proud of who they are. We hve in a white racist society, but if we  strengthen ourselves further in various ways—education could be one way and discussions  like these—then we can overcome.  Mercedes: But it's also okay not to beat ourselves up if we decide to go away for a while,  and not fight. A lot of times I think, "WeU, I should be confronting this person," but I get  tired of doing that aU the time. And I tlunk it's important to say, "I can't do that today  and it is okay not to do that today. Do it when you feel strong enough." There can be  quite scary repercussions [to confronting racism] especially if you're not ready for them.  Monica: I'm glad you mentioned that, Mercedes. My girlfriend from South Africa and  I had a conversation [that went on] for about four hours. We were talking about this very  thing.  "They don't understand the rage...lt's not  one thing, it's years, it's everything..."  -Monica Buchanan  When do you turn away? You know that if you're walking into a waU, you know the waU  is not going to break open—your head is. And when you find you're beating your head  open, you have to turn around and go around the waU at some point. It's very difficult  to do as people of colour in the struggle. But sometimes we have to. So how do we survive in the struggle? As survivors of racial oppression, we have to keep the struggle going  but there are times when you have to turn around and say, "I'm burnt out, I'm tired, I'm  going to go around this waU."  Right now, I'm struggling hard to hve in BC because when I fight here, I feel Uke I'm  mad—people say "We don't know what you're talking about. You must be imagining it,  you're blowing things out of proportion. "  My daughter's teacher told me today, "We don't want to make a mountain out of a  molehiU here." She was telhng me my concerns are not vahd, not real. When somebody  invalidates me, erase me as a person, and erase my chddren, what do you do?  So out of frustration at the supper table, I sat down and I said to them, "WeU, this is  what you are going to start doing. Every morning before you leave home, you are going  to raise your right hand, and you are going to pledge aUegiance to yourselves, your family  and your race, so that, no matter what anybody says, you know that you are proud to be  a Black person Uving in Canada." It sounds Uke I'm insane, but it's frustration. How do  I empower my chddren? How do I make them realize that they don't have to internalize  'whiteness is Tightness'. I can't wake up the whole of society, but I can wake up my chUdren.  Janisse: Wow!  Kim: It's good to hear how you talk to your chddren, Monica, and how you instiU in  them their pride. I found myself thinking of my sister, who's just had a baby and now has  two sons. What are mothers doing there [in LA]? How do they, as Black women, raise their  chddren? How do they put something positive into their chUdren and not let this be just  another weight. How do they rise above this? I have no answers for my sister.  Monica: I don't think we always have an answer. In '86, my son came home with a  bloody nose. He was "chocolate," so he was beaten. We didn't know what to do. We got  together in the community—I was Uving in Kingston, Ontario, at the time— and formed  the Kingston Black Women's CoUective. We did a lot of anti-racist work, especially at my  son's school, but that wasn't enough. People turned the idea of [our] conung into the school  into something of a 'multicultural' event.  I tlunk it was at that point I started using the words, 'racism,' 'racist,' 'racist society,'  'white supremacy,' at home openly. Since I've been in BC, I don't have that community  and I feel isolated. But I know, at least within my household, we wdl do this. We can't  lose sight of it. I don't have the answer, Kim. Just out of frustration, I come up with new  techniques everyday.  I do know that you have to tell your chUdren everyday before they leave home first and  foremost [that] they are Black, growing up in a racist society because what's going to happen when you pretend it doesn't happen is they get out there and have to deal with it and  internalize everything.  Lydia: I spent half my hfe in South Africa and half here [in Canada], and what's nurtured me is my sense of who I am, of having strong roots and an identity as an African.  I always think, "I'm an African, and this is what my people are aU about. They're strong  people, they're fighters." Having pride in who I am is what has been so strengthening.  Knowing that I have roots, and I can go back and reaffirm my sense of who I am is very  empowering. I think we have to continue to encourage that sense of connection and roots  within the community.  Thanks to Kirn Williams for many many hours of transcribing.  KINESIS Arts  .XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXN  5th Mayworks: Art with an attitude  Labour arts forum  LABOUR ARTS FORUM  5th Mayworks Art With An Attitude  BC Teachers Federation Auditorium  Vancouver, May 13, 1992.  By Janet Nicole  Larger than Ufe, a woman tUts her head  to look at the lens of a microscope beside test tubes and tiny bottles. She is a  health care worker, one of several powerfuUy  drawn figures on a waU mural created by  artists Nora Patrich and Juan Sanchez for  the Health Science Association. The mural,  on display at the Mayworks Labour Arts Forum, expresses the forum's purpose weU—  to show how art in the workplace empowers  workers by affirming our value and place as  women workers in culture.  In an entertaining and often riveting way,  through the artists use of a variety of mediums the audience learned a lot about jobs  and our feehngs about them. A video excerpt from the Hospital Employees Union's  The Heart of Healthcare, a musical revue,  told us of some of the heartaches and hassles experienced by health care workers.  Vancouver Poets Kirsten Emmott and  Sadhu Binning gave us insights into other  work worlds—Emmott, that of a doctor,  and Binning, the daily trials of a postal  worker and farmworker. In one poem,  Kirsten made an interesting analogy between a woman as she is about to give birth  and a car passenger on a long journey asking "are we there yet?"  A BC Ferry cafeteria employee dehvered  a hdarious seven-minute rant on routine  labour and harassment on the job in Lisa  Doyle's video, Did you Do the Napkin  Tops? This emotional outpouring of frustration combines great worker-therapy we  can aU relate to with smart analysis about  the job packages we put up with.  A performance as open and humorous  was given by Nora RandaU in her one-  woman skit, Mavis in the Garden. Ran-  dell is a Vancouver-based school bus driver  out to win a management-sponsored competition. She Ukens her experience to the  Detail from mural by Nora Patrich and  for the Health Sciences Association  lessons she learns growing carrots in her  garden, giving rise to some wise worker's  truths.  Aya, an a cappeUa group, graced the forum with some femimst songs, including one  tune about a satisfied woman truck driver.  A short video by Revolting Eye, Up to  Scratch showed quick flashes of union culture, such as buttons and slogans— a sort  of pop-art union video.  All of these projects demonstrated that  merging art with labour creates unique and  positive messages for workers. In the last  decade or so, BC artists have been busy pursuing this goal. Yet funding for more of this  type of work is stiU a major problem. Guest  speakers at the forum attested to this as  they discussed Mayworks' labour arts proposal to the provincial government.  "Arts and culture in BC is facing a serious funding crisis," said Zoe Lamert, a  Squamish-based visual artist, in her presentation. "I have yet to meet an artist in BC  Juan Sanchez  who's not been on welfare in the past or  is currently on welfare or expecting to be  in the future." Lambert stressed the need  for funding which would aUow for reasonable working conditions and a Uving wage  for artists. "We need far more than a labour  arts program," she said. "British Columbia  needs a comprehensive arts funding pohcy."  Christine Micklewright, a Vancouver  labour activist and writer, pointed to the  successes of her union, Canadian Auto  Workers (CAW), in setting up labour arts  projects. She reported enthusiastically on a  recent CAW initiative which provided instruction to members interested in writing about their work at a workshop led by  writer Rick Salutin.  Teresa Marshall, a film/video artist and  Mayworks board member, showed shdes of  labour artwork from Ontario. She said the  Ontario Arts Councd has been a leader in  encouraging labour arts projects, such as  the Artist and Workplace program. In one  Workers kick class  WORKERS KICK CLASS  5th Mayworks Festival of  Art with an Attitude  Video In, 1102 Homer Street, Vancouver  May 9, 1992  by Harriet Fancott  The eclectic videos shown at Mayworks'  Workers Kick Class "rock the corporate  conformity of mainstream media in an empowering mix of oral history, comedy and  collage," according to the show's curator,  Theresa MarshaU.  "The creators of the images are workers  who have taken control of the media themselves, out of the hands of the elite," she  adds.  The three videos about women I saw at  Workers Kick Class are as unique in form  and content as their creators. The thread  that binds each video together is the theme  of women's labour, and how it is acknowledged and valued by various cultures in the  present as weU as in the past.  Shikha Jhingan is an Indian filmmaker  studying in US. Her mini-documentary,  Once this Land was Ours, focuses on the  women who farm the rice paddies of India. The video begins with the narrator saying, "It happened a long tune ago,mothers  became the first farmers." We see women  and girls gathering, sowing, planting and  reaping rice. We see women beating dry  rice, making chapatis and tending to babies'  cries.  "The women do aU the work in the fields  and yet they have no land rights, no tools  and no credit," the narration continues.  Only men can own land. Women are often  paid in rice and therefore have no cash income. When they are paid, it is not even  half what the men get for their labour.  Through the camera, we are introduced  to a group of migrant workers. They hve  in temporary mud shelters as they wander  from farm to farm in search of work. " WiU I  find work tomorrow?" one of them wonders.  When they do find work they are sometimes  told, - "Don't come back tomorrow, we've  bought a machine". These women have become disposable.  There are 25 miUion landless women. The  video presents factual statistics on women  set against a backdrop of places we rarely  see portrayed in the media. It shows us forgotten women of India.  Vancouverite Sara Diamond's Ten Dollars or Nothing is the personal testimony  of Josephine Charlie, a Native woman who  worked in the BC fishing industry from the  19th Century to the 1950's. CharUe talks  about working conditions and her successful negotiations for higher wages for cannery  workers.  The videotape uses archival footage from  industry, government, and labour history to  explore the experiences of women in the  coastal fishery. Black and white, colour, stiU  and moving images are used simultaneously,  taking us back to women's Uves and the battles they fought for working conditions some  of us now take for granted.  instance, workers received traimng in photography sHUs and gave exhibits of their  work of images from the worker's perspective. Other projects included beautifully  hand-sewn union banners, paintings and  stage plays.  "We don't have an Art s CouncU in BC,"  said Marshall in an interview later. "We are  the most underrepresented group of artists  in Canada." She said that the cultural community in BC must unite as a whole to  fight for significant provincial funding. She  hoped the presence at the forum of John  Walsh, Deputy Minister of the provincial  Ministry of Tourism and Culture, was a sign  of support. "We need to support Darlene  Marzari, the Minister of Tourism and Culture for BC, to see that government aUo-  cates more money to her ministry," Marshall said. "Mayworks has been a way to  bring us together as artists and to lobby for  funding."  Although Marshall is a union member—  she belongs to NABET freelance film and  video union—she recognizes that a substantial number of women in BC are stiU outside  the union movement, working at low-wage  jobs. But Marshall suggests that a first step  be to work with organized labour and, from  there, to access non-union workers. "Art has  been and can be key tools we can use to organize," she said.  Women's views were weU represented at  the forum. Teresa attributed this to the fact  that "because women are the most underpaid in society, when we are artists, we recognize workers' struggles."  Mayworks board members have submitted a labour arts program proposal to the  BC Cultural Services Branch which caUs  for 75 percent funding from the government and 25 percent funding from within  the next year. Copies of the proposal were  distributed at the forum and, during discussion of the paper, audience support for its  implementation seemed strong.  Janet Nicole is a freelance volunteer  writer and a first- time Kinesis contributor who teaches ESL at public schools.  Humour and personal testimony are used  to display social attitudes towards women in  work and daycare. They reflect our changing consciousnesses and experiences with  trade u:  Charlie recounts her experiences at the  Cannery in a voice full of vitality and humour. As she speaks, we are shown images of slips, trains, salmon, marching  bands, the cannery, the smokehouse, pLoios,  dances, mountains, saiUng boats, mothers  baking bread, and chUdren playing.  An image of a weU dressed '50s housewife buying a tin of fish in the supermarket is juxtaposed against that of hardworking women in the Canneries, places  where women who fiUed the cans with no  rest period were paid by the piece for $6 a  day.  As Charlie tells her anecdotes, she  laughs. She talks about how she was too  See KICK page 20  4KINESIS  June 92 Arts  /*mss^<m%m%m%^.  Lesbian sexual imagery in film:  Smashing up the salad  VISIBLY QUEER  Lesbian Sexual Imagery in Dominant  Cinema  Pacific Cinematheque, Vancouver, May 14  by Kathleen Oliver  Visibly Queer is the title of Vancouver  independent cinema/theatre Pacific Cinematheque's current series of lectures on gay  and lesbian images in cinema. The series'  title is something of a paradox, since mass  media has traditionally served to render invisible those sexuahties that fad outside of  the heterosexual mainstream.  The series' opener, "Lesbian Sexual  Imaginery in Dominant Cinema," featured  guest lecture, Carla Wolf, a lesbian filmmaker. Wolf's first point was that she had  an extremely difficult subject to talk about,  since lesbian sexual images do not really exist in mainstream films. Instead, female sexuality is used symboUcaUy as part of the  male heterosexual drama of coning to terms  with himself. In such a construct, it is Uttle wonder that lesbianism—a female sexuahty utterly independent of men—is rarely  ghmpsed or, if present, is used to signify  other tlings altogether.  On the rare occasions when lesbianism is  treated literaUy in films, Wolf notes, it usually faUs into one of three categories.  In the first, the image of the lesbian is of  someone who is "used and abused," as in  The Children's Hour (in which the taboo  against same-sex love is so strong that acknowledging it must end in death) or a re-  Carla Wolf  cent twist on that theme, Basic Instinct.  Another approach is to use the language  of mainstream cinema to make our revolutionary hfestyles appear 'normal' and  unthreatening—an example would be a  movie hke Desert Hearts.  Finally, and most radicaUy, there is the'  body of filmmaking that makes a complete  break with conventions in order to create  a new cinematic language, expressing that  which is not normal and therefore cannot  be spoken of in 'normal' language.  As an example of the latter approach,  Wolf showed Vera Chytilovas Daisies, a  1966 Czech film that is radicaUy unconventional even by today's standards. The  film is a blow-your-mind tour-de-force of  colour, food, quirky visual patterns and every conceivable variety of excess, in which  two young women decide that since the  world is spoded, they may as weU be spoUed  Not too  nice tonight  TWO NICE GIRLS  Vancouver East Cultural Centre  May 13, 1992  by Kathleen Oliver  As the lights at the Vancouver East Cultural Centre dimmed for Two Nice Girls, my  roommate leaned over and said, "This is exciting!" And it was. Anticipation was high  for the Vancouver debut of tlis four-woman  band from Austin, Texas, who've been described as "the lesbian Beatles." Unfortunately, the show didn't Uve up to our expectations and, by the end of the evening,  my roommate was sitting back with her eyes  closed, asking if we could go home yet.  Tlings started off promisingly enough.  After a pledge from guitarist/vocalist/ keyboardist Gretchen Phillips to "transcend  aU boundaries and resonate with truth  for you as weU," the band launched into  "Speedracer," the theme song from a mid-  '60s Japanese cartoon show, although it  seemed the cultural reference was lost on  most of the audience.  Next, they brought things to a hush with  "Sweet Jane (with Affection)," included on  their debut album. PliUips and bassist-  /guitarist/vocalist Meg Henteges harmonized on the Velvet Underground classic while giitarist/vocalist Kathy KomUoff  threw in  bits from  Joan  Armatrading's  "Love and Affection." The result was  enthraUing—even a friend who roUed her  eyes as the song began and said, "Not another band doing 'Sweet Jane'!" later admitted she was completely captivated by the  Girls' version.  The Girls' slift in focus to their own  material was probably the evening's undoing. All the band members write songs  but, with few exceptions, their compositions  never rise above the mediocre or the merely  clever.  This may be partly the a result of a musical identity crisis. Last year's album Chloe  Liked Olivia was a conscious attempt to  shed their folk image and become more of a  rock band. Unfortunately, as was evident in  their performance here, the band's efforts at  rock just aren't as interesting as their considerable talents as a folk band.  It's possible the atmosphere of the Vancouver East Cultural Centre—a superb  venue for folk bands—was a less than ideal  setting for the band's new sound. The Girls  were obviously trying, but it's a lot easier to  rock out if you're on a dance floor than sitting in a row of straight-backed chairs. The  sit-down factor also means that it's easier  to notice a song's essential banaUty.  BauaUty seems to be the point in quite a  few of the band's songs, but it's not quite  enough to sustain an evening's entertainment.  too. They proceed to indulge in nonstop orgies of eating, sunbathing and taking the  world for a ride. They unrepentantly take  advantage of men, from sugar daddies to  earnest artists. In one hUarious scene, they  are forcibly ejected from a nightclub for tormenting both staff and patrons and stealing the show from the official entertainment. Their dedication to excess culminates  in their trashing an enormous banquet, but  they return afterwards to clean it up, chanting, "We must be dUigent and good."  Throughout the film, our heroines worry  about their hair and make-up, wear bikinis  and niii-dresses, and walk with exaggerated, mincing gaits, complete with 'girlie-  girl' giggles and petulant looks. Although  not explicitly lesbian in its content, Daisies  deUberately separates itself from the mainstream. The visual qualities—colour shifts,  collage, distortion—are dazzhng enough in  themselves, but the women's actions are  also quite distinct from patriarchal agendas. No matter where their adventures take  them, their first loyalty is to each other, and  to "being spoUed" together.  The film's final dedication, before aU the  credits come up, is "to aU those whose indignation is limited to a smashed-up salad," a  metaphor as apt to the condition of women  as it is to the chmate of social repression in  mid-'60s Czechoslovakia.  To round out the evening's discussion,  Wolf showed chps from several mainstream  films to dlustrate the differences in the  handUng of lesbian themes by male and  female directors. Leontine Sagan's Mad-  chen in Uniform, the one example from  a female director, is sympathetic to the  lesbian relationship it recounts. Not surprisingly, the film was banned upon its  release and attempts were made to destroy existing prints. The other cUps, taken  from Bergman's Persona, Bertolucci's The  Conformist, and PhiUp Kaufman's The  Unbearable Lightness of Being, depict  variations on ways in which male directors  distort lesbian imagery to suggest madness,  explore parts of male identity, or titillate  male viewers. In any case, lesbian experience is mediated by the male gaze.  It is precisely tlis tendency that Wolf  seeks to counter in her own film, Standing Under Your Understanding, with  which she closed the evening. In Wolf's  film, the gaze is explicitly female as the  camera explores women's bodies and sexuality. Like Daisies, the film rejects convention and reinscribes itself in its own  language, with jump-cuts, blackouts, and  a non-Unear structure complemented by a  voice-over reading of lesbian erotic poetry.  At four-and-one half minutes, it is a short  but powerful document.  The importance of lesbians  ating our own images and our  in the arts cannot be understated. With  more of us working to counter the negative  stereotypes and invisibdity that have generaUy been our lot in mainstream culture, we  are creating a place for ourselves where we  can be visibly   queer.  a gays cre-  Kathleen Oliver is a Vancouver-based  freelance writer.  The Two Nice Girls from left to right: Gretchen Phillips,  Pam Berger, Kathy Korniloff and Meg Henteges  It's true these women are witty. "I Spent  My Last $10 (on Birth Control and Beer)"  is a hdarious 'tale of woe' about a woman  who loses her lesbian common-sense—and  everything else—for the love of Lester, a,  'strong, hairy man.' In its country and western setting, the song is a wonderful novelty'  singaloiig, and was warmly received by the  crowd.  And "The Queer Song" is a Buddy HoUy  rewrite with a decidedly unconventional  agenda: "I'm gonna take you to queer bars-  /I'm gonna drive you in queer cars/You're  gonna meet aU of my queer friends/Our  queer, queer fun it never ends we're gonna  have a happy life/Both of us are gonna be  the wife."  Their improvised between-song patter  was also deUghtfuUy deadpan, as when  PliUips drawled, "Sure is a nice country  y'aU have here. I Uke the health care option."  Despite numerous references to exhaustion from their 47-hour drive to Vancou  ver, the band's second set was thoroughly  high-energy. Drummer Pam Barger kept a  steady beat despite a few rough spots in  the musicianship. Here's where a dance floor  would have come in handy, though the songs  themselves were stiU no great shakes. By  the encore-an inspired medley of Jimi Hen-  drix's "Purple Haze" (probably the pohtest  vocal take ever on a Hendrix song) and  Donna Summer's "Love to Love You Baby"  (complete with extended simulated orgasm  sounds)—you were either really grooving or  you didn't much care.  This performance was Vancouver's first  and oidy chance to see Two Nice Girls hve—  by the time you read tlis, the band members wUl have gone their separate ways to  pursue other projects. It's too bad such a  historic occasion didn't quite manage to hve  up to the excitement its anticipation generated.  Kathleen Oliver is a Vancouver-basea\  freelance writer soon to be published  Contemporary Verses 2.  KINESIS SSSS*S**S*S5S*Sxxxx^^  ARTS  Review: Lesbian science fiction  Oil of Olay anyone?  SPEAKING DREAMS  by Severna Park  New York: Firebrand Books, 1992  $9.95  by Robyn Hall  Summer is approaching and if you have  time to grab a good, relaxing book, and if  you hke science fiction, especiaUy lesbian-  positive science fiction, Speaking Dreams  by Severna Park may be the story for you.  Set in, as the book-jacket tells us, "a ret-  grade future, where the unknown galaxy  is divided between slavers, a deteriorating empire, and legendary aliens," Speaking Dreams combines the larger struggle  between evil expansion-minded slavers and  good galaxy-controlUng empire with the  personal fight of slave Costa and Emirate  diplomat Mira LoDire's for freedom and  love.  Costa, a young lesbian, has the gift of prescience, or the abihty to see the future in her  dreams. Bom on a planet controlled by chief  slaver Raffad, she faces hfe as a 'breeder',  bearing chddren to be future slaves with  arranged husband. Instead, she attempts  to foUow her dreams, which lead to vandal-  i, arson and unsuccessful escape attempts  into the icy winter of her planet. Eventually  caught by RaffaU, she is administered 'The  Drug', which keeps slaves young, beautiful  and productive, and is sold into slavery.  Mira LoDire, an Emirate diplomat, finds  Costa in a slave market whde on her way  to negotiate sector territory loss with Raffad. Although initiaUy skeptical of Costa's  prescient abiUties, when they successfuUy  alert her to a potential attempt on her  life, Mira becomes respectful of Costa's prescient powers. In the process, Mira and  Costa faU in love and, although Costa is  technically Mira's 'property', they work together to escape RaffaU and live happdy  ever after.  Speaking Dreams has aU the elements  of fiction I was taught in Grade 12 Enghsh  class: protagonists, antagonists (both major  and minor), science fiction settings—for example, aboard spaceships and on different  planets—and an action-packed chmax with  a predictably happy conclusion.  Author Severna Park does, however,  weave interesting feminist themes into the  story. The situation on Costa's home planet  where women are forced into marriage in  order to bear chUdren who are then taken  away from them at a later date, reflects the  struggle women have in our society for control of our own bodies and reproductive ca-  Open daily 10 am till 11 pm  Your Lesbian & Gay Bookstore  Playing in the Dark  Whiteness and the Literary Imagination  by Toni Morrison $19.95  Bastard Out of Carolina  by Dorthy Allison $26.95  mail order service available  1221 Thurlow St.(at Davie) Vancouver,B.C.  Tel: 669-1753 or Fax: 685-0252  pacities. Furthermore, Costa's deviance and  rejection of her prescribed role is greeted  with intolerance and punishment.  The Drug, administered to the slaves,  freezing the aging process, aUows the  women to retain the appearance of a 20-  year-old weU into their '40s. Sounds familiar? Od of Olay anyone?  And finally, Mira and Costa must rely on  each other and their own instincts in order  to, among other tlings, kdl a slaver and escape to safety. Everywhere today, women  need other women as aUies in order to gain  space and power.  Unfortunately, these themes exist as  background to a rather predictable story  with two-dimensional characters. At a certain point, the direction the book was taking became obvious and the type of ending  foreseeable. Park also seems to rely more  on the plot and action of the story than its  characters so I never felt hke I really got to  know Costa, Mira or any of the minor players in Speaking Dreams.  The settings, place names and language  created do not seem particularly complex or  creative to me. Often, they are extremely  close to tlings on earth—one of the space-  slips is called the MergenthaUer. As Park is  an American writer, I don't know if she's famihar with Henry Morgentaler but the similarity kind of struck me. However, the story  does move along quite fluidly and Park's  writing style is smooth. She uses dialogue  which makes it easy to imagine the situations that are being described.  So, as I said at the beginning, if you have  time tlis summer for a quick read whde dozing off in hot summer weather, Speaking  Dreams might be an option. It's lesbian-  positive, feminist and is fun to read. Sometimes a break from deep, dense, 'meaningful' Uterature is good for you.  Robyn  Hall  is   a  first-time  Kinesis  writer.  VANCOUVER     'I  WOMEN'S  BOOKSTORE  L  315 Cambie Street  Vancouver, B.C. V6B 2N4  (604) 684-0523  Hours: Monday- Saturday  11:00-5:30 pm  new and  gently used books  Fei    ^^^^  Philosophy - Poetry  Native - General  [Open daily 11am-7pm  Coffee Bar  1020 Commercial Drive  Vancouver BC V5L 3W9  (604) 253-1099  Bonnie Murray  Cynthia Brooke  And Books  aft* Sgafha's jttyslgrp&kcre  Book launch  and refreshments  July and Other Stories  by J. A. Hamilton  published by Douglas & Mclntyre  Saturday, June 13  1-3pm  1988 West 4th & Maple  Vancouver, BC V6J 1M5  (604)733-3511  6KINESIS ■"•« /////////////////////^^^^  Native women writers:  A language all our own  WRITING THE CIRCLE  An Anthology by Native  Women of  Western Canada  Compiled and edited  by Jeanne Perreault and Sylvia Vance  Edmonton:   NeWest   PubUshers   Limited,  1990  by Michelle LaFlamme  The preface of Writing the Circle is  written by an amazing Native poet/writer,  Emma La Roque, who says tlis anthology  by Native women in Western Canada reflects "nothing short of a revolution in Native literature."  La Rocpie draws attention to the usurping and belittlement of Native achievements, including vast oral histories, determined by white society to be less valuable  because of an inane notion that "the written  word is [considered] superior to the spoken  word." She writes that "the issue is not that  Native people were ever wordless but that  in Canada [our] words were UteraUy and pohticaUy negated."  The effect writing in Enghsh has on Native women, writes La Roque, is that "not  only do we have to learn Enghsh, we must  deal with its ideology. To a Native woman,  English is like an ideological oiion whose  stinging layers of racism and sexism must be  peeled away before it can be fully enjoyed."  ThematicaUy, Writing the Circle deals  with issues of the dispossession, objectification and marginalization Native women  experience as individuals and as a collective culture. The theme of betrayal runs  through the book and issues of race and gender are more poignant because of the context of personal accounts of the abuse Native women undergo—psychologicaUy, culturaUy, sexuaUy, and racially. There are  over 50 writers writing about hving on  the street, prison experiences, 'prostitution, child abuse, substance abuse—it's all  there—by reading aU the voices, you get a  chorus of the surviving Nations.  The writers, who are from many Nations  in Canada, express these themes in many  forms—from ten-page poems and essays on  Native traditional medicine and Native education, to journal entries on university Ufe,  chUdbirth, grandmothers, traditional value  systems and language barriers. Each of the  contributors begins her piece with a short  biography, sketching who she is and sharing with the reader whatever she feels is relevant. It is difficult to single out any one  writer—the book's power hes in the-fabric  created by hearing so many different Native  The compilers and editors of Writing  the Circle, tell us the anthology does not  intend a specifically Uterary or narrowly political agenda. But it challenges mainstream  standards of Uterary exceUence, which have  excluded Native women's voices and led to a  huge gap in Canadians' understanding of society, history and literature. Hearing these  voices is an important part of the change  that Canada needs to undergo.  Somewhat ironically, the editors and publishers are non-Native, but their pohtical  viewpoint, expressed with refreshing honesty and sensitivity, is presented at the outset. They clearly seem to struggle with the  nature of their privUege, and appear almost  self-effacing in the forward. They claim their  primary aim was "to Usten and to learn,  not to restrict and define" and, as such, "no  boundaries were made as to what forms the  writers could choose, nor were there any restrictions about content."  The anthology, they tell us, was initiated  for only one purpose—to give a place for  Native women to speak. They make no attempt to define 'Nativeness' because, they  say, it is not their place to establish definitions or determine categories. Each contributor, therefore, is self-defined as Native  and the pride and affirmation of that identity speaks for itself. The editors acknowl  edge the trust placed in them by the contributors.  They also face the fact that their position of power over the publication of Native  voices makes them hable to misappropriation of the voices. They deal with this in the  forword saying they made a concerted effort  to "make sure that the words of each writer  would appear just as she wished them to."  Tlis editorial pohcy should serve as a model  for other white editors and publishers who  find themselves in positions of power that  ultimately should and wdl be in the hands  of Native editors.  The editors write: "Whites, too, must feel  the pain of [the reality of racism] and if  [they] don't Uke what [they] see in the mirror of these works, [they] have been offered  the gift of change by the truths told [in the  anthology]. "  CLAIMING BREATH  by Diane Glancy  University of Nebraska Press, 1992  Like Writing the Circle, Diane Glancy's  Claiming Breath chaUenges the de facto  apartheid in Canada and America and is  part of the cultural, pohtical and artistic  wave asserting the unwUUngness of Native  voices to remain sUent any longer.  Claiming Breath simultaneously uses  the language of the oppressor and deconstructs it—a double victory for Glancy, a  Native American woman who remains able  to express herself even as she acknowledges  the "hole in our head where our heritage  had once been."  In Claiming Breath, Diane Glancy combines poetry and prose, compiled primardy  from her journal entries over the course of  one year. As Glancy puts it, "it's a year that  covers more than a year." Indeed, Glancy  won the first Native American Indian Prose  Award for tlis diary of sorts that weaves  personal experiences together with analysis  of the socio-cultural and psychological effects of the appropriation of Native culture.  Many of Glancy's theories are in the context of feminist analysis of the language  and are ironically juxtaposed with the everyday circumstances that affect her as she  leaves her then home in Wisconsin to drive  throughout Arkansas to teach poetry in the  schools. Her concern with breaking down  "boundaries between genres" is reflected in  the way her writing fluctuates from fictional  narrative to non-fictional analysis.  She writes of bridging the gap between  the oral traditions of the elders and the  written language of the oppressor (Enghsh), and of the resulting psychological  schism. Using vivid imagery, Glancy explores themes and issues about identity, her  connection to her grandmother, and about  being a Native woman by using "non-linear  non-boundaried non-fenced open prairied  words."  Claiming Breath, fids the reader with  the immediacy of the prairie landscape and  the depth of Glancy's emotional experiences  and psychological discoveries, prompting  terms such as "SHEdonism: the enjoyment  of oneself as a woman... the pursuit of she  pleasure."  She uses graphic imagery to create an  emotional response to language appropriation and says, "When the word disappears,  we disappear." Yet her voice remains as an  ironic testimony to the strength and persis-  tance of the voices of First Nations people—  the Prose award Glancy received for Claiming Breath is an acknowledgement of her  voice and cultural endorsement of her abd-  ity as a Native woman to make her voice  ring in the white, male-dominated field of  'respectable' Uterature.  Michelle LaFlamme is a writer and  actress of Mic Mac and Senegalese descent. She teaches English at SFU and  explores issues of mixed heritage, feminism and racism in her creative pursuits.  PAqiNq Women  by Gabrielle Cordelia-Chew  Looking for a new read? Our review books for June include a range of theory, reference,  and fiction. In case we haven't already mentioned tlis. anyone who reviews a piece of fiction or poetry from Paging Women may keep the book. For those struck by the urge  to review a title from a previous Paging Women, terrific! We encourage both budding  and established feminist book reviewers to contact us. The following books merit further  attention, so call 255-5499 if you want to review one.  Sexual Harassment: Women Speak Out eds. Amber Covcrdale Sumrall and Dena  Taylor. Dedicated to Anita Hill, this anthology includes over 60 accounts of sexual  harassment by women who had experienced these situations—Many stories sound  familiar yet are all very different from each other. The testimonies are complemented by cartoons and illustrations that provide ironic comic relief throughout.  (The Crossing Press, Freedom CA 1992)  Eatmg Women Is Not Recommended by EiUs Ni Dhuibhne. This collection of short  stories is described as a place where the mundane and the macabre collide with  'gloriously comic results'; an overlapping of sober reality and wild laughter. (Attic  Press, DubUn 1991; Distribution: Book-people, CA)  Lesbian (Out)Law: Survival Under the Rule of Law by Ruthann Robson. On lesbian legal theory in the context of the US legal system, this book places lesbians  at the centre of issues around employment and housing discrimination, child custody, sexuality, and violence against lesbians. (Firebrand Books, Ithaca NY 1992)  AfterShocks a novel by Jess WeUs. The lives of Tracy Giovanni, her partner Patricia, and step-daughter Beth are shaken and dramatically changed when an earthquake, 8.0 on the Richter scale, hits San Francisco. In the aftershock, the women  are brought back to their pasts. They are also propelled forward as the people of  San Francisco reorganize their physical and psychological orientations in the world.  (Third Side Press, Chicago 1992)  The Female Body: Figures, Styles Speculations Ed. by Laurence Goldstein. This anthology includes a range of vantage points from art historians and literary scholars, to psychologists and fiction writers. The book deals with discussion of the female body. The essays attempt to explore women's bodies in many contexts, including art history, medical science, cross-dressing in society, and film. (The University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor 1991)  Yearning: Race, Gender, and Cultural PoUtics by bell hooks, hook's 4th book examines the valuable insights of postmodern theory while alerting us to the dangers  of the 'fashionable infatuation' with discourse around difference— a trap that detaches us from our place in the struggle against racism, sexism and cultural imperialism. (South End Press, Boston 1990)  Life-Size a novel by Jenefer Shute. In the tradition of The BeU Jar, Shute presents  us with a story about a young woman's battle with anorexia. This highly personal  and intimate first-person narrative absorbs us emotionally, while the author's feminist insights aid our understanding of the disorder, both politically and culturaUy.  (Houghton Mifflin Company, New York 1992)  Woman On Trial by Lawrencia Bembenek. The author denounces the media's use  of a nick-name—Bambi—that undermines her straggle to escape to Canada after  spending ten years in a Wisconsin prison for a murder slie maintains she did not  commit. Bembenek cuts through the hype and hysteria surrounding her case, telling  her side of the story in her continued fight for justice. (Harper Collins, Toronto 1992)  The Worry Girl: Stories From A Childhood by Andrea Freud Locwenstehi. These  partly autobiographical short stories tell of childhood in an assimilated Jewish family and in a community set against an often hostile upper-middle class suburb. The  cruelties and torments among children are all too present in the world of grownups, and these shape 'the worry girl's' consciousness. (Firebrand Books Ithaca 1992)  One Mother to Another: Canadian Women Talk About Pregnancy and Childbirth by Winifred WaUace Hunsburger. This is not a practical guide to preparing for  birth, but a book containing stories by women across Canada about their experiences with changes in their bodies, support they received from midwives and partners, the role of interventions and technology, and various other experiences of  the pain and ecstacy of birth. (Fifth House, Saskatoon 1992)  KINESIS sssssssssss*^^  ARTS  Review: An Autobiography  Red Flower of China  RED FLOWER OF CHINA:  An Autobiography  By Zhai Zhenhua Toronto: Lester Pubhsh-  ing Limited, 1992 $26.95  by Lisa Valencia-Svensson  I picked up Zhai Zhenhua's first book  with much anticipation. Red Flower of  China is about Zhai's experiences as a Red  Guard member during the Cultural Revolution in China. I have studied Chinese language, history and culture for the past six  years, but everything I have read about the  Cultural Revolution, a very dark period in  China's modern history, has been oidy from  the viewpoint of Western academia. During  my stays in China, I found Chinese people  extremely reluctant to discuss tlis period of  their lives. Zhai's account was the first in-  depth personal account I have come across.  The Cultural Revolution lasted ten years  from '66 to '76 and was the product of two  tlings: Chairman of the Communist Party  of China Mao Zedong's continuous experimentation with the application of communist theory to China's realities; and Mao's  intense suspicion of other high-ranking officials and their poUcies. Mao unleashed a  fury of violence, supposedly aimed at ridding the Communist party and the country  of counter-revolutionaries.  The Red Guard student movement grew  in the universities and secondary schools  in Beijing. Students began by denouncing school officials for being counterrevolutionary and, not long after, collaborated with poUce in searching out, questioning and ultimately severely beating  ordinary citizens who had been labeUed  coun ter- revolutionary.  In the first section of her book, Zhai leads  up to the Cultural Revolution with stories  of her chUdhood and some background history. In the niddle section, Zhai writes candidly about her involvement as one of the  Red Guards, describing in detaU her transformation into a woman capable of treating innocent people with tremendous cruelty. The third and final section focuses on  the late '60s when she was sent to the countryside, along with thousands of other students, to work with peasant farmers.  The book reads weU, but is not written  with quite the same flair as other autobiographies I have read. The language is obviously directed at a mainstream, white North  American audience. Zhai's choice of words  sometimes seems out of place. I found myself jarred by the bizarre placement of such  comments as "What a load of crap," and  "Slit." As weU, Zhai does not always provide a complete explanation of the compU-  cated, and often confusing, developments in  Chinese poUtics that form the basis for her  story. A reader unfarriUar with recent Chinese history wUl have some trouble foUowing the flow of events.  Zhai is now hving in Victoria, and has  hved in Canada since 1980. I had a chance  to interview her and asked her to talk  about the status of women in China and in  Canada.  Lisa: How much has traditional sexism  been eliminated in the cities as compared  to the countryside?  Zhenhua: I thought because I grew up in  the cities I was just as equal as any of the  boys. If you get good marks, you get into  a good school—it doesn't depend on which  sex you are, If you graduate from university,  if you are good, you get a good job. That's  what counts.  When I was in the countryside, I found  women were not called by their own names,  they were called so-and-so's wife. That was  really surprising to me. They were so used  to it. Women should have their own identity. I tlink it wdl take a long time to  change...It's deep, it's really deep in their  minds, and it's hard to change.  Lisa: What was the difficult part about  getting divorced in China?  Zhenhua: It was the social pressure, I  tlink. I myself was divorced. Everybody  would try to get you back to your husband.  They would always try to say 'Oh, try your  best to reconsider it.' Divorce is just considered a bad thing. They worry about the  reputation of the family. It's just Uke my  parents. In the beginning, they opposed my  divorce. The old traditions wUl slowly die,  but I don't know how fast.  In the end, my parents accepted [my divorce]. But right now they don't want me  to stay here, they want me to go back. I am  41, but my parents stiU tlink I should do  what they tlink is right. For example, I told  them I was staying [in Canada], but they  just won't accept it ... they just try and  put pressure on me so that I wdl go home,  go back to contribute to China. There are  different ways of contributing. Why don't  they leave it to me? It's my hfe. Parents stiU  tlink they have a big right over their chUdren.  Lisa: Do you tlink that if it was one  of your parents' sons who had left China,  would they put as much pressure on lim?  Zhenhua: Yes.  Lisa: WUl attitudes in China towards  women change more quickly now that China  is opening up to the West?  Zhenhua: Sex discrimination was not reaUy bad in the cities, but in the countryside  it was. Change in the countryside takes a  long time, because many of the peasants are  UUterate or they know how to read, but they  don't have money for newspapers or books.  All their money is spent on living. There  "When I was In the countryside,  I found women were not called by  their own names, they were called  so-and-so's wife... Women should  have their own idendity. I think it  will take a long time to change..."  -Zhai Zhenua  Lisa: You were a member of the Red  Guards, but you were from an aU-girls  school. On the whole in the Red Guards,  were the boys and the men students in the  universities the ones taking the lead, or was  it both the boys and the girls?  Zhenhua: I don't even know whether  they were girls or boys. Perhaps they were  boys, but the girls went right along very  fast. You see, my school foUowed very  tightly ... I didn't feel that one sex was  dominant. I didn't have the impression that  cither the girls or boys were leading.  ActuaUy, what surprised me was that the  girls were just as violent as the boys who  were beating [people], Uke me. Supposedly  we were more feminine, but we were beating the victims. I guess that also was it. The  girls didn't want to be looked at as scared,  as old, traditional women. They wanted to  be manly. So, they took part in the beatings. I don't tlink they did it worse than'  the boys.  are many isolated places in China. For the  message to reach there wdl take a longer  time because it's really not easy to educate  the peasants. They are used to the traditional ways. They take them for granted.  Why should they change? But they wiU, I  tlink, in time. I don't know how long.  Lisa: Do you think that Chinese women  are better off than Canadian women?  Zhenhua: Yes I do. One thing, in China  the government is pro-choice. We are supported by the government to abort—we are  encouraged. But here, people have to fight  so hard to get an abortion.  Lisa: How did you adjust to hfe here?  Zhenhua: WeU, in the beginning it was  very hard. The first place I went to was  Winnipeg. It was so cold and the whole system was different. I couldn't find a classroom. I was two weeks late and classes had  aU started. When the teacher talked about  assignments, I didn't know what we were  doing. In the beginning, my Enghsh was not  very good. We heard very Uttle EngUsh in  China. I really missed home. Later it became better. From Winnipeg I moved to  Montreal, and from Montreal to Victoria.  The weather is so much better here.  Lisa: Are you planning at any time to go  back to China?  Zhenhua: Yes I am. I'm planning to go  back at the end of tlis year. I really miss  China. There are so many tlings I'm used  to—the atmosphere, the language, the culture and the people—I also miss the food.  Lisa: WiU you be going back permanently or for a long visit?  Zhenhua: My husband has a pohcy. He  says 'If it's a dictatorship, I wUl not go.'  Not even to visit. He said if the government  changes, he wdl go. If I go, I would Uke to  go with lim, but for now I guess I don't  have a choice. I wUl stay here, but I wUl go  visit and, later, I may change my mind. It  depends on how things go.  Lisa: Do you tlink you'U run against any  problems because you've just had this book  published?  Zhenhua: Yes, I do have some fear. I  know China is open now, but I don't know  how open, and what is aUowed. In China  they do admit Mao made mistakes in his  old age, but I don't know how much [the  government] wUl aUow people to criticize  lim. I do show my resentment towards lim  openly in my book because that really was  what I felt. You never know in China when  the situation is going to change because, after what I've been through, I now beheve  anything can happen in hfe. And if something happens in China, my experience wdl  certainly bring me some unpleasant tlings.  During the Cultural Revolution, everybody  who had been hving abroad was questioned  about their past.  That's why I wrote the book. If I was  stiU a Chinese citizen and living in China, I  would have trouble. I don't want any trouble. I've had enough trouble in my hfe. I  don't want more.  Lisa Valencia-Svensson, a woman of\  mixed heritage, is a first-time Kinesis  writer who is currently working on a  plan to close down the recently opened  Avon cosmetics store in Guangdong,  China.  * KINESIS Arts  /^m*2*2%^%^*m2  Free Press Festival:  A many splintered thing  DRIVE THRU POETRY BLAST-OFF  Street poets read and perform along Commercial Drive, Vancouver, BC, AprU 24.  THE PLANETARY POETRY BASH  Vancouver East Cultural Centre, AprU 24.  by Celeste Insell  I find it hard to remain cool about anything that really matters, which brings me  to the Vancouver's Free Press Festival in  late AprU, and the question, who does tlis  festival really serve?  An important event for writers in tlis  community, the festival gives independent  publishers the opportunity to access a wider  public for their publications, and writers the  chance to attract new readers and network  with independent publishers. This year saw  the fourth such festival organised by the  SmaU Press Action Network, a non-profit  society of independent publishers in the  Pacific Northwest. It included numerous  events, but I am only reviewing two.  Most of my time was spent at The Planetary Poetry Bash, an evening of poetry  at the Vancouver East Cultural Centre.  I was particularly impressed with a portion of it sponsored by Rungh magazine,  a South Asian quarterly publication. Many  fine writers present included Surjeet Kalsey,  Shani Mootoo, Yasmin Letha, Ramabai Espinet and Raj Pannu. These names are not  as weU-known in BC as they should be.  From among them, two of my favorite poets were writers from the Caribbean, both  of whom write with ironic humour and offer  poUtical commentary. Shani Mootoo's writing is packed with images of vibrant colours,  contrasting with some of the bleak winter  landscapes that are found in Canada. Poems about loss of identity with titles hke  Who does this festival  really serve?  "I am Canadian—No room to Negotiate"  seemed to me to echo the experiences of  many Women of Colour who have immigrated to Canada.  Ramabai Espinet, originaUy from Trinidad, gave an absolutely wonderful reading,  and her poem "Orthodoxies Be Dammed"  Women and silences:  But we  gotta write!  SILENCES?  But We Gotta Write.  Moderator: Rose-Marie Kennedy Panelists:  Nancy Doehring, Nadine Shelley, Shirley  Sterhng, Jana WiUiams  Britannia Community Centre, Vancouver,  AprU 25.  by Charmaine Saulnier  What keeps women from writing? What  keeps women from using their own voices?  What does it take to break through these  sUences?  Women writers and their audience of 45  women gathered to discuss answers to these  questions at a panel discussion sponsored by  West Coast Women k Words as part of the  Vancouver Free Press Festival in AprU.  Moderator Rose-Marie Kennedy read her  poem, "Whisper," as an introduction to her  own struggle into "the land of words," and  spoke of the backlash women face when they  are not part of the mainstream, defined as  heterosexual, white, middle-class and male.  Each panelist's story reflected the diversity of women writers' sUences.  Panelist Nadine Shelley spoke of her  "self-imposed" sUence. She talked about  growing up with upper-middle class privUeges and attending art schools. So why  would such an environment not promote  the creative nind of tlis woman? Shelley  said she found it difficult to understand  why but managed to come to terms with  her expression when she overcame a long-  rooted habit—a desire to "apologize for her  words," Her soft voice touched upon my  own fears about having to learn to "speak  up" in a society that discourages women to  raise their voices. Instead, society seems to  teach women to softly echo the voices of oth-  Panelist Shirley Sterhng said she found  her words when she was asked to turn a chUdren's legend into a story. As she wrote the  story, she was surprised to discover her own  voice—her Native voice. Sterhng spent years  in residential schools struggling to Uve according to the standards of a white middle-  was hke clear, cool wind breaking through  aU the 'ism's' and 'shoulds', sweeping away  academic perceptions of reality for the hardcore realness of them.  Rungh's hour-long presentation was stirring—my major criticism of the Planetary  Poetry Bash was that I would have hked  to have heard these voices throughout the  evening. The rest of the poetry bash, by  contrast, seemed to me to present works  by artists trying to create 'personas' rather  than getting down to the real heart of anything and the evening took on the feehng of  a competition. I felt I was being asked to decide just who is the coolest poet on stage?  The most amusing? The cleverest?  There were many moments when some  poets managed to transcend the competitive atmosphere and present some genuinely moving work. Corinne Lee served up  a plateful of irony as weU as insightful tidbits when she read a poem about this country's "multicultural pie".  There were the stirring images in Sheri-D  WUson's poetry and I particularly Uked the  poem "The Egg Factory" which expressed  the frustration and the paradox of women  being viewed as receptacles for male sperm,  with their identities removed and their complexities diminished to an "Egg Factory".  I was also moved by Carmen Rodriquez's  poetry. In particular, I found one love poem  extremely sensual and seductive. Her work  reveals her to be a mature writer who is not  afraid to delve deep into herseU and puU out  words, images and ideas that emanate with  range of passion. Her first book of poetry is  being launched later this month.  Alice Tepexcuintle, on the other hand,  whde presenting some very funny and vivid  images, seemed to me to lack this kind of  maturity and depth in her work at this stage  in her development.  Which brings me the number of contradictions I noticed overall during the Free  Press Festival. The theme this year was  Freedom of Expression. The idea of freedom  See FREE PRESS page 20  Shirley Sterling  class society. When she stopped fighting to  hve to these standards and chose to write  her story, she came to terms with her identity.  One woman in the audience asked: "How  does one deal with aU the emotions and feelings that surface when writing and when  does writing become art?"  Sterhng said she found that recording  events without "thought-processing" protected her from rehving painful experiences.  She said she also came to a point in her  Ufe when she could nurture her own inner chUd, creating a certain distance in her  writing. PersonaUy, I find the process of  editing my writing enables me to read my  words from a different perspective. As Shelley pointed out, "one loses claim" on the  writing through tlis process.  But where do women find words when  they are sUent? Panelist Nancy Doehring  said she found it much easier to speak about  the tlings that stopped her from writing.  She talked about the difficulty in getting  beyond the expectations placed on her as  , especially the pressure of not being aUowed to express anger. A survivor of I  sexual abuse, Doehring found "sUence was  a tool for survival and therefore there were,  no words." Only when we stop blaming ourselves for the abuse and confront our own)  fears and validate ourselves wdl our U  Tlis led me to think about how, months]  ago, I stopped writing because I could not  face the pain of writing and reactions of others to my writing when I attempted to write  an article for a series called Women Against  Violence. I spent months in pain, fear and  self-contempt untd I wrote a poem about  the abuse. I had finally stepped out of 'my'  imitations.  The final panehst, Jana WiUiams, said  she had begun to write out of a sense of "dissatisfaction," out of a desire to write "a new  world," a world where she would not have  to add the experiences of women and lesbians. Her objective was "to tell the truth"  where dialogues between women were vahd.  Through her writing, she said, she reconstructed a self outside of what the mainstream's perception of her was as a woman.  She inspired a positive and empowering response in novice writers hke myself in the  audience.  The atmosphere of this panel discussion  was intense for me. I was touched by the  deep emotional struggles of each of these  women in dealing with their experiences as  women and as writers, coming to terms with  their identities and validating themselves.  To end, I would hke to quote Louise Began, an American poet, who expresses my  idea of what being a woman writer means.  "No woman should be shamefaced in attempting, through her work, to give back to  the world a portion of its lost heart."  Charmaine Saulnier is a first-time  writer for Kinesis who plans to never  stop writing in her present life-time.  KINESIS Help Marguerite  Marguerite has a new job (lucky her!)  She is working on a listener survey for  Co-op Radio (102.7 fm). Marguerite is  doing a great job, but she still needs  people to fill out the surveys! Help  Marguerite. Fill out a Co-op Radio  Listener Survey, available throughout  June at the station, at libraries and  bookstores, in Co-op's Radio Guide, and  over the phone (684-8494, extension 9,  during normal business hours).  Marguerite says thanks.  Kin-op  O 2 . T   F M  Nl is the one  journal anyone  concerned about  international  development must  read."  - Frances Lappe,  author of Diet for a  Small Planet  For just $2.50 you can sample Nl. the world's largest-selling  monthly magazine on international developmental issues.  Send your cheque or money order payable to: Chaos  I Consulting, 4-1825 Nelson Street, Vancouver, BC V6G 1M9.  Don 7 forget your address!  ThisMagazine  "Some of the most  energetic political  commentary in the  country."  - Richard Gwyn,  syndicated national  newspaper columnist  I For just $2.50 you can sample This Magazine, Canada's fiercely  I independent journal of politics, society and culture. Our articles are  I written with wit and insight we're winning awards for. Send your  I cheque or money order payable to: Chaos Consulting, 4-1825 Nelson  | Street, Vancouver, BC V6G 1M9.  Don't forget your address!  FREE PRESS from page 19  of expression as it pertains to artists has always been a can of worms. While I am obviously for basic tenets of freedom of expression, I beheve it is necessary for the artist  to take some responsibihty in the expression  of freedom. This can further be complicated  by the fact that poetry is a very subjective  art form. It becomes particularly important  for the artist to attempt some self-analysis  along with exploration of the world around  them, so that she can begin to tear away  at layers of facade rather than actually construct them.  A case in point, is the work of Vancouver poet Isabella von Huendenberg. At  The Drive-Thru Poetry Blast-Off on Commercial Drive, von Huendenberg spit out  a poem with the image of Voodoo rights,  equated it with sinister, evil "Black Magic."  To me, this kind of writing does not challenge the status quo, it simply perpetuates  a Eurocentric view riddled with ignorance  and racism of an ancient African rehgion.  Why not deconstruct racist stereotypes  at a Free Press event, rather than maintain  it? Unfortunately, many of the artists at tins  event seem to feel that standing in front of  a store, sporting purple hair and spouting  poetry is all that's needed to challenge conformity. Perhaps the only thing I found nonconformist was the clothing the poets wore  and even that has achieved a kind of conformity on Commercial Drive.  Further, many of these artists seem able  to explore their ideas, emotions and fears  while remaining rooted in privilege. I did  not stay for the whole event because, after  almost an hour, I had heard experiences of  First Nations women and men and People  of Colour repeatedly objectified and in some  instances appropriated, all in the name of  'freedom of expression'.  This created a paradox for me in tins  year's festival which included panel discussions exploring issues of appropriation and  representation. Perhaps the organizers fail  to realize that, by including artists in the  festival who express racist views, they end  :> *-*'  ■>* 4  up participating in a time-old form of censorship that silences People of Colour. Our  behefs and experiences are denigrated and,  at the same time, used and abused by those  in the 'dominant' culture, making it even  more difficult for us to express ourselves  fully and with pride. When we do voice our  concerns, we are told that we are being oversensitive or denying someone "freedom of  speech".  A challenge awaits festival organizers for  next year's Free Press Festival, and that is  to take on greater responsibihty in programming this event and realizing that inclusion  of all artists in a community does not ensure  freedom of expression as long as the structures of privilege within the event remain  unchallenged.  I pose the question again. Who does this  festival currently serve? This year, the Free  Press Festival largely appeared to serve the  interests of a group of poets who can abandon their accessories of rebellion whenever  they choose, and while the organizers of the  festival have made an effort to reach out to  other communities, I beheve they still have  a long way to go.  Celeste Insell is a writer and performer of African-American, Native-  American and Creole descent, currently  residing in Vancouver.  WOMVN'S DRESS  ' ■     P.O. box 562,  Mia*, potX/iy, itui-ii  YEARLY SUBS individual-$7  i^z-ux^i   ^vu^> WOMEN IN PRISON - FREE  (6) ISSUES INSTITUTIONS - S16  SISTERS-S13  NAME  S-S30ORMORE  m  STATE  ZIP  KICK from page 14  short to reach the trays where they canned  the fish so she had to wear spike-heeled  shoes to work. We watch her running down  the street in her canning outfit in a pair of  spiked heels.  Charlie formed the Indian brotherhood/-  sisterhood which became the cannery's first  union. One day she storms into the boardroom of the company, demanding that they  all receive the same wages as at other fisheries. "Ten Dollars or nothing," she says.  The chairman, "got redder and redder and  continued to smoke." He eventuaUy conceded and a union was formed. The picture  closes to strains of the 'Song of the Sockcye'  and images of the mighty fish.  Mako Indemitsu's Kiyoko's Situation  is the longest and the most powerful of  the three videos. The video presents the  dilemma of a woman in Japan told to choose  between being an artist, or a housewife and  mother.  Indemitsu is Japan's oidy female videotape artist concerned with the psychological  make-up of the Japanese woman from a female perspective. As an artist, Indemitsu's  primary concern is to encourage awareness  of Japanese women's situations as they are  dictated by traditional expectations in an  attempt to bring about a feminist awakening by revealing the Japanese woman as she  really is.  In Kiyoko's Situation, Indemitsu uses  video monitors to review Kiyoko's past,  portraying her situation as an intolerable  present in which her family and society forbid her to paint.  Kiyoko, a middle-aged housewife, is trying to paint. After 20 years, she has given  up painting. As Kiyoko narrates her story  poised in various positions on and around  her video monitor, she reveals her past. We  see her mother and father forcing her into  a marriage society demanded. In Japan, we  are told, girls are traditionally expected to  work until 25, retire and devote their hves  to child rearing and household responsibihties.  Kiyoko is led to beheve that, as a wife,  she will have ample time to paint. She soon  discovers her hfe as wife and mother is devoted wholly to domestic chores, social obligations and to pleasing her husband. She  desperately attempts to paint and suffers  through constant interruptions and ceaseless pressure to abandon her craft and become a 'good wife and mother.' In one brutal and symbolic scene, her husband attacks  and rapes her on a freshly painted canvas  while he berates her for not keeping a clean  enough house.  Frustration over her suppressed desires  drives her to desperation. The greater her  latent ability, the deeper her desperation  becomes. Kiyoko learns that motherhood  and artistic creativity are judged to be psychologically opposed.  Her creativity is slowly sapped by the intense pressure to conform. Her identity is  slowly whittled away and part of her dies as  she is called upon to give herself entirely to  her roles as wife and mother.  The image of Kiyoko hanging from a  noose above her video monitor finally concludes the tragedy of a woman whose soul  is beaten until it finally breaks into a thousand shards of whirling glass revealed in the  immortal television monitor.  All three videos are the work of courageous women: women who create compelling and thought provoking art that seeks  to validate and acknowledge the daily work  of women as—work.  Harriet Fancott is a film fanatic and  i volunteer writer.  2o KINESIS BULLETIN BOARD  READ THIS  AU listings must be received no later than  the 18th of the month preceding publica-  tion. Listings are limited to 50 words and  should include a contact name and telephone number for any clarification that may  be required. Listings should be typed or  neatly handwritten, double-spaced on 8 1/2  by 11 paper. Listings wiU not be accepted  over the telephone. Groups, organizations  and individuals eligible for free space in the  BuUetin Board must be, or have, non-profit  objectives. Other free notices wiU be items  of general pubUc interest and wiU appear at  the discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $8 (plus $0.56 GST) for  the first 50 words or portion thereof, $4  (plus $0.28 GST) for each additional 25  words or portion thereof. Deadhne for classifieds is the 18th of the month preceding  pubhcation. Kinesis wUl not accept classifieds over the telephone. AU classifieds must  be prepaid.  For Bulletin Board submissions send  copy to Kinesis Attn: BuUetin Board,  #301-1720 Grant Street, Vancouver, B.C.  V5L 2Y6. For more information call 255-  5499.  EVENTS  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis? We want to get involved  with you too. Help plan our next issues.  Come to the Writers' meetings on Tues.,  June 2 (for the July/August issue) at  7 pm at our office, #301-1720 Grant St.  If you can't make the meeting, call 255-  5499. No experience necessary, all women  welcome.  NOT JUST ANOTHER PAGE  The Not Just Another Page Collective  welcomes all First Nations women and  women of colour who are past, present  and possibly future Kinesis volunteers to  our next meeting on Thur., June 25 at  7:30 pm. For info on location and to arrange childcare subsidies, please contact  Agnes Huang at 875-1640  KINESIS BENEFIT  The Annual Kinesis fundraising benefit  is Mon., June 15 at La Quepa (1111  Commercial Dr., Vane. Doors open at  7:30, entertainment 8:00 sharp. Tix at  door, sliding scale $2-6. Join entertainers Penny Singh, Anne Jew, Mercedes  Baines, Sylvi, Vicki Oates, Reijingu Ho-  rumonzu and Random Acts. Women and  children only  VSW WANTS YOU!  Want to get more involved but not sure  where to begin? Join us ... become a volunteer at Vancouver Status of Women.  VSW volunteers plan events, lead groups,  raise funds, answer the phone lines and  help to connect women with the community resources they need, organize the library and other exciting tasks! The next  volunteer potluck and orientation will be  on Wed., June 24, 7 pm at VSW #301-  1720 Grant Street. For more information  call Jennifer at 255-5511  VSW RESOURCE CENTRE  Vancouver Status of Women's Resource  Centre is open on Mon., 10 am to 8 pm  and Tues. to Thurs., 10 am to 5 pm  Check out our collection of periodicals  and books  PINK PRIDE POWER  Pride-a-thon, Sat., June 27, in the Edmonton river valley from 10 am-2 pm will  be raising money for the Delwin Vriend  Defense Fund. For more info call Dave  (403) 454-6914  PARADE AND RALLY  Parade and Rally, Sat., June 27, at the  Gazebo  in   Mclntyre   Park,  Old   Strath-  cona, Edmonton, from 2-5 pm. MP Svend  Robinson will be in attendance. For more  info, call Maureen (403) 454-8031  RAMANOVSKY AND PHILLIPS  Last but not least, Ramanovsky and  Phillips at the Garmeau Theatre Sat.,  June 27 at 7 pm. Tix $15 from the Gay  and Lesbian Community Centre. For info,  call (403) 488-3234, or AIDS Network  (403) 424-4767  NO MORE SECRETS  No More Secrets, a professional training conference to explore the intersecting  dimension of childhood trauma, woman  retraumatization and responsive therapeutic modalities on Oct., 16-19/1992  at 252 Bloor St. West, Toronto. For  more info contact Registration Coordinator, CRI 285 Markham St., Toronto,  Ont., M6J 2G7, Tel (416) 924-8998 or  Fax (416) 924-8352  WESTERN FRONT  Maggie Nicols and Irene Schweitzer bring  their  performance art to The  Western  Front, 303 E. 8th Ave., Tues., June 23.  For info call 876-9343  SHWETA JHAVERI TRIO  India Music Society presents Shweta  Jhaveri, a classical Hindustani singer, on  Thurs., June 25 at The Western Front  303 E. 8th Ave. For info call 876-9343  THE SWING JESSIES  The 10th Annual Jessie Richardson Theatre Awards take place on Sun., June  7 at the Commodore Ballroom. Tix $15  general public, $10 for Theatre Alliance  Card holders. Doors open at 7 pm, ceremonies begin at 8 pm. For info call the  Arts Club Box Office 687-1664 or Ticket-  master 280-4444  FREE LEGAL ADVICE  The Law Students' Legal Advice Program  will be offering free legal advice clinics  throughout the Lower Mainland including a special clinic for women. For further info regarding times and locations  call 822-5791  THE RANKIN FAMILY  The Vancouver East Cultural Centre,  1895 Venables at Victoria, presents The  Rankin Family. From Cape Breton, Nova  Scotia, this ensemble blends gaelic music, original songs, and the harmonies of  these three women. On Mon., June 8.  For times and prices call 254-9578.  STONEWALL FESTIVAL  Join the Gay and Lesbian Centre (GLC)  and the Pacific Foundation for The Advancement of Minority Equality to celebrate the 23rd anniversary of Stonewall.  Starting on Sat., June 20th 12 noon-  5 pm is "Festival in the Park" at Sunset Beach. On Sat., June 20, is Vancouver's First Military Ball, held at the Denman Community Centre, doors open at  7:30 pm. Tix $10 per person. On Sun.,  June 21, is the Community Awards Banquet at the Keg Caesar, 595 Hornby St.  Cocktails at 6 pm, dinner at 7 pm. Tix  available from the GLC, 1170 Bute St.,  684-5307, at $22 for mbrs, $26 for non-  mbrs after June 1  VIDEO IN  Advanced Workshop Series: "De-Mystifying Documentary Art" Sept., 16 and  17 from 7:30 pm-10 pm. $42.80 mbrs,  $53.50 non-mbrs. Call Mary Alice at 688-  4336 for info or to register.  WOMEN IN C/C RADIO  Women in Campus/Community Radio is  holding a conference  Mon.,  July 6 at  CONFERENCE  The United Nations Association, Victoria  Branch, is sponsoring a conference "Toward a Common Future: Women, Environment and Development" from June  26-28 at Lester B. Pearson College (outside Victoria). Registration fee $70. For  more info, call Sarah or Meika at 383-  4635. Licensed daycare available  A1  IRHEART  International Travel Jl  call  251-2282  for travel arrangements  and information on the  17th Michigan  Womyn's Music  Festival  August 11-16, 1992  2149 COMMERCIAL DRIVE  VANCOUVER  \mimj      CUPE AGENCY  HARRISON FESTIVAL  OF THE ARTS  fcs  The Most  Colourful Beats  Under the Sun  Celebrate the  rich cultures of  Africa  Music - 3 stages  Art Exhibit & Market  Children's / Seniors' Day  Featuring:  • Four The Moment  •Aya  • Melanie DeMore  • Laurette Langille  • Ahdri Mandiela  • Winsom  Lecture & Discussion Series:  • global development  • South Africa today  • racism & art in Canada  For more information: Box 399  Harrison Hot Springs, BC VOM IKO  (604) 796-3664 or Vancouver 681-2771  Fax (604) 796-3188  JULY 4 -12,1992  Harrison Hot Springs, BC  WOMEN OF NOTE  QUEEN ELIZABETH THEATRE  THE STAPLE SINGERS  featuring MAVIS STAPLES  JUNE 19, 8PM  USA  •  •  •COMMODORE •  •  •  THE MAHOTELLA QUEENS  plus MAHLATHINI  JUNE 19, 10PM S.AFRICA  MARGARETH MENEZES  JUNE 20, 10PM  BFIAZIL  KATIE WEBSTER BAND  plus MARION WILLIAMS  JUNE 25, 9PM  USA  ANN PEEBLES, OTIS CLAY  & THE MEMPHIS SOUL REVUE  JUNE 27, 10PM  USA  VANCOUVER EAST  •  • CULTURAL CENTRE •  •  DIANA KRALL TRIO  JUNE 21, 8PM  CANADA  CRISPELUBROTZMANN/DRAKE  plus MARILYN CRISPELL/  IRENE SCHWEIZER  JUNE 24, 8PM  EUROPE/USA  BARBARA DENNERLEIN TRIO  with RAY ANDERSON  JUNE 28, 8PM GER/USA  . WESTERN FRONT •  ELIZABETH FISCHER  JUNE 19, 5:30PM CANADA  MYRA MELFORD TRIO  JUNE 20, 5:30PM  USA  MAGGIE NICHOLS  & IRENE SCHWEIZER  JUNE 23, 5:30PM  EUROPE  SHWETA JHAVERI TRIO  JUNE 25, 5:30PM  INDIA  KATRINA KRIMSKY TRIO  JUNE 26, 5:30PM  USA  plus Joanne Brackeen, Amy Denio,  Pearl Brown and many more  KINESIS ^sss^^^^*^^  Bulletin board  VENTS  SOUL MUSIC/BROWN STORIES  Soul Music/Brown Stories at the Station  St. Theatre July 21, at 7:30 pm. Big  Mama Productions and Penny Singh welcome all to an evening of gospel, Billy  Holiday ballads and voices from SOUL  (Shades Of United Liberation). For reservations and info call 736-4052  HllsMlfaMMflE  PRO CHOICE CONFERENCE  Pro-choice conference on reproductive  rights and wrongs announces a BCCAC conference. Five sessions: "The Politics of Reproductive Rights-Assessing Our  Past, Looking to the Future," and social on June 26, 7:30 pm. "Racism and  Exclusion," "Reproductive Technologies  and the Medical Model—Women Taking  Control," "Abortion Rights;" "When Do  We Go From Here?—The Reproductive  Rights Movement of the Future." All on  June 27, 9 am 805 E. Pender. To register call 669-6209. Childcare 291- 0196  (before June 22)  "WHITE, DARK & BITTERSWEET"  Work-in-progress based on original material written, directed and performed by  two local artists of colour. Heritage Hall,  June 12, 18, 20 at 8 pm. A part of DAS  Festival. Based on experiences, pains, agonies and joys of Michelle La Flamme and  Mercedes Baines, who grew up facing a  complexity of issues about their mixed  heritage. All Women of Colour, First Nations women and allies encouraged to attend  ART EXHIBIT  Vancouver East Cultural Centre Gallery  presents, Roberta Batchelor: "Emotion of  Division." May 27- June 22, 12 noon-  6 pm daily. View exhibits while attending  a performance at the Centre, 1895 Venables St. (at Victoria Dr.). For info Call  Michelle Knaut, 251-1363  SYLVI WITH GYPSALERO  Folk blues artist Sylvi performs with  Gypsy Ethno-Jazz Fusionists for the Vancouver Food Bank on Fri., June 12, 8:00  pm, 1313 Granville St. Tix $5-7. Presented by the Vancouver Elk Lodge #1.  Call 874-0111  LEE PUl MING  A highly innovative pianist from Toronto  will be appearing in the jazz festivals at  Victoria and Vancouver as well as the  Vancouver Folk Festival. Lee Pui Ming's  style is a fiery blend of Chinese, jazz and  experimental improvisation where the piano is transformed into a multisonic instrument. The music that emerges is a  dynamic interaction among the keyboard,  the piano and her voice. Of MING, Lee  Pui Ming's cassette release, Lillian Allen  writes: "MING is both stimulating and  soothing with innovation that puts it over  the edges." Performance dates: Victoria Jazz Festival, June 25, Open Space  Gallery, 8 pm. Vancouver Jazz Festival,  June 27, Discovery Theatre, 3:45 pm.  Vancouver Folk Festival, July 17-19  DAS FESTIVAL  DAS Festival of 5 at the Heritage Hall—  The Development Arts Society showcases  Vancouver's emerging artists and performers through visual art, dance, theatre, music and film. A contemporary vision for a ripening new age of arts and  entertainment. June 11-20. For more information call: 872-5442  LESBIAN ARTISTS  Lesbian Video Artists are gathering at  Video In, Thur., June 11/92 at 7:30 pm  to discuss the endless possibilities of activist thought & collectivity. Lesbian Id  not required. ALL WOMEN WELCOME.  For further info contact Susan at 731-  4074   TACKY TOURIST DANCE  Friends In The Valley (Gay/Lesbian Support Group in Abbotsford) are having a  dance on July 4, 1992. There will be a  door prize and a costume prize, so put a  costume together and come on out for a  great time! For more info call Val 1-850-  1368  OU PS  VOLUNTEERS NEEDED  Have some time to spare? Rape Relief and  Women's Shelter can put you to work on  the crisis line, in the transition house or  fundraising. Interested? Call 872-8212  LESBIAN ARTISTS  Lesbian Video Artists are gathering at  Video In, Thur., June 11/92 at 7:30 pm  to discuss the endless possibilities of activist thought & collectivity. Lesbian ID  not required. ALL WOMEN WELCOME.  For further info contact Susan at 731-  4074  GLOBAL STRATEGIES  Women to Women Global Strategies  needs information on how free trade has,  and is affecting women in BC: Please assess, analyze and clip everything relevant  and mail to c/o 1426 Napier St., Vane,  BC, V5L 2M5  EATING DISORDER CENTRE  The Eating Disorder Resource Centre of  BC, St. Paul's Hospital, 1081 Burrard St.,  Vane, BC, V6Z 1Y6, will open May 7.  Tel: (604) 631-5313, Fax (604) 631-5461,  toll free telephone 1-800-655-1822. For  more info, contact co-ordinator Cynthia  Johnston  WOMEN IN RECOVERY  The Recreation Club for Women in Recovery is an opportunity for women in recovery to get together and socialize with  other recovering women. For further info,  call 876-0078  FAT ACTIVISTS  "The National Association to Advance  Fat Acceptance" is the leader in the  body-size liberation movement. Experience the power and comfort of planning social and political events with other  big beautiful people. New BC Bellingham  chapter meets May 31, 3 pm, Metrotown  Library. For info call Reisa Stone at (604)  732-9753  OUT/RIGHTS  The 2nd Pan-Canadian Conference on  Lesbian and Gay Rights will be held in  Vancouver Oct 9-11, at Robson Square  Media Centre. The conference will be a  participatory forum for us to discuss and  develop coalitions, strategies and ideas  about our rights. We need your help  with everything from planning to promotion to production. Conference topics  include: "Are we Family?" "Rights and  Wrongs—Past and Present;" "Mobilizing  for Change;" "Working in Law;" "AIDS  and HIV issues." For details call Donna  at 255-3023 or write to Out/Rights /  Les Droits Visable at#321-1525 Robson  Street. Vane, BC, V6G 1C3  CANDIDA SUPPORT GROUP  The Vancouver Women's Health Information Centre will be starting a Candida  Support Group. Interested? Call 255-8285  WOMEN HEALING WOMEN  The Western Canadian Feminist Counselling Association provides professional,  educational and political support for  women healing women. WCFCA meets  the 2nd Tues. of each month at 7:30 pm,  2nd floor, 3590 W. 41st Ave. All practitioners welcome. Next meeting June 9.  Call Reisa Stone (604) 732-9753 for more  info  FRASER VALLEY DYKES  There is now a gay/lesbian support group  functioning in Abbotsford. Break isolation, make new contacts. For info on  "Friends in the Valley," call Val 1-850-  1368  VCL SUMMERTIME BLUES  With the warm weather comes greater use  of the community centres around town.  With warm weather comes a greater need  for volunteers to keep these community  centres open. The Vancouver Lesbian  Connection is one of those centres. We  are looking for lesbians to keep our centre doors open, meet and greet the public,  lend out our library books and answer the  phone-lines. Having some previous counselling or human service skills is nice but  not required. We do full training. We are  also looking for a trained counsellor who  could volunteer her services, maybe once  per month, at the centre. A female nurse,  already trained in HIV testing, would be  a welcome addition. Peer counsellors always needed to facilitate various support  groups, including Coming Out Groups &  Lesbians in Battering Relationships. Previous or related experience required. If  you are interested in volunteering in any  of these or other areas, please phone Ginger at 254-8458. VLC would also like to  say farewell to the Lesbian Film Festival  collective and thank you for the recent  donation. Good luck in your future endeavors  SELF ESTEEM  June 26-28. An intensive weekend for  women. An opportunity to explore the  roots of our self esteem in a supportive  environment with experienced therapists.  You will be invited to reconnect with your  own liveliness, spontaneity and strengths.  We will be using gestalt/experiential  work, visualization, dream work and psy-  chodrama to heighten and enhance self-  awareness. For info phone Delyse at 873-  4495  "SEASON'S"  "Season's"—life on the single parent road  is looking for your stories! Cultural diversity encouraged. Stories that help encourage others are needed. Send up to 6 double spaced, typed pages. For info write  to: Ms. A. Carr, PO Box 97, Surrey, BC,  V3T 4W4  LESBIAN EROTIC FANTASIES  The anthology "Graphic Details" will explore different ways women of colour  create erotic fantasies. A mixed media collection of poetry, art etc. Deadline Sept 30, 1992. Send queries to  "Graphic Detail," Attn. Makeda Silvera  or Leleti Tamu, Sister Vision Press, PO  Box 217, Station E, Toronto, Ont., M6H  4E2. Writing should be typed and double  spaced.  BISEXUAL WOMEN  Call for written and visual work, for the  first anthology published in Canada, by  and about bisexual women. For info write  to Bisexual Women's Anthology, c/o Sister Vision Press, PO Box 217 Stn. E,  Toronto, Ont., M6H 4E2. Deadline Sept  1, 1992  MIXED RACE WOMEN  Submissions needed for anthology by  mixed race women. Poetry, interviews,  etc. Deadline: Oct 31. 1992. Ensure your  piece specifies your bi or multi-racial her  itage. Write to: Mixed Race Anthology,  Sister Vision Press, PO Box 217 Statioi  E, Toronto, Ont., M6H 4E2  ASIA/PACIFIC ISL. LESBIANS  Short stories, poetry, artwork wanted for  an anthology of writing and artwork.  Deadline June 15, 1992. Send queries  or submissions to Anne Mi Ok Bruining,  2316 Vance St, Bronx, New York, 10469-  6018, Tel (212) 653-0613 (mess)  MANUSCRIPTS WANTED  Alternatives for Women with Cancer (Vol  2) will be an anthology by women for women focusing on alternative treatments  and alternative communities. Deadline  Oct 15, 1992. No poetry. Send SASE  with sufficient postage if manuscript is to  be returned. Send queries or manuscripts  to Third Side Press, WCFP Series, 2250  Farragut, Chicago II 60625-1802  COLONIALISM & IMPERIALISM  Resources for Feminist Research invites  submissions on the issue of class organized, racialized and heterosexist nature of colonialism and imperialism in  Canada and globally, from a variety of  historical and contemporary perspectives.  Send contributions in French or English,  (max. length 500 words) to Resources for  Feminist Research, 252 Bloor St. West,  Toronto, Ont., M5S 1V6. Tel (416) 923-  6641 ext 2278. Deadline Sept 1/92  WOMEN AND WRITING  Resources for Feminist Research is planning an issue on women and writing. Emphasis is focused but not limited to looking for a variety of approaches in the theory and practice of women's writing. Send  articles in English or French to Resources  for Feminist Research, OISE, 252 Bloor  St. West, Toronto Ont., M5S 1V6. Tel  (416) 923-1992. Max. contribution, 5000  words.  AT THE CROSSROADS  A new visual, performing and literary arts  journal for women artists of African descent. Written and visual art of any kind is  welcome. Send manuscript (copies only)  in a SASE to: Crossroads: A Journal for  Women of African Descent c/o Karen Augustine, PO Box 317, Station P, Toronto,  Ont, M5S 2S8. All submissions require a  brief bio.  SOUTHWEST ASIAN WOMEN  Diva: A Quarterly Journal of South Asian  Women is preparing a collection of poetry and short stories. Submit manuscripts in English (translations welcome),  one sided, double spaced. Mail to Fauzia  Rafig, Diva, 364 Coxwell Ave, Tor., Ont.,  M4L 3B7, Tel (416) 778-6945  FEMINISM & EDUCATION  Centre for Women's Studies in Education  is looking for papers on the politics and  practices of education in Canada. Publication date is Summer 1993. Deadline Oct., 15, 1992. Send contributions to: Publications Committe Centre  for Women's Studies in Education, OISE,  252 Bloor St. West, Toronto Ont., M5S  1V6. For info call (416) 923-6641 ext  2204  DFL PAULETTE ROSCOE  NATUROPATHIC PHYSICIAN  HOMEOPATHY  COUNSELLING  DETOXIFICATION  HYCROFT MEDICAL CENTER  108-3195 GRANVILLE ST.  VANCOUVER, B.C. V6H 3K2  731-4183  KINESIS BULLETIN BOARD  /////////////////////^^^^^  nn»; rir.widM*]  JOB OPPORTUNITY  Press Gang Printers, a feminist, worker-  owned print shop is looking for an experienced, on call press operator for casual  part-time work. We are implementing an  affirmative action policy in our collective  and are looking for women of colour to  apply for this position. Please deliver resume to: Press Gang Printers, 603 Powell  St. Vane, BC, V6A 1H2, and pick up application form. Deadline for Applications:  June 30, 1992  CONFERENCE COORDINATOR  National Association of Women and the  Law requires co-ordinator for national  conference of feminism and the law held  in Vancouver, Feb/93. Part-time now,  full-time Sept. Must have book-keeping  and fundraising experience and excellent  communication and organization skills.  Must be able to work with, volunteers.  Computer skills and French an asset.  Conference experience preferred. Reply  by June 7 to Admin. Committee, Box  48665, 595 Burrard Street, V7X 1A3  WRITER/GRAPHIC ARTIST  VSW is offering a contract for a writer  and graphic artist to help develop new  brochure to promote our organization. Interested women should call Jennifer at  255-5511  ROOMATE WANTED  ll'x 14' room, southern exposure, bright  in an old Strathcona house. Women only  251-9471  BASEMENT SUITE  (Anytime June or July 1st). One bedroom basement suite. $325 per month  (including hydro) Lesbian(s) preferred.  Quiet, non-smoking house in Mt. Pleasant. Call Diana 876-1465  SHARED HOME WANTED  Lesbian feminist, university student, quiet  and responsible, is looking for someone  to share 2 bedroom apartment, either in  the Westend, Kitsilano, or East End. If  you already have one, fabulous, or we  could look together for one. Need to move  within at least several months. Price limit  $400ish. Cass, 681-9839  SHARED ACCOMMODATION  Lesbian wanted to share apartment. 2  bedroom main floor of house, large  kitchen & living room. Back porch  with view of mountains. Victoria and  Kingsway. $400 per mth incl. utilities.  Available July 1st. Tel Delyse 873-4495  HOUSEMATE WANTED  For lovely 2 person E. Vane, house with  many nice features. $450 rent. Available  now or possibly later in summer. Gail 253-  5404  lr=Jr=ir=Jt=Jr=Jr=Jr=  =Jf=U[=Jf=Jj=Jj^  ROBIN QOLDFARB rmt  Registered   Massage   Therapist  ir=ix=ir=ir=±v=i<F^v-  ACCOMMODATION TO SHARE  Fairview slopes fully furnished townhouse  to share with mature, responsible lesbian.  Fireplace, view, all conveniences $550 includes utilities. This is a comfortable, special space worth looking at. Immediately  available 731-2867  NAME CHANGE  This is to announce that Kathryn Tamar  Moore Ostry is changing her name to  Kathryn Tamar Moore-Ostry  WELCOME SADIE  Rachel Epstein and Lois Fine are delighted to announce the birth of their  daughter, Sadie Rose Epstein-Fine. She  was born at home on April 24th in  Toronto, helped out by two wonderful  midwives and welcomed to the planet by  a loving and devoted birth team  RUSTIC CABINS  Tiny cabins in Coombs (Vancouver Island) for rent. $5 a night or $125 a  month. Rustic and peaceful by the creek.  More time than money? Ask about work  exchange. Call, write Spinstervale. Box  429. Coombs, BC, VOR 1M0, (604) 248-  8809  MUM AND KIDS CAMP  Do you and/or your kids need a camping  holiday this summer? Camp Fircom offers 8 one-week camping holidays in July  and August on Gambier Is. Two camps  are for moms and kids (or female caregivers and kids), one is for "families,"  and the other five camps are for children  aged 8-11, 12-14, 15-18. Camp Fircom  is a United Church Camp but it is not a  "bible camp." Campers of any or no religious affiliation are welcome. Camp Fir-  corn's program provides a focus on group  building in a caring, nurturing outdoor environment. Financial assistance is available for those on low income. Please call  662-7756 for more info or to register.  TRAINING CLINIC FOR WOMEN  The YWCA's Police/RCMP training clinic will be held Wed June 24, 1992 at the  YWCA, 580 Burrard St. from 6:30-8:30  pm. Cost $30. To register, call 683-2531  SWIMMING LESSONS  Moms and tots (children 6 mos to 3 yrs)  lessons  are being offered at the Vane  YWCA, beginning April 25 for four weeks  on Sat 10 am-10:30 am. Cost $25. Call  683-2531  MARTIAL ARTS  The 15th Annual Training Conference for  women martial artists will be on Sept., 4-  7, 1992 at The Evergreen State College  in Olympia, Washington. Sponsored by  PAWMA, a non-profit organization dedicated to the promotion of women in all  martial arts, the conference's purpose is  to bring women from different styles together in a cooperative learning environment. For more information contact Anne  Moon, 2516 17th Ave. S., Seattle, WA,  98144, 206-329-4456  OUR PREROGATIVE  It's our prerogative to explore women  drawing women as a radical practice. At  the prerogative site, our lives temporarily intersect in a safe, non-structured context, and for 5 hours we can be, drawing  relatively free from the demands of the  outside world. The conversation or the silence between us can become so engaging that we may forget that we're drawing, yet we continue to draw. Perhaps it  is then, when we let go of intent and become immersed in the process of drawing  that we might actually document the unconscious yet very real collective spirit of  we, women, in our drawn or painted im-  Penny Singh will perform at the annual Kinesis fundraiser benefit - Monday,  June 15th at La Quena (1111 Commercial Drive). Joining her on stage will  be Mercedes Baines, Anne Jew, Vicki Oates, Syivi, Random Acts and  Reijingu Horumonzu. Kinesis' own Agnes Huang, writer/ed. board member  turned comedienne, will control the microphone as MC, with sound by Cat  Renay. Doors open at 7:30 and entertainment starts at 8:00 pm sharp. In  addition to the raffle draw, door prizes will go to lucky attendees. The event  is for women and children only, with tickets available at the dooron a sliding  scale - $2-$6. For more info, call 255-5499.  CLASSIFrED GLASSIFrED  ages; each of us documenting the experience from our own particular perspective.  A pan-optic view of meta-reality? We just  might be finding a way to expand our  awareness of the complex nature of reality. If we can let go of naming the experience of drawing while drawing and just  do it we may be documenting be-ing.  Prerogative coalesces at 802 Hawks St.  Wed. 6-11 pm, Sun 1-6. Exchange  2 drawing sessions for one sitting, as  clothed model, or pay $150 for 10 sessions, $80 for 4 sessions, $25 for one session. At Prerogating, we mean to render  the power dynamics that occur between  teacher and student, model and artist,  professional and non-professional, obsolete. We collectively critique our work by  consent of each artist. Call 253-8246 to  register for a block of these ongoing draw-  stroke instruction and a relaxing paddle  on False Creek. Cost $58—all kayaking  equipment included. Prerequisite; none.  BASIC C2 July 28 &. 30. Call Helen at  Ecomarine Tel: 689-7575.  BODY THERAPY  The Trager Approach gently encourages  relaxation, self-acceptance and respectful  change. Chris Bruels will share the theory  supporting this non-intrusive approach,  Mentastics and samples of tablework. No  charge. For women. Thur., June 11 7:30  pm at Women's Counselling Services of  Vancouver, 1662 W. 8th Ave., 738-4298  AFFORDABLE COUNSELLING  I am Carol Vialogos, a Feminist Registered Professional Counsellor. I work with  individuals, couples or groups. My priorities are promoting healthy relationships  whether bi-sexual, lesbian or straight,  and providing support to increase skills  and self-awareness. Your mental and  emotional health is your right. For my  brochure call Carol 731-0758  KAYAK TOURING WORKSHOP  In the Sechelt Inlet on the Sunshine  Coast. For women who have basic paddling skills and want to try kayak touring. The trip includes instruction on  methods for loading, paddling techniques,  marine ecology, natural history, outdoor  cooking, minimum impact camping, navigation technique, weather interpretation  and contingency planning. The focus of  this course is to encourage experiential  learning. Cost $190-all kayak equipment  provided. $160-own equipment. Prerequisite: any novice kayak course or equivalent experience. August 9, 17 & 18. Private lessons, custom courses and Guiding  also available. Ecomarine Coastal Kayaking School is offering courses for women.  'Basic Ocean Kayaking' is a 4 1/2 hour  course. First evening session introduces  participants to touring equipment and  safety.   Second   evening   includes   basic  EXHAUSTED? TENSE?  Jin Shin Do body/mind acupressure. Receive gentle deep release of physical and  emotional stress, fully clothed in a safe  healing environment offering respect and  honour to women with regard to any issues our healing may involve. Our bodies remember our experiences. Feminist-  /mom/survivor and certified practitioner  Call Lisa 685-7714  WOMEN &. WEIGHT  Do you have a push-pull relationship with  food? Difficulty accepting your weight?  Bingeing/purging? Learn to feel comfortable being in your body and with eating at twice-monthly 'Body Image' workshops or in an ongoing therapy group. I  would love to help you reclaim your health  from bulimia or anorexia. Also accepting  clients for personal sessions: counselling,  breath release, Inner Child, trance journey, music, role-play. Reisa Stone, feminist therapist. (604) 732-9753. Officer:  WCFCA  FEMINIST COUNSELOR  I work with lesbians and other women.  My interests and experience include  childhood abuse, addictions, relationship issues, panic and self-esteem. I use  Gestalt/experiential work, dreams and visualizations. Sliding scale. Tel: Delyse  873-4495  DESKTOP PUBLISHING  Design and layout of newsletters, brochures, flyers, business cards. Call Gabrielle Mayer at 872-8780  KINESIS KINESIS BENEFIT  Monday,June \51K T3¬∞vm   at   La QwehoOM Commercial  FEATURING- ^MEKCIDCS BAINES* ANNE JEW  ^PENNYSlNfrH* VICKI OATfS * SY^VIS *  RANOON\ ACTS * RUTIN**) HofcUMONXU