 ^iCoii^ KINESIS  ^^News About Women That's Not In The Dallies  T  W^\  Barbara Hayman's struggle against cancer highlights  need for women's health fund 10  Shirley Turcotte is featured in the new N  Place, a moving documentary on incest .  The B.C. based coalition against 'Free' Trade warns  against wheel of fortune games with Uncle Sam .. 4  INSIDE  Kine-  e of the writer  necessarily re-  Ml  un-  >he re-  of the Kinesis  Editorial Boarc  SUBSCRIPTIONS: Individual subscriptions to Kine-  iatures  and   reviews   thr  ith preceding publication; news copy, 15th;  ietters and Bulletin Board  listings, 18th. Display advertising: camera ready,  :h; design required, 12th.  0%  Dalkon Shield: Women await ruling 3  Meech Lake coalition formed 3  Quarantine bill dangerous 4  Justine Blainey: Still battling 6  CN Rail still off track despite ruling 7  Disabled activistsJajoj^k/tyansit meeting 8  Menstruation and the Media: What is the  real message to women  9  by Tova Wagman  Hayman's experience illustrates need  for women's health fund 10  by Jackie Brown  Li Xiao Ping: An individual story in China's  revolutionary history 12  by Elaine Marty n  MTS  The Rez Sisters  14  by Agatha Cinader  Solidarity Forever: B.C. history on stage  15  by Patty Gibson  Book reviews: Mysteries, feminist astrology,  'free' trade 16  Movement Matters  2  Beans  11  In Other Worlds  18  by Melanie Conn  Commentary  20  Letters  21  Bulletin Board   22  compiled by Jody McMurray  18th;.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status of  Women, 301-1720 Grant  St., Vancouver, B.C. V5L  2Y6  Typesetting    by    Eastside Vancouver   Desktop   Pub-  Data Graphics. Camera by llshing.   Printing   by   Web  Jean    McGregor,    Open Press Graphics.  Road.   Laser   printing   by  Second class mall #6426  Kinesis Is a member of the  Canadian Periodicals Publishers Association.  KINESIS Movement Matters  Movement  matters listings  information  Movement Matters is designed to be a  network of news, npdates and information of special interest to the women's  movement. Submissions to Movement Matters should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double-spaced on eight and a half by  eleven paper. Submissions may be edited for  length. Deadline is the 18th of the month  preceding publication.  Women  runners  A therapy study is now underway involving pre-menopausal women runners with  menstrual cycle changes (amenorrhea, short  luteal phases, anovulation, irregular cycle  length). Although running may build bone,  there may be negative effects on bone density if the menstrual cycle is altered, accord-  to recent findings by Dr. Jerilyn Prior,  an endocrinologist with University of British Columbia (UBC) at Vancouver General  Hospital.  The purpose of the present study is to  determine whether calcium and/or progesterone therapy, taken for one year, will increase bone density in runners with such  menstrual cycle changes. The study will also  look at factors that predispose women to osteoporosis, a state of decreased bone density  and increased risk of fractures. Osteoporosis  is a major health concern for women, who  are eight times more likely than men to develop the disorder and roughly 25 percent of  post menopausal women have osteoporosis.  Women, aged twenty to forty, who run fifteen miles or more per week and are not on  the oral contraceptive pill are needed to participate. There will be a two month screening period to assess menstrual cycle status by daily oral temperature monitoring.  It should be noted that women with anovulatory or short luteal phase cycles may not  be aware of it because they menstruate regularly.  If the entry criteria are met, women will  then begin their assigned therapy for a one  year period. The following procedures will  be done at the beginning of the study: spinal  and tibial bone testing, percent body fat  assessment, blood and urine sampling. Every three months, nutritional intake will be  monitored by a three day dietary analysis.  Explanations about results will be offered  by participants as they become available.  Participants' informed consent is necessary.  The study has been approved by the U.B.C.  Ethics Committee. If you are interested,  please call: Yvette at 875-4566(w) or 873-  9493(h) or Karen at 875-4587(w) or 732-  6370(h) or Dr.Prior's office at 875-4565.  Archives  needs info  The Canadian Women's Movement Archives (CWMA), based in Toronto, collects archival material on the contemporary  women's movement. As far as the CWMA  is able, it provides information in both English and French.  Currently the CWMA is compiling a  computerized data base of women's groups  in Canada and is trying to contact as many  existing women's groups as possible for inclusion in the list.  Groups will be indexed by topic and listings will be available on computer disks and  mailing labels. Once the data base is complete women's organizations will be able to  order the complete disk, part of the information on the disk, or just simply mailing  labels.  If your group would like to be listed on  the data base please get in touch with the  Archives at the address below and request  a questionnaire designed to elicit complete  information on each group.  The CWMA requests that groups add  the Archives to their mailing lists and send  copies of papers, articles, posters, buttons  etc. Women from across Canada can help  the archives by forming a national network  of women's archives to co-ordinate CWMA  work with feminist work in their area. As  a registered non-profit charitable organization CWMA gratefully accepts financial donations ; tax deductible receipts for donations will be provided.  For inclusion in the women's movement  data base or for more information contact  the Canadian Women's Movement Archives  at P.O. Box 128, Station P, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 2S7. The Archives is located at  455 Spadina Ave., Suite 215, Toronto, Ontario, telephone (416) 597-8865.  Women's  studies  conference  Over 1,500 women from around the  world are expected to arrive in Minneapolis, Minnesota June 22-26, 1988 to form alliances and explore leadership models from  diverse cultures at the 10th annual National  Women's Studies Conference. The 1988 conference theme is "Leadership and Power:  Women's Alliances for Social Change."  The conference will explore leadership  and empowerment among women, examine culturally diverse leadership models  and will offer the opportunity for women  from different backgrounds to find common  ground and build coalitions.  Three plenary sessions highlighting international, American Indian and lesbian issues are scheduled for the conference. Two  hundred and fifty workshops will feature  speakers and issues from the local, national and international communities. Cultural events include a film festival, a book  exhibit, international and intercultural exhibitions and entertainers.  For further information contact Sally  Gordon, NWSA '88, University of Minnesota, 217 Nolte Center, 315 Pillsbury  Drive. S.E., Minneapolis, MN 55455, or telephone (612) 625-9023.  Resources on  anti racism  The Cross Cultural Communication Centre, based in Toronto, is a community based  education and resource centre working on  the issues of anti-racism, immigrant women,  various ethno-cultural groups and immigrant settlement.  The Centre, established in 1971, publishes print resources dealing with these issues which have been used extensively by a  broad section of community groups nationally and internationally.  Recent publications include Rivers Have  Sources, Trees Have Roots which is the  third book in a trilogy of anti-racist resource materials. Rivers is a powerful compilation of peoples's experiences of racism  and their desire to mobilize for positive  change. Learning Though Our History,  also a new publication, guides the reader  through a historical analysis of the immigrant women's community over the past  twenty-eight years in Ontario. Along with  these publications and an excellent newsletter, many other resources, including audiovisual material, are available.  For information and a catalogue of available resources write Cross-Cultural Communication Centre, 965 Bloor St. West, Toronto, Ontario, M6H 1L7 or telephone (416)  530-4117.  Domestics self-  help manual  The International Coalition to End Domestics' Exploitation (INTERCEDE) has  recently published Know Your Rights! a  guide for domestic workers in Ontario. Designed to meet the specific needs of domestic workers, the guide outlines the laws and  policies which protect domestics from unjust treatment.  The forty page booklet covers a wide  range of subjects including: the new Ontario  overtime regulations, stat holidays and vacation, termination of employment, workers  comp, unemployment insurance, pregnancy  leave, human rights and emergency welfare.  Know Your Rights! also includes a section  on "helpful hints" in dealing with government officials and employers and lists community based services where free assistance  is available for a variety of common needs.  INTERCEDE is urging organizations to  purchase the guide in sufficient numbers  to ensure the widest distribution possible.  Copies of Know Your Rights! are available at $5. for one to five copies and at $2.  if more than five booklets are ordered.  To order write INTERCEDE, 58 Cecil  St., Toronto, Ontario, M5T 1N6 or telephone (416) 591-6351. Donations to INTERCEDE are gratefully accepted.  Outwrite  needs support  Outwrite, an outstanding British women's newspaper, whose major focus is local  and international news and analysis by and  about women of colour has been forced to  suspend publication temporarily due to lack  of money.  Outwrite, which is five years old this  year, is a newspaper with a unique perspective and a commitment to internationalism  and feminism. The paper regularly provides  news and information not found elsewhere  and is an invaluable aid to strengthening international feminism.  The paper intends to relaunch as soon as  possible and is urging readers and supporters to contribute donations to ensure Out-  write's survival.  To help, send donations to Outwrite,  Oxford House, Derbyshire Street, London,  E2 6HG. For a copy of their most recent  issue (July/August, No 60) send an additional 50p.  Farmworkers  fundraisers  For all readers who have been wondering  how they can support the Canadian Farmworkers Union (CFU), there is a special opportunity to provide some concrete support.  A new cassette tape of labour music and T-  shirts and sweat shirts with a graphic designed by Claire Kujundzic is now available  for purchase.  The plight of farmworkers is a matter  which concerns all who care about equality for every woman. Eighty percent of the  farmworkers in the Fraser Valley are women  of immigrant origin. They work and live under Third World conditions in a country  which prides itself on its high standard of  living. Farmworkers earn between $2.00 and  $2.50 an hour; they work ten to twelve hours  a day, seven days a week, during the growing season.  For seven years now, the Canadian Farmworkers Union has been struggling to end  the exploitation and deregulation that are  part of the daily hves of all farmworkers. As  ever, finding enough money to continue the  struggle remains an urgent priority. We in  the union are offering this music tape and  the T-shirts to concerned supporters for a  reasonable price. All proceeds will go toward the C.F.U.'s organizing drive.  The music tape features a blend of  traditional union songs as well as some  new material written especially for the  farmworkers. Some of the musicians are  AYA, Ginger Group, Euphoniously Feminist Non-Performing Quintet, Jane Sapp,  Pete Seeger, and some others.  The T-shirts and sweat shirts feature  the above "Talking Union" graphic in red  and black on a white background, with two  women facing each other.  Tapes and T-shirts are $10; sweat shirts  are $15. All are available from the CFU  by sending an order to #1-4725 Kingsway,  Burnaby, B.C. V5H 2C3. For more information call (604) 430-6055.  Tools for Peace  calendar  Tools for Peace, a volunteer, non-profit  organization has been actively working in  Canada to provide material aid and coordinate solidarity efforts for Nicaragua This  year, as one of its many support projects,  Tools for Peace has produced a beautiful, full colour wall calender with illustrations by Claire Kujundzic, a local Vancouver artist.  Kujundzic's illustrations are based on  photographs and sketches she made while  living in Nicaragua in 1985 and focus on  depicting Nicaraguans at work, study and  play.  Proceeds from the sale of the calendar will go towards helping the people of  Nicaragua. The calendar is available at the  low price of $10. at a number of Vancouver  bookstores or can be ordered from the  Coalition for Aid to Nicaragua, National Office, 1672 East 10th Ave., Vancouver, B.C.  V5N 1X5 or telephone (604)879-7216.  Farmworkers  literacy  campaign  The Canadian Farmworkers Union is recruiting volunteer tutors for their annual  English as a Second Language Crusade.Now  in its fifth year the campaign has reached  275 farmworkers and their families. Many  of the students are older women who have  never learned English because of their dual  domestic/economic workloads. Farmworkers need English to read labels, warnings  and instructions for pesticide use, and to demand protective gear. English is also vital  to read scales and interpret what minimal  legislation protects them.  Tutors are being recruited until mid December and will be trained by ESL professionals in the methodologies of Paulo  Freire, Nina Wallerstein and others. Workshops will familiarize tutors with literacy  techniques, farmworkers issues, the Punjabi community and language. A network of  other tutors and ongoing support provide  valuable training in a stimulating environment. Classes run from January to April. -  For more information contact the Canadian Farmworkers Union at 879-9749.  Correction  In November's Kinesis, the telephone  number of the Infant Feeding Action Coalition (INFACT) was incorrect. Their number is 263-4684.  KINESIS //////////////^^^  ////////////////////^^^^^  NEWS  Dalkon Shield  Women await  court ruling  by Pat Feindel  "If we look at this from an  overall, long range view—these  are things I've never said out  loud before and I don't know  how they're going to sound—  perhaps the individual patient  is expendible in the general  scheme of things, particularly  if the infection she acquires  is sterilizing but not fatal."  Dr. Robert Wilson, 1967 First  U.S. National Conference on  the IUD.  Over 200,000 women who used  the Dalkon Shield intrauterine device now await results of a recent bankruptcy court hearing  in Richmond, Virginia, involving  the Shield's manufacturer A.H.  Robins. After six days of testimony in early November, Judges  Robert Merhige and Blackwell  Shelley adjourned to determine  the total cost to the company  of compensating women who were  harmed by the device. Women  have reported numerous medical  problems from the device, from  pelvic inflammatory disease to  sterility and abnormal pregnancies.  The A.H. Robins Company estimates the total cost of Dalkon  Shield claims at $1.75 billion. Representatives of the claimants estimate it will take $4 to $7 billion to  settle the claims. The bankruptcy  hearing is the result of a complex  move on the part of A.H. Robins  to protect itself from the massive  financial losses the claims could in-  By 1985, Robins had already  paid out (with Aetna Casualty  and Surety Company) $530 million to 9,300 claimants. That same  year, the company filed for protection under Chapter 11 of the  Bankruptcy Act in anticipation of  future debts resulting from Dalkon  Shield claims. Since then, the company has paid none of its creditors,  though it has continued to operate  and earn revenue.  In order to emerge from bankruptcy, the company had to develop a reorganization proposal acceptable to the bankruptcy court,  including a plan to pay its debts.  November's hearings were set to  evaluate the proposal and called  for testimony from the company's  creditors, including Dalkon Shield  claimants.  A.H. Robins proposed a merger  with Rorer Group, Inc., that allows for large tax shelters to  the emerging company for setting up a trust fund to pay $1.75  billion in compensation. If accepted, a court-approved Board  of Trustees would determine the  settlements to individual Dalkon  Shield claimants.  Claimants will be able to vote  for or against the judge's decision,  though technically the judge may  overrule the vote.  Maggie Thompson, of Dalkon  Shield Action Canada in Vancouver is concerned about what  right women will have to appeal  settlements, should the plan go  ahead. "There must be some link  between the trust fund and the  courts. There's got to be some  avenues open for appeal, though  claims will go through faster under  the private trust arrangement."  Thompson speculates that  Judge Murhige will assess the value of DS claims at somewhere near  the low end of the range between  Robins' assessment and that of  claimants. If he sets the amount at,  say $2 billion, she says, "that will  be a signal to women that there  will be less chance of fair compensation. Some women will be put  off and drop it if the amount they  stand to gain is really low."  Thompson reports there are  over 4500 claims from Canada, and  probably up to 2000 more Canadians who have filed through U.S.  lawyers. She points out that initially Robins was willing to settle only those claims that were  presented in Richmond, Virginia.  However, a Board of Trustees  might be willing to travel to centres where substantial numbers of  claimants live, or accept written  submissions.  If Robins is required to pay substantially more than the $1.75 billion they offer for claimants, some  of the extra money needed may be  taken from the company's shareholders. The value of A.H. Robins  shares dropped considerably the  week of the hearing, as well as  those of Rorer Group.  If the court sets the value of DS  claims much higher than Robins'  assessment, Thompson thinks the  merger plan will fail and Robins  will be forced to sell outright. The  sellout would have to include a  plan for setting up the trust fund.  In early 1986, Dalkon Shield  Action Canada filed an appeal  to extend the deadline for filing claims against A.H. Robins  (April SO, 1986), because potential claimants in Canada  had received inadequate information. That appeal was denied, although the company had  secured five extensions from the  court on the deadline to prepare  its reorganization plan.  Bob Manchester, the lawyer  who acted for Dalkon Shield  Action Canada will be in Vancouver on December 5 to provide an update. See bulletin  board for details.  'Free' trade is a gamble with Uncle Sam holding the winning hand, argues B.C. new  anti 'free'  trade coalition. See story page 4.  Tax reform cheats poor  by Esther Shannon  Tax reform is on the federal government's agenda and if the tradition of non-involvement by ordinary Canadians is maintained, the  average working woman is not going to see the reforms bring many  positive changes in her financial  situation.  Tory Finance Minister Michael  Wilson has tabled a White Paper  on tax reform with promises that  the reform will mean the tax burden will be shared more equitably  among different income groups in  Canada.  According to Lucie Pepin, Liberal opposition critic on women's  issues, Wilson's reform proposals  favour the well-to-do and bring  only marginal relief to low income  women.  Pepin-points out that in 1984,  66 percent of taxpayers earning  $10,000 or less were women and  says that Wilson's reforms undermine the "principle of vertical equity which ensures that levels of  taxation are related to capacity to  pay."  Noting that the main beneficiaries will not be those on low in  come, Pepin says that "families  earning less than $15,000 will, on  average receive a tax reduction of  0.8 percent of income compared  with a reduction of one percent for  families with income of $100,000  and over. In dollars, this works out  to a saving of $140 for a taxpayer  with an income of $15,000 and an  average tax decrease of $4,365 for  those earning $100,000.  Another critic of Wilson's proposals, a Quebec government social policy body, the Conseil des  Affaires Sociales et de la Famille  says the reforms "represent a major step backward for Canadian society where fairness is concerned."  The society is concerned that  the replacement of tax deductions  with tax credits will not stop the  erosion of family benefits.  According to the society the reforms call for the end of the $1,000  deduction for a child aged 18 or  over but offers no offsetting compensation. And the exemption of  $710 for children under 18, worth  about $165 per child, will be replaced with a non-refundable tax  credit of only $65 per child.  Both the society and Pepin are  also critical of the fact that neither  family allowances nor tax credits  are indexed to the rate of inflation,  a situation that will cost families  $1.2 billion dollars in 1991.  Historically, Canadians have devoted little political energy to issues around tax reform. In contrast, the business sector has  stymied every recent effort at fair  tax reform by mounting massive  lobbies against measures that increase their tax responsibilities.  Wilson's tax reform proposals, and  there are more coming in the next  several years including proposals  for a national sales tax, will affect every Canadian directly. As  so many of the working poor  women, the government's current  agenda for reform promises little  relief to thousands of Canadian  Letters protesting Wilson's  tax reform proposals should  be sent to Finance Minister Michael Wilson, House of  Commons, Ottawa, Ontario,  K1A OA6. Send copies to Lucie Pepin, M.P. at the same  address.  Meech Lake coalition formed  by Delores Fitzgerald  A November meeting, held in  Vancouver, established a British  Columbia branch of the ad hoc  committee of Women on the Constitution, a coalition opposed to  the Meech Lake Agreement.  Over thirty representatives of  the women's and disabled rights  communities agreed on a list of demands which called for provincial  hearings before ratification of the  accord by the B.C. legislature, inclusion on an equal rights amendment, a process for future constitutional amendments which is  open and democratic, and a government funded national conference on women and the Meech  Lake Accord.  Together with the British Columbia Coalition of the Disabled  (BCCD) and the Disabled Women's Network (DAWN), the ad  hoc committee organized an emergency public meeting which endorsed the call for the building of a  provincial coalition to oppose the  accord.  Peter Carver, of the BCCD, told  the meeting that, "The accord will  threaten, and possibly eliminate,  national health and social cost-  sharing programs which would be  devastating to the disabled community."  The Legal Education and Advocacy Fund (LEAF), a member  of the coalition, warned the meeting that the accord, as it presently  stands "will eliminate a national  child care program."  The committee's call for a national conference is intended to  move the debate on the accord into  the communities directly affected  and to inform the public of the undemocratic process used in constitutional amendments in Canada.  . Joan Meister, who chaired the  public meeting, stated, "When we  clear away the legal language and  present the practical implications  to the public, I'm confident there  will be a public outcry to force  amendments to the accord."  For more information or to  get involved call 875-0188  KINESIS ACROSS  B.C.  XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX^  Quarantine bill dangerous  by Noreen Howes  It happened in British Columbia in the forties; it was called internment. In the eighties it might  happen again, but now they're  calling it quarantine.  The following are some proposals included in the Health Standards Amendment Act, or Bill 34  (also called 'the quarantbe bill')  recently introduced by B.C.'s Social Credit government, and which  is already at second reading in the  legislature.  If This Legislation Becomes  Law ...  • Definitions of "communicable  disease", "isolation", "reportable communicable disease",  and quarantine will be at Cabinet's discretion, making it a political rather than a legal definition, subject to the government  in power.  • An individual's medical records  must be handed over to the  government upon request. If  she/he feels "aggrieved" by this  request, she/he can apply to  the Supreme Court for a review, (but such action would  then presumably expose the individual's private life to public  scrutiny.)  • "A person or a class of persons"  suspected of having a communicable disease must "comply  with reasonable conditions the  medical health officer considers desirable for preventing the  exposure of other persons to  the disease." This includes isolation, modified isolation, or quarantine. (One assumes that if the  communicable disease in question is ADDS, then the "class of  persons" most likely to be quarantined would be gay men.)  • "A person or a class of persons"  can be charged for contravening the directions of a medical  health officer.  The Vancouver Coalition for  Responsible Health Legislation,  whose members are primarily from  the gay and lesbian community,  recognizes this legislation's human  rights violations. If quarantine is  made law no less than five sections  of the Canadian Charter of Rights  and Freedoms would be contravened. This is particularly frightening in B.C., where the human  rights commission was abolished  by the Social Credit government in  1983.  "We are asking for the complete withdrawal of the quarantine  bill," says Bet Cecil, a spokesperson for the Coalition. "If the public health system took on education programs, which have al  ready proven effective, instead of  threatening to lock people up, real  progress in containing AIDS could  be made."  Fred Gilbertson, also a member  of the Coalition, calls the bill "dangerous" because it allows conservative politicians, doctors and judges  "control of our lives, and they look  at our sexuality itself as irresponsible."  If Bill 34 becomes law B.C.  could become the first government  in Canada, and perhaps worldwide, to respond to the ADDS epidemic with quarantine.  1m  The Coalition for Responsible Health Legislation is calling for the  withdrawal of Bill 34.  Patients rights group formed  in trouble  *fMWt  by Kinesis StafT Writer  International Women's Day organizing is off to a slow start this  year, raising fears that IWD activities and celebrations may not take  place.  Traditionally IWD features a  march, rally, information day and  fundraising dances. All this requires considerable planning and  co-ordination usually starting in  November.  To date two meetings have  been held, neither of which was  well attended. While planning at  the initial meeting got underway  smoothly, at the second meeting  only two women attended and neither was able to commit herself to  organizing future meetings. As it  stands now there are no further  meetings scheduled and more importantly, no one who is able to  take on ensuring that future meetings are called.  IWD has always provided a  good opportunity for women to  get involved, or re-involved, in  the women's movement. While the  pace is demanding, particularly in  the final two weeks, IWD is a short  term organizing project that offers  a broad range of activities with  something for every organizer. For  women new to the city or feminism, IWD provides a chance to  get to know most of Vancouver's  women's groups and the issues  they are working on, information  that enables a woman to make informed choices about where she  wants to do her future political  work.  In the temporary absence of  anyone to take on organizing future meetings, Kinesis is willing to  act as a contact for women who  want to get involved in IWD organizing. Call us at 255-5499 and we  will put you in touch with other  women who are interested in organizing this year's events.  by Kinesis StafT Writer  If you have a child, and that  child has a health problem, Social  Services may apprehend your child  if you choose alternative medical treatments. The Health Action  Network Society (HANS) has been  monitoring cases where Social Services has done this "in order to enforce conventional treatment."  Social Services apprehended an  arthritic child in August, to  "guarantee the appropriate treatment." This "appropriate" treatment, which the child had already  undergone for three years, was ineffective and has serious side effects. The parents wanted to have  the child treated holistically, and  were only able to do so after  threatening legal action.  Another parent is coming under extreme pressure from Social  Services to enforce eye surgery on  her child, despite the fact that the  eye specialist is not recommending the high risk procedure. However, the child's neurologist, psychologist, physiotherapist, speech  therapist, the CNIB, the Variety  Treatment Unit and the Surrey  School Board, none of whom are  eye specialists, have recommended  to Social Services that this operation be done. Social Services has  been complying with the threat of  child abuse and apprehension.  According to Option, the HANS  newsletter, B.C. Health Minister  Peter Dueck has stated that if  the doctor and the parent disagree  about a child's treatment, then Social Services has no choice; it must  apprehend the child "for its protection."  Perhaps the most serious situation is with psychiatric medicine.  Dangerous mind-altering, and addictive drugs such as Ritalin are  being administered to control hyperactive children. According to  HANS many parents have been  pressured into giving their children these drugs, when it is well  known in holistic medical circles  that nutritional therapy and allergy treatment will stabilize most  hyperactive children. But threats  of child apprehension or expulsion  from school have so far been overriding the long-term health of the  child.  Brad Aherne of HANS says  when there is a difference of opinion, social services has enormous  power to apprehend. "The threat  of apprehension—they call it child  abuse—can be a very frightening  thing."  Partly in response to these  threats, and as a response to the  growing consumer health movement, HANS has created a Patient's Rights Committee. To date  the committee has been dealing  largely with parent's rights in the  medical treatment of their children, but it was also formed to  inform people about their rights  and options with respect to their  own health care. Says Aherne,  "The trend is to have more knowledge about alternatives, we need  to be consulted and have conferences with our doctor. It's your  health, you have to know."  The Patient's Rights Committee and the Health Action  Network can be contacted at  #11-8856 Sunset St., Burnaby,  B.C. V5G ITS, phone (6O4)  435-0512.  Coalition opposes 'free' trade  by Noreen Howes  The cry for a federal election  dimmed the noise of November  rain as two hundred free trade opponents recently demonstrated in  Vancouver.  The rally, organized by the Vancouver based Coalition Against  'Free' Trade, was called to protest  the "farcical" hearings of a Commons Committee reviewing the  Mulroney trade deal.  "The text of this deal has not  yet been written, !." alone made  public. Rushing through hearings  under these circumstances makes  it a mockery to claim that this  is a public consultation," said  Sue Vohanka of the Confederation  of Canadian Unions, a coalition  member.  The Vancouver coalition along  with the Victoria Coalition on Free  Trade was alloted fifteen minutes  to present, a time limit they felt  was inadequate and insulting considering the two coalitions represent forty-three B.C. organizations.  "You have allowed us a grand  total of twenty seconds per group  to express our views. Under these  circumstances, how can we possibly regard these hearings as  anything other than a ludicrous  farce," they said.  The trade deal means a drastic shift in the foundation of  Canadian society—the corporate  takeover of government and the  turning over of democratic process  to the marketplace, according to  these groups.  "Like a new brand of cigarettes  ' or car, the trade deal was developed behind closed doors in close  liaison with multinational corporate backers ... And it is using a  $12.5 million public relations campaign, not to inform us of the  deal's real effects, but to make us  'buy' it."  They said that by taking economic power away from democratically elected government this deal  will create a dictatorship of the  market, resulting in, for example,  the market deciding if women will  get equal pay for work of equal  value.  According to the Coalition's  brief, the deal takes the power  from elected representatives, who  are accountable to Canadian citizens, and hands it over to U.S.  corporations, accountable only to  U.S. shareholders.  "We are confident that Canadians will not allow our country to  be taken from us," the submission  read. "The only way to ensure a  thorough debate is with a general  election."  4 KINESIS across B.C.  Gay Games  Organizers support South African boycott  The 1990 Gay Games and Cultural  Festival will be held in Vancouver. The  following article, prepared by the Vancouver Gay Games Board of Directors,  discusses the Board's recent decision to  ban the participation of South Africa  gay and lesbian athletes from the 1990  games.  When the Gay Games was founded in  1981 its inspiration was the vision of an alternative international sports event. In opposition to the fiercely competitive and nationalist character of Olympic events, the  goals are those of inclusivity and equality.  Accordingly, equal participation of men and  women and a refusal to bow to sex role  stereotypes are founding principles. So too  is the active invitation to participation by  all men and women, regardless of race, age  or sexual orientation. There are no regional  or 'national' run-offs and no national delegations. So far as is possible, one's personal  best is valued above winning.  These principles were developed by gay  men and women who know too well how we  are excluded from equal participation in society because of our sexual orientation. Our  experience in sport is only a small part of  the story.  The reality of the South African sports  boycott brought us face to face with some  very difficult considerations of what our  principles mean.  The question was not whether the Gay  Games Board opposes apartheid. We are  united in our opposition—without qualification. Rather the question was whether to  allow the participation of gays and lesbians  from South Africa, in light of the boycott.  Li making our decision we took a step back  to learn about the history and current status of the South African boycott.  The Origins of the Boycott  For over twenty years a boycott campaign  to exclude South Africa and South African  athletes from international sports competition has been vigorously and successfully  pursued.  According to Bruce Kidd in "Boycotts  That Worked," black athletes ... sought international support for full integration with  South African sport. It was only with the  realization that the intractable opposition  of the Government doomed the strategy to  failure, that they redirected their efforts toward the international isolation of the all-  white South African sport federations.  The primary proponents of this strategy were the members of the South African  Non-Racial Olympic Committee (SAN-  ROC), formed in 1963, and the Supreme  Council for Sport in Africa (SCSA). SAN-  ROC is now a London-based organization of  exiled South African athletes, coaches and  sports administrators. SCSA is made up of  representatives of African states.  The boycott weapon was first employed  in 1968 after the International Olympic  Committee (IOC) had voted to accept  South Africa's entry for the Games in  Mexico. SCSA announced that thirty-two  African national Olympic committees would  boycott any Games in which South Africa  participated and the IOC quickly reversed  its position. The South African Olympics  Committee (SANOC) was expelled from the  Olympic movement.  The United Nations voted support to the  boycott and currently its Centre Against  Apartheid monitors and reports on all aspects of the campaign.  The Boycott in International Sport  South Africa has been expelled or restricted  in the competitions it can enter in all  but one of the twenty-eight federations in  the Games and in twenty-two other fed  erations. It retains membership in a number of international sports federations in  which European and North American countries exercise control and Third World countries have little influence: rowing, gymnastics, canoeing and fencing. Even so, South  Africans have been excluded from international competition within those sports by  the refusal of Scandinavian, East European  and Third World countries to participate if  South Africa does.  In 1977, the Commonwealth Games Federation (CGF) adopted the Gleneagles  Agreement, with the active support of the  Canadian government. Member states "undertook as an urgent duty ... vigorously to  combat the evil of apartheid by withholding  any form of support for, and by taking every  practical step to discourage contact or competition by their nationals with sporting organization, teams or sportsmen from South  Africa or any other country where sports  are organized on the basis of race, colour,  or ethnic origin."  These strong words were not consistently  applied. Canada, for example, continues to  turn a blind eye to sporting ties in the  big money sports of golf, tennis and boxing, using as an excuse that competitors  are individuals and not representatives of  South Africa. As a result of such attempts  to soften the boycott, the 1982 CGF meeting incorporated a Code of Conduct (a  policing mechanism for Gleneagles) in its  constitution. CGF associations are required  to prevent sporting contacts with South  Africa, and face suspension penalties for individuals, national sports governing bodies, and member associations if they fail  to act against such contacts. Theoretically,  the Canadian government is obliged to deny  funds to any organizations making sports  contact with South Africa and to deny visas  to athletes coming from South Africa.  South African Government Response  The South African regime and its supporters have actively fought the boycott by lobbying sports federations and associations  and luring professional athletes to South  African with large sums of money. They  have sent athletes abroad with the passports of other nations. They have introduced showcases of "multi-racial sport" in  S.A., in attempts to win international credibility. And in soccer and track and field  they have achieved some success in involving black athletes, by giving top athletes  jobs in the mines and providing sports facilities at those workplaces. Environments  where men live in compounds, many to a  room, and are prevented from bringing their  wives and children to live with them.  The laws which create different economic, political and legal conditions for  non-whites go unchanged. Black sport leaders are jailed or forced into exile. Apartheid  secures eighty percent of all sports facilities  for whites who make up less than twenty  percent of the total population. (SANROC  report, 1987). Under these conditions, the  South African Council on Sport (SACOS)  slogan is: "No normal sport in an abnormal society." (SACOS is the black-led organization which attempts to organize anti-  apartheid sport whenever conditions of repression make that possible.)  The Boycott Strengthens  The present phase of the boycott involves  a deepening of the total sports ban. It includes efforts to exclude S.A. from membership in international sports federations  (not just exclusion from competition), and  to pressure individual athletes who continue  to compete in South Africa or with South  Africans to cease doing so.  Of particular concern is the move to introduce tennis into the Olympic Games,  the only Olympic sport which accommodates South Africans in international competition, (partly on the pretext that South  Africans are participating as individuals  and are not representing their country).  The boycott's successes have to be carefully  guarded since they are continually under attack by South Africa and its supporters.  The boycott stands as one of the most  powerful symbols of international opposition to apartheid. It is the chosen tactic  of black South Africans in their efforts to  dramatize their virtually complete exclusion  from social, economic and political power in  their society. They did not choose to make  sport political. In South Africa, apartheid  in sport makes sport political.  The campaign has the active support of  virtually every poor and non-white country  in the world and a good deal of support in  the wealthier, white states. Many countries,  many athletes, have foregone the opportunity to participate in international sports  events in order to show the depths of their  solidarity with black South Africans.  On the other hand, those who oppose the  boycott are those countries and individuals  whose outrage at apartheid has been tepid  at best.  In Canada, the development of anti-  apartheid sentiment has dramatically increased in recent years. The Canadian government has recently played a leadership  role among white Commonwealth countries  in pushing for an extension of the economic  boycott of South Africa—over the objections of the British delegation led by Margaret Thatcher.  Church, trade union and community organizations have actively supported anti-  apartheid activities, including raising funds  for banned black organizations. Support for  the fight against apartheid is strong within  the gay and lesbian communities, not surprisingly given the strength of this perspective in Canadian society as a whole.  Our Response  What does this mean for the Gay Games?  After all, homosexuality is a felony in South  Africa. No gay or lesbian athletes from that  country would receive official sanction from  the South African state. In any case, the  Gay Games does not recognize "national"  delegations, does not accept representation  on a geo-political basis.  How can it take this stand and reject participation on the basis of country of residence? Wouldn't it be placing gay and lesbian athletes in S.A. under double jeopardy? Aren't the Gay Games a symbol of international co-operation, friendship and understanding? Would not denial of participation to anyone violate that symbol, undermining our principles?  At times, one principle is in contradiction  with another, at least in the short term. It  is our conclusion that the Gay Games must  observe the boycott against all sport contact with South Africa.  We cannot make "national" issues disappear just because we wish they would. We  face here much more than the 'innocent'  problem of gay athletes raising their state  flags at the games because they too have  some 'nationalist' sentiment. The national  issue of South African sports is already defined by a rather overwhelming majority of  the world. Neat distinctions are not made  because the South African athlete is female,  or gay, or handicapped or senior.  Rejecting the boycott because we don't  believe in sport competition between states  is equivalent to ignoring the reality of  the boycott. Such a position could easily be interpreted as being the same as  that presently argued by the international  graphic by Susan Fell Pacaud  tennis federation: that South Africans are    dIG3S6 S66 G3iT16S DQ. 19  KINESIS    Dec/Jan..8a    , ross Canada  Nxxx^^xx^xxx^xx^^  \*xxx^Sxx^***x^x^^  Justine Blainey  Ontario teen still  battling to play hockey  by GenevieVe Appleton  Fourteen year old Justine Blainey has spent a quarter of her life  fighting for her dream: to play  hockey with boys. On the eve of  her last chance to play, she faces  the question, "Was it all worth it?"  Justine began figure skating  at age five. Six years later, she  wanted to quit. She felt overshadowed by her brother, David,  who had moved from figure skating to hockey, a sport considered  by many to be more 'masculine'.  David's practices, unlike Justine's,  were always enthusiastically attended by their parents. How did  Justine feel about this? "I was jeal-  only has seven. After a long search,  Justine found Don Valley, a coed team where she could be in  that "middle ground". Many boys  teams, however, would not play  against Don Valley because there  were girls on the team. She decided to try out for the forty all-  boys teams where she would be in  a position suitable to her needs,  and the many other advantages of  boys' hockey would be open to her.  Justine's choice to play boys'  hockey has nothing to do with  the sexes; she loyes playing hockey  with girls. As she says, "You can't  tell with the equipment on anyway.  But if you're serious about hockey,  there are disadvantages to being  on a girls' team."  ous and I wasn't keen on doing  figure-eights forever."  When she told her parents she  was interested in playing hockey,  they replied, "Justine, girls don't  play hockey." But her mother,  Caroline, didn't completely dismiss Justine's wish. She discovered  that there were hockey teams for  girls. At the age of ten, Justine  went to Leaside for her first try-  out and made the 12-year-old All  Stars team.  Justine played on the Leaside  team for two years. It was fun to be  playing, but Justine found it frustrating to be with older girls. She  just couldn't identify with them,  so she decided to look for another  team.  You must be among the best  jseven players on a team to avoid  bench-warming and to face good  challenges. It is fairly easy for a  boy in Metro Toronto to find a  team where he is in between the  best and the worst players; he has  forty teams to choose from. A girl  To Justine, boys' hockey is appealing because it offers practices  year-round and more games. Boys  learn enormous amounts of strategic plays and even do homework on  the logistics of hockey; they learn  discipline, and to play to win. But  it's the team spirit that she admires most about boys' hockey. So  the move to a boys' team was the  natural thing to do.  According to Fran Rider, president of the Ontario Women's  Hockey Association, doing the  "natural thing" makes Justine potentially responsible for weakening "female opportunities and possibly (causing) the destruction of  female hockey." The OWHA predicts that, if Justine is allowed  to play on boys' teams, all girls  will want to do the same. Justine believes that it is equally possible that allowing girls to experience boys' hockey will increase  women's opportunities.  please see  Blainey pg. 10  WHAT' S NEWS?  by Esther Shannon  Christians  control  adoption  The Saskatchewan government  has given a $100,000 grant to  a Christian anti-abortion adoption agency angering a coalition of  church and feminist groups. Earlier this year the province ended  grants to all advocacy groups, including the provincial branch of  Planned Parenthood  Christian Counselling Services  became the province's first private  adoption agency when it received  the grant and a one year license  from the Conservative government  led by Grant Devine. The group's  director confirmed that the agency  tries to persuade pregnant women  not to have an abortion. After  about a month of operation the  agency is working with eight or ten  unwed mothers.  The bulk of adoptions in Saskatchewan are handled by the  provinces social services department and under provincial law, an  adoption can not be handled by a  third party unless there is special  permission from the government.  Education  discrimination  Women from Third World countries are four times less likely than  men to get federal funds to study  in Canada, according to the annual report of the Canadian International Development Agency. Despite a CIDA policy that is supposed to ensure that women get  half of the $50 million in education  programs offered by the agency, an  agency spokesperson says bridging  the gap between the sexes remains  difficult.  Statistics from the agency show  that of the 3,543 people brought  to Canada last year as students or  trainees, only 734 — just 21 percent — were women. CIDA has  been asked to set five year quotas  aimed at increasing the numbers of  women getting support. Officials  will be required to report their  progress and explain any shortfall.  According to a CDJA spokesperson, "It's very difficult to find  women in the proper fields." Another factor is that when a women  studies abroad it can often cost  the woman her family since, as is  the case in the First World, in  most Third World countries family responsibilities are clearly designated to women.  Charter  undermined  Manitoba laws dealing with  health care and the education system still contain discriminatory attitudes towards women says a report released in November by the  Manitoba Charter of Rights Coali  tion. The report cites 167 violations of the federal Charter of  Rights and Freedoms in these two  areas of Manitoba laws.  The report urges the Manitoba Education Department to  use materials and textbooks that  conform to provincial policy of  using non-sexist language and  text and criticizes hospitals that  sought parental consent before administering medical care to minors, particularly females, since  the Supreme Court of Canada has  ruled that if a minor is mentally  competent they are allowed to  make their own decisions regarding medical care. The report calk  for legalizing midwifery, establishing regional health centres and independent sexual assault centres.  The coalition's recommendations, part of their ongoing review of Manitoba's laws vis a vis  the Charter, are being forwarded  to the provincial government for  study.  Prisoners  file suit  Women prisoners at the Kingston Prison for Women, the only  federal women's prison, will be  bringing a lawsuit against the federal Correctional Service for violations against equality guarantees  in the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. The Women's Legal Education and Action Fund, which has  taken on the case, says the action  will charge that the administration  at the prison is discriminatory because it denies women services and  opportunities male prisoners take  for granted.  In a 1981 landmark decision, the  Canadian Human Rights Commission ruled that the Correctional  Service did discriminate against  women because male prisoners had  better work and education programs, and more facilities where  they can serve their sentences. Little action has been taken by prison  officials to rectify the inequities.  In October Gayle Horii, a  Kingston prisoner, fasted for ten  days in a successful bid to persuade British Columbia prison officials to accept her transfer request. Horii wanted the transfer to  be closer to her husband, who has  i heart condition.  In vitro  condemned  In vitro fertilization, the production of test tube babies, came  under intense attack at a recent international conference held  in Montreal. Speakers denounced  the lack of information about the  health risks involved and "dishonest" inflation of success rates, and  warned that in vitro fertilization is  part of a trend to reduce women to  breeders.  Critics argued that medical  technologies developed for use in  limited cases gradually came to  be used generally.  One speaker  pointed to the history of the use of  amniocentesis, in which amniotic  fluid is withdrawn from a pregnant women's womb to determine  whether the fetus has "genetic defects." Originally the test was first  used on pregnant women over 40  but is now routinely given pregnant women over 35 and is even  being suggested for women over  30.  Sex tests  obsessive  Canadian high jumper, Debbie  Brill has called for an end to  sex testing of female athletes saying it's silly to think any country would put men into women's  events so the only men trying to  pass as female athletes would be  men acting on their own. Such impostors, she says would have to  pretend to be female the rest of  their lives to avoid discovery of  their initial deception.  World renowned genetics professor Dr. Albert de la Chapelle,  speaking at the same public forum at the University of Manitoba, agreed with Brill saying the  testing is tantamount to medical  malpractice and that current testing methods are unreliable.  The test involves taking a scraping from the inside of an athletes cheek and examining it for  X and Y chromosomes. The presence of the Y chromosome supposedly indicates the subject is  not female. De la Chapelle said  the test is unreliable because some  women have the chromosome naturally and some men don't.  Brill, who labeled the testing  "absurd and completely obsessive"  said the test also causes serious  psychological harm to women who  are told they are not female.  Victim  compensation  The federal government has introduced Criminal Code amendments that would mean major  changes in the way the courts  deal with crime victims. Bill C-  89, campaigned for strongly by  crime victims groups, would see  convicted criminals obliged to pay  restitution to their victims. Restitution decisions would be made  by the judge during a case and  would come before payment of the  fine imposed on the criminal. Areas covered would include property damage, loss of salary, medical bills and other expenses.  Courts would also be allowed to  accept victim impact statements  and judges would be given "discretionary and mandatory" powers to  ban publication of the identity of  victims of sexual assault.  Opposition critics, have pointed  out the difficulty with the proposals is that very few convicted criminals will have the money to make  financial restitution.  KINESIS  Dec./Jan. '88 Across Canada  /i^^^%^^^^^  Blue collar women  CN Rail still off track despite ruling  by Nancy Pollak  Eight years after a Quebec feminist group  charged Canadian National Railways with  sex discrimination, a landmark Supreme  Court ruling has forced the company to  comply with an affirmative action program.  While the June 1987 decision marks a  precedent-setting victory for women and  other groups facing workplace barriers,  CN's record as an employer of women  in non-traditional jobs—the subject of the  original complaint—is still no cause for celebration.  Further, the affirmative action program,  aka employment equity, applies only to the  company's St. Lawrence region; women in  the west remain at the mercy of corporate  goodwill—in this case, a crown corporation  that fought against measurable change every inch of the judicial way.  It was in June 1979 that Montreal's  Action Travail des Femmes (ATF), an  energetic group committed to improving  women's access to 'blue collar' jobs, complained about CN to the Canadian Human  Rights Commission. Two years of pressure  by ATF persuaded the Commission to establish an investigative tribunal.  The evidence presented over the next  three years—by women who applied to  CN unsuccessfully, by others who passed  the hiring hurdles only to face harassment, by company officials, psychologists  and sociologists—led to the inescapable  conclusion that CN did indeed practice systemic discrimination  The statistical evidence was damning:  women never exceeded one per cent of the  blue collar workforce, compared to a less  than awe-inspiring national average of thirteen per cent.  Systemic Problem, Systemic Cure  The tribunal attributed this meager showing to company policies and non-policies:  women were neither recruited nor encouraged (the 'chilling effect' of the employment office); management and shop-floor attitudes were typically sexist; actual hiring  procedures gave subjective powers to foremen and departments; and job criteria and  tests were unfairly applied.  The tribunal then issued 'Special Temporary Measures' ordering CN to hire one  women for every four openings until such  time as the national average was achieved.  CN never disputed the fact that they discriminated. They did, however, object to the  imposition of a quota and timetable, argu  ing the tribunal had overstepped the boundaries of the Human Rights Act by prescribing those affirmative action mechanisms.  Fortunately, the Supreme Court didn't  agree. While the company insisted that prevention, not cure, was the extent of the  Act's purview, the court judged that "in any  program of employment equity, there simply cannot be a radical dissociation of 'remedy' and 'prevention' ... the prevention of  systemic discrimination [requires] systemic  remedies."  "We are delighted that the Supreme  Court backed up our decision," said tribunal  member Joan Wallace. "It established that  affirmative action can be imposed by human  rights legislation, and future tribunals can  use that precedent."  ATF was an active force throughout the  long legal process and the ruling is a credit  to their persistance and organization. It also  underscores the difficulties of striving for social justice via human rights channels. As  Paul Leroux of the Commission said, "This  case points out how necessary it is to have  some sort of back-up group ... it is almost  impossible for one woman to bear a complaint alone."  The Supreme Court has, in its own  words, embraced a "purposive interpretation of human rights legislation." Says Susan O'Donnell of the BC Human Rights  Coalition, "The Commission can say, yes,  we are here to promote equality, not just  hope it happens."  Hoping it happens may be all women outside CN's St. Lawrence region can do unless  they too decide to launch a complaint.  This isn't due to ill-will on the company's  part. CN has employment equity policies  and personnel assigned to carry them out.  According to Wallace, "CN has introduced  a really good affirmative action program  [from its Montreal headquarters]." But Wallace cautioned that a company "so huge and  diversified may face difficulties getting those  programs enforced in the boondocks."  British Columbia and Alberta constitute  CN's Mountain region, and Colin Campbell is the Edmonton-based Employee Equity Coordinator. Campbell was reluctant  to supply any information—statistical or  otherwise—about regional goals, complaining of "a desk full of work" and referring to  Montreal as a more appropriate source.  He did, however, offer that "we do a  heck of a lot of networking and soliciting—  if you'll pardon the expression—to reach  the right people." Campbell also cited CN's  Equity Scholarships which award $600 to  women entering trade schools for welding,  diesel mechanics and other related courses.  Voluntary Goals and Voluntary Laws  Ann McMillan, Employee Relations Assistant in Vancouver, does the networking in  BC and is personally committed to finding  women for non-traditional jobs. According  to McMillan, Mountain region has a "voluntary" one-in-five hiring goal.  McMillan speaks to groups such as 'Employment Skills for Women,' represents the  company at career days, and arranges radio ads specially geared to attract women  to CN's trade occupations. McMillan is confident that CN's centralized hiring process  and 'non-sexist' skill tests have eliminated  some old barriers. Her biggest headache is  the paucity of applicants.  The statistics still damn: during the first  half of 1987, women were only 2.1 per cent  of Mountain's blue collar workforce. For  a company whose discriminatory practices  have been exhaustively documented, analyzed and strategized about—in the 1976  Year of Women, CN commissioned an excellent internal study—2.1 per cent betrays  appalling inaction by management.  Little has  changed —  the statistics  still damn.  Hiring routines are an aspect of the  problem; employment practices are another.  CN's sexual harassment policy earned  praise from the tribunal, yet a single policy  obviously cannot neutralize the range of difficulties a woman may experience in a predominantly male workplace. Mountain region lacks any specific educational programs  for integrating women, nor are there specialized counselling resources. When faced with  a housing complaint from a newly hired  woman, CN ducks behind Labour Standards or passes the buck to the union [see  box].  When CN attempted changes in the St.  Lawrence region in the late 70s, says Wallace, "They had two problems: alot of management didn't want women, and they never  said a word to the unions: the men were up  in arms and harassed the women in every  possible way."  Talking to the unions is essential, especially since lay-off and seniority issues are  so significant: the 'last hired, first fired' syndrome still reigns. Yet, unions are not necessarily bastions of support.  Judy Pearson, an engineer and 13 year  veteran of CN, is the president of local 701  of the United Transportation Union. UTU's  10 women and 225 men represent the running trades: brakemen, switchmen, yardmen, engineers and conductors. When asked  about UTU's stance on affirmative action,  Pearson recounted a national representative's remark: "some of my best friends are  women."  "We support it," says Pearson, "but it's  fairly hard since we have nothing to do  with hiring." She also noted that the national union "doesn't tend to push for us  [women]."  Also not pushing for women is the  federal government's Employment Equity  Act (EEA) of 1985. CN is right in step  with the Tory strategy of voluntary programs to hire women, disabled people, visible minorities and aboriginal peoples. The  EEA, which requires that federally regulated employers merely report their workforce statistics, has been denounced by feminist economist Marjorie Cohen: "there is  simply no mechanism to require that the  employer implement employment equity.  Another Tory initiative tripping up  women and ironically, CN, is the- Canadian Job Strategies (CJS). As Brenda Pengelly, former Women's Access Consultant  at BCIT says, "Canada Employment programs that helped women into trades were  canned just before the CJS was introduced."  Pengelly is referring to programs like  Women Into Non-Traditional Occupations,  where the government bought spaces in pre-  apprentice and trade courses for women  at community colleges. These 'bridging'  programs generated partially-skilled women  applicants, just the kind Ann McMillan cannot find in sufficient number.  Now, the CJS has handedthe bulk of  training over to the private sector which has  no interest in promoting women's advances  and lacks, in Pengelly's words, "a rounded  view of job skills."  Pengelly believes that CN needs to be  "more creative and persistent about finding  women." The same, it would seem, could be  said about women seeking employment on  the rails.  How CN made one woman feel welcome  When Val Murdock got hired on at CN Rail as a welder-helper last August, she didn't  really care that her hiring was the result of company efforts to employ more women in non-  traditional jobs: what mattered to Val was that she would be getting valuable experience  in her chosen trade, in a unionized workplace, at decent pay—$11.62/hour.  Unlike the three other lower mainland women also hired, Val was immediately sent into  the field. Posted to Lytton, she joined a three-person 'frog and switch' crew that grinds  and welds the rails at switches. The job was okay, as were work relations with her male  colleagues.  However, Val found herself housed in a CN trailer with one co-worker, a man who made  a show of reading skin magazines in the kitchen and wandering around in his underwear.  He was difficult to deal with and, as Val says, "I just had it in my head that it wasn't right  for a woman to have to share housing with a man."  Complaints to her supervisor yielded, "I knew this was going to happen," yet he dismissed it as just another accommodation gripe. (CN regards these trailers as "an incentive  to workers" who get charged $35/month for their use; if unhappy, workers are welcome to  rent motel accommodation to the tune of about $300/month.)  Her union, the Brotherhood of Railway Maintenance of Way Workers, told her, "If we  r get you a separate place, we'll have to get all the guys a separate place." And Employee  Relations in Vancouver seemed eager to turn this into a sexual harassment, rather than a  management, problem. Further, they advised Val to get the union to fight for an accommodation allowance, insisting that their policy "fulfilled all the requirements of the Canada  r Labour Code."  Transferred to Kamloops, Val now lives in a motel. (Val Murdock is a pseudonym.)  KINESIS  Dec/Jan. '88        7 International  "xx^xxx^xx^j^x^^  ^xxx^SSSSS^N^xx^xxxx^^  Sati, a traditional form of ritual  suicide for widows banned in India since 1829, claimed the life of  sixteen year old Roop Kunwar in  early September. Kunmar burned  to death on her husbands cremation fire in the Rajasthan village  of Deorala, 100 miles from Delhi.  When news of the death leaked  out, feminists and progressives began a series of outraged protests,  seeing this case of supposedly vol-  Sati death spurs wide protests in India  untary suicide as symbolic of the  brutality a patriarchal society inflicts on Indian widows and on Indian women in general. Demonstrations by groups like the National Federation of Indian Women  have gained wide press coverage  and revived the debate about sati.  As a result, the central government has been forced to intervene with Rajasthan state officials.  Some forty-six people, including  six of the woman's well-to-do in  laws have been arrested for complicity in her death. National legislators have called for the dismissal  of four state legislators who attended the post-death ceremonies,  which continued for two weeks after Kunmar's death and attracted  over 10,000 pilgrims.  Activists have also filed an injunction to prevent the erection  of a shrine at the cremation site,  while pressing for the prosecution  of police officials who made only  half hearted efforts to prevent the  death, or to disperse the crowds  who gathered at the site.  Sati was never universal in India, but in the eighteenth and  nineteenth centuries did occur  with some frequency in certain feudal areas like Rajasthan. To have  a sati in the family gave enormous prestige that lasted for generations. Although there is always  Disabled activists block transit meeting  Over 500 disabled activists,  pressing for greater access to  municipal public transit systems,  mounted four days of continuous  protests at the American Public  Transit Association's (APTA) annual national conference in San  Francisco in late September.  The protesters from all over  the United States, most of them  in wheelchairs, demanded a national mandate that all newly purchased bus and rail equipment be  made fully accessible. The four day  protest included a march and rally  and numerous acts of civil disobedience, resulting in over 130 arrests.  The APTA, the national lobbying group and trade association  of the American transit industry  has been a strong force in opposing accessible transportation, citing the "exorbitant" costs of such  a system. The association prefers  to promote a paratransit system  that is implemented on a local basis "with each transit district making its own decision about what  kind of services to provide to people with disabilities." (Paratransit  systems are analogous to the standard Canadian transit systems for  disabled people: a separate system that requires that riders must  book service at least twenty-four  hours ahead of time, -ontend with  Conference calls for  liberalized abortion laws  An international conference of  family planning experts, held in  Nairobi in October, has called on  governments throughout the world  to liberalize abortion laws, as part  of their efforts to improve women's  health. The conference also called  for family planning education to  be extended and for contraceptives  to be made more widely available.  Delegates   also  proposed  that  family planning be included in  all primary health care programs.  "No primary health care strategy is complete without the inclusion of family planning which has  been demonstrated to improve the  health of women and children," a  draft statement issued by the conference said.  According   to   one   conference  South African  domestics organize  The union intends to co-ordinate on a national level efforts that  have begun in many local areas to  win legal recognition for the rights  of domestic workers.  Domestic workers unions have  faced many obstacles, especially  the isolated nature of the work itself. The power of employers to for-  Domestic workers organizations  across South Africa joined forces  in November to form the South  African Domestic and Service  Workers Union (DWA), according  to a report in Africa News. With  member groups from Cape Town,  East London, Port Elizabeth and  Natal Province, the newly formed  organization will have a membership of almost 60,000.  bid their help to have visitors in  the household and fundraising are  two key problems.  In spite of these difficulties, the  domestic worker's movement is beginning to make its presence felt.  The largest janitorial firm in Cape  Town has recently negotiated an  agreement with the union and a  form has been drawn up for wage  and benefit agreements between  domestic workers and employers.  According to one DWA organizer the national union is "a beginning. We feel we will be able to  fight when we make our demands  nationally and publicly. We're not  going to beg anymore."  from Listen Real Loud  delegate "It is unethical for service providers to shut their eyes to  abortions and unplanned pregnancies which indeed exist and are responsible for the deaths of thousands of women every year."  One delegate from East Africa  noted that induced abortion is illegal in Kenya and in many other  African states largely due to the  opposition of the Catholic Church.  In a related development the  planned cutoff of United States  money for international planned  parenthood programs could result in 1,200 maternal deaths  and 69,000 additional abortions  around the world during the next  three years, a study released in  November says. In addition researchers have concluded that the  cutoff will lead to an additional  311,000 live births over three  years.  The U.S. Agency for International Development will not renew  funds to the Family Planning International Assistance group  whose 23 million annual financing  is scheduled to end January 1.  The group has rejected an  American demand that it not assist foreign family planning programs that include abortion or  abortion counselling.  The increase in maternal deaths  would be the result of complications of pregnancy and delivery  and infections following abortions,  the study says.  the limited number of rides available and compete with other disabled riders plus pay higher user  fees than regular transit systems).  The demonstrations focused on  highlighting accessible transportation as a key factor in enabling  people to participate in society.  The right to work, have relationships, attend events, get healthcare or go to school all depend on  the ability to get there in the first  place.  Over the course of the four  day meeting, demonstrators in  wheelchairs blocked APTA shuttle  buses, chained themselves to cable  cars, blocked intersections and the  lobby and elevators at the federal  Department of Transport after officials refused to meet with them.  Protest organizers want every  American city to work toward having a combination of both accessible fixed route transit (the regular  bus and rail system) as well as specialized door to door van service.  They say the APTA paratransit  local option position really means  "no option" for disabled people.  Activists point out that the cost  of a new lift operated bus is only  six percent higher than a new bus  without the lift, and argue that the  APTA's worries about high costs  are based on renovating existing  systems which is not what disabled  people are demanding.  from The Guardian  official disapproval after the fact,  occasional sati cases have continued to occur up to the present, especially in Rajasthan. Sati remains  a cultural ideal of womanly heroism, and is always assumed to be  voluntary.  Popular belief encourages the  ideal among women. If a man dies,  especially shortly after marriage,  his widow is often directly accused  by his family of causing her hus-  bands's death by bringing "bad  luck" into the household. At the  same time, women who die of natural causes before their husbands  are worshipped as blessed individuals.  In many ways the society still  makes the lives of widows who survive their husbands dreadful, despite more than a century of efforts  by reformers. With no hope of remarriage, widows are expected to  live lives of self denial, humiliation  and virtual invisibility. They are  expected to eat meagerly, dress in  ugly, distinctive clothing, wear no  jewelry and shave their heads regularly. Widows are banned from  festive occasions since they are regarded as bad luck. Some may  find themselves targets of rape  by men in the household. Expressions of sexual interest—let alone  remarriage—are considered sacre-  ligious.  Kunwar's twenty-four year old  husband died suddenly of a ruptured appendix after they had  been married eight months. First  reports said she died in classic sati  fashion, praying calmly. However,  later reports from some of those  present suggested that she wept,  screamed and struggled as she was  forced to the fire by her in-laws.  Indian feminists point out that  the issue is not whether a woman  chose her own death but the  whole system of belief and social approval which makes such a  suicide—or murder—acceptable.  Recently Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi has expressed strong  support for new legislation which  will mandate punishment for those  who assist in a sati burning or who  erect memorial shrines glorifying  the custom.  VDTs and birth  defects linked  A new Swedish study establishes a definite link between birth  defects and the use of video display  terminals by pregnant operators.  The study, sponsored by the  Swedish government, found a two  fold increase in fetal death and abnormalities in pregnant mice exposed to the same low level electromagnetic field as emanates from  video display terminals (VDT). It  replicates research done by Stockholm's Krolonsta Institute, which  concluded that VDTs pose a risk  to pregnant women after finding  a four-to-five fold increase in fetal malformations among exposed  laboratory animals.  The Swedish studies are of particular interest since they are the  first to use the exact type of ra  diation produced by VDTs. Other  international studies, which have  produced conflicting results, have  been based on surveys of population sectors which have been exposed to unspecified forms of low  level radiation.  It has been estimated that 65  percent of the Canadian workforce—more than 1.5 million workers—work with VDTs. It would  not take a major effort to safeguard their health and that of  their offspring. Terminals can  be shielded to eliminate emissions and some manufacturers produce emission free machines. The  Swedish government will only purchase shielded equipment.  from the TWU Transmitter  K'NESIS ////////////////////^^^^^  //////////////////^^^^  Media  by Tova Wagman  Menstruation and the media  What is the real message to  women  That Time of the Month  There are approximately one and a half billion people who menstruate on this planet,  yet this function remains a source of shame  and embarrassment for almost all women in  most societies today. Menstruation is rarely  talked about. It is a function that is considered highly private.  In many societies, women who were menstruating were thought unclean, and were  physically separated from other members in  the group. Sexual relations between women  and men in some cultures were also forbidden when the women were menstruating.  While these negative myths about menstruation prevail, some cultures view menstruation as positive. For example, in some  native communities, menstruating women  were seen as powerful. A girl's first period was perceived as a time for self reflection. She would be physically separated  from others in order to get in touch with,  her inherent "woman power." Some thought  that because women bled, but did not die,  and were able to give birth, they were very  strong. These views, while still held in some  cultures, are not the dominant view in Western society today.  There is a belief that a woman's personality changes dramatically when she is  menstruating. This belief suggests women  are weaker or unable to cope when menstruating. While it is true that one's body  changes during the menstrual cycle, and  e women even experience a great deal  of discomfort due to dysmenorrhea (or period cramps), it is dangerous to suggest that  women are irrational and/or erratic.  Although menstruation is hidden or seen  as negative in society, it is not hidden from  us when we open up a women's magazine  or turn on our TV sets. It simply cannot  be avoided, for the advertisements show us  the products in living colour. While there  are advertisements for all types of products, these ones specifically elicit strong reactions.  As a national organization working to improve the status of women in the mass media, MediaWatch is alerted to programming  and advertising which portray narrow and  unrealistic views of women and girls. Many  of the complaints we have received over the  years concern the advertising of feminine  hygiene products on Canadian airwaves (I  am specifically referring here to sanitary  napkins and tampon commercials).  The majority of people who complain  about these commercials want them off  the airwaves. For example, one complainant  stated: "I wish to voice my strong opinion  about the advertising of feminine hygiene  products on television. I find these advertisements very offensive, revolting, disgusting and degrading ... " Another person  wrote: "I was disgusted to see the ad for  Tampax which discussed 'your period', and  the pros and cons of 'pads' over Tampax .. ?  After reading many similar complaints, I  have come to the conclusion that these complainants are not upset with the sexist content of the commercials, but rather with the  issue of menstruation. As a result of hearing  about and reading many such complaints  over the years, I began to take more notice  of these commercials, and did some research  into the issue. During this time, I was able  to both view many ads featuring these products and talk to people who studied menstruation and how it is perceived in our culture. As well, I discussed the issue with some  of the creators of the ads themselves.  Much of the sexist imagery we see does  not reside in feminine hygiene advertisements. In fact, these are the ads which have  improved the most over the years. Many of  these ads depict women in strong and positive roles. By comparing feminine hygiene  advertisements to other kinds of advertisements, I hope to shed some light on the differences between sexist content in advertising and advertising which can elicit a negative response because of its product. As  well, I hope the ideas in this article will assist advertisers to better understand why  people complain about feminine hygiene advertisements.  Media lmage=Message  From a very early age, television (and other  media), form our diet. Each year, children view more than 27,000 commercials. A  study by the Royal Commission on Violence  in the Communications Industry (LeMarsh  Commission) in 1976, stated:  "It would seem improbable that children  could avoid acquiring much of their value  system from their television experience."  Young women attempt to emulate the  images they see. This can be dangerous  in that most images of women are unrealistic and present a lifestyle and appearance that few will attain. For example, most  women in the media are depicted as obsessed with their appearance. Almost all  "media women" are thin, and the maintenance of an ultra slim figure is highly valued. The rise in eating disorders such as bulimia and anorexia nervosa indicate the de-  for people, so she designed a coupon, and  asked her readers to submit it within three  weeks. It read:  "We the undersigned, feel feminine hygiene advertising should be restricted to  women's magazines and implore the Canadian Radio Television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) to remove it  from television viewing."  The response was an overwhelming  100,000 signatures. The CRTC told advertisers to regulate. The ads were to be shown  at specific times during the day, and the images in the ads were to be "toned down." For  example, we started seeing more flowers and  doves, and fewer ballerinas jumping up and  doing splits. The sanitary napkin could not  be shown out of its package. These stringent  regulations have eased off since the 1970's.  While this may be true, the advertisers of  these products are still careful about what  they show and how they show it. Some companies, such as Cascade in Quebec, try to  ensure that women play a large role in designing their advertisements for Vania san-  the sanitary napkins. This is the most progressive aspect of these commercials. It has  been taboo for men to go near women when  they are menstruating, let alone to actually  hold a pad. These commercials put across  a message that menstruation is part of a  woman's life, and not something we need be  ashamed of.  Areas of Concern  While it has been true that feminine hygiene advertisements present some of the  most positive portrayals of women (and are  increasingly becoming better at doing so),  there are some valid public concerns about  these advertisements. Some advertisers resort to using imagery which plays on the  dreaded fear women have of being in public (at a party or school) and having their  "secret" found out. For example, the use of  women wearing lots of white enhances these  fears.  Every Day More Women  Provide Themselves with Kotex  Feminine hygiene advertising has always empathized sparing women embarrassment, whether at the corner store or  during her working day. In the past, however, such advertising was usually only found in women's magazines not  broadcast far and wide via television.  gree to which young women strive to look  like these female "models."  Feminine Hygiene Ads: Background  Most advertising depicts women in relation to men, or show women competing  with one another for male attention. Feminine hygiene advertisements are the exception. These ads almost always depict women  alone or together as friends. The advertisers of these products have had to be more  conscious of the imagery they use to advertise their product. After all, it is unlike  any other product on the market. Its purpose concerns women only, and this makes  it unique.  In the early 1970's, Nicole Parton, a consumer columnist for the Vancouver Sun  found these advertisements to be an issue  itary napkins. Others, such as Kimberly-  Clark of Canada Limited in Ontario, are using humour to advertise sanitary pads.  One commercial involved a woman and  two men who were portrayed as spies. The  men try to steal a "microfilm" from the  woman's briefcase, but instead end up with  a packaged sanitary napkin. The woman  says: "Zat's not it you fools."  Such commercials break new ground, not  only where feminine hygiene commercials  are concerned, but with reference to the images portrayed of women in all commercials.  The woman spy is shown to be clever and  able to outwit the male spies. Not only is  she clever, but she runs fast, is physically  strong, is independent, and is not rescued  by a man. The ad also portrays men holding  The advertisers (perhaps due to their  own embarrassment), rarely provide us with  much information about the nature of their  product. I'm not suggesting we be given a  sixty second lesson on the menstrual cycle, however the use of euphemisms such  as: "sanitary napkins" rather than pads,  or even "feminine protection" as opposed  to one's period, indicate that it is a phenomenon we should be indirect and/or  ashamed about. The use of commonly-used  words (among women) such as: cramps,  flow, period, etc. would enable us to feel  more comfortable with menstruation in general.  please  see Menstruation pg. 19  KINESIS Health  NXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXV  xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx^^^ V  s^xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx^^  by Jackie Brown  Hayman's experience illustrates  need for women's health fund  Barbara Hayman is making coffee. She  apologizes for the wait, saying it's a little  more difficult getting around these days. I'm  actually glad for the time to sort out my  own thoughts and feelings about our impending interview. Hayman arrives with the  coffee and a plate of her favourite cookies  and we chat about the weather, the ridiculous amount of media hype surrounding the  adventures of Chuck and Di and our mutual  interest in music. It's the usual kind of small  talk, but with a slight edge of uneasiness.  Barbara Hayman has cancer, probably  the most terrifying disease of all. For the  past six months, she has been struggling to  overcome the effects of chemotherapy, which  at one point resulted in such severe nerve  damage she couldn't walk. It has also been  an emotional ordeal, starting with the initial shock of being told she had only a 20  percent chance of survival.  Said Hayman: "I was dead. I wasn't terrified at all. I looked at everything with a  very jaded sense of humour ... everything  took on an amusing, terrible, awful feeling." Today, however, the prognosis is good.  The cancer has gone into remission and  physical rehabilitation has been so successful that the forty-one year old Vancouver  Women Against Violence Against Women  (WAVAW) staff member is planning to return to work full time in January.  Barbara Hayman has shown remarkable  courage in her battle with a disease most  of us have trouble even talking about. Indeed, even my own journalistic "objectivity" deserts me momentarily as Hayman  describes where the cancer first appeared.  Suddenly, the pain in my arm is much worse,  my leg hurts, and I resolve to quit smoking  tomorrow.  The reaction is typical and is an important aspect of Hayman's story, which serves  as a reminder that the consequences of cancer go far beyond pain and suffering. It is  also the story of a medical profession often prone to branding womens' pain as hysterical and treating female patients as second class citizens; of friendship and support  extended and, sometimes, withdrawn; and  finally, of the need for women to protect  themselves from severe financial problems  associated with any long term illness.  Early in 1987, Hayman began having  pain in her arm and legs. Unable to get  an appointment with her own family physician, she was referred to various associates.  Over the next three months, she saw doctors every three weeks on average—none of  whom, she says, took her symptoms seriously. "They wanted to know if I was under any stress," Hayman recalls of the traumatic experience. I had just started a job  at WAVAW and my stepmother was dying  of cancer, so yes, there was stress. But what  I got was 'here, take these pills.' Not only  did the pain get worse, Hayman experienced  profound guilt over being told it was self-  inflicted and would lie awake nights worrying abut what she was punishing herself  over. Amazingly, the doctors attached little  importance to the fact that she couldn't lift  her arm and could barely walk.  Hayman finally managed an appointment  with her own doctor (a woman) who recognized immediately that something was  very wrong. Tests revealed severe anemia  and she was sent to a cancer specialist  who checked her into Shaughnessey Hospital. Things moved quickly ("they were running tests down the hall 'stat' ") and within  three days the diagnosis was in: large cell  lymphoma—similar to leukemia in that the  bone marrow stops producing white blood  cells.  Barbara Hayman's cancer has gone into remission and rehabilitation has been so successful that she's planning on returning to work in the new year.  Taking More Control Over Treatment  While Hayman praised the speed with  which Shaughnessey staff diagnosed her illness, she was disturbed by her specialist's  aloofness and seeming lack of concern for  her ordeal—something Barbara feels would  not have been the case had she been male.  Without her permission, for example, Hayman became part of the intern training  regime and was subjected to four or five doctors at a time examining her. "There was  a real 'poking order'," she said, describing  how it was possible to determine who was  the most important doctor by the amount  of prodding each one of them got to do.  She also objected to their use of technical jargon. When she asked that the case  be discussed in language she could understand, Hayman says the specialist "patronizingly" agreed, but never followed through.  Hayman says he also reacted angrily when  she asked for a second opinion, and told her  it wasn't done with cancer. "I later found  out that's a pile of shit. You can get a second  opinion on cancer or anything else and it's  not unusual to ask for one." Shortly after,  Hayman checked into the Cancer Control  Agency of B.C. clinic (a move which also  distressed her specialist) where she felt the  doctors were more responsive to her needs  and concerns.  Hayman is now more philosophical about  her early experiences and concedes that cancer patients are often "guinea pigs" because  there is so little known about the disease. At  the same time, she is taking much more control over her own treatment, by asking questions and listening to her own body (at one  point she refused radiation which doctors  later said could have increased the nerve  damage caused by the chemotherapy) and  advises other women to do the same. Above  all, says Hayman, women should question  any diagnosis of stress when pain is involved, and should never hesitate to get a  second opinion.  Besides struggling with doctors and the  physically debilitating effects of her disease,  Hayman also had to contend with the often negative reaction of others, including  some close friends who simply couldn't deal  with her illness. "When you tell someone  you have cancer, it's like a giant abyss ...  some people don't want to be around it.  They don't want you close, they don't want  to talk about it or be anywhere near it."  Other women in Hayman's life did offer not just moral but also financial support. Unable to work and with no health  coverage, her only income was unemployment insurance medical benefits, which ran  out after fifteen weeks. Through fund raising and sometimes out of their own pockets, the women made sure her expenses were  covered. To a large extent, Hayman says,  they were responsible for her recovery. "I  never had a moment's worry ... it was like  a safety net I could feel," she said of the  group's dedication and concern. "It made  me realize how important they were because  60 percent of the cure is up to you. Having  friends around who make it clear that whatever you need they'll get means you don't  have to think about money, rent, food. All  you have to do is concentrate on getting  well."  A Women's Health Fund  Others, however, aren't so fortunate and it  was that recognition that led the group of  women who helped Hayman to establish a  task force to investigate long term disability matters. Lisa Price, Hayman's long-time  friend and a member of the task force, says a  high percentage of working women have no  health coverage mainly because traditional,  non-union women's jobs don't include such  plans. As a result, those who fall ill often  find themselves in deep financial trouble.  "Other women in Barb's situation would  very possibly have to turn to family," Price  says. "But what about those who have no  family, or the family can't afford to help?  What do they do?"  The task force has turned up some possibilities for self-employed women and is-  continuing its investigation of coverage for  individual workers in the women's movement. Another goal is to set up a permanent  health fund for women who "fall through  the crack", such as those not eligible for UIC  or whose disability is not recognized by insurance plans. One example of the latter,  is 'burn out.' Says Price: "When you think  about the kind of work we do at WAVAW,  or VSW or wherever, it's high stress. But  it's (burn out) classed as psychiatric so it's  not covered."  hi the meantime, Price and Hayman  are urging women's organization to apply  for disability coverage in their government  grant applications, although neither expect  such plans to materialize overnight. "We  have to fight for every nickel we get as it  is but if groups start insisting it's a priority, eventually something will happen," says  Price, adding that government is well aware  of the aging women's population and the  high cost to taxpayers of inadequate health  plans.  For Barbara Hayman, having cancer has  affected virtually every aspect of her life.  But, while hers is a story of an emotional  and physical ordeal, it is also a tribute to  personal strength and the remarkable support women are capable of giving one another. It was that combination that enabled  Hayman to overcome the fear and pain, the  financial difficulties and the negative attitudes surrounding her disease.  If you wish to donate to the woman's  health fund for Barbara Hayman, please  send your donation to: Woman's Health  Fund, c/o 303-1820 Salsbury Drive,  Vancouver, B.C., V5L 4BS.  Blainey from Pg. e  In an interview, Justine described what she  thinks will happen.  Were you the first girl who wanted to  play hockey with boys?  No, there was Abby Hoffman and some  others. I just arrived at that decision when  I had no where else to go. I found out about  the others afterwards. It made me feel better to know I wasn't alone.  Do you personally know many other  girls who are interested in doing this?  A few. But I've spoken with a lot of girls  and I think most like girls' hockey. They  haven't had a taste of boys' yet; they don't  know what they're missing.  So you feel that once they try out  boys' hockey more girls will want to  switch?  Yes, but they wouldn't stay in boys'  hockey. They'd use what they learned to  make girls' hockey better.  Your case is being heard by the human rights commission because you believe the hockey associations have discriminated against you. How have they  done this?  Sometimes I'm allowed on try-outs for a  boys' team. Then they don't pick me because I'm a girl. Sometimes I'm not allowed to try out because they say I'm a  troublemaker. Even when I'm chosen for a  team, the OHA (Ontario Hockey Associa  tion) won't give me a card, so I can't play  on the team anyway.  Are there any officials in particular  who have been unfair?  Yes. It's mostly the presidents and vice-  presidents (of the leagues). They say things  like, "You don't have insurance." That's not  true at all. It's just an excuse to keep me  off the ice. They've even refused to let me  try out after a coach has invited me to. But  my teammates are never unfair; once I've  proven myself on the ice they appreciate me  and know I can compete. People who know  both sides of the story are supportive of my  cause.  Justine won her case at the Supreme  Court. When the ruling was appealed by  the OHA she started all over again at the  human rights commission inquiry. She has  been scorned by friends who think that because she's in the spotlight, she's not the  same Justine they once knew. Time to give  up on her dream? No way. As Justine says,  "If not this year, then next. If not me, then  someone else."  What she hopes for the future of hockey  are girls teams with the skills to compete  equally against boys teams. We've all heard  the expression "positve thinking." Justine  Blainey lives it.  Genevie've Appleton is a student at  Subway Academy II Alternative School  and Photo Editor of Fresh Perspective, Metropolitan Toronto's youth-run  newspaper.  , KINESIS /////////////////////^^^^^  //////////////////////^^^^^  STORIES  Gitksan traditions  emphasize stability  by Nora D. Randall  Marie Wilson is a Gitksan historian who  is travelling with the play, NO 'XYA  (Our Footprints). This play, co-produced  by Headlines Theatre and the Gitksan-  Wet'suwet'en Tribal Council, is about ancestral land and gives us an insight into how  the people of the Gitksan and Wet'suwet'en  nations see their relationship to their land  and to the white people who live on it. Right  now the Gitksan and Wet'suwet'en Hereditary Chiefs are in federal court claiming the  22,000 square miles of their ancestral home  which they never signed away. They are currently hving on a forty-four square mile reserve.  Marie Wilson has been working with the  Tribal Council since 1979. As part of her job  she has travelled all over the province with  NO 'XYA. She, along with other members  of the company, answer questions after each  performance.  It's in hearing her answers, how she imparts information, how she cares for the  questioners, that I can imagine how it could  be different. What she gives the audience is  a glimpse of a perspective that is so different that it cannot really be compared and  contrasted to our European understanding  of land ownership. If you try to line it up so  you can compare and contrast these two different visions point for point, you lose the  magic and the energy of the Gitksan vision.  But at least for the time that Marie Wilson  is speaking if you can just hold the vision in  your mind by itself, it's like flying.  For example, the play opens with a hereditary chief telling the story of Gawa-Gyani.  Gawa-Gyani is the clearing where the warriors from two nations met and fought each  other. They were very evenly matched and  they fought long and hard until many of  their best soldiers were dead. Then they  retired to build up their strength to fight  again. One time when they retired a huge  flock of beautiful white birds landed in the  clearing and danced there until the entire  clearing and all the blood that had been  shed was covered with their white feathers. The warriors from both nations were so  struck by the beauty of the birds and the  clearing covered with their white feathers  that they laid down their arms and made  peace.  The night I saw the show, a woman rose  during the question period and asked what  the buttons we were given meant. They  said, "I've been to Gawa-Gyani." David Diamond, the artistic director of Headlines  Theatre answered that Gawa-Gyani was the  place they talked about at the top of the  show, the place where peace was made.  Marie Wilson said, let me tell you about  Gawa-Gyani. It's much more than that. It  is a concept of the mind, a vision of a neutralized area where peaceful communication  can take place. It's the reason that any time  we have something important to say we first  spread the down, just like we have here  tonight. Down is a very important neutralizing symbol of peaceful assembly. At the  beginning of this show we spread down over  the audience so that all witnesses (the audience) could accurately hear what we have to  say. We do this in our feasts today so that  our actions may be properly validated  I used to wonder "Why down?" Why is  down the symbol of peace we use to neutralize an area before we speak. Then I realized that down is not controllable by humans. You cannot hold it in your hand, it  will squeeze through your fingers. You cannot make it settle on one particular person  within a group. It floats off and goes where  it will. The down recognizes no favourites.  We look out at the audience and see little  fluffs of down float up and drift away with  every breath and movement of the crowd  ... the magic  and energy of  the Gitksan vision  Another woman asked her, How do you  account for the resurgence in native culture?  Marie said, I don't mean to sound flippant,  but it has always been there. It never went  away. We have had our feast halls and we  have passed on our titles and our culture,  our ways of governing and decision-making  have been there all along. All through time  the cultural activities of our communities  have continued, invisible to our white neigh  bours who hve right next door. It's another  world. The culture has never died.  This is the theme she chose to expand on  when she was the main speaker for the "Our  Lives" panel during Aboriginal Rights week  here in Vancouver. She started her talk by  telling about an exchange that took place  at one of the panels earlier in the week. She  said, "I heard this very young man speak  out from the audience and ask this knowledgeable lady who first spoke, 'What happens to the kids who have been removed  and lost contact with their origins? Is there  room for them?' She answered, 'You have  never been forgotten! Find out where you  come from. There is a place waiting for you.  And it suddenly struck me that what I have  to talk about is not the economies or the  politics of our life and our Uvea from the beginning of time to now. What I have to talk  about is the stability of our lives."  Stability for Marie Wilson as a Gitksan is  an integral part of her vision that is so different from a European mind set. She talks  about her people having to leave their ancestral home 10,000 years ago because it was  covered by a glacier, and then of returning.  She talks about the fact that for those thousands of years her people learned how to live  in balance with the land so that even after  supporting her people for all that time the  land was still rich and her people were comfortable. She talks about how recent contact  with Europeans has been. For the Gitksan-  Wet'suwet'en contact with Europeans firs!  took place 150 years ago and that the land  rip off from the black hole of Ottawa only  began in 1888 and ended in 1914. Less than  one hundred years. From a Gitksan point oi  view it is not too late to work things out.  It is possible and they are doing what needs  to be done.  After hearing her speak that first night,  I asked Marie Wilson if the Gitksan would  consider claiming the whole province. We  should be so lucky.  KINESIS  Dec/Jan. '88       n Li Xiao Ping  An individual story in China's revolutionary history  by Elaine Martyn  Life in the People's Republic of China  for a liberated woman is not as easy as the  government would have you believe. The  heritage of Confucius and the memory of  the excesses of state policy during the late  1950's and the Cultural Revolution still restrain women despite their constitutional  guarantees.  Li Xiao Ping (pronounced Lee Shao Ping)  is a liberated Chinese woman, who presses  against the restraints but appreciates the  present freedoms available to her. When  asked if she was a feminist, she replied,  "In China people don't use the term 'feminist' to describe a Chinese woman. I don't  know clearly what a feminist is like, but I  think I'm to some degree a feminist—I de  mand the rights men enjoy. The Chinese  who know me well think I'm one of the 'nu  qiang ren', strong women."  These women are independent, self-  confident, strong-willed, usually well-educated, and somewhat successful in their careers. That describes Li quite fully, and  more appropriately than any Western term  could do.  Li Xiao Ping makes a Canadian feel at  ease—she is not only fluent in English, but  a cheerful, direct speaker who understands,  even shares the views of Western women.  She goes against the Chinese grain—like  others of her generation—over thirty, single,  intent on pursuing her career with little concern for marriage. She has experienced the  problems of the Great Leap Forward (1958-  1960) and the Cultural Revolution (1966-  76). However, she's not pessimistic like some  of her generation—she faces the future with  determination and hope.  Li Xiao Ping's life story illustrates the  struggles and courage of many women now  in their thirties. Li's mother was a teacher  and her father was a high education official  in the city government in the early fifties,  'intellectuals' in Chinese terms. In the early  years after the Communist revolution in  1949, China was prosperous.  As Li mentioned, "New China brought  people a good life and a wonderful vision  of an idealistic future." Unfortunately this  didn't last long; political pressure forced  collectivization of farms; intellectuals and  others were punished as rightists; famine  struck.  Chinese  women  over-represented  in unskilled occupations  Li Xiao Ping: "I think I'm. to some degree.  a feminist - I demand the rights men enjoy."  "In 1957 the campaign against the rightists began. That was the beginning of our  sufferings. My father was persecuted. To  punish him they were going to send him to a  kind of farm—a prison actually—in the remote mountains to do heavy manual work  to 'remold' himself. Since he had T.B. he  was allowed to return home, but without a  job and under the watchful eye of a committee.  "I was only three or four years old and  unaware of the disaster. It was not until  a few years later that I began to feel its  shadow. It was said, 'A rightist is the enemy  of the people.' His family members were regarded as enemies, too; my mother didn't  get any promotion from then on, my brother  couldn't go to a formal school, and I was  called the 'daughter of a prisoner' by my  classmates. My father's fall put an end to  our future.  "To make matters worse, China had a  famine from the late fifties to the early sixties. We could not get enough food to eat.  To help my mother, the only breadwinner,  my father grew some grain and vegetables,  and raised rabbits. Much of my spare time  was spent working in our small patch of a  field or cutting grass for the rabbits."  Intellectuals were seen by Mao and others as impractical bookworms who made no  contribution to society and were considered  more ignorant than peasants and workers.  It was believed that they needed to be reformed ideologically to be trusted to assist in the molding of children. They had  to attend political studies to learn concepts  such as class struggle. They had to make  self-criticisms in small groups and write  1 ]jj. 'thought conclusions' of sessions or confes-  S- sions to the satisfaction of the cadres in  q. charge, a process known as thought reform.  tq     It was the "Hundred Flowers" campaign  ^ and its aftermath that lead to the downfall  S  of intellectuals in 1958. Mao first used the  5; slogan in May, 1956: "Let a hundred flow-  3. ers blossom together, let a hundred schools  3   of thought contend." It was originally intended to promote creativity and independent thinking, with its reference to the classical age of Chinese scholarship, from the  sixth to third centuries B.C. when there was  a great deal of intellectual stimulation and  voicing of conflicting views.  Finally the intellectuals spoke out about  a year later. They criticized the regimentation of education, political interference, the  thought reform process, and even the abuses  of the Communist Party. After one month of  'blossoming', in June, 1957, the anti-rightist  campaign was announced, leaving intellectuals even less secure than before.  Many lost their positions, and were deprived of rights and privileges. Though most  teachers were allowed to continue to work,  their salaries were reduced. Professionals  were sent to the countryside for reform  through labour. But worst of all they were  labelled, 'rightists', a stigma which stayed  with them until the late seventies. They and  their families became second class citizens.  But life went on—intellectuals were  needed to carry out educational work. So  between the self-criticism and confessions,  Meanwhile Li Xiao Ping continued at  school. In spite of the difficulties her family  faced, she was a good student and an excellent swimmer. In fact, she was about to be  accepted by the provincial swimming team  when the Cultural Revolution broke out.  The Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution in 1966 brought the next wave of criticism against intellectuals and other rightists. Classes were suspended and Li danced  with other young people in the streets to celebrate the party's victories. Student groups  organized as 'Red Guards', travelled the  country criticizing bourgeois ideology, old  habits, old ideas, old culture and old customs. It was a time of destruction before reconstruction.  When the schools were reopened in 1967  or later, there was a new educational plan:  schools were administered by revolutionary  committees of peasants, workers, and soldiers; entrance examinations were abolished  and students were admitted by recommendation, the years of schooling were reduced,  and a half-day work/half day study system  was introduced. Li Xiao Ping returned to a  high school run by workers.  Only eighteen months later her education came to a halt once again. Then she  waited for her work assignment. To learn  a peasant's education, she was sent to a  people's commune. Many young people met  in huge rallies then were sent to the countryside by trainload from the big cities.  In fact once they arrived they often were  not appreciated—and could not work to the  level of the peasants and so would have gone  hungry if their families had not sent them  'care packages'.  Li Xiao Ping spent five and a half years  there—working in the fields, grinding corn,  and finally teaching in a village school. She  remembers the time with sadness, "Life in  the countryside was miserable. It meant  working from morning to night in the fields,  and suffering from the want of food.  "If I refused the assignment, my parents would have been criticized (publicly denounced). Besides, what else could I do? Everything was in disorder. How can I explain  it? Born in a society like China, my fate is  closely linked with its fate. When the country has suffered, I suffered. When the country has become better, my situation has also  become better. The influence of the government on individual Chinese is tremendous,  almost unimaginable to most Westerners."  And so with the death of Mao and the end  of the Cultural Revolution, Li Xiao Ping's  life opened up again. First she returned to  her city, and at twenty-two years old she became a high school teacher. "I was supposed  to be a teacher but what could I teach? I  myself had so little schooling." It was decided she would teach English, so she set to  work to learn it. She said she was able to  gain the respect of her students though she  had begun at the same level as they had.  She could have taken the first university  entrance examination with the one million  other applicants in 1977, but she lacked the  confidence to even try. In spite of discouragement, she wrote the exams in 1979 and  was enrolled in the foreign language department of a teachers university. "You could  say my life began in 1979."  Not only did she get a new lease on education, her brother was also a university  Two Views of Women in China  The Traditional View  Confucius' advice to women:  Before marriage, obey your father.  After your marriage, obey your husband.  After your husband dies, obey your son.  Fu Hsuan wrote:  How sad it is to be a woman!  Nothing on earth is held so cheap.  Boys stand leaning at the door  Like Gods fallen out of heaven.  Their hearts brave Four Oceans,  The wind and dust of a thousand n  No one is glad when a girl is born;  By her family sets no store.  student and her father was 'liberated' that  iyear. "For the first time in many years we  felt that we were equal to other people"—  officially freed from the rightist label.  In spite of her potentially destructive experiences, Li maintains a positive approach  to her past trials: "They've contributed  to the forming of my character, made me  strong, and helped me to know myself.  Without them I would be a quite different  person today."  Today she lives a simple but satisfying  life. She shares her room with a roommate  and eats at the campus cafeteria. As a researcher for the Canadian Studies Centre  at the Sichuan Institute of Foreign Languages in Chongqing she is kept busy as  a librarian, translator for Canadian delegations, and researcher on Canadian women's  issues. In addition she teaches at another  college for two half days per week. Her free  time is on Saturday evenings and Sundays  when she enjoys visiting friends, dancing,  watching movies, and climbing nearby hills  and mountains.  Li Xiao Ping is pleased with her present  level of success. Never having taken life  too lightly, her struggles—studying surreptitiously at night while living in a northern  people's commune, trusting in herself when  others treated her as second class—have finally paid off. Perhaps more importantly,  she notes, "I've broken the tales about single  women. I live alone but live well, which some  single women over thirty are unable to do.  Not long ago newspapers reported the suicide of such a woman, a post-graduate student who killed herself because she couldn't  stand the pressure from her family and society."  The present modernization and open  door policies have brought Li freedom; but  she insists they offer great potential for the  advancement of all Chinese women "... because it opens their eyes to a vast world and  enables them to exchange views with their  sisters in other countries."  Recent policy changes have affected Chinese women's lives greatly, perhaps fundamentally. Though Li Xiao Ping does not  have a colour TV or a refrigerator, she has  experienced more personal and significant  changes. She mentions "... changes in my  mind: through this door to the outside, I've  seen a vast world—with different social systems and various ways of living. I've made  my own comparisons, accepted new ideas,  and chosen my own way of living.  "On the whole I've become an individual  person, though perhaps this is unfortunate  for in a society like China which stresses  generality life is difficult for an individual."  When thinking of past experiences from  this perspective, she becomes saddened. She  recalls being summoned to the principal's  office of her previous employer and taken to  task for wearing too colourful clothes one  year, then for wearing a blue jean suit—too  dull and dark—the next. Those, like Li Xiao  Ping who don't follow the norms, are sometimes termed deviant.  As she explains, "You are lonely because  some can't understand you and others are  against you ... what I hope is that more  changes will take place in people's minds."  While Li still considers marriage a future  possibility, she is now focusing her attention on her Canadian studies research interests and hopes to spend a year studying in Canada, hi the future she would like  to translate and publish books by western  feminists to raise the awareness of Chinese  // you could help Li Xiao Ping with  resources on any of the following topics, please contact her at the address below: the Canadian women's movement;  the social position of Canadian families; women's issues—abuse, violence,  daycare; women's studies programs at  universities.  Write: Li Xiao Ping, Canadian Studies Centre, Sichuan Institute of Foreign  Languages, Chongqing, Sichuan, People's Republic of China.  by Jiao Xing  As this year's university graduation assignments were being written, reports of  sexual discrimination in the process appeared again in the newspapers *. A female  student from the Peking Iron and Steel Engineering Institute told of her experience of  being refused by the research institute to  which she had been assigned because 'we  don't want women.' Another young woman  from the Political Science and Law University of China met with the same fate.  A third example is that dozens of female  graduates from the People's University were  turned down by their prospective working  units. They are now idling away their time  on campus. All these remind me of my own  experience a few years ago. Though I stood  at the top of my class, having done fine work  during my years at university, I was spurned  by a unit which preferred 'to have a man.'  The sexual discrimination toward female university graduates is an odd phenomenon in modern China: although a pub  lic demand for university graduates can be  heard throughout the country, women graduates are not as appreciated as their male  counterparts—even though they may have  achieved better results in their studies. The  evidence would indicate that the reason for  this lack of appreciation is discrimination.  Ignoring the discrimination against these  "lucky" women who have received university education, we are startled by the fact  that women enjoy far fewer learning opportunities than men.  Historically, Chinese women were denied  education. It was not until 1896 that the  first school for girls was founded in Shanghai and this school lasted merely two years.  When the May Fourth Movement** swept  through China, the issue of equal access to  educational opportunities was put forward  and more women, mainly from well-off families, entered schools or universities.  The greatest advancement came with the  establishment of New China in 1949. Thou  sands of women attended schools at various levels. And for the first time, thousands  of women learned to read. The female enrollment has increased since the fifties and  in 1986, made up 42.5 percent of the total school enrollment, however, the number  of women enrolled in Chinese universities is  still small, compared with those of North  American countries and of some European  countries. For the academic year 1986-87,  represented only 26.9 percent of all  university students.  More distressing are the millions of  school-age girls who are staying out of  school for various reasons. In Gansu province, for example, there are now about  157,300 school age children out of school  and nearly 131,100 of them are girls. Furthermore, of all the girls enrolled in elementary schools, about 80 percent drop out of  school before they complete the first level  of education. According to current statistics given by a national newspaper, China  has about 3.5 million "truant" school-age  girls. Most of them are from poor families  in the countryside, where boys are far more  favoured than girls.  Women form the major part of China's illiterate population. They are in an inferior  position in society because of their generally  lower educational opportunities. Their inferior position is likely to continue as shown  by the above figures. These facts demand  attention, because 'times are changing.'  Recent reforms in China have placed  great challenges before Chinese women. For  the first time since 1949 women's employment security is 'threatened'. As industry  modernizes and automates, local women's  federations have been busy "protecting female workers' rights."  In Jinzhou, an industrial city in the  Northeast, about 2000 women workers were  dismissed from their posts within one  month. A survey made by the Shanghai  Women's Federation this spring outlines the  situation of women in twelve sino-foreign  joint ventures. Women represent 38 percent  of all the employees, 15.8 percent of the  technical personnel, and occupy only 8.3  percent of the managerial positions.  Since women are over-represented in the  unskilled occupations, many female employees earn less money than their male colleagues and face more possibilities of losing their jobs in the future. A recent report from the Women's Federation in Beihai  city, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region  pointed out that nearly half of the \  three enterprises there became jobless. The  report cited low educational level and lack  of training as the major factors.  The picture appears clear. Compared to  men, women are not well prepared for an  advanced market economy. The situation  of these female workers has raised a welter of questions: how will women be affected by the negative attitude of employers  who turn them down even when they have  university diplomas? What will happen in  about fifteen years to those school age girls  staying out of school? To what degree will  the reforms limit women's participation in  the urban labour force? Where will Chinese  women stand in society if they continue to  be under-represented in the highly educated  group and over-represented in the illiterate?  What will the government do to help w  catch up with advancements in education in  developed countries around the world?  Women enjoy constitutional protections"  against discrimination but female stu-f  dents still form a minority of the univer-|  sity educated in China.  photo by Elaine Martyn I  AINESIS  KINESIS Arts  VXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXNXXXXXXXXXXXVXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXV  "x^N^S^x^^^  ^SiSKaSx^xxx*^^  To a Safer Place  Through doors and windows  by Jean Burgess  Five times I watched the newly released  NFB Women's Studio D film To a Safer  Place, directed by Beverly Shaffer. Five  times I dove into the film's emotional depths  and five times I surfaced.  This is a film about an incest survivor,  Shirley Turcotte, who embarks on her healing journey across Canada to the homes of  her family members, her neighbours, her  therapist. We witness their conversations  about the years of sexual and physical abuse  that the Turcotte's father heaped upon his  children. We see the insights Shirley gains  about the truth of why no one could protect  her, and why she had to save herself. We  glimpse her adult family life with her part-  and her little boy. We appreciate her  long term relationship with her girlfriend.  These are the bare facts of the story.  What is most present are the feelings that  watching the film evokes: pain, fear, compassion, burning, grief, rage and calm. The  question keeps coming back ... "Shirley,  how did you take care of yourself so that  you could make this film? How did you not  get overwhelmed by the feelings?"  hi the film, you, Shirley, are able to listen to your mother admit that you and your  brother were black and blue from your father's beatings. You sit beside your brother  who says he once pulled the curtain aside in  your basement bedroom prison, looked in,  and saw your father on top of you. He tells  you he was afraid to know what was happening.  And later, you sit across from the man  and the woman, the next door neighbours  who never intervened. You sit still and hear  them say they saw you as a grubby kid,  drab, not appealing, no sparkle. And the  man telling you that even now he would go  to the Father first and ask what was going  on, instead of seeing and believing the little girl who is living in terror. You didn't  leap across the room and strangle the man  for his betrayal and unwitting collaboration  with the father rapist, the child molester,  the torturer of children. And finally, how on  earth did you take care of yourself so you  could go back to the old house and walk  down the basement stairs and face the bedroom scene of terrible times past?  Shirley, your film is full of doors and windows. You take us with you on your journey.  You take us through all those doors into all  those homes. My arm ached every time you  raised your hand to knock on yet another  door. My breath tightened every time you  stepped over the threshold to face another  person, another fear. Is that part of how  you took care of yourself? By taking us with  you? Did you feel us there at your side? It  must be so. Your healing journey is yours  alone and, paradoxically, it is all of ours.  Your film gives voice to your child inside  you. And it is my child inside who hears you.  We have the same intonations, the same  child words, the same child trust, that this  is what we must do.  I made the journey with you and felt the  safety you created for yourself. As a result  I was able to stay present, stay in my body,  and listen to your family members say hurtful words. By staying present, as you did,  I also heard the good, loving words. They  came through.  Your mother owned up to her inability  to protect you. She said she is hoping for a  better time between the two of you. Your  brother and sister-in-law let you know how  much life shines in your face, validating your  healing.  Your sister had the courage to tell you  that she didn't think you would believe her  if she told you she was pregnant with your  father's baby. In confessing her resentment,  she frees herself to love you more fully. She  put her arm around you. Your sister asked  you, with such pride, "How did you get so  liberated?"  Your film speaks from the gut and the  spirit, not just the head. Finally a film that  really speaks to survivors where we need to  hear it. That is where the remaining healing still needs to be done. In the gut. In  the body. In the spirit. Instead of saying the  adult word 'rape', you say "His hand reaching for me." These words reach into my gut.  Now I know you know. You are speaking  from the child self and talking to the hurt  child in me.  The Rez Sisters: celebrating  the will to survive and dream  by Agatha Cinader  In the last few years an exciting and distinctive Native Canadian theatre movement  has developed Native Indian dramatists are  writing plays about aspects of the Canadian  Indian experience: mythological and historical events as well as contemporary situations. And they are creating new ways to incorporate aspects of traditional Native performances: music, dance, masks and costume, into their productions. Native theatre  companies are training actors and producing plays, which are seen for the most part  on reserves or in urban Native communities  centres.  Since its initial success The Rez Sisters  has been produced again in Toronto and it  comes to the Vancouver East Cultural Centre in January as the last stop on its national tour.  The play, which deals with the lives of  seven women on an Indian reserve, was  first performed a year ago at Toronto's Native Canadian Centre. On the basis of that  production it won the Dora Mavor Moore  award for Best New Play last year and it was  runner-up for a Floyd S. Chalmers Award  for Outstanding Canadian Play in 1986.  The storyline of The Rez Sisters is simple. Seven women related by birth or marriage, live on the Wasaychigan Hill Indian  reserve (the 'rez' of the play's title) on Man-  itoulin Island. Their lives are characterized  by poverty, lack of power and a sense of  futility. When the women hear that the  biggest bingo game in the world, with a top  prize of $500,000, is to be played in Toronto  they are thrilled.  Each woman dreams of winning the game  and so transforming her life. Together, the  sisters raise the money for the trip, and set  off on a journey to Toronto, in quest of the  jackpot and the realization of their dream.  As the women journey together they touch  Philomena Moosetail dreams of how  on many subjects: love, children, adoption,  madness, death, alcoholism, sexual abuse  ... and their experiences, their hopes and  fears tell us much about the social and economic experience of being Indian in Canada.  Highway has drawn clear portraits of  seven distinctive characters. Pelajia Patch-  nose is the carpenter, who dreams of using  her bingo money to pave the dirt roads of  the reserve. Her sister Philomena, aspires to  nothing greater than a new toilet.  Marie-Adele Starblanket, who is dying of  cancer, longs to buy an island covered with  strands of sweetgrass and green trees, where  she can live with her husband and twelve  children. Marie-Adele's sister Annie Cook  is a rock-and-roll groupie. Emily Dictionary  left her children and her abusive husband  to become a biker. Childless Veronique St.  Pierre has adopted Zhaboonigan Peterson,  a mentally disabled young woman (whose  real name significantly, is Marie-Adele).  Together these women quarrel, insult  and tease one another and ultimately give  each other strength and support. Although  she will spend her winnings-  critics have praised the actresses for uniformly fine performances, the dialogue (in  the script, at any rate) is sometimes weakened by the frequent sexual and scatological  jokes and references, which are rarely funny  and which add nothing to our understanding of the characters.  If The Rez Sisters is an indictment of  the conditions under which many Canadian  Indians live, it is also a celebration of the  will of a people to survive and dream.  Throughout the play a seagull dances.  Only Marie-Adele and Zhaboonigan recognize him as the trickster. Called Nanabush,  in Ojibwa, the trickster is the character  in Native cosmology who mediates between  the human and spirit world, who embodies  characteristics of both worlds.  In the play's final scene the women have  returned to the reserve, winless, and have  taken up the threads of their lives once  more. As the play closes we see Pelajia repairing her roof as she was doing at the beginning of the play. Behind her and uns<  by her Nanabush dances triumphantly.  \i   r   Shirley Turcotte  Your healing  journey is yours  alone and,  paradoxically,  it is all of ours.  In making this connection with me, with  other survivors, I now know how you could  sit through all those family conversations.  The adult part of you let your child part  speak in her own words. The adult listened  to your family, let them have their say without you reacting and leaping across the  room to strangle them. The adult absorbed  the hurtful words so that the child could  finally hear the loving words, the healing  words, the human voice in everyone of them.  By moving into and through the pain  you moved your 'self through to where you  needed to go. Down the basement stairs to  your child's room. And there she was, your  Jennifer. The other child that split away  from your psyche and hid in the wall in  der to survive. You discovered the essence  of her that had been left behind. You embraced her and healed the split and became  more whole.  When I interviewed you I asked how  you kept yourself whole during the pressure of the month long cross-Canada premier screening of the film.  You answered that you had learned to ask  for what you need regardless of the possible lack of understanding of others around  you. You asked to be picked up at the  port, you asked for hot baths and candles  at the end of the screening. You asked for  a tall stool beside you to lean against when  you need support. "I will be standing," you  insisted, "so that my strength can come to  me." You arranged for a massage at the end  of an evening to give you access to your  body and work out the hurt that surfaces.  You asked for understanding when you have  to cough out the old wounds, spit out the  old semen when the memories were, and are,  triggered.  You listen to your child inside you, you  remember the survivors you have worked  with, and you trust that you know what you  need. By getting what you need, you are  teaching others how to take care of themselves and find their own healing wisdom inside.  Thank you, and the women filmmakers of  Studio D, for being gentle. Thank you for|  bringing us To a Safer Place. By so doing,  you and thousands of other survivors will]  continue to demand and create a world that  is a safer place for all women and children.  To a Safer Place is distributed by the  National Film Board and is available  in 16mm and three quarter inch Beta  and VHS. For information on rental  or purchase contact: NFB, P.O.Box  6100, Station A, Montreal, Quebec HSC  SH5 or NFB, 1161 West Georgia, Vancouver, B.C. V6E SG4 or phone (6O4J  666-0817 *^^^^^^'Ѣ  KINESIS  Dec./Jan. '88 Arts  /^mss^s^^s^^sm^^.  Solidarity Forever ... ?  bringing B.C. history to the stage  by Patty Gibson  SOLIDARITY FOREVER ... ?  by Chris Creighton-Kelly, with  Direction by Jane Heyman and  Technical Direction by Laura Hackett,  played the Vancouver East Cultural Centre,  November 12 to 21, 1987.  When Solidarity Forever ... ? opened  to a full house on November 12 it appeared  as if the play would enjoy a good run. Well,  if not a good run, at least a respectable one.  But in the days following opening night the  verdict was clear: most Vancouverites would  give this show a pass.  Why?  Dealing with some of the issues and historical events which brought B.C.'s Solidarity campaign to an abrupt end in the fall  of 1983, the subject matter alone should  have enticed many Solidarity participants  and supporters to an evening at the theatre.  Twelve video monitors flashing an impressive score of original footage from Solidarity days meant audiences would have an opportunity to see and remember a campaign  that almost brought the Social Credit government of Bill Bennett to its knees.  But perhaps that word "almost" tells its  own story. Perhaps the people who suffered  the betrayal and defeat of the Kelowna Accord, were simply not ready to relive the experience. After all, everyone knew the ending to the story, leaving the only suspense  whether or not Creighton-Kelly's version of  events would be accurate. And maybe that  piece of suspense wasn't enough to bring the  audiences that would, through the course  of a November evening, four years after the  historic "sellout", bear witness again to a  defeat that had left many of them bitter,  confused, and with little to say about a campaign that had raised so many hopes only  to dash them to pieces at the moment the  movement was having its greatest impact.  In the context of an overall absence of  political theatre in Vancouver, Solidarity  Forever ... ? was a significant effort. Billed  as "tele-theatre", with an interesting mix  of original footage and fictional stagecraft,  the play was a good experiment in form,  successfully demonstrating the conflict between so-called "objective" experiences captured on the "tube" and the actual subjective experiences of our day-to-day lives.  I would also argue that the dialogues  between four composite characters, all fictional members of the Lower Mainland Solidarity Coalition, did manage to bring out  some of the differences at the heart of the  Coalition and the movement as a whole.  The labour composite, Dave, talks about  the need to hang on to what we have in direct contrast to the lesbian feminist composite, Cindy, who talks about the need to  make significant gains. The teacher composite, Francesca, believes the system can  work to solve problems while the native single mother on social assistance, Patricia,  believes the system works against her and  must be changed in its entirety.  Despite the didactic nature of the play,  all these characters are believable. Haven't  we met them all somewhere before?  Each one delivers a personal monologue  that successfully works to transcend the  political stereotype presented. The monologues are sensitive and private, allowing a  place for personal truths and well-kept secrets to come out.  This technique accomplishes two things.  First, it gives the audience a glimpse into  the background of the characters and sec  ond, it reminds us that movements are made  up of people, real people, whose political aspirations are deeply rooted in personal experiences.  But there are also problems. The play  needs more characters. None of these characters are able to represent the conflicts  within their own composite. The idea that  there are two sides to every story (in this  case four) is not accurate. There are at least  two stories to every side. Differences within  the ranks of labour, teachers, feminists and  the poor or disenfranchised, simply cannot  come out within this structure. Many of the  people in the audience can not find their  story in the composite closest to them. Additional characters would have helped.  And while the theme of betrayal is well-  executed throughout  the play,   the  issue  August 1983: The now famous demonstration that filled Vancouver's Empire Stadium, bringing visions of victory to Solidarity.  of power falls short. Somewhere between  the video images of Munro and Bennett  in Kelowna and the conflicts confronting  Coalition members on the stage, the power  structures linking these two poles are missing.  All the characters represented broadly  defined constituencies. But none portrayed  the problems inherent in representing the  concerns of an organization. Hence, the subtleties of power and the links between power  Although  the theme of  betrayal is  well executed  throughout  the play, the  issue of power  falls short.  bases are absent. And yet, the Solidarity  Coalition was a coalition of organizations,  not individuals. And the issue of representation, who spoke for whom, was a continuing conflict within the Coalition.  Where, for example, was a character  working closely with the leadership? Where  was a character representing some form of  leadership? Is it possible to examine the role  of labour in the Solidarity Coalition without  looking at the complicated structures existing between Dave and Jack Munroe?  Nonetheless, Solidarity Forever ... ?  was a good attempt to bring some of the  questions and issues that occupied many of  our lives four years ago to the stage. The  acting was excellent, there were many good  lines, and the experiment in form was valid  and in many respects, successful.  The technical direction also deserves applause. Reams of television footage that required split-second timing on twelve video  monitors could have been disastrous. Other  than a few difficulties with sound levels, the  video part of the production came off like a  3 charm.  2  | So what went wrong? In the aftermath of  £ Bills 19 and 20, and in the midst of Bill Van-  £, der Zalm's privatization scheme and Brian  3> Mulroney's free trade sellout of the coun-  (£> try, how many of us were up to a retrospec-  ^ tive look at Solidarity? As several people  "° said over wine and cheese on opening night,  ■5 "I liked it, but, it brought back the nightie mare." For many of us, the nightmare continues.  WSJtW  THE ALEXANDER TECHNIQUE  Learn a simple, practical way to move  with more flexibility and ease in walking  and sitting, playing an instrument, acting  or playing a sport. Relieves back pain,  improves posture and reduces daily  stress.  "choosing to change..."  CALL JULIA BRANDRETH 684-2541  KINESIS   Dec/Jan.  88 15 ;N>>>\N>>VXXXXXX\XXXXXX\XXX^^  Arts  Mysteries for the discerning feminist  by Penny Goldsmith  WORK FOR A MILLION  by Eve Zaremba  Toronto: Amanita Enterprises, 1987  $9.95.  THE MONARCHS ARE FLYING  by Marion Foster  Toronto: Women's Press, 1987  $8.95.  STUDY IN LILAC  by Maria-Antonia Oliver (trans, by Kathleen McNerney).  Seattle: The Seal Press, 1987  $13.50.  Sonia Deerfield, a singer and show business personality, has just won a million dollars in the lottery. She has also just started  to make a go of it professionally. Suddenly  she is being harassed—phone calls, vandal  ism and minor accidents—and she wants  protection. Enter Helen Keremos.  Work for a Million is Eve Zaremba's  first mystery since A Reason to Kill  was published by Paperbacks in 1978. Helen Keremos, Zaremba's feminist answer to  the "hard-boiled" (and until now predominantly male) detective, is tough, smart, soft-  boiled underneath ... and a lesbian.  The attraction of Zaremba's mystery to  the jaded reader of the genre is that you  can relax, knowing that you do not have to  eventually hurl the book across the room as  some form of sexism, racism or homophobia rears its head. The lesbians here are not  mad and frustrated spinsters who end up  being the murderers. The women, regardless  of their jobs, are treated (by Helen, at any  rate) as intelligent and reasonable human  beings whether they are straight or gay. The  men are only as evil as they deserve to be.  There is no psychological tension here to  give us nightmares. Zaremba gives us a good  read without being didactic—feminist issues  work their way into the plot without being  awkward and you come away from the book  without feeling compromised—no mean feat  in the genre. And there's another one coming next year.  The Monarchs are Flying, Women's  Press' second foray into the field of feminist mysteries, is predominantly a courtroom drama in the style of Perry Mason or  Sara Woods' Anthony Maitland. Leslie Taylor, a media-personality in a small town in  Ontario, and a closet lesbian, is accused of  murdering her ex-lover (who is married to  an upstanding lawyer) in a particularly brutal fashion, and Harriet Croft, a big-name  lawyer from Toronto, arrives in Spruce Falb  Astrology for feminists  by Maura Volante  THE KNOT OF TIME  Astrology and the Female Experience;  by Lindsay River and Sally Gillespie,  Women's Press, 1987, 291 pages  I have been waiting for this book for a  long time, partly because it's the first astrology book to my knowledge written from  a solid feminist base, and also because one  of the authors is an old and dear friend.  Though we haven't seen each other in over  eight years, Lindsay River is one of the  few travelling companions from my nomadic  have kept in touch with through letters. So  I knew the book was on its way and that it  would be good.  Ten years ago, when Lindsay did my astrological chart, she spoke of each of its components (planets, signs, houses and aspects)  in a way that made sense to me as a feminist  and as a lesbian. She was also very positive,  stressing the gifts and potentialities of my  particular configurations, and treating the  difficulties as challenges to be worked with  and learned from.  The Knot of Time does all that, and  more. Woven into the flowing prose descriptions of each of the planets and signs is a  wealth of information on ancient goddess religions and mythologies. This intermingling  of personality analysis with herstorical and  mythical storytelling makes for a very readable text, interesting on several levels to a  wider audience than those solely pursuing a  study of astrology. The goddess stories are  also useful to the reader in giving her strong  female archetypes to identify with, helping  to translate abstract concepts into real personality traits.  The authors also refer to real women of  the past and present who illustrate the characteristics they are talking about. Though  apologies are made for the omission of  women for whom the full birth dates are  not known, thus leaving out many "women  of achievement born in obscurity, poverty or  slavery," River and Gillespie have evidently  made an effort to include women of varying  racial and cultural backgrounds in these examples.  The consistent use of the female pronoun  throughout the book is a tremendous relief  from the male bias of most astrology tests.  The "Authors' Note" states, "This book has  been written for women, and for men who  honour womanhood and female experience.  We have generally used the female pronoun  to include both men and women, just as the  child of each sex was once enclosed within  the female form."  Not only is this book written for women;  it is also clearly written for those of us  interested in more than our private little  worlds. There are recurring references to  ways in which the energies of various signs  and planets can effect change in the world  around us—how we can best use our unique  strengths to correct the imbalances of gender, class and race, and to heal the earth.  This political viewpoint is carried through the chapters dealing with specific planets and signs, and also in the general sections at the beginning and end which give  historical and future-looking overviews of  the development and purpose of astrology.  I particularly enjoyed the "Prologue" and  "Epilogue", which are written in myth form  and give a poetic introduction and conclusion to an essentially analytical book.  My frustrations were really only about  the limitations of the book, in that there  is not much interpretation of the combinations of various components as they appear in each individual's chart. The authors stress the need to take all parts of  a chart into account in interpreting each  person's astrological make-up. "Categorical  statements, applied to individuals merely on  account of their month of birth, are bad astrology." They then proceed to write about  the essence of each planet, sign, house and  aspect, leaving the reader to put all this  information together with reference to her  own personal chart.  My frustration diminished as I realized  that it would really be a cop-out for the  WAVAW  Women Against Violence Against Women  RAPE CRISIS CENTRE  WE HAVE MOVED!  Our new address is  102-96 East Broadway  (at Quebec Street)  Vancouver, B.C. V5T 1V6  authors to write a section on, for example,  what it means to have your moon in Leo,  as I have seen in other astrology books. It  would obviously be different to have moon  in Leo for someone with sun in Aquarius  and Venus in Pisces than for someone with  a Cancer sun and Sagittarius rising. There  is, however, an extensive bibliography given,  referring the reader to further study in astrology and ancient religions.  What Lindsay River and Sally Gillespie  have given us is not a recipe book, complete  with measured quantities and detailed instructions, but rather a book which examines and celebrates a variety of ingredients.  It is for us to understand and use these ingredients to know ourselves and realize our  fullest potentials.  and offers to defend her. Harriet ends i  with more than she bargained for when she  switched from corporate to trial law five  years before ... including taking care of  Leslie's very unhappy dog while her client  is in jail.  This is a mystery where Foster creates a  tension in the pace of the action and the dialogue. Everything, from the facts of the plot  to the ultimate courtroom climax, moves  quickly to produce a real page-turner. In  this book, the feminist edge revolves around  the homophobia of a small town (especially  its police force) and the strength of both  Leslie and her parents as she decides to  come out as a lesbian in order to help find  the murderer of the woman she once loved.  A fast-paced good read of particular interest to the mystery fan with a legal bent.  Study in Lilac is a very different kind  of mystery. It is set in Barcelona, Spain and  although Ldnia Guiu is a hard-boiled detective in the style of Helen Keremos, the likeness ends there.  This book has a realism which the other  two do not. Lonia is trying to be a feminist,  but she is not always successful, and she is  not nearly as empathetic a character as Helen or Harriet. She is not particularly well-  behaved towards her male employee Quim  or her photographer Neus—she tends to exploit both of them and has not much patience for either of them. She argues with  her radical feminist friend who has all the  answers, argues with herself about her politics and struggles on with her life in constant frustration. Familiar.  Lonia is working on two cases, one involving a fifteen-year-old rape victim who  is pregnant and the other an antique dealer  who is trying to locate three men whom she  claims defrauded her. How these two cases  ultimately connect with each other provides  a shocking denouement for a hard-boiled  private eye who's not particularly good at  being hard-boiled but who in no way fits  into the marshmallow underbelly which traditionally characterize the players in the  field.  Maria-Antonia Oliver belongs to a cooperative of writers of detective stories who  collectively sign their books with the names  Ofelia Dracs. Study in Lilacs is the first  detective novel she has published on her own  and there is another one pending.  This one's not an easy read—it takes a  bit of work to wade through the initial resentment of not being allowed to take it  easy. I think I was won over by her particular obsession. In a world of escapist murder mysteries where the detectives are fascinated by food, jogging, plants and poetry, a  hard-boiled private eye who collects lipstick  struck some sort of a chord in this reader's  perverse sensibilities.  All three of these books are available  at Ariel, the Vancouver Women's Bookstore and Octopus Books.  CCEC CREDIT UNION  "Keeping our money  working in our  community/9  When you bank at CCEC,  you are investing in a neighbourhood  business, in the co-op down the street,  and in the whole community's growth.  CCEC CREDIT UNION  33 EAST BROADWAY  VANCOUVER, B.C. V5T 1V4  MON. & WED. 11 am-5pm  FRIDAY 1pm-7 pm  876-2123  KINESIS Arts  ,#***m*m%22^m*^#s*m  Free trade:  Cohen's book readable and vital  by Sue Vohanka  FREE TRADE AND THE FUTURE  OF WOMEN'S WORK  by Marjorie Griffin Cohen  Garamond Press and the Canadian Centre  for Policy Alternatives  Toronto, 1987  Reading this new book by Marjorie Cohen is something of a relief at the same time  that it is a truly frightening experience.  It's a relief to read a book that makes  the economics of free trade understandable,  by an economist who writes clearly and  forcefully, and who concentrates on how the  trade deal will affect women's work in the  manufacturing and service industries.  Its a relief to read a  book that makes the  economics of free  trade understandable.  It's also reassuring that Cohen is an  economist who understands that free trade  is much more than just another trade deal.  As she says in her introduction: "The question at stake with free trade is whether government policy will meet the demands of the  people of this country or the demands of  business. These are different objectives and  cannot be met by the same policies."  What's frightening is the picture which  Cohen brings into focus. Her book makes  a compelling case that women's jobs are  particularly vulnerable under a free trade  agreement, and provides clear examples to  show why and how women will be the major losers under such a deal.  The first half of the book looks at the effects that free trade would have on the manufacturing industries. Cohen shows that the  industries most threatened by free trade are  precisely those industries in which women  are concentrated.  Over 60 percent of all women working  in manufacturing are employed in the five  industries—textiles, clothing, food processing, electrical and electronic products, and  leather products—which are least able to  resist competition and least able to expand  export markets.  Cohen also shows how women have been  worse off when jobs have been lost in these  industries in the past: women are most  likely to be displaced, and least likely to get  new jobs or to benefit from available retraining and relocation programs.  In manufacturing industries, Cohen argues that free trade will increase women's  unemployment, confine women's work to an  even more narrow range of occupations, and  hurt the ability of women to improve working conditions through unionization.  At Last, A Clear Picture  But Cohen's most useful and timely contribution is in the last half of her book, which  provides the first clear picture of how a free  trade deal will affect the service sector.  In recent years, the service sector has  come to dominate Canada's economy, with  services accounting for two-thirds of our national income, or GNP. About 70 percent of  all jobs in Canada are in the service sector,  and over 80 percent of new jobs created in  the last ten years are in the service sector.  Cohen notes the general "invisibility" of  service industries means their importance  to the economy is tremendously underrated.  Nevertheless, she adds, "... it is from the  service sector that the United States has potentially the most to gain in a free trade  agreement, and Canada has the most to  lose."  The American economy, like Canada's,  is dominated by the service sector. However, Cohen points out that the U.S., unlike Canada, has developed into a massive  service exporting country—and this means  Canada and the U.S. have opposing interests in the service sector.  Cohen's view is that achieving free trade  in services was the single most important issue for the U.S. in its free trade negotiations  with Canada. And while there has been virtually no publicity about it, the fact is that  the trade deal initialled on October 4 will  provide free trade in services.  Once again, Cohen predicts that women  will be hit hardest, because "... it is in  the service sector that the largest number  of women have the most to lose."  She notes that the overwhelming majority of working women—about 83 percent—  are employed in the service sector. If women  working in service-related jobs in other sectors, like manufacturing and resource industries, are included, the number of jobs  performed by women in Canada that are  service-related rises to 87 percent.  Cohen argues that free trade in services  will undoubtedly cause job losses in such as  data processing, finance, insurance, adver-  VANCOUVER STATUS OF WOMEN  ASSERTIVENESS TRAINING  Do you have difficulty making decisions?  Sometimes have trouble knowing what you want?  Assertiveness training can help you learn more about your needs,  understand why it's so difficult to be assertive and give you  support to stand up for yourself.  Next session starts:  Tuesday, January 12th, 7 to 9:30 pm for 6 weeks  No Charge/Childcare money available  For information and to register call 255-5511 (after 1 pm)  ALL WOMEN WELCOME  rising, culture and transportation, for example, as imported services replace domestic services.  And, unfortunately, that's not the only  threat. Free trade in services also means  that Canada has given up the "right of establishment" and "right of national treatment"; in other words, American companies  will have the "right" to set up operations in  Canada and receive the same treatment as  Canadian firms.  Free Trade Meets Privatization  According to Cohen, conceding these rights  to American companies will make it much  more difficult for Canada to maintain control over our social, economic and political  development, because there will be increasing pressure for Canada to conform or "harmonize" with the way things are done in the  U.S.  For instance, the public sector accounts  for an estimated 40 percent of Canada's economic activity. This is unheard of in the  United States, and, in fact, some American  companies consider the scope of Canada's  public sector to be an unfair trade barrier  which restricts their ability to compete in  providing services.  Cohen's most useful  contribution is to  provide a clear picture of how free trade  will affect the service  sector.  Most of the services provided by the public sector in Canada—such as health care,  fire protection, postal services, prisons, daycare, and garbage collection—are provided  by private, profit making companies in the  U.S.  As Cohen points out, the pressure will  be indirect. "The danger for Canada is  that while the United States may not directly say 'change your tax system, your  health care system, your unemployment insurance system, and your regional development schemes,' these programs may be  forced to change if Canada is to continue to  trade with the United States."  But the pressure is already proving effective. The federal government is moving  to change Canada's tax system to conform  more closely with the U.S. and the current  moves by governments across Canada toward privatization and deregulation make  the free trade picture look more than a little scary.  As Cohen notes in her conclusion: "Once  we embark on the free trade route our ability to establish priorities, other than those  dictated by the private market mechanism,  will be relinquished."  Read this book even if it does scare you.  It will also arm you with a wealth of information and a better understanding of how  much is really at stake under free trade, especially for women.  It may even give you the boost you need  to do something about it.  TOO FEW  TO  COUNT  Canadian Women  in Conflict with the Law  edited by Ellen Adelberg  and Claudia Currie  loo Few To Count is an incisive and controversial book about women and crime in Canada.  Its nine articles challenge traditional theories of  female criminality and examine the consequences  for women of a criminal justice system designed  for, created and controlled by men.  Intended to provoke debate and discussion about  the treatment of women by the courts and prisons,  Too Few To Count helps fill a huge gap in  criminology literature and makes an important  contribution to a feminist analysis of these issues.  5Vi" x &y2", 2S6pp  8 B&W photos  ISBN 0-88794-009-7  K  press gang publishers  603 Powell Street. Vancouver. B.C.  Airheart  Co-operative Travel Centre  MEMBER TRANSPORTATION  AND COMMUNICATIONS  UNION  Running out of Christmas Gift Ideas?  Browse through our complete  selection of books on  travel.  Airheart is a worker-owned co-op that  recognizes the importance of equality of  ownership and control. Our members are also  aware of, and monitor, political and social conditions  globally and make that information available to customers  who may be concerned where their travel money is spent.  2149 COMMERCIAL DRIVE, VANCOUVER, 251-2282 COMPUSERVE 71470, 3502  KINESIS  Dec/Jan. '88        17 /N^O>YA£*  Wing women and  Zanzibar cats  by Melanie Conn  If you want to know where to find a good  choice of science fiction, I have a few suggestions. One of my favourite sources is the  public library: every branch has an SF collection where I often find newly published  paperbacks. The library is also a good place  to get copies of the classics, such as the  book by Kate Wilhelm I've chosen to review this month. Sometimes I find surprises  there, too. I thought I had read every word  Joanna Russ had written until I picked up  The Zanzibar Cat, a collection of her short  stories, at the Dunbar branch.  My biggest inspiration for this month's  column came from the Vancouver Women's  Bookstore on Cambie Street. It's a great  place to browse. There are several shelves of  SF by women and on one of them I found a  new book by Sandi Hall, whose first novel,  The Godmothers, I reviewed here a year  and a half ago.  LISTEN, LISTEN  by Kate Wilhelm  Houghton Miflin, 1981  Hardbound  Kate Wilhelm doesn't write the "Star  Wars type of science fiction," as she says  in her essay at the end of this book of four  long stories. Her interest is in getting beneath the surface of reality, and her skill is  in drawing us along with her into a realm  where premonitions and mysterious occurrences can't be disregarded.  These are not gothic ghost stories. Wil-  helm's characters are contemporary, people  in situations we can easily recognize: a couple enjoying retirement in the New York  countryside, a bored youngster recovering  from a cold.  My favourite story in the collection is  "The Winter Beach". It begins with Lyle  Taney's journey to Oregon to recuperate from a family tragedy. The November  coastal setting is vividly evoked in Wil-  helm'8 spare style; the gentle rain, the misty  beach and the solitude suit Lyle's mood.  But her sense of unease steadily builds as  she becomes caught up in a confusing relationship with two mysterious neighbours  and a man who is spying on them. Lyle's attempts to extricate herself from this frightening web reflect her inner struggle to come  to terms with her future. Like all Wilhelm's  characters, she mistrusts her experience and  her strength until it is almost too late.  THE ZANZIBAR CAT  by Joanna Russ  Arkham House, 1983  This is a treasure chest of stories by an  author who for years has been writing adventures about victorious women heroes:  The Female Man, Picnic On Paradise,  The Two of Us.  This collection gives Russ the chance to  flaunt her talent to speak in many different voices. Several of the stories are narrated by men who observe intrepid women  from a safe distance. In "My Boat", an insistent New Yorker tells, in dialect, a story  of youthful racism dissolving into awe when  a quiet black adolescent reveals her identity as a splendid tune-traveler. "The Extraordinary Voyages of Amelie Bertrand" is  told in a genteel eighteenth century style  by another man, also awe-struck by a trail-  blazing woman, and too fearful to follow her  lead. Such delicious irony!  "When It Changed" has a very different  quality. It opens with a car speeding down a  highway. The couple is involved in sporadic  conversation; their eldest daughter is dozing  in the back seat. They are on their way to  an encounter they have been prepared for  ever since their colony was founded. This  is Whileaway, a world of women, and men  have just landed for the first time in six hundred years. The meeting does not turn out  to be auspicious; the men are arrogant and  infuriating:  "Where are all the people?" said the  monomaniac. I realized then that he did  not mean people, he meant men and he  was giving the word the meaning it had  not had on Whileaway for six centuries.  "They died," I said. "Thirty generations ago." "You've adapted amazingly," he said. "To what?" I said. He  looked embarrassed. He looked inane.  With an odd exhilaration—as if we were  something childish and something wonderful, as if he were doing us an enormous favour—he took one shaky breath  and said, "Well, we're here."  Russ expanded this dramatic, rather  gloomy glimpse of Whileaway into her  book The Female Man, but the basic  structure of the colony—relationships between women, parthenogenesis, ecological  emphasis—is here in the original story.  One last highlight of the collection is  "Useful Phrases For The Tourist", a piece  that is wonderful to read aloud, and funny  even if you don't like science fiction.  WLNGWOMEN OF HERA  by Sandi Hall  Spinsters/Aunt Lute Book Company, 1987  $12.55  This is the first book of " The Cosmic  Botanists Trilogy" and in it the author establishes the central elements of the series.  Two planets, ripped from their orbits by a  wayward comet, now rotate around double  suns, their inhabitants adapting very differently to the changed cosmic circumstances.  Maladar has become a planet of ice; its  social structure is unbending, unforgiving  and rigidly perpetuated in laws, customs  and conditioning. Genetic engineering controls the birth-rate and any deviations are  ended. Hera, on the other hand, is a lush,  ATTENTION  Adults over the age of 18 who  have been sexually assaulted in  the last six years.  Ekos Research is conducting a federally  funded study to find out if sexual assault or  rape victims are treated in a sympathetic  manner by the Criminal Justice System in  Vancouver.  We need to hear from you.  We need to know about your experience if you  had any interaction with the police, a hospital,  a sexual assault/rape crises center, or the  courts in Vancouver.  Your identity will never be revealed and the  information   you   give   us   will   remain  confidential.  We guarantee this!  Please Phone Mary at 876-3646  Monday - Friday 12-8PM  January 2-30,1988  single-gender world, its new orbit swinging  closer to the suns. The female inhabitants  have mutated into a telepathic, winged community, each an aspect of the whole: Leader,  Pilots, Spinners, they blend their resources  to weave a culture that sustains, stretches  and enriches them.  Communication between worlds is explicitly initiated by the Herans when an unusually virulent disease erupts on the planet,  and defies then* considerable technological  skills. Meanwhile, on Maladar, the long-  awaited Newchild has been born. But the  child, destined to be Guider of the planet,  is female, an unprecedented situation. Fearing for the life of the baby, her Birthgiver  looks frantically for a safe place to flee.  As in The Godmothers, Hall runs parallel plots which is confusing until the reader  becomes familiar with the elements of each  complicated set of characters, terminology  and social structures. I found the details  of Heran physiology particularly difficult to  sort out. I'm still not sure I have a very  good picture of what the wingwomen look  like, although the illustration on the cover  of the book gives some direction.  The success of the book is that despite  the need to follow the author's descriptions  very carefully, the story is ultimately absorbing. I am looking forward to the next  installments.  There is still room  for your ad in  KINESIS  ^^Mews About Wamen That'; Not In Trie PaBlw  publicize your event, service,  campaign, co-op or business  in English Canada's oldest  feminist newspaper  Call us for rates  255-5499  UPRISING  BREADS  BAKERY  WINTER MEANS  HOLIDAY  GOODIES  1697 Venables Street  Vancouver 254-5635  A part of CRS Workers' Co-op  KINESIS Games  from pg. 5  competing in this sport as individuals, not  as national representatives, so the boycott  shouldn't apply.  More importantly, rejecting the boycott  would be telling black South Africans that  their tactic is wrong. The boycott is then-  chosen weapon of struggle, one which has  been consistently and convincingly utilized.  We will not counterpoise our ideas of noncompetitive international sports co-operation to the living movement which has been  built by blacks. The call by blacks for a total sports ban with South Africa is a key element in their fight against exclusion from  material, social, political and legal rights?  How can we, in Canada, in the name of lesbians and gays everywhere justify ignoring  a boycott which stands as one of the impor  tant successes of a social movement fighting  for equality under extremely adverse conditions.  The Gay Games is committed to fighting  racism in sport. The great majority of South  African black athletes and sports organizations support the boycott—that's how they  fight racism in sport. That's why they have  adopted the slogan "No normal sport in an  abnormal society."  The fight for homosexual rights goes  hand in hand with the fight against apartheid. In the words of a South African black  gay activist: "Even if homosexual rights  were granted tomorrow, you still wouldn't  be yourself, you wouldn't live as a person  at all." (Alfred Machela, "Black Gays and  Lesbians in South Africa" Rites). We believe that support for the boycott will help  to strengthen the position of black gays and  lesbians in South Africa  If we reject the boycott in the name of  open participation we would not be encouraging "inclusivity" by taking such a stand.  Who would come? Only white gays and lesbians who reject the sports boycott. Our  stances would in no way challenge racism  in South African sport. Rather than being  seen as anti-racist we would be seen as the  opposite.  Close to home, we are also convinced  that support for the sports boycott is strong  within the Canadian sport community, and  the different levels of government concerned  with the support of sport organizations.  We want the Gay Games to participate in  strengthening that sentiment, not undermining it.  We believe our support of the boycott to  be a stand in favour of the goals of equality between races, for real co-operation,  for demonstrated solidarity between peoples. We believe that it will be understood  in those terms by South African gays and  lesbians, both black and white, who share  those same goals.  And too, we believe that our action of solidarity is a concrete expression of the kind of  links, the kind of support that gays and lesbians must nurture in our search for equality.  In this we are not naive. Anti-racist or  anti-apartheid organizations are not by definition opposed to the oppression of homosexuals. But we also know that the experience of one form of oppression can make it  easier to understand different forms of oppression. We anticipate that our hand of solidarity will be grasped by anti-apartheid activists. We believe that it will strengthen  the position of black gays and lesbians and  that it will stand as an example of how we  can win a world in which our colour, or our  sex, or our sexuality, is a source of pleasure  in our differences rather than a basis for denial, hatred and injustice.  Menstruation  from pg. 9  (among women) such as: cramps, flow, period, etc. would enable us to feel more comfortable with menstruation in general.  Advertisers have the opportunity to both  educate us about an issue and describe their  product. The more specific, honest coverage this issue receives, the less embarrassed  women will become and the population as a  whole will begin to be more relaxed with it.  Feminine hygiene advertisements are no  different from other advertisements in their  use of a stereotyped woman. This stereotype  fails to depict a realistic and diverse image.  Far too often we are presented with women  who are thin, white, young, conventionally  attractive, etc. This excludes women of different sizes, shapes, ages, colours, cultures,  etc. We need to counteract these stereotypes  in all media.  While a generalized stereotype of women  exists in most media, feminine hygiene ad  vertisements do not sexualize women's bodies in order to sell their product. Women are  not shown wearing skimpy, revealing clothing. Camera attention is not paid to specific  body parts as it is with many other advertisements.  By focussing attention to body parts, or  showing women undressed or continuously  wearing revealing clothing, advertisers render women powerless, as nudity is equated  with vulnerability in Western society. In advertising, these semi-clothed or unclothed  women are usually with men who are fully  dressed. This creates an imbalance between  the ways women and men are portrayed.  Solutions  Commending advertisers (and networks)  is an important tool in educating. This  method is as important as complaining to  the media industry, if not more so. Advertisers and networks need to know when they  produce a positive portrayal of women (and  men). Otherwise it is not clear what the  public wants to see.  The National Film Board of Canada  and  The Committee for Political Skills  invite you to the Vancouver premiere of  PRAIRIE WOMEN  The untold story of farm  women and social action in the  1920s and '30s.  Directed by Barbara Evans  Wednesday, December 9, 7:30 p.m.  Cinema, Robson Square Media Centre  800 Robson Street  Also featuring  A Love Affair with Politics:  A Portrait of Marion Dewar  A profile of the recently elected  MP (Hamilton—Mountain) in her  former role as Ottawa mayor.  Directed by Terri Nash  Reception and no-host bar to follow  Admission free    For info: 666-0718  WINNING WOMEN -COMMITTEE FOR POLITICAL SKILLS  National Office  Film Board     national du film  of Canada     du Canada  9  Feminine hygiene advertisements are the  least offensive ads in terms of sex role  stereotyping and sexism. While it is apparent that the ads cause viewers to react in a  variety of ways, it is important that we distinguish between our reactions and what we  are complaining about.  At MediaWatch, we encourage the public  to voice their opinions when they see a sexist ad (or program, or article). We make every effort to follow-up and provide information to the people who produced the material. The complaints I have heard and read  regarding feminine hygiene advertisements  have more to do with getting the ads off  the air because of embarrassment about the  subject, and less to do with whether the ads  are sexist.  As the Consumer Advocate for MediaWatch, I encourage women (and men) to  complain about images that really hurt us.  Those degrading and limiting portrayals  which I have discussed in this article are  the images which teach young people narrow sex roles. Let us move away from static  images of violent and angry "Rambos" and  conniving, "sexy" women to images which  offer a wide range of choices to young people today. Let us commend advertisers who  are taking risks to create images of women  that are respectful and realistic.  Media Watch representatives are  available for speaking engagements, and  the organization provides resources of  audio visual material in both French  and English for young people and  adults.  Media Watch is in the process of de  veloping a national membership. If you  or your organization would like to become a member of Media Watch, please  write or telephone for more information. Commendation/complaint forms  are available for public use when spotting non sexist and/or sexist media.  For more information contact: MediaWatch, Ste.250-1820 Fir Street,. Vancouver, B.C. V6J SB1 or phone: (604)  731-0457.  The talk of the 1987 Toronto theatre season - now a cross - country hit.  "Seven of the most remarkable women you could ever hope to meet."  Globe & Mail  Performing Arts,  TteREZ  SISTERS  by Tomson Highway  directed by Larry Lewis  design by Patsy Lang  Vancouver East  Cultural Centre  Monday - Saturday  January 7-30    8 pm  Tickets: VTC - 280-4444  Reservations 254-9578 Commentary  The following article was submitted  by EGALE, an Ottawa-based coalition,  working to ensure that sexual orientation is added to the Canadian Human  Rights Act.  On October 25, 1985 the all-party Parliamentary Sub-Committee on Equality  Rights tabled its report Equality For All,  the House of Commons. It unanimously  recommended "that the Canadian Human  Rights Act (CHRA) be amended to add sexual orientation as a prohibited ground of  discrimination to the other grounds, which  race, national or ethnic origin, colour,  religion, age, sex, marital status, family status, disability, and conviction for an offense  for which a pardon has been granted." Since  then, two years have passed, and homosexuals and lesbians remain outside the protection of the Canadian Human Rights Act.  Equal rights for gays and lesbians  tentious issue, are pointing to some kind of  "implied" rights in the Charter. The Charter is a contract between a citizen and  her/his government. It is not a contract between an employer (even if that employer is  the government) and an employee, a landlord and a tenant, or a business or association and a consumer or member. Such people want a martyr to take the Charter to  court to prove or disprove that it is "implied" in the Charter that you cannot discriminate on the ground of sexual orientation.  The people asking for a court case do  not consider the years of family tension, the  agony of constant press surveillance, the unemployment or underemployment which occurs as a matter of parallel with such cases.  In any Charter case the full weight of half  the government will be on the side of the  An amendment to the Canadian Human  Rights Act to include sexual orientation  as a prohibited ground of discrimination  would do just that, no more and no less.  The CHRA is designed to prohibit discrimination in the area of employment, housing, and services in the federal jurisdiction.  Lesbians and gay men span the spectrum  of society. Sexual orientation has nothing  to do with value systems, moral or ethical  codes, economic status or desires, religion,  abilities, skills, politics, or physical characteristics. Gay men and lesbians are average Canadians, being under-paid and overtaxed the same as any heterosexual person,  but with one big exception. They can be  discriminated against in employment, housing, and services in many jurisdictions in  Canada.  Although some employers have gone beyond the current federal Act by voluntarily prohibiting discrimination on the basis  of sexual orientation, most still appear to  do so at the insistence of contract, or at  the incumbency of an individual manager or  chairperson of the board. Competence, reliability, dependability and other strengths  can still be ignored by an employer, landlord, business enterprise, or an association  in the federal jurisdiction that finds it easier to get rid of an individual. Innuendo can  be enough to destroy the career of a person  suspected of being gay or lesbian, or one  who is arbitrarily maligned, or who fits a  perceived stereotype.  Recently we have heard about rights that  are guaranteed in the Charter of Rights and  Freedoms. People who like to pretend to  be sympathetic to gay men and lesbians in  terms of discrimination, but who lack the  courage to take a strong stand on a con-  defendant, while the other half of the government will be fully arguing the other side  of the issue. A quick resolution in these circumstances is remote. Judges used to interpret the law, now they are being asked  to write the law. Legislative amendment to  the Canadian Human Rights Act is clearly  a better alternative.  Are you prepared to watch your son or  daughter, your brother or sister, your neighbor or your friend become the martyr? Martyrs are not born, they are created by robbing ordinary people of something that we  as a society hold precious—in this case self-  esteem and human dignity.  People opposed to the recommended  amendment to end discrimination on the  ground of sexual orientation have used false  myths about homosexuality and lesbianism—sometimes deliberately—to play on  fear and intolerance. Two popular inaccuracies are that sexual orientation is a deliberate choice, and that gays actively recruit  heterosexuals to "switch over."  Men and women do not "choose" to be  gay. The two most credited theories point  to being homosexual at birth, or that homosexuality is fixed in your personality at a  very early period in life. The only choice involved is whether one accepts his or her homosexuality, and attempts to live a happy  and well-adjusted life, in spite of the prejudices, or whether the choice is to deny their  homosexuality, and live in "the closet."  hi some cases the "closet" doors are not  opened by the individual himself or herself, but by well-meaning but misinformed  friends, or by malicious gossip created by  angry, hateful or frightened people. Some  people accept their homosexuality or les  bianism in early life; some only find this acceptance within themselves later in life. But  you cannot "choose" to be, or not to be, gay  or lesbian. Neither do you choose to be, or  not to be heterosexual. Gay people cannot  recruit heterosexuals to be something that  they are not, nor vise versa.  Theories about the origin of a person's  sexuality abound. All that the theorists can  agree on is that varieties of sexual orientation have been with us, in varying degrees of practice and acceptance, since before recorded history. Suggested origins of a  person's sexual identity point to genetic, environmental, societal, emotional, and even  religious influences. It appears to be far too  complex an issue for one theory to stand on  its own as singularly correct. A more advanced civilization than ours may one day  explain it with a full understanding, but it  is unlikely that this explanation will be simplistic.  Homosexuality or lesbianism is not sun-  ply a 'sex act' with a person of the same  sex. Sexual curiosity and experimentation  with a person of the same sex is very common in late puberty. It remains a curiosity throughout the lifetime of even the most  adamant heterosexuals. Homosexuality and  lesbianism is the bonding of two people of  the same sex in a relationship as strong as  the bonding drive in heterosexual couples.  Gay couples experience the same discovery, growth, building, pulling apart, jealousies and compassion as do heterosexual  relationships. The only difference is that  the state, the church, and the justice system geared to nurture the heterosexual social structure work against gay relationships, by trying to have homosexuals and  lesbians deny their relationships and themselves. The same desire for long term relationships exists for gay men and lesbians as  it does for heterosexuals. As in the heterosexual population some last only for a short  time, while others last a lifetime. Considering the psychological toll involved in discrimination, long term homosexual relationships take deep commitment.  One of the most harmful misrepresentations made by opponents to the Canadian Human Rights Act amendment is the  allegation that this would lead to an increase in child abuse. Pedophilia and child  abuse have nothing to do with sexual orientation. Studies show that the vast majority of child abusers are heterosexual. These  studies also show that the offender is usually  someone known to the family, or is a person in authority or trust. Opponents to antidiscrimination legislation also fail to point  out that many homosexuals and lesbians are  parents themselves, and that the discovery  that their child has been abused has the  same devastating emotional effect on the ho  mosexual or lesbian parent as it does on the  heterosexual parent.  The gay and lesbian community has long  been on the record as supporting strong legislative measures to deal with child abuse.  By denying the realities of this repugnant  crime, and by using the homosexual community as a scapegoat, we both malign a  generally innocent group, and avoid taking  measures to reduce the victimization of our  children by addressing the real root causes.  Reports of the Quebec Human Rights  Commission for the last several years will  show that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation is about 4 percent of their  case-load. That is on par with their caseload on the ground of racial discrimination.  Gay men and lesbians are with you everywhere. They work with you, they worship with you, they share your successes,  and they console you in times of distress  and sorrow. You may not know that they  are gay or lesbian, because for the most part  it is still a family concern and a personal  matter. That is not a reason to be afraid or  to hate. If you get the opportunity to share  an experience with a lesbian or gay man,  please take it. They are loving and caring  people too. You may discover that you have  far more similarities than differences.  Readers are urged to write the Minister of Justice, Roman Hnatyshyn,  House of Commons, Ottawa, Ontario  K1A OA6 asking that the government  include sexual orientation as a prohibited ground of discrimination. Copies of  letters should be sent to Prime Minister  Brian Mulroney, Liberal Justice critic  Robert Kaplan and NDP Justice critic  Svend Robinson. To contact EGALE  write: P.O. Box 2891, Station D, Ottawa, Ontario KlP 5W9.  1146 Commercial * 253-0913  20  KINESIS  Dec./Jan. '88 //////////////////////^^^^^  LETTERS  Criticisms of pap  smear article  Kinesis:  While it is exciting to see Pap smears  treated as a "News" item ("Pap smears cut  cervical cancer," Kinesis, November 1987)  we are dismayed that Kinesis would use  condensed information from the Globe and  Mail rather than material from the feminist women's health movement.  We disagree with a number of things in  your article including:  1. There is controversy whether Pap  smears have actually cut the rate of cervical cancer. Feminists and consumer health  advocates note that better standards of living and better hygiene may in fact be more  responsible for the drop in cases of cervical  cancer than Pap smear screening.  2. Experts do not agree that cervical  cancer can only be initiated by a sexually  transmitted agent. How diseases or conditions are "initiated" is often speculative.  Cervical cancer, for example, takes many  years to develop. Some medical researchers  look for certain types of initiating factors.  They might overlook others that a feminist  or a socially aware person might consider.  For example, there are factors which can  contribute to vulnerability in the cervical-  vaginal area like: poor nutrition, lack of personal hygiene, hormones like birth control  pills, stress and lack of education about sexually transmitted diseases and birth control.  3. Pap smears can identify abnormal, precancerous and cancerous cells of the cervix.  Your explanation that the purpose of Pap  smears is to "pick up pre-cancer of the  cervix" is misleading and can cause women  Kinesis is    ■  ■" ■  Cody Books. Port Coquit-  /">i\ //^"ijloik^lo  'a-m; Everyw°man's Books,  VJ VV^IIIVw-lk^MC?   Victoria;    Friendly    Book-  worm, Dawson Creek; Ha-  Q ClOSS  neY Books- MaP|e Rid9e;  t   t NDP   Bookstore,   Gibson's  Drj+jqK   Landing; Nelson Women's  Columbia  Centre;  The  Open  Book,  Williams Lake: Port Coquit  lam Women's Centre;  Quesnel Women's Resource Centre; South Surrey/White Rock Women's  Place; Terrace Women's Resource Centre; Unemployed Action Centre, Nanaimo.  «W««ftM«««KKKtt«^  OPEN SEVEN DAYS A WEEK  10am to 7:30pm  • KIDS play space  • FRESH produce —incl. organic  NEW convenient location  10% OFF for seniors, Wed. & Thurs.  1034 COMMERCIAL  254-5044  Eastside  Desktop Publishing  ■ -m  unnecessary worry if they have an abnormal  smear. There are many reasons for abnormal Pap smears. Many result from infection  at the time of the smear. Many revert back  to normal after a period of time.  There is a tremendous scare that comes  with the word cancer or pre-cancer. We  all think of death when we hear the word.  Women who think that they are at risk for  cancer get scared and upset. In that frame  of mind it is often difficult to make decisions  about health care treatments. Some sectors  of the medical profession treat all abnormal  Pap smears as pre-cancer. That is, when you  begin having abnormal Paps they assume  that one day you would get cancer. This is  only true for a small percentage of women.  Most of us will not develop cancer because  we have had an abnormal Pap smear. For  example, inflammatory cells from an infection can appear abnormal on the Pap smear.  Once the infection clears up, a repeat Pap  test might be normal.  4. Treatments for abnormal Pap smears  might include a number of things before a  woman would seek the medical procedures  outlined in your article. For instance, if she  was sexually active with a man she might  try condoms, she might go off the pill, she  might improve her diet or quit a job. All  these and more have resulted in women reversing their abnormal Pap results back to  Normal (or Class 1). We particularly caution women to clear up any evidence of infection or virus and re-do the Pap smear before considering medical procedures.  The women's health movement worries  about "overtreatment", from the medical  procedures you listed, of a condition that  might be easily resolved. There are detailed  discussions about the classification system;  what different classes mean, Human Papillomavirus, and non-medical treatments included in A Feminist Approach to Pap  Tests published by the Vancouver Women's  Health Collective.  This booklet is a revised edition of a supplement to Kinesis, but no review or articles has appeared in Kinesis. The headline  for Kinesis reads "News About Women  That's Not in the Dailies." Certainly the  Globe and Mail qualifies as a daily newspaper.  We would appreciate Kinesis seeking  out the research and approaches of the  women's health movement on issues such as  Pap tests.  Robin Barnett  Rebecca Fox  Thanks To You  The Move's  Over, Darlings  Vancouver Status of Women has completed the move to our new location at  #3011720 Grant Street (at Commercial Drive).  Our heartfelt thanks go to the many people whose efforts made the move  possible — in particular, thanks to move coordinator Jody McMurray:  Biruta Morozevicius  Jeanie Lochrie  Claire Stannard  Mary Matthews  Cheryl Sisson  Jackie Bennett  Lisa Parker-Jervis  Heather Wells  Sue Moore  f"^ Patty Gibson  Astarte  fe(f Irene Sobkin  M  Allisa McDonald  <h      Noreen Howes  Moira Coady  MUMS Movers  Joy Clifford  Kathee Muzin Nancy Pollak  Barb Bell   Carl  Penny Goldsmith  Sheree  Luna Nordin  Brenda Bryan  Astrid Davidson  Jan Skeldon  Marsha Arbour  Gail Meredith   Val Barone  Liz Brock     Michelle Valiquette  Zoe McMurray  Miche Hill   Brenda Dunbrack Judy Newman  Emily Lamb   Caroline Amor  LucyMoreira  Sandra Magee  See  Bulletin  Board  for  details  about  our  Open  House  Celebration January 15th, or call 255-5511.  Support your local  -VANCOUVER WOMEN'S   BOOKSTORE  Hours: Monday-Saturday  11:00-5:30 pm  684-0523  J Ask about our new book club.  315 Cambie Street     Vancouver, B.C. V6B 2N4  KINESIS  Dec/Jan. '88      21 Bulletin Board  .\XXXXNVX\\X\\\.NXXX\N\S.\.XX\XXX\\X\\^  Read this  All listings must be received no later than  the 18th of the month preceding publication. Listings are limited to 75 words and  should include a contact name and telephone number for any clarification that may  be required. Listings should be typed or  neatly handwritten, double-spaced on 8 i  by 11 paper. Listings will not be accepted  over the telephone. Groups, organizations  and individuals eligible for free space in the  Bulletin Board must be, or have, non-profit  objectives. Other free notices will be items  of general public interest and will appear at  the discretion of Kinesis.  Classified are $4 for the first 75 words or  portion thereof, $1 for each additional 25  words or portion thereof. Deadline for classifieds is the 18th of the month preceding  publication. Kinesis will not accept classifieds over the telephone. All classifieds must  be prepaid.  For Bulletin Board submissions send  copy to Kinesis Att'n Bulletin Board, 301-  1720 Grant Street, Vancouver, B.C. V5L  2Y6. For more information call 255-5499.  EVENTS  18 SUMMER PHOTOGRAPHS  By Rhoda Rosenfelt at the gallery in the  Carnegie Centre to Dec. 18.  SEWING DISSENT  Patterns of Resistance in Chile. An exhibition of stitched wall hangings made by  women in the shantytowns of Santiago  is on display at UBC Museum of Anthropology until Spring '88. 6393 N.W. Marine Dr. More info Elizabeth Shefrin 734-  9395.  RITA MACNEIL  At the Orpheum Dec. 10 & 11, 8 pm.  Tix $16 and $18. Available at Black  Swan. Highlife Si the Van. Folk Music  Festival.  MASKS — PERSIMMON BLACK-  RIDGE  Art show opening at the Vancouver Lesbian Centre. 876 Commercial Drive Dec.  1. 7:30 pm. Shows runs until Dec. 18 .  Mon. - Fri.. 11-4 pm. Women and children only.  BAKE AND CRAFT SALE  The Vancouver Lesbian Connection is  holding a fundraising bake and craft sale  Sun. Dec. 6, noon to 3 pm. Call Lorraine  at VLC 254-8458 if you're interested in  having a bake &/or craft table at the sale.  CHILEAN ARTISTS  Women Art and the Periphery. Chilean  Artists-Curators Diamlo Eltit, Nelly Richard and Lotty Rosenfeld will be in Vancouver until Dec. 19. As co-curators at  the Floating Curatorial Gallery at Women  in Focus: exhibition of 13 Chilean artist's  multimedia works until Dec. 19; Dec. 10  8 pm walking tour of works with curators.  As foreign visiting artists in-residence at  Video In: video installation until Dec. 19.  Dec. 4 noon Art Action: Van. Art Gallery,  old courthouse steps. Robson St.; Dec.  5 10-5 pm workshop: Women and Art in  Chile, $5 un/der employed Si members.  $6 employed. Dec. 11 noon. Art Action: Van. Stock Exchange. 609 Granville;  Dec. 12 noon to 6 pm workshop: Interchange with Canadian Artists. Lotty  Rosenfeld as artist-in residence at the  Western Front until Dec. 19. As speakers co-sponsored with Women In Focus  Si Video In Dec. 3 7:30 pm: Feminism Si  Politics in Chile, La Quena Coffeehouse,  1111 Commercial Drive. $3 un/der employed. $4 employed. More info 688-4336.  872-2250. 876-9343.  LEGALLY SPEAKING  Calgary Status of Women Action Committee presents professor Janet Keeping,  discussing concerns surrounding Section  15 and 28 of the Charter of Rights and  lawyer Beverley Britton-Clark discussing  new legislation regarding property rights,  divorce, child custody Si maintenance.  Dec. 10, 7:30 pm. Common Room. Old  "Y". 223-12 Ave. S.W. Calgary. Free.  Childcare subsidy available. More info  262-1873.  RESERVE MAY 27-29  Douglas College Community Programs  and Services and WomenSkills Community Economics Options asks that May  27-29 be reserved for their upcoming  conference on Women and Community  Economic Development. More info Rita  Chudnovsky 520-5400 or Melanie Conn  430-0453.  VSW OPEN HOUSE  Vancouver Status of Women and Kinesis  open house. Come and see new offices  Fri. Jan. 15. 8 pm. 301-1720 Grant St.  In time for open house festivities VSW  will be wheelchair accessible.  VLC COFFEEHOUSE LINE-UP  Dec. 18: Donna Lee—women's folk,  Corrine Lee—classical and flamenco guitar. Jan 14: Stephanie Swenson—folk  and instrumental guitar. Jai Harland—  original and women's folk. 876 Commercial Drive. 7:30-11 pm. Sliding scale $3 -  $5. All women welcome. Wheelchair accessible. Pool table.  WOMEN'S MUSIC FESTIVAL  The Vancouver Women in Music Network and Nada Productions are looking for women interested in organizing  and/or performing in the first Vancouver  Women's Music Festival to be held outdoors in the summer of '88. All women  welcome. More info and time Si place of  first meeting in Jan.. Nadine Davenport  681-3617.  PRIVATIZATION  Community Conference on Privatization  sponsored by Van. District Labour Council, Council for Public Services in association with End Legislated Poverty and  other trade union Si community groups.  Dec. 12 8:30-2 pm. Key address-  Mike Harcourt. Lunch and childcare  provided—please pre-register at 206-33  E. 8th. Vancouver. Cost $25 if able to  pay. Workshops on: transport, health  care, environmental protection, welfare,  housing, education, municipal services,  etc.  CONCERT/PRODUCTION  Nada Productions, a women's music concert producer in Vancouver is looking  for women interested in producing concerts/workshops through a pacific northwest women's music production connection. Cities include Seattle, Portland and  Eugene. Contacts to produce such acts  as Alive, Diedre McCalla. Phranc. Teresa  Trull, Tret Fure Si more. Contact production co-ordinator Nadine Davenport 681-  3617.  SUBMISSIONS  SQUARE PEG: THE MOVIES  The Institute of Contemporary Arts,  London, in association with Square Peg  magazine will be presenting a month-long  programme of new lesbian Si gay film and  video in Mar. '88.  Square Peg's spring issue will be exclusively devoted to film. A series of discussions by leading filmmakers and critics will provide a further context for this  event.  This is the first and last call for submissions both to the magazine and the Cinematheque programme ...  Films (excluding 35mm) and all format videotapes to: Kate Leys, Associate Director. Cinema ICA, 12 Carlton House Terrace, London SW1Y 5AH.  Features/articles/images to: BM Square  Peg. London WC1N 3XX. WORKSHOPS  WAVAW/RCC  Women Against Violence Against Women-  Rape Crisis Centre services include:  24 hour crisis line, guaranteed confidentiality, counselling, information—  police,legal,medical,advocacy.  Accompaniment: police.legal,medical,referrals.  Criminal compensation: information or  applications, third party reports, public  education and information tables, speaking engagements. Office hours Mon-Fri  10-5 pm 875-1328. 24 hour crisis line  875-6011.  NORTH SHORE WOMEN'S NETWORK  A small group of gay women are gathering for social activities twice a month.  We hope to meet new friends and add  to our numbers. Interested? Call Irene at  986-8907. We will get back to you!  S.E.Shefrin  WOMEN IN POLITICS  The NFB and the Committee for Political  Skills present the Vancouver premiere of  it A Love Affair with Politics: A Portrait  of Marion Dewar by director Terry Nash  and Prairie Women by director Barbara  Evans. Dec. 9 7:30 pm Cinema. Robson  Square Media Centre, 800 Robson. Reception with no-host bar to follow. Free  admissions. For info 666-0178.  WOMEN'S SOCCER  Lotus   Kaze  women's   soccer   needs   a  coach and a team manager for spring '88.  More info please contact Francie at 734-  0658.  LESBIANS WANTED  Lesbians who are interested in starting  up a lesbian newspaper in Vancouver. A  newspaper for lesbians, by lesbians and  about lesbians. The first meeting is Dec.  13 7 pm at VLC. 876 Commercial Drive.  Contact VLC for more info 254-8458.  WOMEN'S ECONOMIC AGENDA  Next W.E.A. meeting Jan. 14 7:30 pm  First United Church. Info call Margaret  291-4360.  SUPPORT/SOCIAL  Support/social group for lesbians recovering from mental illness, past or present.  Drop in: Tuesdays 7:30 pm VLC. 876  Commercial Drive.  »»»««»»»»»««  ??????????????????????????  Wit +h<t &w>  Utd- if or W)5t-  !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! M  Kinesis needs women to  write news stories.  No experience necessary.  Lots of encouragement  and support provided.  Please call Esther  at25S-5499  MCWWWWWWW  KINESIS //J/////////////"//////////////////'/////////////////////////////////////////////'////////////////*'  //////////////////^^^^^^  ///////////////////////^^^^^  BULLETIN BOARD  WORKSHOPS  LEGAL ADVICE  VLC is offering a series of workshops  dealing with lesbians ad the law facil-  itied by lawyer Ruth Lea Taylor. Next  workshop: You and Me and My Baby  Makes Three—Non-Traditional Family  Structures. Legal treatments of same-sex  marriages, historical treatment of homosexuality in divorce cases and custody issues discussed. Jan. 18. 8-10 pm. VLC,  876 Commercial Drive.  CLASSIFIED  WEST SIDE CO-OP HOUSE  Participate in founding a west side co-op  house. Enough for one more n/s person  in a bright, newly-formed co-op house  (5 people total). We are three adults in  our 30's and a considerate pre-teen boy  who have rented a spacious house near  the UBC endowment lands for Nov. 1. If  you are interested in living co-operatively  and creating a home which is power-  sharing, child-welcoming and supportive  Please call 224-4587.Feminist preferred.  VAN EAST HOUSING CO-OP  Looking for people for waiting list. No  subsidy available at present, but reasonable market rents. Single units from  $248-$356; 2 bedrooms from $378-$535;  3 and 4 bedrooms from $459-$572. If interested please write for an application.  Membership committee #3-1220 Sals-  bury, Vancouver V5L 4B2  HOUSING CO-OP  DERA Housing Co-operative now accepting applications for its waiting list.  Bachelor, 1 and 2 bedroom suites—some  subsidized, in Downtown Eastside. Send  SASE to Membership Committee. #503-  638 Alexander, Vancouver V6A 3X9 for  application.  IN VANCOUVER/BURNABY  Lesbian-feminist seeking accommodation. Will be relocating first week in Jan.  I'm a non-smoker, quiet Si responsible.  Please write including a phone # to Jo-  Anne Ingram. 16-31 Craig St., London,  Ont. N6C 1E9.  SHARED ACCOMMODATION  Room in shared house. Children welcome. Dogs, cat, garden, bright, sliding  scale. 255-3424.  JOB POSTING  Women's Skills Development Society Microtechnology Working Group has received funding to conduct education campaign focused on improving health and  safety of clerical workers. 14 month position open for research and education coordinator. Closing Dec. 4. Starting Jan.  4. More info Marcie Cohen 430-0458 or  430-0450.  GOLDEN THREADS  A contact publication for lesbians over  50 and women who love older women.  Canada and U.S. Confidential, warm, reliable. For free info send self-addressed envelope (U.S. residents please stamp it).  Sample copy mailed discreetly, $5 (U.S.)  Golden Threads. P.O. Box 2416. Quincy.  MA 002269.  TRAVELLING TO CHINA  Woman looking for someone to travel  with in China April and May '88. Will  be in Vancouver early Jan. before leaving Canada. Can meet regarding travelling plans then. In the meantime, write  to J. Langford. Box 5546, Whitehorse.  Yukon Y1A 5H4.  Persimmon Blackbridge's masks will be on display at the  Vancouver Lesbian Centre. December 1 to 18. The VLC  is open from Monday to Friday, 11-4 pm.  CLASS IFIEDlCLASSIFIEDiCLASSIFIED  BOOKS BY MAIL  Feminist and lesbian books by mail  (in English and French). Free new  book bulletin published 3 times/year.  L'Androgyne Bookstore. 3636 St. Laurent. Montreal H2X 2V4.  ALEXANDER TECHNIQUE  Most people carry unwanted tension in  their bodies. You can feel it all around  you ... stiff necks. Rigid shoulders.  Headaches. The Alexander Technique  has been widely used by four generations  of actors, singers, athletes and musicians  to eliminate unwanted tension and improve their performance.  It is equally effective in ordinary everyday activities around home or office. The  Technique will assist you in achieving the  light and easy alignment of the head an  neck that reduces tension and pain. Common activities like sitting, standing and  walking provide a focus for its subtle reeducation. A few private lessons will help  you assess how the Technique can help  you.  For professional instruction phone: Julia Brandreth, Certified Alexander Technique Teacher (604) 684-2541, Vancouver, B.C.  WOMANSPACE ON SALTSPRING  Newly built, fully equipped, self-contained cabin on 5 | secluded acres. Close to  Ruckle Provincial Park, hiking trails and  sea. Saltspring is accessible by ferry from  Swartz Bay and Tsawwassen. $50/night  double. $35/night single. Wheelchair accessible. Children welcome. No pets. No  smoking outdoors. Call Gillian 653-9475  or write Box C85, King Rd., R.R. 1. Ful-  ford Harbour. B.C. VOS ICO.  RURAL RETREAT WANTED  Urban woman seeks rural retreat. Would  like to apt./house sit while you're away,  or possible exchange Vancouver bach, coop apt. (woman only) for Jan. and Feb.,  flexible. Will take care of pets, plants; responsible, mature, quiet, N/S. N/D, references. Would like Gulf Islands or southwestern B.C.; must have electricity and  h/c running water. Please call Andrea  253-1678, day or eve., or leave message  at 254-7923.  FOR SALE  Cedar bunk bed, sectional couch, dresser,  desk, girl's 5-speed and other misc.  items. Reasonable offers accepted. 251-  3872.  ONE DAY ART SALE  Five Vancouver women artists. Small  gifts and affordable art. Sat. Dec. 5,  noon. La Quena. 1111 Commercial Drive.  WORKSHOPS  Often groups find themselves drained  by the demands of the group itself, as  well as everyone's personal lives. Burn  out and over-extension are inevitable.  Through guided fantasy, visualization,  stress management and open dialogue,  we can replenish the well. I am interested  in facilitating workshops that focus on  "Group Building Through Renewal." Experience in group process, mediation, facilitation, and group building in various  areas, including feminist, lesbian/gay, coop and peace and grass-roots organizations.  If interested, please contact: Brenda R.  Bryan, Polarity Therapist/Master Hypnotist, 3541 14th Ave., Van. V6R 2W3.  732-8927.  POETRY IS NOT A LUXURY  A collection of poetry by North American Indian and Black poets set to reggae, classical, guitars, dub and'AFrican  drums. Featuring Ahdri Zhini Mandiela.  Jeannette Armstrong, Lee Maracle, Afua  Cooper, Lenore Keeshig Tobias and  troducing Canada's first indian dub poet  Pineshi Gustin. It deals with a wide range  of topics from the situation of Black and  Indian women to the genocide of Indigenous people. Available for $8.50 (U.S.)  from Pt Andrade. 170 Booth #311, Ottawa. Ontario KIR TW1. Also available  "First And Last" the new cassette from  Dub Poet Andri Zhini Mandiela featuring  the piece "In South Africa Today."  WOMEN'S COUNSELLING  My specializations include depression  sexuality, sexual and emotional abuse  adult women survivors of childhood sexual abuse, identity issues, self-awareness,  relationship issues, decision-making and  career explorations. I work using verbal and expressive therapies, gestalt and  guided imagery. Sliding fee scale. Janet  Lichty. B.A. M.Ed Counselling Psychology. 874-6982.  The 1988  Tools  for  Peace  Calendar  with 12 colour images  OF NICARAGUA  by Vancouver artist  CLAIRE KUJUNDZIC  is now available at the following  locations:  McLeod's Books, Spartacus Books,  Octopus Books, Peoples Co-op Books,  Women's Bookstore, R2 B2 Books,  Ariel Books, East End Food Co-op,  Uprising Breads and Tools for Peace at  1672 East 10th Avenue, Vancouver  KINESIS  Dec/Jan. '88     23 #  Xh  ^  E, S,  lr S,  u,  m  #  &  S^ M3 A, R,  T,  *  *To aid fundraising efforts, the Vancouver Status of Women and Kinesis will be exchanging  mailing lists with other progressive social action groups and magazines.  If you do not want your name used in this way, please contact us and we will ensure that your  name will not be exchanged ^  -^-  Published 10 times a year  by Vancouver Status of Women  #301 1702 Grant St., Vancouver, B.C. V5L2Y6  □ VSW Membership-$25.50 (or what you can afford)-includes Kinesis subscripts  G Kinesis subscription o  T i Institutions - $45  □ Here's my cheque  n Bill me  - $17.50       □ Sustainers - $75  □ New  □ Renewal  D Gift subscription for a friend