 #ww. wuicmns  <jpt Cjc0  73- S3o£  women and sport  HOW ABOUT A LITTLE QUIZ?  ...Name 10 Canadian women athletes...Try for 5.  ...At your local school what sport or team is the'prestige'  one and is given most encouragement, facilities and practice space and time? What about at the nearest college?  ...At your Community Centre what kinds of activities are  scheduled for the girls? How do they compare to the ones  for boys?  ...Listen to the Sports news on the radio for one week  and write down the name of every woman you hear. Do the  same for the TV sports news. Do you find you don't need  a pencil?  ...When you were a young girl who was your favorite athlete — the one you used to pretend you were?  ...Your daughter announces that she wants to be a professional athlete. Do you worry that she will starve to  death? Do you worry what the neighbours will say? Do  you worry what men will say?  ...Recite at least three comments that men make about  female athletes.  ...Read a copy of WomenSport magazine. Are you surprized  that there are all those women athletes out there?  ...Have you ever seen a glowing, healthy, radiant, strong,  athletic woman (eg. the recent Women's Supersports on TV)?  How did you feel?  ...What physical activity do you enjoy doing most yourself?  ...What do you want for your daughter? Your sister?  ,Yourself?  ...Read your answers. Do they please you? Why not? ,...role   models  In 1962 , Vancouver's Mary Stewart  became the first woman in history  to better the one minute mark for  the one-hundred yard butterfly swim.  At the time, noted swimming coach  Howard Firby. likened her feat to  that of the first male breaking the  four minute mark for the mile run.  During her swimming career Mary held  the world records for the one hundred  metre and one hundred and ten yard  butterfly.  Swimming butterfly and  free-style, she represented Canada  at two Olympic, two Pan-American and  one Commonwealth Games.  The press covered Mary Stewart's activities very well — when she had just  broken a world record or had won a  major international competition.  But  as a young girl, eagerly listening  to the late night news, I often felt  the frustration of not hearing about  her performance in the U.S. or Canadian National Championships. Hockey  scores and football scores were always available.  Coverage of women's sports has not  changed considerably during the last  thirteen years. Male-dominated professional sport continues to monopolize every area of sport media.  Such a focus has provided young boys  and men with the deplorable super-  sport model who is agrressive, "masculine" and often violent, and for  most part has completely neglected  women.  Thus, we seldom hear about  the activities of women who play  basketball and fieldhockey, or who  are involved with track and field or  tennis. Where women's activities are  considered, there is often an emphas-  sis upon her "feminine" qualities,  and her physical appearance rather  than upon the excellence of her performance.  Indeed, one sport writer  compared the fast-moving action of  a women's volleyball team to "tigresses in heat".  Obviously, the impact of media upon  children's and adult sport has been  detrimental to both sexes.  The positive aspects of individual skills  and friendship play little part in  the "news", and few female athletic  role-models exist.  The particular  concern for women is that we are  physically unfit and have not been  encouraged to use our bodies.  So  that while the competitve aspects  of sporting life should not be overemphasized, surely coverage of wo*  men's competitive and non-competitive sport should be equal to that  of male coverage.  Glinda Sutherland  Photo - B. Cunningham  "It is true that rampant discrimination against women athletes has been  the rule, not the exception; that  facilities are often unavailable to  women or only available at awkward  hours; that women's athletic equipment is often inferior and difficult  to obtain; that money allocated for  women's sports programs is minimal  or nonexistent.  It's the male administrators of athletic programs who  aren't interested in women and sports."  -from WomenSports Magazine's  Action Manuel  "Among women who do participate in  sports it is the female professional  who is most discriminated against,  just as the prospects of the female  as breadwinner are most frustrating  in other areas of paid work."  -Abigail Hoffman  "...in sports the end in view is not  success independent of physical equipment; it is rather the attainment of  perfection within the limitations of  each physical type:  the featherweight  boxing champion is as much a champion  as is the heavyweight; the woman skiing champion is not the inferior of  the faster male champion; they belong  to two different classes."  - Simone de Beauvoir no   federal    action      why DOt?  by Dr. Katie Cooke, reprinted from  The Vancouver Sun, March 8,1975.  For the first time in recorded history, the world is recognizing that  there is something drastically wrong  with the second class citizenship  accorded to women.  From my point of view, as chairman  of the federal advisory council on  the status of women, legislation is  crucial. We have had in Canada a  royal commission on the status of  women.  One hundred and twenty-two  of its 167 recommendations relate  specifically to areas under federal  jurisdiction.  Only 44 of these have  been implemented to date.  Currently in Parliament, three bills  have received first reading and could  implement another 12 recommendations  in one year if they are passed.  Let us have no illusions that these  will get to royal assent under their  own steam.  There must be support for  these bills from women's groups, from  individuals, from people all across  'the country.  Did you know that a private member's  bill to make the beaver an official  Canadian symbol was introduced on  Jan. 14,1975, and has already had  second reading? Why? Because thousands of letters have been received  supporting its cause.  Have you urged your member of Parliament to support bills C-16, C-20, and  C-52? If not, why not?  What are these bills?  In brief, they  include these provisions: C-16, the  so-called omnibus bill, will give  women equal status with men under  the Canada Elections Act; will remove the rigid requirements for  maternity leave benefits under the  Unemployment Insurance Act; will  give women eual status as breadwinner' under the Immigration Act.  C-20 will give Canadian mothers equal  right to confer citizenship on their  children.  C-52 will give working women equal  pension rights in the federal public  service in the armed forces, in the  RCMP, and in Parliament.  Legislation is but one of the crucial  ingredients of the concerted action  necessary to achieve equality of men  and women in Canada.  There must be  changes in attitudes.  Stereotypes  must go.  We must all come to believe in the  equality of the sexes and to act on  our belief. Opening car doors is an  insult and not a courtesy when doors  to the better paying jobs are still  slammed in our faces.  Social plaudits are in reality put-  downs, when those who choose to fulfil the role of homemakesr are accorded the status of "merely a housewife".  Do we do men a favor when we insist  they play a solo role as breadwinner  for the family in the impossible  guise of chivalrous knight in shining  armor on a Detroit-built horse?  Where are our labor unions? Equality  ensures that profits cannot be made  by firing men and hiring women at  lower wages <, Why are only 25 per  cent of women workers organized and  the numbers of women in executive  positions of most unions conspicuous  only by their absence?  Where are our provincial governments?  Does yours and mine have an official  council on the status of women to put  a spotlight on the problems women  face? Such official councils are a  public government commitment to act,  to redress inequities.  Equality is a very modern concept, but  it is based on a realistic assessment  of the harsh demands of a post-industrial society. We can no longer afford inequality.  Today's world demands aware and responsible citizens,  knowledgeable and able to participate  in making the decisions that will keep  us from blowing ourselves into an infinite and implacable hostile vacuum.  And where are women? Are we ready to  assume the rights and responsibilities  of full participants in today's world?  Indeed yes. And the time is now —  INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S YEAR.  VOW  FOCUS...  Recommendation 165 of the Royal Commission Report on the Status of Women  in Canada as one of the most important yet-to-be implemented recommen<~  dations , deserves solo billing.  Rec. .165 That a federal Human Rights  Commission be set up that  would (a) be directly responsible to Parliament,  (b) have power to investi*  gate the administration of  human rights legislation  as well as the power to enforce the law by laying  charges and prosecuting  offenders, (c) include  within the organization for  a period of seven to ten  years a division dealing  specifically with the protection of women's rights,  and (d) suggest changes in  human rights legislation  and promote widespread respect for human rights.  The minister to write regarding the  implementation of Recommendation 165  is Otto Lang, Minister of Justice,  Parliament Buildings, Ottawa. Parliament is in session now so postage is  not required on mail sent to members  of parliament.  Just write OHMS in  the corner of the envelope.  A few letters to Marc Lalonde, PM  Trudeau, and the Advisory Council  wouldn't hurt either.  However the implementation of Rec.  165 in and of itself isn't sufficient because Rec.165 offers primarily a means for dealing with discrimination after the fact. More pertinent would be some strong federal  affimative action legislation, legislation which is constructed to nip  discrimination in the bud.  So while  you're writing, link Rec. 165 with  Affirmative Action because the two  go hand in hand.  - Roberta Schlosberg  Alice Coppard, Ecology Chairperson  of the Provincial Voice of Women  has informed us that the VOW is involved in the campaign to protest the  proposed Trident base at Bangor.Washington, about 60 miles off Victoria.  The Undersea Long Range Missile System  will have a range of 6000 miles and  represents the most destructive system  in the history of the world.The VOW  urges women to join the protest. Contact the American group "Concerned  about Trident" at 305 Dietz Building,  Bremerton, Washington, 09310; press"-  ure both federal and provincial governments to protest the base; inter5*  view M.P.s and M.L.A.s on the subject.  The address of the B.C. Voice of Women is Box 235, Nanaimo, B.C.  NEWS  EMPLOYERS  The National Research Council set up  a committee last June headed by Madeleine Hinchey to examine the practices and policies regarding women  in the NRC. At the moment,the ratio  of women scientists at the research  level is very low.  The committee  will be looking into recruiting policies as well as other aspects relating to the status of women.  - reprinted IWY bulletin, Jan-Feb The women of B.C. are preparing to  travel to Victoria to attend the  Convention-cum Demonstration-cum  Festival on April 18,19 &20.  Not  many women, though, know the history  of B.C.F.W.  It was in August 1973 that the concept  of a coalition of women's groups first  germinated.  The occasion was a conference on women and education sponsored by the UBC Women's Action Group.  The conference was attended by women  from many different parts of B.C.  Some of these women earned the title  oe  "The Mothers of Confederation" by  publicizing the idea of a province -  wide feminist organization. This was  taken up by the NDP Women's Committee  at its conference in Sept.1973. Around:  November, 1973, Rosemary Brown presented her bill on Affirmative Action.  A Commission on'Legislative Priorities  for Women's Rights was established,  and a series of hearings were held in  several places by many women's groups.  The briefs presented left no doubt  that women were not interested in  fighting one another on legislative  priorities; rather that they believed  all women's demands were equally.important .  In the early months of 1974 there  came a spate of well-attended women's  conferences, the common denominator  of which was a growing resentment at  government's failure to respond to  the call for affirmative action.  Rosemary Brown's private member's  bill seemed doomed to oblivion.  Had  the NDP government forgotten its election platform? Was it really indifferent to briefs, delegations,  and letters from women's groups? Or  was this government waiting to see  how strong the women's movement was?  The NDP Women's Committee decided to  take up the.challenge.  In April 1974  they contacted women's organizations  throughout the Lower Mainland with  a view to holding a strategy conference.  Elated by the response, a  loose steering committeee representing more than a dozen groups began  to prepare for the Action for Women  Strategy Conference.  In spite of a  mail strike, over 300 of the 700 women contacted met at Capilano College  on May 25th. What emerged clearly  from this conference was the need for  some sort of federation and, as a nec-  . essary concomittant, the need for  manifestation to the government of  the strength and unity of the women's  movement.  The groups that participated in these  decisions included the Women's Health  Collective, Women in Teaching, Vancouver Status of Women, Committee to  Defend Dr. Morgentaler, BCTF, Victoria Status of Women, NDP Women's Committee. UVIC Action Group,  In order  to implement the two major decisions  ie. to form a Federation and to hold  a women's parliament in Victoria, a  steering committee was formed of rep-  B.C.F.W.  resentatives from a variety of women's  groups.  These volunteers met as"a  group for several weekends over the  summer. Most of the work, however was  achieved through sub-committees dee1-  ing with areas such as policy,finance,  structure, publicity. Then deliber*  ations culminated in the Founding  Convention of September 13th at UBC  when the B.C. Federation of Women  came into existence.  What then is the aim of this B.C.F.W.?  Basically, to demonstrate that through  the power of power of united numbers  we can achieve more than as individuals or individual groups. To co-ordinate the diversity of organizations  (with the attendant range of aims and  methods) into a mosaic wherein B.C.F.W.  can represent the needs of women from  every walk of life and from every  part of the world.  To learn from  one another, to support one another.  To enable particularly oppressed minority groups of women — such as ethnic groups, the old, the young, the  poor — to speak for themselves, to  organize themselves.  This gigantic but challenging task  has been entrusted to the Standing  Committee which is the elected body  of B.C.F.W.  It consists of 22 members, 12 of whom are designated as  regional reps, and 10 as members with  specific tasks.  How can yc become a member? Submit  a simple declaration of support with  a donation of any amount — for organizations.  Individuals join by simply  making a donation of whatever amount  they wish.  How can you find out more about  B.C.F.W.? 1) By membership 2) By  subscribing to the monthly newsletter — $2.50 except free to women on  welfare and residents of mental institutions and prisons.  3) By joining Interest Groups. Those that now  exist are Education, Employment, Daycare, Lesbian Caucus.  Those in the  offing are Credit, Welfare, Minority  Ethnic Groups, Immigrant Women.  Each  of these different groups is involved in presenting its proposals for  legislative changes at the April Convention.." Every woman who is registered at the Convention is entitled  to vote. Those proposals that are  voted on and passed by the Convention  will be presented to the government  for its consideration and speedy  implementation.  Both member groups  and individual members may present  policy proposals or resolutions.  If  sent by March 27th to Terry Robinson,  these submissions will be published  in the April issue of our newspaper.  New resolutions may be entertained  if received by April 11th.  The Victoria Convention April 18,19  and 20 is the best way to find out  about B.C.F.W., its aims, policy and  structure.  It will provide an opportunity for you to meet us, to ask us  questions, to give us your suggestions. Yes, we are open to suggestions  as to how to make B.C.F.W. more viable. This is the time when change  in structure and policy may be made.  It is also a time to,meet women from  all over B.C.  Where is this Convention being held?  At the Esquimalt Recreation Centre,  527 Fraser St., Esquimalt.  It is a  brand-new building recently opened by  Premier Barrett.  It has one huge  hall, the size of an old-fashioned  ballroom, another smaller hall, several small rooms, 2 swimming pools,  a large basement hall for childcare  and a huge playground. The centre  is about 5 minutes drivvng distance  from Victoria.  We urge women to attend the sessions  on. B.C.F.W. policy and structure, to  participate actively in discussion  and voting, or at least to listen and  learn about the women's movement .and  the issues that most preoccupy us.  The socials that follow the sessions  on both Friday and Saturday will provide an occasion to talk to other  women about what you did not understand or did not agree with or wish  you had said! At a meeting of "women  only" you might find it easier to ask  questions, display ignorance, compliment, compare notes. At the Forum  on Sunday you might wish to simply  wander around and feast your senses  your senses on the cultural displays:  dances, songs, poetry readings, literature, films, etc. etc.  If you wish  to present a display of any kind, you  would be well advised to register e  early and book space in advance.  S  Sale of arts, crafts, etc. will be  possible provided you bear sole responsibility for the items.  A group of dedicated women in Victoria are looking after arrangements for  billeting, catering, daycare, transportation, demonstrations, entertainment and the Forum.  They are Trish  Scott, Miriam Robertson, Lillian  Smith, Margaret Edwards, Dryme Dol,  Stephanie Gaine , Alice Ages t  Lynne  Green bough, and Harice Parkinson.  The Victoria Women's Centre, UVIC  Action Group, Women's Bookstore, Victoria Status of Women are some of the  organizations represented by the women mentioned above. All preparations  in Victoria are being co-ordinated  through The Women's Centre at 552  Pandora St.  Telephone 385-3843.  - Mary Barretto  For more en the B.C.F.W. Victoria  Weekend see the Office Page, p. 14.  Remember - registration fees will be  refunded to women who find they can't  make it after all  For further information and to get  brochures, etc. contact:  Vancouver  Mary Barretto     733-9.558  lo81 West 16th Ave, Vancouver  Leslie Dixon      980-1855  1972 Alderlynn Dr. North Vancouver  Victoria  Harice Parkinson  656-4381  103 - 10025 Resthaven Dr., Sydney  Kootenays  Marcia Braundy    226-7624  R.R.#1, Winlaw, B.C.  Prince George  Sharon Hirt       563-7934  1306 - 7th St. Prince George  Courtenay  Nicky Phillips  R.R.#2, Courtenay,  338-5763  B.C.  Dawson Creek  Toni O'Hare       782-7707  1509 - 94th, Dawson Creek  Gibsons  Jo-Anne McNevin   886-2993  R.R.#2, Gibsons, B.C.  Kelowna  Susan Gillespie   765-0882  R.R.//1, Sexsmith Road, Kelowna, B.C.  Abbotsford  Susan Belford     856-4204  10-3365 Homeview St., Abbotsford the avid   ant icier  For years I have bought magazines  that contain one Or (if I'm lucky)  two articles that I want.  Because  the articles are interesting and may  come in useful someday, I save the  magazines and they fill up baskets,  overflow shelves and gather dust.  When I am researching a topic I may  know that I have a dandy article  somewhere but the task of plowing  through the accumulation of magazines  to find it is so stupendous that I  rarely bother.  I mentioned this frustrating state  of affairs to a friend recently and  she favoured me with the thoughtful  gaze usually bestowed on those who  need written instructions on how to  tie shoelaces or open pull-tab cans,  and asked,"Why don't you just make  an article file?"  The light dawned and that very eventing I sat down with a pair of scissors  and a felt pen and a pile of file  folders.  In a few hours I had reduced the mountain of magazines to a  stack of neatly labeled file folders.  A cardboard box makes a dandy file  holder.  So I imagine would a wooden  crate, a small trunk, a wicker picnic  basket or an antique breadbox.  Now when I buy a magazine I tear out  the material I want to keep, note the  publication and date on the corner,  file it and chuck out the rest.(You'11  find an amazing amount of it is advertising!)  BOOK  REVIEW  RAPE: THE FIRST SOURCEBOOK FOR WOMEN..  by New York Radical Feminists, Editors Noreen Connell & Cassandra  Wilson, Plume Books, 1974, 283 pages  $4.50.  The sourcebook stands as a major work,  breaking new ground' in feminist writing.  It shows the importance of action to fight rape as a part of the  overall struggle for rights and dignity.  How did rape become an issue in the  Women's Movement? By comparing experiences (in consciousness raising  groups) women soon discovered that  sexual assault was not the unique  or individual experience they had  thought it to be. Whether the sexual aggression manifested itself as  psychological assault or physical  brutality, it was common to the experience of far more women than anyone had realized. Women began to  see it in the context of their overall oppression in a society which  still tends to minimize the importance of rape, blames women for it,  and even denies that it exists.  Thus consciousness raising can be  seen as a tool of analysis for the  Women's Movement.  It is a process  through which other hidden issues  may still develop.  The book begins  with one of the best explanations of  consciousness raising that I have  seen anywhere, telling what it is,  what it isn't, and why or how the  reader might start a C-R group.  Mentioned here are five recent articles . that we have found informative.  We hope that readers of Kinesis will  notify us of ones they come across .  Just jot down the name of the article  and author, and name and date of publication and a brief note about the  article and we'll print it for the  benefit of other readers.  Back copies of magazines can usually  be obtained by writing away or can  often be found in used book stores.  Public libraries subscribe to most  of the major publications and while  ripping up library magazines for your  file is not advisable, most libraries  have copy machines.  RAPE! by Myrna Kostash — MacLeans  March/75 — the first of two part  series on rape.  Re-enacts a rape  trial, gives statistics on rape in  Canada, and a discussion of the  "victim-precipated rape" theory.  IUD—THE BLOODY TRUTH by Helen Epstein — Viva,April/75 — interesting  and at times appalling information  on the fastest-growing method of  birth control. What women aren't  told.  HOW TO CHOOSE THE RIGHT CHILD-CARE  PROGRAM by Joan M. Bergstrom & Jane  R. Gold — Ms., March/75 — a check  list to help assess a child-care  program.  A chapter of person testimony follows.  It took tremendous courage to speak  out in ways that countered some of  the prevailing myths, for these myths  are supported and sustained by the  media (cinema, literature, and porno- .  graphy) as well as the acedemic and  progessional establishment.  They  include such ideas as "A woman cannot be raped against her will," "Women really want to be raped," and  "Women are to blame for rape."  Feminist analysis follows the per**  sonal testimony, with chapters on  "The Sexual Abuse of Children" by  Florence Rush, "Rape and Psychother-  aphy," by Phyllis Chesler, Ph.D., and  "The Rapist and His Victim," by Lilia  Melany and Kinda Golaski.  This last  chapter helps in understanding the  rapist better — who he is, what mo^  tivates him, and his general attitude  towards sex.  This book provides analysis of rape  in literature and cinema as well as  a legal analysis.  Three bibliographies on rape are included: One is sympathetic to the victim, one "objective" (mostly by men), and one which  is taken from the card catalogue of  a msjor library, showing an almost  total lack of interest in rape as a  topic for serious study in 1971.  The rest of the book, about 100 pages,  is devoted to specifics for feminist  action, both individual and group  (how to set up a rape crisis centre,  rape conferences, workshops, defence  etc.)  - excerpted from a book review by  Carolyn Folse in the Victoria Status  .of Women News  THE NEW'NON-VIOLENT'CHILDBIRTH METHOD  by Joanne Kates — Chatelaine, April/  75 — a Parisian doctor has decided  babies deserve gentle births without  trauma and violence.There is a beautiful discription of a baby being gently brought through the transition from  the womb to the world. And the difference Dr. Leboyer has seen in children who were delivered this way are  fascinating.  A PERSON WHO MENSTRUATES IS INFIT TO  BE A MOTHER bv Hadley V. Baxendale  — Psychology Today, March/75 —  a hilarious one page article that  states "child rearing is too important and complex a job to be entrusted  to unstable, untrained neurotics,  who can be thrown off balance by the  merest biological event." It would  be better if child rearing were entrusted to the more stable male and  women could channel themselves into  less important things - such as profess ionaJ^competition^^   And to carry sex-role studies to new  heights Bobbie Patrick offers the  following article. However before you  rush out to buy the publication it  is only fair to tell you that Bobbie  has refused to produce a copy of CHIRP  for us and we are becoming a little  suspicious.  FURTHER NOTES ON SEX ROLE REVERSAL  IN THE RED PHALAROPE (PHALAROPUS  FULICARIUS) — Chirp, March/75 —  explores selection of mate by female;  nest building by male; incubation of  eggs by male; chick-rearing by male.  —■ Jo Lazenby  magazines  PLUS is a bilingual feminist quarterly magazine, published in Ottawa.  Available from selected bookshops,  or from Plus, 581 O'Connor St., Ottawa, Ontario.  Subscriptions: $2 -  individual, $3 - institutional, $5-  sustaining, or 50c a copy.  Communique:Canadian Studies, the  publication of the Association of  Canadian Community Colleges, has devoted its December 1974 issue (Vol  1, No 2) to women's studies in Canadai  It lists programs of study, plus Canadian materials on women, biographies  and autobiographies, and makes a fine  introductory handbook of information.  Available in English only as long as  supply lasts from: Editor, Communique  Canadian Studies, 1750 Finch Ave.East,  Willowdale, Ontario M2N 5T7  NEWS  WOMEN'S SPIRITUALITY PROJECT  If you are interested in sharing  thoughts, feelings, experiences in  this area, and might be willing to  respond to a questionaire (or part  of one), please contact:  Sylvia Holland  %The Women's Centre  552 Pandora  Victoria, B.C.   (385-3843) p<  n rerson  Those few months of the year when  Margaret Atwood isn't writing or  managing her small Ontario farm,  she may be found reading and discussing her work with audiences  across Canada. At Capilano College  and at U.B.C. recently, Atwood  treated her listeners to the first  public reading of her new, almost  completed novel.  The Capilano College audience picked  up the story at chapter five, when  the protagonist, Joan, is remembering  some significant event in her pre-  pubescent past. At age seven and  plump, she is enrolled in a tap-  dancing and ballet school by her  scheming mother, who hopes that the  exercise will help deflate her daughter's ballooning contours.  Using a  humour based on understatement and  absurd incongruities, and with deep  insight into the pain of a young  girl's misfortune, Atwood gives a  memorable account of the dancing  school's final recital. Joan, looking more like an over-stuffed caterpillar in her costume than the dainty butterfly she is supposed to be,  is cajoled by the image-conscious  dance teacher into coming on stage  only at the end of the butterfly  routine, dressed up instead as a  mothball. Joan's success in making  the audience laugh and her mother's  false praise after the show only  serve to underscore the embarassment  and humiliation she has suffered.  The next chapter, read at U.B.C, finds  our young heroine having, as Atwood  says, "a bad experience with a women's  group — the Brownies." With equal  perception and humour, Atwood once  again illuminates the contest between  the adult's romanticized version of  what little girls should be - sweet,  angelic, and happy at dancing school  or Brownies - and the sometimes painful reality of girlhood, when fat isn't  beautiful and one is made the victim  of cruel games played by other, more  powerful, little girls.  In order to  learn Joan's fate as she grows older,  we shall have to wait for the novel  to reach the bookstands, which should  be about a year from now.  One of Margaret Atwood's first attempts at writing came at age sixteen, when she wrote a comic opera  for her home economics class.  (The  other girls made stuffed animals.)  True to the concerns of her subject, she chose a textile theme,  naming her females Orion, Nylon and  Cotton. They meet up with a Sir  William Woolly, whose probem, believe it or not, is that he shrinks  when wet. The opera actually got  staged, Atwood confessed; however  she didn't divulge to us her final  mark in the course.  The Edible Woman, Atwood's first  published novel, was written in  the mid-sixties while working as  a lecturer at U.B.C.  She snitched  U.B.C. exam booklets for the purpose.  "I would write until I came  to the end of a booklet, and that  would signify the*end of a chapter,"  explained Atwood.  "I enjoyed writing  it.  I even sketched in the margins  the clothes worn by my characters."  Atwood's most recently published novel,  Surfacing, which she terms "a ghost  story, partly", has been rewritten by  her into a screenplay, and may result  in a film, if it manages to get  through all the necessary channels.  Of scriptwriting in general, Atwood  is not enthusiastic, even though she  has written five scripts herself.  (One has been produced by the C.B.C.)  The disadvantage she sees in this  form is having to write a deliberately  unfinished piece, and know that you  are providing only the framework for  the result, not the result itself.  Does Margaret Atwood consider herself  to be a feminist? "I am not a femin  ist in the sense that I subscribe to  a point-by-point ideology" she replied,  "but a woman writer cannot write anything of length without it being applicable to society. And I encounter  the same situations on the street, or  in trying to get a bank loan, as do  all women."  As a woman writer, Atwood has experienced the same problems as any woman  who has become well-known in her profession. People are afraid of her.  She recalls one incident when some  members of an audience told her they  thought she was a witch and would be  speaking on witchcraft. When she  told them she was only a writer,  they left.  One problem shared by all women  writers, she said, concerns literary criticism. The critical vocabulary for discussing excellence  in women's works has not yet been  developed.  "I don't consider it a  compliment to be told my book has  balls," said Atwood, "and yet, to  talk about it using 'feminine' vocabulary is to imply that the work  is silly, or deficient in some way."  When asked by a U.B.C. listener, male,  why so many women writers, Atwood in-  eluded, are preoccupied with  dness  in their works, she replied ctyptic*  ally "that is a question we should  all ask ourselves".  Does Margaret Atwood have a 'purpose'  in writing? Yes, but it» is not to deliver any messages to her readers.  Any purpose to be found lies in the  activity itself.  "I must try to  write the best way possible. The  work that is important to me is only  what I am writing at the time.  I  always hope that it will be the best  I've done, but it is impossible to  tell. Once the job is finished and  is given to the readers, it is out of  my control.  If my books bring awareness to people, that is fine, but if  I had to care about that, I couldn't  be a writer.  Margaret Atwood in person is as delightfully witty, humourous and intense as her writings. We can look  forward to her new novel, as yet  untitled, with the assurance that it  will equal, if not surpass, the standard of excellence we have come to  expect from her.    _, ., '" " ,  v Sheila Purdy  FOR  CHILDREN  Once Upon Anne Eldphant There Was A  Time. By James Barber.  Illustrations  by Claudine Pommier. McClelland and  Stuart Ltd.  $4.95.  Southpaws have it rough. They have  to struggle with telephone booths  designed for right handed people, buy  special scissors, and grow up with  constant pressure to fit their left  handed selves into a right handed world.  Left handed little girls have an extra,  and all too familiar set of problems.  But moral support is at hand. James  Barber's new children's book Once  Upon Anne Elephant There Was A Time  introduces a delightful left handed  girl elephant who sometimes wears pink  ribbons in her hair, not because she's  a girl, but as an alternative to the  flap jacks that she wears—frequently  on Fridays.  The text is a series of questions, in  a form that every parent knows:  "She was a left handed elephant."  "Does that mean she was not right?"  "No."  "Then if she was not right, was she  wrong?"  "No.  She was just a nice left handed  elephant...."  Claudine Pommier's illustrations are  fresh and funny.  They combine with  the text to make Anne Elephant a happy  exercise in the kind of word and picture play that all children enjoy.  A must for any non-sexist children's  library.  - reviewed by Eve Johnson HISTORY  1291- Wilhelm Tell (better known here  as William Tell) freed Switzerland by  the following two memorable deeds:  1) he managed to shoot an arrow  through an apple (probably Macintosh)  which had been placed on his son's  head by the oppressor Gessler.  2) he took a second arrow and  shot it (with the now famous Swiss  precision) right through Gessler's  heart.  With this Switzerland was born, freed  and became Europe's first democracy.  With many ups and downs, we proceeded  through the years, leaving a couple  historic marks: by 1847 Switzerland  had one of the most liberal constitutions in the world, and we contributed  another humane touch by inventing the  Red Cross. (Actually Henri Dumas was  responsible.)  1961"- Democracy had been in effect  for 670 years and in a federal vote  a big majority of the people - excuse  me, people refers strictly to men —  voted in favour of sparing the women  from getting involved in politics,  which is very time consuming anyway.  (You vote on everything — on a wide  variety of issues: on whether some  trees should be cut down, more public  toilets erected, the road widened,  expenditures of more than (last I  heard) $350,000.  The whole municipality elects grade school teachers  whether you have any children or not)  and in 1912 they voted on the elimination of the cavalry from the army.  In brief — women have no place in  politics.  The interesting point is .that the  women themselves were split on the  issue and the majority agreed with  the men!  The statistics of the Swiss Federal  Institute of Technology are quite  depressing. (The S.F.I.T. specializes  in Science and Technology and has a  more rigorous program than that of  the universities.) Most of the women  who go on to higher education attend  the universities and are mainly in  the traditionally 'female' departments of languages and psyschology.  (Though in my grammar school class  6 out of 18 women went into medicine)  several times the vital parts which  control the role of women in society  have never been touched. I never  hnow whether to laugh in disbelief  or cry in despair when I see these  laws.  I will list some of them here  and I can imagine your incredulous  gasps when you-.read them:  — The minimum age for women to get  married is 18, for men 20, the husband alone decides whece to take residence, (This makes it impossible  for a woman who wants to separate  and file for divorce to move where  she wants to go and apply for divorce  there.)  Article 161: "the husband provides  the financial means to support the  wife(and children), the wife helps  her husband in every way and puts  her best efforts into the marriage.  She does the housekeeping."  Article 167:  "if the wife wants to  work she has to get her husband's  permission.  If he does not give it  to her without good reason she can  go to court and the judge will decide."  — If the wife works in her husband's  business she is not legally entitled  to financial compensation for her  work.  It is considered part of the  lormal contribution of a loyal wife  to a marriage.  On the other hand, if the wife  works somewhere else, she is not  legally obliged to contribute to the  living expenses unless the husband  cannot fullfill his duty and provide  the necessary means. Although this  seems great at first glance, I believe the attitude behind it is seriously wrong.  It implies that the  wife's work is some kind of hobby,  and I'm sure every woman will glad-  Daughters of Tell  1971- The year of the great miracle!  The women got the vote on the federal level, most cantons (provinces)  joined in and only a few municipalities are still debating (in 1975)  whether women are endowed with a  soul, intelligence and political  responsibility.  EDUCATION  The general education level is quite  high although relatively few people  attend university which is structured  differently than here and has a different status as well.  pop. in Switz:  Swiss 5,189,707  (^2,486*371  £ 2,703,336)  Foreigners  Total  1,080,076  Age group 20 to 29:  men  women  379,303  385,472  attending  university:-  29,449  12,208  :percentage: app 8.5%  app 3%  In absolute numbers this is pro  gress since in 1963/4  there were  only 4848 women attending univer  sity.  Number of students at the S.F.I.T,  j.     o  Swiss:  53«5       428  Foreign: 1012       103  Total:  6337  531  The highest number of women are found  in pharmaceutics (132 women, 116 men)  and architecture (141 women, 903 men)  but in engineering there are only 21  women as compared to 2420 men!  WORK  Working women are still either pitied or despised (this is a very general statement) and as everywhere  else, women are grossly underpaid —  they earn about 65% of the wages that  men get for the same work.  Total Swiss population  1,466,580 men  541,842 womei  work full time  9^'346men \work part time  258.979 womenX  There are a few women lawyers who are  trying to change the, laws"— although  the constitution has been amended  ly give up this'privilege' in exchange for less condescending laws  concerning women and work.  Article 168:  "if there is a court  case concerning the wife in connection with her money or assets her husband is automatically her legal representative, (ie. as soon as the woman marries she loses all control  over her assets).  Article 200: "the husband takes care  of all assets (money, possessions)  during the marriage."  Article 201: "he has the sole use  of the woman's assets and property."  (unless they have a legal agreement  saying otherwise before they get married.)  Article 202:. "the husband needs the  permission of the wife before he disposes of her assets but a third party  can assume the permission is granted."  (ie. the third party does not have  to check back with the owner of the  assets and even if she would not have  agreed, the deal is legal and the  third party not liable.)  Article 214: "in case of death, once  the original possessions are separated, the increase in the value (for  instance from the use of the wife's  continued on page 8... continued from page 7  fortune) is divided thus:  1/3 to the wife and her heirs  2/3 to the husband and his heirs  If, however, there are debts, the  husband's and his heirs have to pay  unless they can prove the debts were  caused by the wife."  — If a foreign woman marries a Swiss  she instantly becomes a Swiss citizen.  — If a foreign man marries a Swiss  nothing happens — in the best case  if they want to live in Switzerland  it is somewhat easier to get a work  permit.  — Wife and children of course take  the husband's name although it is  common for the wife to add her maiden name with a hyphen.  Article 274: regulates the children's  education as follows:  "do the parents disagree on the  upbringing of the children, the husband will make the final decision."  The young Swiss women are carefully  prepared for their lives as wives and  mothers.  It is mandatory in most  cantons for the girls to spend either  6 weeks consecutively in some remote  place, or alternatively to attend a  school once a week for one year, to  learn essential things like mopping  up floors (daily), arranging flowers,  studying the various qualities of  mattresses, furniture,etc., and the  minimum requirement of sheets, tea  towels(a dozen), etc. to start a  marriage.  In my class the teacher  gave us the priceless advice:  "When  a man proposes to you, before answering ask him to show you his savings  account booklet so you will know if  he is reliable and can support you!"  Sfo kidding -- and this to a class of  grammar school girls who were likely  to attend university later and be  trained in a profession'..  The other day I came across a Swiss  nagazine and the all prevailing sought  after ideal in the 'personal' section  Ls still " a simple, faithful, kind  girlo"  There are brighter spots --* but there  Ls still a lot to be done —and hopefully International Women's Year will  rake up some of the simple, faithful,  cind girls and they get things going!  lang in there Daughters of Tell!  -Viviane Hotz  children  child abuse  I read a copy of the Commons discussion  (December 6, 1974) on child abuse-  prevention, reporting and treatment -  and took a vacation in San Francisco,  ana the combination turned out to be  very interesting. While in San Francisco, a poster on the bus caught  my eye:  "If you ever feel angry enough  to-hurt a child, call the TALK LINE."  I contacted the director of the TALK  LINE project who. gave me lots of information (well, at least a start) on  successful treatment programmes for  child abusers in major U.S. cities.  Besides Talk lines, there are emergency  squads that rush to reported troubled  homes and 'foster grandparent' programmes.  In addition there is growing  co-operation from the courts, a willingness to let agencies support and  treat rather than imprison and condemn  troubled parents.  This is a crucial point in the area of  child abuse and one that should have  been brought to government and public  attention before.  Especially now,  when policies and methods are not yet  formed.  Only last December was a Parliamentary  committee set'up to examine incidences  of child abuse.  In Canada we're at  the beginning of the beginning.  This  is the perfect time for us to do some  research, write some well-directed  letters and hopefully have a say in  shaping this area.  —- Susan Levin  daycare -  To quote the petition circulated on  "Daycare Day" at the UBC campus March  , 12, "Daycare facilities at the UBC  . campus are appallingly inadequate to  meet the needs of the campus community.  In the past, the university administration has not supported daycare projects, causing them to fail,  despite the demand for them."  At present eight university day-care  centres serve 150 children.  But; 150  parents are on the waiting list. All  of these centres are parent co-operatives so parents must work.a certain  number of hours per month - this  creates a lot of pressure, especially  on single parents.  There is provincial money available  for expanded facilities., But because  there is no particular person to  handle day-care, it falls under the  office of the Dean of Women.  Money  was not applied for nor has day-care  been a campus priority.  The march,of students and their children, on march 12, was held to emphasize the need so that it will receive  more attention.  For information on  the results of the rally and the petitions contact the UBC Women's Office  228-2082.  -Susan Levin  Women's life rhythms are rather different from men's. Women who want to  have children usually want to have  them during the years that are designated for undergraduate or graduate  studies, or the first years of settling into a career.  Since in our  culture women are still chiefly responsible for child-raising, and support services are minimal, women with  small children are forced to interrupt  their education and career patterns.  That we stereotype all education and  career patterns by age and continuous  progression, penalizes every woman  with children.  (from The Report on the Status of  Women at the University of British  Columbia by The Women's Action Group)  It just depends on the university's  policy letting married women students in, and I see no reason in the  world why married women shouldn't  study.  So, if you accept the premise that those women deserve to be  on campus studying, then I accept  the premise that they should have  the support to be able to do that.  And that involves day care.  (Voices of Women, Women's Research  Collective, UBC)  NAMES  What's in a name in Alberta may soon  be different from the rest of Canada.  That province has just given first  reading to a change in the Vital Statistics Act to allow parents to give  both their surnames to their children.  So far, Alberta is apparently the  only province in Canada to allow  hyphenated names. A young couple;in.  Ontario who requested registration  of their child in the Spanish tradition of their ancestors were told Ontario had no provision to do so.  They sent further requests to the Ontario Attorney General, citing not  only tradition, but the recognition  of the woman among reasons for the  request.  - reprinted IWY bulletin, Jan-Feb SOME INTERESTING  DISCOVERIES OF LATE.  1.  Finance Minister John Turner  told a constituency meeting in his .  riding that "Criminal law should  not be used to force one moral  view over another. When there  is no concensus criminal law should  withdraw and it should be a  personal matter." He favours  removing abortion from the Criminal  Code. (Van. Sun, March 6/75)  2. Hugh Anderson, Liberal MP for  Comox Alberni, circulated a  questionnaire asking people to  state whether or not they would  prefer to make their own decision,  or to have the law make the decision  in an abortion situation.  73% of  the people polled preferred to make  their own personal decision re  abortion, 11% wished to have the  decision made by the law.  In  releasing these most decisive  results Anderson said his position  on abortion has not changed,  stating "Abortion should remain a  matter under the jurisdiction of  the Criminal Code.  The decision to  terminate a pregnancy is not one  to be taken lightly and the policy  of requiring a panel of three  Doctors to decide the issue should  remainT  3. Simma Holt, Liberal MP for  Van-Kingsway circulated a  questionnaire askingamong other  things, how many people favoured  "Abortion on demand". Of the 3,584  abortion  responses received 53% favoured it,  47% opposed.  4.  Tory MP for Capilano, Ron  Huntington has come to an "interim  conclusion" in his Feb. constituency  newsletter.  It reads "I believe,  that the decision to abort an  unwanted pregnancy should be the  right of the individual woman  and spouse, depending on their  conscience and beliefs - particularly  during the early months of pregnancy  and our laws should protect this  right. The only way to work toward  a lower abortion ratio is to provide  good government birth control  programs that help to prevent  unwanted pregnancies combined with  safe legal abortions as a back-up  to the failures of prevention. No  individual or power group should  be allowed to impose his or their  beliefs onto or over the rights of  others - particularly on a subject  as sensitive and personal as  this one".  Someone has been  working on Mr. Huntington's  feminist consciousness because  prior to the election he stated  at an all-candidate's meeting  that he was firmly against  abortion on demand.  CONCLUSIONS - is it possible  that despite all the sensational  publicity about abortion, despite  the money and organizing efforts  of the anti-abortion groups, the  people are understanding that this  whole issue is, as Mr. Huntington  states, that"no individual or  power group should be allowed to  impose his/her/their beliefs onto  or over the rights of others".  Certainly the women's movement  has been adamant in stating the  issue this way, although we are  still often accused of being  cold heartless child-haters.  These politicians will be  receiving a lot of mail from  the anti-abortion people. How  about letting them know of your  support.  Send off a letter to  John Turner and Ron Huntington  today. Write Hugh Anderson and  remind him that according to  the results of his questionnaire  the people who voted for him  are against his abortion stand  and perhaps he should re-evaluate?  Why not ask your own MP to send  out q questionnaire on this issue  if he haBn't already?  Suggest  he ask people if they think  abortion should be removed from  the Criminal Code or not. Let  us know what the response is.  Sometimes it is very worthwhile  to listen quietly to the heartbeat of the country rather  than the noises that come from  the mouth.  WOMEN IN SWEDEN  Ad in the Swedish daily newspaper  (January 8, 1975.) Expressen  NEW ABORTION LAW  VOLUNTARY ABORTION ADVICE AND IMPROVED  BIRTH CONTROL TNFORMATTON""' " '  The Parliament has decided that a new  abortion law will be in effect as of  January 1, 1975. At the same time  the efforts for voluntary abortion  advice and birth control are being  increased.  The efforts of the society  are primarily focused on the fact that  a woman should not need to request an  abortion.  NEW ABORTION LAW  The new abortion law is to the effect  that the woman herself decides if her  pregnancy should be interrupted or not.  A woman has, after consultation with  a doctor, the right to an abortion  before the end of the 12th week of  pregnancy.  If a woman wants to have an abortion  after the 12th, but before the 18th  week of pregnancy, she has to, in most  cases, talk to a social worker before  the abortion is being performed.  During this consultation the women  gets an opportunity to discuss her  situation, in order to get support  and help.  If the pregnancy has developed further  than 18 weeks, an abortion can be performed only if there are very strong  indications in favour of the action.  In these cases a permission from the  Department of Health and Welfare is  always necessary.  It is important that a woman, who  wants to have an abortion, requests  this as soon as she has decided that  she wants it.  If an abortion is performed before the end of the 12th week  a simple method for abortion can be  adopted.  For later abortions the  woman has to be admitted to a hospital, and the risk for complications  is greater than during an early  abortion.  If a woman wants to have an abortion,  she goes to a gynecological clinic  at a hospital, to a district doctor  or a maternity clinic. An abortion  has to be performed by a medical  doctor in a hospital or other approved  medical institution.  If a doctor  refuses to perform an abortion, the  case should immediately be remitted  to the Department of Health and  Welfare for investigation.  ABORTION ADVICE  All women, who want to have an abortion,  have a right to free personal advice  by a social worker.  The advice is totally voluntary, and  the woman can bring a person who is  close to her, if she wants to.  The  purpose with this advice is to give  the woman support and help in a  difficult situation.  Abortion advice is being given at  gynecological clinics in any hospital,  at maternity clinics or other medical  institutions.  A woman should always  have a possibility to immediate  contact with a social worker, if she  wants to have advice, or if a special  investigation has to be made.  BIRTH CONTROL INFORMATION  The birth control information is being  improved in order to prevent unwanted  pregnancies. The information can be  organized in different ways in different parts of the country.  Information  can be given at maternity clinics,  district nurses' offices,district  doctors' offices, gynecological  clinics in the hospitals, school  health clinics, juvenile clinics, or  privately practicing doctors' offices.  'ĢThe information is free.  In connection with the information certain  contraceptives can be given out free.  From Jan 1, 1975, birth control pills  are covered by the health insurance  and will cost no more than Skr ($ 3)  at any pharmacy.  INFORMATION FROM  DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE  DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND WELFARE  Jlranslated by Berit Lindberg 1966  Ruth Wilson  Born Calgary, Alberta, April 27, 1919. Led  Vancouver Hedlund*s to five straight national  basketball titles (1942-1946), managed Pan-  American Games team in 1959 and coached  Vancouver Eilers to two national titles.  Played in two world softball tournaments and  coached in another. Member of eight B.C. golf  teams and one Canadian team. B.C. doubles  and mixed doubles champion in tennis.  Coached bronze medal basketball team, 1967  Pan-American Games.  The British Columbia Sports Hall of  Fame, formally opened in 1960, is  housed in the B.C. Pavilion on the  grounds of the Pacific National Ex*  hibition. Within the Hall, the history of each sport is traced through  the display of photos, scrapbooks,  artifacts, mementos and other articles of historic significance.  The  Hall also houses an impressive collection of Olympic, Pan-American, and  Commonwealth Games medals. A theatre  and sports film library are available  for research and audio-visual presentations can be obtained for service clubs, schools and community  organizations.  The Hall is open,  free of charge, everyday except Saturday,, and conducted tours can be  arranged by phoning 253-2311(local  238).  Members elected to the Hall of Fame  are featured in their appropriate  sports sections. To qualify as a  nominee for election to the Hall an  athlete must have reached a special  excellence on a national or international level,or have performed in such  a wayaas to bring special honour to  B.C. An athlete becomes eligible  for nomination after a waiting period of three years following (a) retirement, or (b) the performance of  a particularly outstanding achieve-  Faye (Burnham)  Eccleston  Born Vancouver, )une 2, 1920. Excelled in  five sports and was also a member of national  basketball championships Vancouver Hed-  lunds. She was named to 10 B.C. field hockey  teams and was B.C.'s top player in 1950.  Played in a world softball tournament in 1944  and managed B.C.'s female track and field  team in 1949.  Appointed to National  Advisory Council on  fitness & amateur sport.  1967  Mary Stewart  Born Vancouver, Dec. 8, 1945. She set world  swimming records for 100 metres and 1 00  yards butterfly. Held U.S. records for same  events. Before she was 1 7, Mary had held  every Canadian freestyle and butterfly record  up to 220 yards. She won a gold medal, five  silvers and two bronze in international games.  Mary was voted Canada's female Athlete of  the Year in both 1961 and 1962 by both the  AAU of Canada and The Canadian Pre^s.  Margaret  (Taylor) Turner  Born Calgary, Jan. 14, 1912. Dominated Canadian badminton scene from 1935-1940.  Canadian ladies singles cham.p in 1935, national doubles champ 1938 and 1939. Won B.C.  singles title five times. Captured singles title at  major U.S. tournament in 1940. Also  excelled at tennis.  ac's  SPECIAL  WOMEN  1969  Olympics. In 1930, she st  of 5.8 in the 50-yard dash, and-won three  firsts in the Empire Games Trials at Hamilton.  At the 1932 Los Angeles Olympics, she shared  a silver medal for Canada on the 4 x 100 relay  team that was just beaten by the U.S. team  that set a world record in the event. Later, on  a British-Canadian relay team, she helped defeat that record-breaking U.S. team in a race  in San Francisco. Won a gold in the 1934  British Empire Games relay, and was fourth  over 200 meters at the 1934 World Games.  Elaine (Tanner)  Nahrgang  Born Vancouver, Feb. 22, 1951. Known as  "Mighty Mouse", this teenage girl from West  Vancouver's Hillside High met and defeated  the world's best swimmers over her brief but  meteoric four-year career in top international  competition. Rated on her record as Canada's  all-time best woman swimmer, Elaine's  triumphs include an historic four gold and  three silver medals at the 1966 Commonwealth Games in Jamaica; two gold and two  silver medals at the 1967 Pan Am Games in  Winnipeg; two silver and a bronze medal at  the 1968 Olympics in Mexico; national championships in the U.S. and Britain, and a  triumphant tour of South Africa, where she  defeated the then No. One ranked backstroke  swimmer in the world, Karen Muir. Along the  way, Elaine set five world records in the backstroke and was close to world record times in  the medley events. Coached by Howard Firby.  ment that warrants special recognition. Any person or association can  forward a documented nomination.  Of the 80 members of the B.C. Sports  Hall of Fame, 14 are women. They  represent excellence in a wide variety of sports. Young girls have  few models or heroines to identify  with— particularly in the field of  athletics which is dominated by men  as far as the media and the schools  are concerned. Well, here are 14 of  our very own! Dedication and deter*-  mination and enthusiasm make good  models.  1972  Irene Margaret  MacDonald  Born Hamilton, Ont., Nov. 22, 1933. Considered B.C. all-time best woman Springboard  and Platform Diver, having competed provin-  cially, nationally and internationally. Irene  won Canadian Championships 15 times, U.S.  Nationals 6 times and Mexican Championships 2 times. She won Bronze and Silver  Medals at the British Commonwealth Games  in 1954 and 1958 respectively and a Bronze  in the 1950 Olympics. Irene has held many  Canadian administrative positions as well as  various diving coaching positions.  1968  Born Vancouver, B.C., April 4, 1952. Karen  has completed a most impressive record, starting with the Kerrisdale Juvenile Free Skating  Championships in 1959 through B.C. Coast  Championships, B.C. Sectionals, Canadian  Jr. Championships and Canadian Sr. Championships 5 times (a Canad'in record). Karen  competed in two Olympic James and 6  World Competitions, and 3 North American  Competitions—being North American Champion in 1 971 and World Champion in 1 973. In  addition, Karen was "B.C. Senior Athlete of  the Year" in 1971 and 1972 and "Canadian  Sport Federation Athlete of the Year"  in 1972.  Helen Moncrieff  (Stewart) Hunt  Born Vancouver, Dec. 28, 1938. Preceded  sister Mary as Canada's top woman swimmer  of her time, beginning at age 1 5 by winning a  silver medal in the freestyle relay at the 1954  British Empire Games in Vancouver. In 1955,  won a gold medal in the freestyle at the  Pan Am Games in Mexico, and added  silver medals in the medley and freestyle  relay events. In 1956, Helen broke the  listed world record for the freestyle, a mark  that was re-broken three weeks after by  Australia's great Dawn Fraser. Competed  for Canada at the 1956 Melbourne Olympics,  won a silver medal in the freestyle at the  1959 Pan Games. Has since turned to volleyball, starred on the Canadian team at the  1967 Pan Am Games, and was named to  the Canadian World Team.  11973  -  Nancy  (Greene) Raine  Born Ottawa, May 11,1943. Raised in Ross-  land, B.C., Nancy matured as queen of the  world's skiers in 1966-67 and 1967-68, when  she won the official World Championship on  the international tour circuit. Her brilliant  competitive career, unmatched in the history  of Canadian skiing, was climaxed by her performance at the 1968 Winter Olympics in  Grenoble, where she won a gold and silver  medal for Canada in the slalom events. Famed  as Canada's "Tiger of the Slopes". Named  Female B.C. Athlete of Century.  Lynda  (Adams) Hunt  Born Vancouver, June 4, 1920. The first outstanding woman diver to come outof B.C.,  Lynda's competitive career spanned 16 years,  to be followed by an administrative career  that earns her entry to the Hall as an athlete-  builder. The peaks of her competitive career  include silver medals in the tower and springboard events at the 1938 British Empire  Games and a bronze medal in the springboard at the 1950 British Empire Games.  She also placed 9th in the tower event at the  1936 Olympics, and was Canadian Diving  Champion in 1939. She chaperoned the  women's swim team at the 1958 B.E.G.,  coached at the Vancouver Amateur Swim  Club for 20 years and the UBC Swim Club  for 5 years. She has been a judge at top  national and international meets, and has  served as vice-president of the Canadian  Diving Association.  1970  P  Margaret  (Sutcliffe)Todd  Born Montreal, May 31,191 8; in B.C. since  childhood. Has been on the Golf scene in  Victoria since 1938. She has been a holder of  eleven Victoria and District Championship  titles and the runner up ten times; ladies  champion of the Victoria Golf Club nine  times and winner of the B.C. Provincial  Championships three times and runner up  five times. She has represented Canada on four  international teams, as a player and once as a  non-playing captain. Margaret has spent  hundreds of hours working with juniors to  better the standard of women's golf in addition to being on the Vancouver Island Golf  Association Executive numerous times as well  as serving twice on the national executive of  theC.L.G.A.  Eileen  (George) Underhill  Born Moosomin, Sask., April 1, 1899. Considered British Columbia's all-time best  woman badminton player, Mrs. Underhill  dominated the sport from 1920 into the  thirties. She won the B.C. singles title 12  times, shared in the B.C. Ladies Doubles title  11 times, and the B.C. Mixed 5 times. On the  national scene, she was Canadian singles  champion in 1927, shared in the Doubles  championship in 1926-29-30-31 and the  National Mixed Doubles in the same four  years. Many of her triumphs in Mixed  Doubles, including the Canadian championships, were shared with her husband, John.  Long known in B.C. as the First Family of  badminton, the Underhills thus became the  first husband-wife team elected to the B.C.  Sports Hall of Fame.  1971  • • • information and photographs from B.C. Sports Hall of Fame booklet  Audrey  .. (Griffin) Kieran  Born B^urgess Hill, Sussex, England, June 16,  1902. Emerged as a school girl swimmer in  1915 and won a junior race at age 13 and B.C.  championship the same year. After that, she  was confined to senior competition and frequently swam in open events against men.  She never lost a provincial women's championship and also won seven of the 10 Through  Victoria Three-Mile Swims-against male  competition. At various times from 1915 to  1930, she held Canadian and Pacific Northwest titles. studies  POLICEWOMEN CAN HANDLE VIOLENCE  Career opportunities for women as  police officers.are increasing in  British Columbia, but it will take  time for supportive policies at senior levels to change traditional  practices and attitudes.  A report recently compiled by Ms.  Joanne Prindiville, researcher for  the B.C. Police Commission, dispels  the popular myth that female officers  are unable to handle violence,  it  states that women are less likely to  resort to unnecessary force in citizen encounters, and more likely to  diffuse volatile situations. Research  also suggests the public is less likely to react aggressively to female  police officers.  "Training and ability to think clearly are more important than physical  strength in determining police effectiveness," reports Ms. Prindiville who  notes that women excel in the academic police training.  She is optimistic about the future  of women in police service, but admits there are problems. The study  found that policewomen are hindered  by the overprotectiveness of their  male counterparts on patrol.  Also, with only 21 policewomen.on the  Vancouver Police Department (VPD),  they ace highly visible,and subject  to rigorous scrutiny not experienced  by policemen.  The police commission and senior officials of the VPD are supporting the  introduction of more policewomen into  the force and into street duties. And  having more women in the service has  improved attitudes at levels where  deployment decisions are made.  Four years ago, women working for  the VPD were restricted to clerical  and matron duties with limited advancement opportunities. Today, a  female is corporal on the VPD, a  first class constable on the faculty  of the new B.C. Police College is a  woman, and 12 of the 30 new female  RCMP are based in this province.  It  is expected that approximately 20%  of the 100 students taking the spring  course at the B.C. Police College  will be women.  Women are now eligible to serve on  all municipal forces in B.C. They  receive the same pay and training as  policemen. Applicants must be 19  years of age, 5'4' minimum height.  They require a grade 12 education,  driver's license, and no criminal  record.  -reprinted Karen Richardson/  Marilyn Moreton, WCWN  GUARANTEED ANNUAL INCOME  The federal and provincial governments are undertaking serious study  of guaranteed income plans for Canada. Despite current social security  programs, one million families in  this country have incomes of less  than $5,500 per year.  Of those, one-  third receive less than $3,000 per  year, far below the "poverty line'.1  A large percentage of these are  single parent women who are the sole  support of their families.  Some system of guaranteed annual income is likely to be introduced in  the next few years.  It is important  that people understand the proposals  being discussed in- order to decide  which system they support.  Suggested reading: "Orange Paper"  gives the background and general  propositions of guaranteed annual  income plans.  For a short analysis  of the issues, order the "Speech by  the Honourable Marc Lalonde to the  New Westminster Chamber of Commerce,  January 17,1975." Both are available  from the Department of National Health  and Welfare, Ottawa, Ontario, without  charge.  "Toward a Guaranteed Annual Income  for Canadians;An Analysis of the Three  Choices Now Being Considered by the  Federal/Provincial Review," prepared  by Marjorie Hartling and available  free from the National Anti-Poverty  Organization, #300-196 Bronson Ave.,  Ottawa. Ontario.  - reprinted Karen Richardson,WCWN  Reports  REPORT FROM BALD MOUNTAIN  The Career Day for Women co-sponsored by the Counselling Service at SFU  and the VSW was a success. Registration was closed at 200 although  400 people expressed an interest in  attending the conference. Highlights  of the day were the speeches made by  Shelagh Day, Human Rights Officer,  Elinor Ames of the Psychology Department of SFU, and keynote speaker Dr.  Pauline Jewett, President of Simon  Fraser University. Many of the students who have attended VSW High  School Women's Workshops were there.  Some comments derived from the evaluation forms include: "opened up new  vistas for me," "thrill of talking  to key people," "information helped  to clarify my guidelines."  The only negative report came from  two VSW staff members who spent half  an hour wandering through the maze  of FFU trying to find the East Concourse Cafeteria.  -Nadine (Wrongway) Allen  WOMEN IN POLITICS CONFERENCE  The Women in Politics Conference held  by the Terrace Women's Organization  (TWO) in Terrace March 1 was attended  by 106 women from Terrace, Prince  Rupert, Kitimat, Smithers and the  Queen Charlotte Islands.  Some of the topics discussed were  day-care centres, college courses  for women, rape centres, and a minibus system.  Ideas  from these discussions will be drafted into specific resolutions at a future meeting.  The focus of the conference was politics and three women experienced in  this area were on hand: — Skeena MP  Iona Campagnolo, Coservative Party  Vice-President for B.C. Edith Gunning, and federal Advisory Council  on the Status of Women member Joan  Wallace.  "I realized four years ago that the  only way women were going to change  anything was to get involved in politics themselves," Ms. Wallace told  the group, "...you must get inside  where the power is." Ms. Wallace  pointed out how small the actual per  centage of policy makers is in Can~  ada.  "The power is not in voting,  as some people think, but in choos*  ing the candidate in the first place.  When I was nominated as the Liberal  candidate for Richmond-Delta in the  last federal election, there were  only 100 party members present. That  is where the power is,and to exercise  it, you must be a member of a party."  She urged women to come out to party  meetings of their choice.  As Ms. Gunning pointed out, "Women  make up 51% of the world's population — they can't waste their potential."  All three guest speakers attested  to the value of writing letters to  influence government policy, and recommended that s.»ch letters be well  thoughtout and to the point; and  that they be directed to the appropriate department and that they be  well timed.  -excerpted from Prince Rupert  Daily News, March 3, 1975, article  by Diane Wood. inFrY( WHAT'S  £fl "1 GOING  <J*W     ON?  cap college      richmond  Capilano College is repeating the  Weekend Workshop for Couples. . This  workshop is designed for couples,  married or not, who wish to explore  in greater depth alternatives in  communication and personal growth  within a relationship.  Group leaders: Leonard Schein &  Cathy Stewart  Fee: $20 per couple.  April ll,12;i3 at Cap College Rm.A112  LECTURE SERIES  Wednesday evenings at 7:30 p.m. at  Argyle Secondary School, North Vancouver, Rm 411-413.  50c a lecture.  April 2 - Free and Female - Liz  Rupert will examine some of the myths  which surround female sexuality and  the social and political implications  of the sexual revolution for women.  April 9 - Strategies for Change -  Cynthia Flood wil discuss alternate-  ives in lifestyles, social and political structures which the women"s  movement has introduced and the implications these have for far-reaching change.  langara  Feminist Fiction; this course will  compare the treatment of such themes  as rape, abortion, child birth, pres-  titution, and madness in novels by  men and women. Authors will include  Colette, Maugham, Audrey Thomas,  Richard Braughtigan, Violet LeDuc^  Margaret Lawrence and Jane Rule.  Instructor: Gayla Reid  8 sessions, Wed. evenings 7:30-9:30,  starting April 9.  Self Discovery:  there is sometimes  a conflict between what others expect us to be and do and what we ourselves want to do.  This group will  focus on self awareness, self image,  self assertion and communication  skills.  Instructor: Jo Sleigh  8 sessions , Fri*. mornings 9:30-11:30  starting April 11.  For information about the above  courses phone Langara College 324-5  5323 or Gayla Reid 876-0974 or  Jo Sleigh 263-2129 (evenings only).  WOMEN TOGETHER DIRECTORY  As their International Women's Year  project, Women Together of Richmond  are compiling a women's directory  for the Lower Mainland.  The direct*-  ory will list women's organizations  and groups, women's services, businesses run by women, professional  women (doctors, dentists, architects,  accountants, etc), groups of or individual women artists, writers,  film makers, etc.  Women Together have applied for an  International Women's Year grant to  publish the directory. The directory  will sell for a dollar or two and the  money will be put into a fund to help  another women's organization with another project.  If you would like to be listed in the  directory or know of a woman or group  that should be contact one of the  following women. Listing in the  directory is free.  Donna Trottman - 876-8570  Carol Norman - 524-0885  #205- 6750 Balmoral, Burnaby  prince rupert  International Women's Year ->Kll be  celebrated in Prince Rupert with a  Women's Exhibition.  The Exhibition  planned for early April and sponsored by the newly formed "Options for  Women" will include crafts, paintings, filmstrips, oral presentations  and the activities of various service  clubs.  Year long projects of the group include a much-needed women's residence  and a film series to be shown at the  Prince Rupert Public Library.  Contact person Susan-Crowley has given several talks to groups in the  city explaining the aims and objectives of International Women's Year.  She can be reached at:715- 8th Ave  East,Prince Rupert, B.C.  624-6811.  maple ridge  Maple Ridge Status of Women is in  the midst of setting up a Valley  Speakers Bureau — so if you need a  a speaker for a meeting in the valley  contact them at 463-8462 or %21695  Exeter Ave., Maple Ridge.  Maple Ridge Status of Women is also  operating a Transition House for women in emotional or domestic crisis.  This is being done on a LIP grant  which runs out May 31st and it is  hoped that a private social agency  will take over administration at that  point and broaden the House into a  much needed Women's Shelter. This  will free maple Ridge Status of Women  to establish a Women's Centre for  Maple Ridge women.  wcwn  Western Canadian Women's News (WCWN)  has been partially funded this year  by the Secretary of State.  The purpose of this project is to improve  communications on women's issues,  between women's groups, government,  media, universities and community  agencies in B.C. As a news service  WCWN provides feminist news in a  form acceptable to the traditional  media, hoping to increase coverage  of women's issues. WCWN material  has recently appeared with little  editing in the Vancouver SunI  In celebration of International Women's Year and to raise futher money  for the project, WCWN has issued its  "Guide to the B.C. Women's Movement,"  at $2.50, the first complete profile  of feminist groups in this province.  It includes 30 pages of more than  125 listings in over 35 B.C. communities and is available at 2029 West 4th  Avenue, Vancouver, or call 736-3746.  victoria  OUR HIDDEN HERITAGE: B.C. WOMEN  SWAG (Status of Women Action Group,  Victoria) is planning a B.C. History  Project as part of the celebration  of International Women's Year. The  Provincial Museum has already granted  space for a women's exhibit next July.  The exhibit will then travel through  the province.  At one time a woman underwent "civil  death" upon marriage, losing all human rights.  She lacked control over  her own earnings, was not permitted  to choose her domicile, could not  manage property legally her own, sign  papers or bear witness.  The husband  was sole guardian of the children.  These laws applied in the 19th Century  —how many of them apply to B.C. history? When and how were reforms made  in B.C.? And just how far have women  travelled on the long road toward  political, social, and economic e*-  quality in the history of British  Columbia?  Why are women so invisible in history?  One would never guess that women are  in the majority from reading a history  book. Yet the changes which improved  her abject legal and social position  are practically ignored, compared with  the study that has gone into World War  II, World War I, and other male-engineered events.  These changes in  the status of women have had an enormous effect on the lives of over 50%  of the population. Maybe 1975 is the  time to really start bringing our  heritage out of hiding.'  Women involved in the initial stages  of planning and applications for funding are Norrie Preston, Linda Gilligan,  Marilyn Gore, Alice Ages, Maureen Gee,  Mary Mitchell and Carolyn Folse.  - reprinted from Victoria Status  of Women News, Jan-Feb issue.  yukon  Congratulations to Eleanor Millard,  Hilda Watson and Flo Whyard, the  three Yukon women recently elected  to seats in the Yukon Territorial  Government.-Ms. Millard representing  the Ogilvie District and Ms. Whyard  representing Whitehorse West were  elected for the first time.  Of a total of twelve seats, women of  that northern territory now hold 25  percent. MONEY  The Vancouver Status of Women  Ombudservice has been funded  for another full year. We  presented our report to Provincial Secretary Ernie Hall  on March 18, stressing that  the service offered here to  women is not duplicated  elsewhere, and that judging  from the variety and number  of cases the need for this  service is still necessary.  So, we remind you that if you  ever need any answers, or know  of someone"in need of advice  about their legal rights etc.—  we are at your/their service.  VERBAL SELF-DEFENCE  The verbal self-defence group got  off the ground March 10 and our  next meeting will be on Tuesday,  April 1 at 8 pm in the office.  We have begun to work out the  areas we are going to cover  and different people are investigating resource material.  In case you didn't know—the  verbal self-defence .group is  working on writing a booklet  on how to handle verbal put-downs.  So many of us have to live  through some incredible put-  down situations and we thought  it would be handy to have a  little booklet to whip out  in time of need!  Anyone  interested in joining us?  Please come along to the next  meeting or call the office.  And now—here's how ALL the  rest of you can help.  We need  to know of verbal solutions to  put-downs, and we want to get  hold of more put-down "lines".  If you.have something to contribute please fill out the following  form and send it to Verbal Self-  Defence, Van. Status of Women,  2029 West 4th Avenue, Vancouver.  VERBAL SELF DEFENCE CONTRIBUTION  PUT-DOWNS I HAVE LIVED THROUGH  SOMEffl  GOING 0  YOU  NGONAT  •r^W:  Diana Bissell  ANSWERS THAT HAVE WORKED FOR ME  OTHER COMMENTS.'-T HAVE  Pis send to Vancouver Status of  Women, 2029 West 4th Avenue,  Vancouver BC  BCFW VICTORIA ACTION  The aim of the BCFW Victoria  Action weekend is to assemble  in Victoria the largest possible  number of women to present demands  on many issues to the government  and to press for legislative  action. The Victoria Action  will take place on the weekend  of April 18-20 and will feature  the following events: .Convention  -°l the BCFW which will discuss  and vote on both amendments to  and expansion of existing policy  and completely new policy proposals.  All women who attend have voice  and vote.  There will also be a  march through downtown Victoria  and a demonstration at the Provincial Legislature.  On Sunday  there will be a Women's Forum  featuring booths, exhibits,  happenings, art, literature,  cultural displays produced by  women's groups from all over BC.  The entire staff of VSW will be  there and we'd like as many  members to join us as possible.  Register early by sending $5  (payable to B.C. Federation of  Women) to Mary Barretto, 1081  West 16th Ave, Vancouver, VgH IS7.  _ Fees cover hall, childcare and  2 lunches.  Please state whether  or not you need billetting,  childcare (state how many kids  and for how many nights) or  if you need extra $$$ in travel  assistance.  Schedule: Fri. 18th April - registration from 6 pm.  Convention  session on BCFW structure from  8-10 pm.  Social, 6-10 pm.  Sat. 19th April - Convention session  on BCFW policy 9:30-3:30. Demonstration in Victoria 3:30-5:30.  Spcial 8 pm.  Sunday, 20th April -  Women's Forum 11 am-4 pm.  ORIENTATION  The March 13 meeting was terrific!  Everyone present was just at the  stage where they were questioning  parts of their life they had  never questioned before. We  shared a lot of information  and got a good core for a new  consciousness raising group.  Orientation meetings are for  people who want to know more  about what VSW does, why it is  necessary, and how they can become  involved if they wish. All  members welcome, especially new  ones. April orientation is  on Thursday the 10th at 8 pm.  OPEN EVENINGS  Open Evenings are a success! They  happen the 4th Thursday of every  month from 8 - 10:30 pm here in  the office. The casual informal  atmosphere is leading to a relaxed  information sharing conversational  evening.  If you want to ask  some questions, do some reading,  meet other women or whatever  come along to the next OPEN  EVENING on Thursday, April 24  anytime between 8 and 10:30.  The coffee pot will be on!  NEW GUIDE TO WOMEN'S MOVEMENT  This is an unabashed plug for the  "Guide to the Women's Movement in  B.C." that is hot off the Western  Canadian Women's News Service  press. All groups will find it  invaluable, all persons having  anything to do with the women's  movement will find it necessary  to have on hand.  It sells for  $2 and isjavailable from WCWN,  2029 West 4th Avenue, Vancouver.  Please add 50 cents if you are  having it mailed.  SPEAKING ENGAGEMENTS  We may have had beefs about the  IWY ads and criticism for the  whole concept of a special year  being set aside for women, but  there are many women who are just  beginning to ask questions about  themselves, thanks to those same  ads etc. We have been out to 22  different groups/classes in the  last 55 days, talking about  everything from "Women and the Law",  and "Status of Women" to "How to  raise your children in a non-sexist  manner" and "What the Women's  Movement is all about".  The  interest being shown in the women's  movement is from women who have  never before questioned their  role in society. Now we certainly  wouldn't credit the IWY ads for  all this interest, but there's  no doubting the fact that IWY  itself is "allowing" many people  to question themselves, and'  learn more about the women's  groups that already exist.  Meanwhile, if anyone has a  pick-me-up for tired tongues  there are six people in this office  who could use it!  LETTER LOBBY  See page 15 for Dorothy Holme's  terse article on the recently  passed tax bill and send off your  letter.  There is also a short  article on abortion on page  9 that needs your support.  We also remind you that Letter  Lobby is always open to new  members and groups.  If anyone  would like to become involved  in issues other than the ones  we print up in KINESIS each  month, please write or call  the office and we will send  you the "basic info package'.'  CONSCIOUSNESS-RAISING GROUP  There will be a meeting to  start a new cr group on TUES.,  APRIL 8 at 7:30 pm here in the  office. We have a list of  people who want to get going  with a group, please join us  if you want to be a part of  it. Need more info? Call  the office and ask for Diana. letter      lobby  FOILED AGAIN!  Do you remember the November 18,  1974 Budget, in which Finance  Minister John Turner announced  that the first $1,000 interest  accruing on savings accounts  or Canadian investments, would  be tax-free?  Like most Canadians, I was  favourably impressed.  This new  tax measure would again encourage  people to save money and invest  in Canada.  More importantly, it would benefit  the homemaker who might have  interest income from a previous  marriage, investments made while  single, or money inherited from  her own family.  But as the Tax Bill slowly wended  its way through the House of  Commons, I had the uneasy feeling  that "people" did not necessarily  include those women who had chosen  homemaking as a career.  Dan McKenzie (PC, Winnipeg South  Centre) must have had the same  fears. On page 2810 of the Jan 31/75  Hansard he stated in part: "In order  for a married couple to receive  any benefit of exemption on the  wife's earnings, it would appear  that she would have had to earn over  $1806 during the taxable year,  and,therefore, not be a deduction  herself. This appears to be a strong  discrimination against the spouse  of the taxpayer, and in most cases  would be a discrimination against  women.  Since I could not find any further  comments on the point raised by Mr.  McKenzie in subsequent Hansards,  I checked with Revenue Canada -  Taxation, my friendly banker and  a chartered accountant. I also  spoke with two income tax experts  on Jack Webster's program.  Everyone fully concurred with  Mr. McKenzie's interpretation  of the legislation, that is, it is  of benefit only to persons having  a taxable income.  What does this mean to you, the  homemaker? Well, nothing has  really changed - you are still a  "dependent" wife and must report  net income over $314 ($334 in  1975) no matter from what source,  to your husband.  Or you have another alternative.  If your husband does not use the  $1,000 exemption for investments  in his name you can transfer your  assets to him, and thus the family  can benefit from the legislation.  However, there is a lot more at  stake here than beating the tax  man.  So far during International  Women's Year we have been bombarded  with advertisements telling us  that homemaking is an honourable  career, even though it has no  economic value.  Our members of parliament, had  they so desired, could have given  this "career" a little more status  by amending the legislation to  include homemakers, as well as  women in the labour force.  An accountant I spoke to takes issue  with the placement of this clause  on the Income Tax return.  It  should have been on page 2 -  Determination of Net Income  instead of on page 4 - Extermination  of Taxable Income.  Then home-  makers could have used it as an  item to reduce gross income,  since it is the net income that  affects a husband's exemption.  Why could our members of parliament  not see this?  A phone conversation I had with our  MP for New Westminster, Stu Leggatt,  answered this question for me. He  confided that he had just not thought  to look at this proposed legislation  from the homemaker's point of view.  Is this what is wrong in Ottawa?  Are our MP's (male) still incapable  of identifying and acting on women's  issues? If so, I wish they would  also dispense with the hypocritical  IWY advertising.  The Letter Lobby Committee discussed  this tax question at our meeting  on March 11 and sent the following  telegram to Senate Leader Ray  Perrault: REFER LETTER FEB. 28 ONE  THOUSAND DOLLAR TAX-FREE INTEREST,.  WE STRONGLY URGE SENATE ENSURE  THIS BENEFIT APPLY EQUALLY TO  HOMEMEAKERS WITHOUT AFFECTING  SPOUSE'S EXEMPTION.  PLACEMENT  ON PAGE 4 TAX RETURN MAKES THIS  IMPOSSIBLE.  WOMEN NOT IN LABOUR  FORCE MUST BE ENCOURAGED TO  INVEST MONEY IN OWN NAMES.  As you know, the Tax Bill has now  been passed. Of the 41 senators  15  who voted, eight thought the Bill  should be sent back to the House  of Commons for further study.  Can we dare to hope that at .least  one other member of parliament  or senator, besides Mr. Dan  McKenzie, saw the ?1,000 clause"  in its true light? We in the  LETTER LOBBY COMMITTEE believe our  members should state their  dissatisfaction with the shortcomings of this new legislation.  Perhaps we can prevent another  "oversight" in the future.  A sample letter could read something like this:  Hon. Marc Lalonde,  Minister Responsible for the  Status of Women,  House of Commons,  Ottawa, Ontario.  Dear Mr. Lalonde:  I wish to express my disappointment  with the "$1,000 tax-free interest"  clause contained in the recently  passed Tax Bill.  Many Canadian women were under the  impression that this benefit would  apply to homemakers as well as  women in the labour force - but  apparently this is not the case.  I am concerned about the  implications of this clause.  It  seems very inappropriate in  International Women's Year when  women are supposed to gain more,  not less, financial independence.  If the government is not prepared  to make one small move in this  direction, then it should also  dispense with the hypocritical  IWY advertisements, which make  a feeble attempt to give status  to homemakers. Only concrete and  progressive legislation, combined  with action can do that.  Yours truly,  (Copies should be sent to  Hon. John Turner, Minister of  Finance, Hon. Ron Basford,  Minister of National Revenue  at the same address as Lalonde,  and Dr. Katie Cooke, Advisory  Council on Status of Women,  Box 1541, 63 Sparks St., Station  B, Ottawa, Ontario)  Dorothy Holme  Co-ordinator, Letter Lobby  responses  UPDATE ON BREAST CANCER SCREENING  We and several members have had  responses from Health Minister  Dennis Cocke concerning the letters  and petitions supporting/requesting  the mass screening proposal for  breast cancer. He points out that  he has just spent $1.4 million  to provide breast cancer screening  equipment to be used on a referral  basis in 25 B.C. hospitals (distributed on a geographic and population basis). The mass screening  pilot proposal would cost one  million dollars and would cover  only a proportion of the central  Vancouver population.  If the  research done proved conclusive,  province-wide mass screening  would cost much more than that.  We spoke with Dr. Scott Dunbar  of the Ad Hoc Committee on  Breast Cancer (they presented  the mass screening pilot proposal  to Cocke) and he indicated  that Mr. Lalonde of the Dept.  of Health and Welfare in Ottawa  had been approached by Dennis  Cocke about funding for the  program. Dr. Dunbar and  colleagues have received  the funding applications from  Ottawa and are working on  a final "firming-up" of their  proposal before beginning to  fill out the lengthy funding  request.  For all of us this means delay  When you go to Ottawa for money  you really have to wait around!  It is important that we keep on  top of this issue so that it  doesn't end up at the bottom of  some drawer. Please, continue to  send support letters to the  Provincial Minister of Health,  Dennis Cocke (Parliament Buildings,  Victoria) and we will let you know  when to begin sending them to  Lalonde in support of the Ad Hoc  Committee's request for funds.  And remember, B.C. spends  more than $1 million a year for  T.B. control and fewer than 500  new cases were detected last year.  Over half a million B.C. women  risk contracting breast cancer  at some time in their lives. We do  not think that $1 million dollars  for a research project that could  lead to more conclusive evidence  on how to save women's lives is  too much to spend. Ruth Patchett is a beautiful example  of how one woman can involve herself  in the women's movement!  Ruth has been a member of Vancouver  Status of Women since Feruary 1973,  and until 1967 lived in Quesnel where  she was very involved with community  affairs — she had a weekly Women's  Institute radio programme for 10  years, wrote a "W.I. Corner" for the  Quesnel newspaper, was editor of the  "B.C.W.I. News", worked with Old Age  Pensioners, and was secretary of the  Fraser Village Homes Society which  built a low-rent housing project for  senior citizens.  Ruth now lives on a ranch in what  she refers to as "the middle of nowhere." Actually, if you look closely you can find it on a map — a  place called Punchaw — west of the  Fraser River, 60 miles from Quesnel,  60 miles from Vanderhoof, and 50  miles from Prince George. The ranch  is not right in Punchaw of course,  and the Patchetts must drive into  town to get their mail.  But Ruth  Patchett is very nuch in contact with  the 'outside world'.  Is she ever in  contact! A few bits from her latest  letter to the VSW Office will give  you an idea:,  "As I live on a ranch in the  middle of nowhere, I find it  very difficult to help the VSW  in any concrete way. However,  I have resolved for IWY to try  to write all the letters you  have suggested in Kinesis -  also some of my own.  I am enclosing copies of those  I have just completed.  I haven't even tried to change the  wording that you suggested in  most of them.  In future, I will  try to do so.  Before Christmas, I wrote Marc  Lalonde on the abortion issue  and Kamloops-Cariboo MP Len  Marchand on the suggested lightening of penalties for simple  possession of marijuana.  SPOTLIGHT  Ruth Patchett (right) with  sister Elsie  Balmer,founder of L.I.F.E  As we lived for over 20 years  in Quesnel before moving out to  this ranch, our interests remain more in that town than in  Prince George.  I write a "Circle  V Ranch Letter" once a month or  so and will try to bring up  matters of special importance  to women this year whenever I  can relate them to country women or the producer. Have enclosed a copy of my January 7th  Letter."  The packets of letters Ruth enclosed  included:  letters regarding the dismissal of pregnant stewardesses to  Premier Lougheed of Alberta, and Minister of Transport Jean Marchand;  letters regarding the proposals on  matrimonial property tc Attorney General Alex MacDonald, Premier Barrett,  Human Resources Minister Norm Levi,  and Alex Fraser, MLA Kamloops-Cariboo; and letters urging the adoption  of a breast cancer mass screening  program to Premier Dave Barrett,  Health Minister Dennis Cocke, MLA  Fraser, MLA Colin Gablemann, and the  Quesnel radio station open line.  Her Circle V Ranch Letter, read by  the 5100 subscribers of the Quesnel  newspaper, combines news on the production of beef cattle and feeding  stock in cold weather(temperatures  of -44 degrees) with a reminder that  1975 is International Women's Year  and an explanation of the Irene Murdoch case.  She outlines the recommendations of the Berger Commission  Working Group on Matrimonial Property  and supplies a sample letter of support for the recommendations. (The  Letter Lobby Lives!)  She urges "You  need not be a countrywoman to endorse  this type of action as it affects all  married women.  If you feel strongly  about it, then write, no matter what  your lifestyle. The more letters,  the more chance of action!"  All this in a breezy, readable,  three-page, typewritten 'Ranch Letter.  Ruth Patchett proves that location  is not a handicap to involvement in  the women's movement.  She has certainly found her own way to work for  what she believes in and to reach  out to other women.  -Jo Lazenby  Summer at Circle V Ranch  FILMS  Women and film: Women producers and  the feminine world, a festival of 18  internationally produced films by  and about women was recently shown  in Montreal.  Films from Hungary ,  France, Angola, England, Czechoslovakia and other countries portray  women around the world.  They are  available for showings, with subtitles  in English or French as necessary.  For catalogue, information and prices  write: Faroun Films, 136a,est, rue  St. Paul, Montral, Quebec H2Y 1G6  Films by Women, a catalogue listing  dozens of films made by women(mostly  Canadian), includes information on  rental prices and shipping, is available from: Kathryne Wing, Canadian  Filmmaker's Distribution Centre, 406  Jarvis Street, Toronto, Ontario,  12 Like You: a 25-minute, 16 mm. colour film in which 12 women discuss  their "traditionally male" careers.  Rental $100, but reserve at least a  month in advance, from: International  Tele-Film, 47 Densley Ave., Toronto  Equal Opportunities for Women —  Government Style,.  The Office of  Equal Opprotunities for Women in the  Public Service Commission has prepared a second audio- visual presentation called "It's Up To You." It's  designed to encourage people to plan  their careers, take initiative in  reaching goals, and to advise people  of the individual responsibility involved in career planning.  Good as  a discussion starter.  Each set of  slides includes one sound tape and  one Kodak Carousel 140.  Cost of  purchase is $100, but also available  on loan from: Office of Equal Opportunity for Women, Public Service Commission, Room 2210, Tower"A", Place  de Ville, Ottawa, Ontario K1A 0M7.  - reprinted IWY bulletin, Jan-Feb.  peel feelings  In twenty-five words or less what is  Reel Feelings? A collective of about  ten women who produce radio programs,  film strips, and video, tapes.  Reel  Feelings concentrates on women's issues for the media.  The group has  also given workshops at the Vancouver  Art Gallery and for a women's studies class at Capilano College. Over  the nearly two years that the group  has been together it's been a learning and mutual teaching experience  for all the women involved.  Co-op  Radio will broadcast a half-hour program (each Thursday at 1:00 P.M.,  102.7 F.M.) prepared by Reel Feelings. — Susan Levin housing  and single women  There is going to be an unusual new  housing project in Vancouver soon.  Construction is expected to begin in  April or May on two apartment buildings for low income single women,with  no dependents, between the ages of  40 and 65. Not only is the provision  of special housing for women in this  particular situation unusual, but so  is the degree of imput and direction  that the women involved have contributed to the project.  Sometime in 1972 the East Ender Society and the Vancouver Council of  Women decided to investigate the possibilities of a housing project for  single women similar to Oppenheimer  House for single men.  They approached City Council with the idea and  began- interviewing women who, because  of their age and income, could be  considered potential resdients of  such housing.  From this the core  group of the Single Women's Housing  Committee formed and in January 1973  Linda Dorey became co-ordinator of  the group.  Very soon the Committee decided that  the single men's housing that they  had looked at was not really what  they wanted and set about devising  a housing development that would meet  their own needs.  The Committee has  worked closely with the various levels  of government involved in the project  which is being funded by the federal  (75%) and provincial (25%) governments.  Land was purchased from the city by  the government and the Committee was  given a choice of five potential sites.  Of the. three sites favoured by the  Committee, two were purchased by the  government. A two-story apartment  building will be constructed on 5th  Ave between Commercial and Victoria,  and a three-story apartment -building  on the corner of Adanac and McLean.  The two buildings will contain bachelor and one bedroom suites and will  house 48 women.  The members of the Single Women's  Housing Committee have worked closely  with the architects in planning the  buildings and will continue to do so.  And so we may see one of those rarities — housing that suits the needs  of women.  Features such as kitchens  placed where they receive sunlight  instead of being stuck off in a corner, window sills wide enough for potted plants, sliding bathroom doors  that don't take up the space of conventional doors, a shelf beside the  front door to put your groceries on  while you fumble for your key may  seem trivial — but it is these  "little things" that make a world  of difference!  The Committee will  also have deciding power in the choice  of paint colour and types and colours  of fabrics and carpets used in the  buildings.  Each apartment will have  its own balcony and the land around  the buildings will be available for  small vegetable gardens.  The work the women have done as a  group, organizing their committee,  holding meetings, preparing and presenting briefs to City Hall, meeting  with government representatives and  architects, has knit them into an  effective working force.  It has also resulted in close personal relationships growing up between members  of the group. Women working together  to get what they need!  If you are interested in this project  call Linda Dorey of the Single Women's  Housing Committee at 253-5161.  -Jo Lazenby  ...and   human   nights  Further to the article on housing  in the February issue of Kinesis ,  we have had discussions with members  of the Human Rights Branch and the  Rentalsman's office.  The Human Rights Code deals with  basic human rights and Section 5 of  the Code prohibits the discrimination "in rental of any space because  of race, sex, marital status, relig~  ion,colour, ancestry or place of origin." This provision covers both  the obtaining and maintaining of  rented space, and the Human Rights  Branch has the power to investigate  any allegation arising before a tenancy contract.  The Rentalsman does not deal in basic  human rights but works where contracts  are already in effect and are being  violated.  Because of this division, both the  Human Rights Branch and the Rentals-  man feel there would be no purpose  served by the duplication that would  arise if Section 5 of the Human Rights  Code were also incorporated into the  Landlord and Tenant Act.  If a woman feels she is being refused  tenancy because of her sex or her marital status, she does have recourse  to redress this grievance.  She should  contact Ms. Kathleen Ruff, Director  Human Rights Branch, Department of  Labour, Parliament Buildings, Victoria.  There are four Human Rights Officers—  two in Vancouver, and one in the Interior and one in Victoria. The Human  Rights Branch has access to records  and documents and powers to. investigate and suggest settlement to the  parties involved or compensation for  costs incurred. If further action is  necessary a Board of Inquiry will  hold a hearing.  The Board includes  one or more panel members appointed  by the Minister of Labour and has  wide powers to act in settling disputes.  It is felt that it will take awhile  before the legislation concerning  tenancy will have a major effect.  But as more and more cases are resolved by the Human Rights Branch,  landlords and tenants alike will  come to realize that the legislation  does have teeth in it.  -J.L. international women's yean  co-ordinator  NEWS  The Provincial Status of Women Co-ordinator 's mandate is to ensure sound  communications between government and  women's groups in British Columbia,  and to co-ordinate government plans  for International Women's Year.  Ms. Gene Errington's office will coordinate existing government plans  aimed at improving the status of  women in B.C., and based on the needs  expressed by women throughout the province, develop new programs.  Ms. Errington's office is not a funding  agency but the government has allotted  it $200,000 for "direct and indirect  assistance to community groups."  Women's groups outside the lower mainland, where facilities and services  are not so readily accessible, will  have priority in grant considerations.  "We view International Women's Year  as an opportunity to focus on this  important area of government responsibility," says Ernest Hall, Provincial  Secretary responsible for creating the  Co-ordinator's position.  "We do not  see IWY as an isolated acknowledgement  of woman's problems and contributions.  "We expect to make substantial progress  in various areas during IWY.  But more  important is the fact that we will  continue this progress in the years  ahead," says Mr. Hall.  One program which will underwrite  this progress is the new Office of  Equal Employment in the Public Service  Commission of B.C., designed to ensure  all government jobs are equally available to women.  Hall says the government is also working to give incentives to the creation  of community programmes which will  provide an effective, long-term improvement in the status of women.  Errington's office will ensure the government is kept informed on women's issues,  and will try to deep women tuned into  government plans for them as they happen.  VANCOUVER SUN BEGINS IWY COLUMN  The Vancouver Sun is featuring an  International Women's Year column  several times weekly with the potential for a daily piece.  This  column could set a precedent for  more frequent, down-to-earth media  coverage of women's news, with other  newspapers following suit.  The Vane  couver Sun is particularly interested in IWY events but general issues  are acceptable. Material is not limited to the Vancouver area.  Send your press releases, announcements and newsletters to Kayce White  Vancouver Sun, 2250 Granville St.,  Vancouver, B.C. or call her at 732-  2323. The Vancouver Sun is a daily  newspaper. Items must be immediate  and up to date.  -reprinted WCWN  Reprinted from WCWN,  Richardson  prepared by Karen  nac  NEWS  SASKATCHEWAN  Saskatchewan has announced a program  which includes an $80,000 Grant Program to allow groups and individuals  the opportunity to undertake projects  for IWY. An Essay Contest is to be  carried out at the various educational levels throughout the province to  create an awareness in the schools  of the status of women and IWY, and  the sponsoring of a number of dele-  gates to federal conferences.  ONTARIO  Ontario's plans for IWY include a  meeting of key labour and management  representatives on February 18, at  which they'll be asked to assist in  programs for women in the labour  force.  It will be followed up b$i a  reunion late in 1975 to assess its  achievements.  Provincial grants  for amounts up to $1,000 will be  available for groups to undertake  projects for IWY, and the Ontario  government will honour a group of  outstanding women, as well as sponsor a program of legislative change,  particularly in the area of family  property law.  - reprinted IWY bulletin,Jan-Feb.  The National Action Committee on the  Status of Women in Canada has announced its major theme for improving the  status of women during IWY/75 -  LEGISLATION.  Four priorities have  been selected.  1. EQUAL PAY FOR WORK OF EQUAL VALUE  Women in Canada who work full-time  earn on average about 60% of what  men earn. And government statistics indicate that the wage gap  is widening.  2. A CHOICE IN CHILD CARE  Children are our most valuable  "natural" resource. Their parents  —especially their mothers— need  a choice in how to care for them.  In 1973, less than 2% of the children  of working mothers had access to formal day care arrangements of any kind  (including lunch and after school  programs).  In 1975 there is still  an enormous need for service. And,  yet,even where programs are available,  the cost to a family of placing a  child in care can be prohibitive.  NEWS  Rembrandt Jewellery has produced an  International Women's Year charm for  charm bracelets.  The design is a  circle with the United. Nations IWY  symbol in the centre and "International Women's Year" written around  the outside.  The price is $6.50 for  silver, $40.75 and $57.25 for gold.  3. BIRTH CONTROL SERVICES FOR ALL  WHO NEED THEM  "It takes 20 years to have a child"  Canadian 'women and men must have  free accesss to the means of birth  control in order to exercise a  shared responsible.  Birth control counselling and services  must be made freely available to all  who want and need them.  The decision to terminate a pregnancy  is a matter of private conscience and  ought to rest with the patient and  her doctor.  4. EQUAL PARTNERSHIP IN MARRIAGE  Our family laws should recognize  that marriage is an economic as  well as social partnership of equals.  This excert from the February issue  of the Status of Women News is very  brief.  For more detail read NAC  ACTION FOR IWY'75 in that publication  or contact The National Action Committee,. 121 Avenue Rd., Toronto, Ont»  Helen Trucker, Secretary of Canada's  National Action Committee on the  Status of Women decribes the UN's  International Women's Year motto in  the following-terms:  "Equality shall be  of opportunity;  development shall be  not a matter of choice  of soaps and cereals,  but of quality of life;  and Peace shall be  cooperation among  human beings who accept  themselves as equals." subscribe!  I wftah mly to wilw OWIt,  IM to HIimi yoM om  pMltiM Mi CM ftot CM* KZK8X2  $3.06 Mr  KINESIS is published monthly by the  Vancouver Status of Women. Its ob-r  jective is to provide an open channel  of communication between the members  of the organization and to promote  understanding about the changing position of women in society.  Views expressed in Kinesis are those  of the writer and unless specifically  stated do not reflect the policy of  VSW.  SUBSCRIPTIONS:KINESIS is provided as  a service to members of VSW in good  standing. Membership is acquired by  an annual donation. In determining  your donation We ask you to balance  your own financial position and the  fact that KINESIS costs approximately  $3.00 per year per person to print  and mall.  PUBLICATION DATE: The third week of  each month.  COPT DEADLINE: The 1st of the previous month.  SUBMISSIONS: KINESIS welcomes submissions from members and will consider those from non-members. All  submissions, including letters to the  thw editorial committee, must be  accompanied by the writer's name  and address. Pseudonyms will be used where requested. Where necessary,  the editorial committee will edit  for brevity, clarity and taste.  CORRESPONDENCE: Send to : KINESIS  Vancouver Status of Women  2029 West 4th Ave  Vancouver 9, B.C.  Telephone: 736-3746  EDITORIAL COMMITTEE: Jo Lazenby,  Diane Ryals, Bobbie Patrick, Monica  Mui, Viviane Hotz, Margie Colclough,  Diana Bissell  CONTRIBUTORS:  Glinda Sutherland,  Mary Barretto, Diana Bissell, Eve  Johnson, Viviane Hotz, Susan Levin,  Shelia Purdy, Dorothy Holme, Nadine  Allen, Berit Lindberg, Roberta Schlosberg, Jo Lazenby.  TYPING: Margie Colclough, Monica  Mui, Diana Bissell, Jo Lazenby  LAYOUT: Jo Lazenby, Monica Mui,  Diana Bissell, Nadine Allen.  GRAPHICS: Kathy Sopko, Kathy Horrocks,  Monica Mui.  Letters  KINESIS:  I read your magazine from a girl at  work who subscribes.  I couldn't believe it!!  I always thought Women's  Lib was a bunch of silly women with  nothing better to do.  After reading, your magazine I'm ashamed that I formed an opinion while  being ignorant of the causes.  I  really didn't realize we are so put  down.  I guess I always just tuned  it out.  I'm enclosing a cheque for a subscription to Kinesis and plan to  attend some of your meetings.  Thanks for opening my eyes.  Yours,  Ramona Gawler  Kinesis:  Replying to Mrs. Janet Hossack on the  subject of insecticides used in spraying, I would like to remind readers  that governments have promoted and  advocated the use of many sprays and  chemical poisons, long after they  were known to be hazardous.  I place no reliance upon assurances  given to us either by governments or  industry. You have only to look at  the shocking history of DDT,1080,  aldrin, dieldrin, parathion, heptach-  lor, 24D-245-T, agent orange, and a  host of others - pronounced "safe"-  and found to be highly toxic and often  deadly.  Speaking on CBC's "As It Happens",  Sept.24/74, Dr. Sidney Wolf, Health  Research, Washington,D.C., said,  "Dioxin is a very serious contaminent  tt.causes birth defects...."  Dr. Theodore D. Sterling, Simon Fraser  professor and chairman of Computing  Science Program, said (Vancouver Sun  July 17/74) "Claims that small doses  of dioxin have no effect are false."  "The data on which these claims are  based are not adequately analysed."  Environmental Protection Agency in  the USA delayed the hearings into  the use of phenoxy herbicides, because of known hazards.  Dr. Sterling  was involved in that matter.  So much has been written on this subject that it is quite inexcusable for  any government to advocate the use  of 24D, 245T, dioxines, phenoxies,  etc. At best they are controversial,  at worst seriously toxic.  I have en file hundreds of articles,  pamphlets, several books, dealing  with the pros and cons of the subject  of herbicides and pesticides. This  file goes back 39 years, and I say  unequivocally that industry and governments have been criminally negligent in their attitude to these substances.  Dr. Stirling questions the right to  use "man as a diving rod, just because a number of commercial interests feel it is a good thing."  Yours Sincerely,  Eve Smith, Ecology Chairperson, B.C.  Voice of Women.  Kinesis,  Please accept my cheque to cover the  subscription rate for one year for  your newsletter.  I've enjoyed your paper in the past,  but because of my recently renewed  involvement in the women's movement,  I find find Kinesis an absolute must.  I would like also, as one of the many  women who have received advice and  encouragement from Rosemary Brown in  her former capacity as a counselor  at S.F.U., to extend my sincere wishes  for success in her seeking of the national leadership of the N.D.P.  Sincerely  Paula Dyer  Kinesis:  I am sorry that Mrs. Hossack now reads  your articles with some scepticism,  although I can understand it. However,  I can assure her that Mrs. Doucet is  a highly intelligent, dedicated person  who can back her statements with substantiating evidence. On the other  hand the Agriculture Department will  not (or cannot) produce evidence of  no environmental damage.  Is Mrs. Hossack aware that due to the  growing concern of citizens about the  use of chemicals, a Royal Commission  was called to explore the question of  herbicides and pesticides and chemicals in general. The hearings continued for nearly 18 months, because of  the extent of information brought  forward.  The findings will not be  completed until late April this year.  I attended most of the hearings and  it became more and more evident that  the so-called experts do not know,  since testing is inadequate. However  they are prepared to work on the assumption that a chemical is safe until  something occurs to prove otherwise.  This can be disastrous and very difficult to prove, as there is often a  considerable time lag between cause  and effect. Aldo Leopold considers  the great discovery of this century  is not reaching the moon, but the  dawning realization that we are only  on the edge of understanding the complex ecosystem in which we live, and  of which we are a part. How can we  change an uncomprehended system, and  know the end results?  I have written many, many letters to  M.P.'s, M.L.A.'s and the Agriculture  and Health Departments, but have yet  to receive a satisfactory answer.  Why are phenoxies still being used in  this country when Canada was one of  the 58 countries to sign against their  use in Vietnam on the grounds of the  danger to health? Two years ago  Council of Women members representing  60 countries called for a ban on phenoxies, but only New Zealand and Sweden  listened, and acted.  Personally I have little or no faith  in either the Agriculture or Health  Departments.  I do not consider their  first priority is the public health and  welfare.  Yours sincerely,  Alice M. Coppard (Mrs) COMING IN  junc  Opportunities  New officers of the V.S.W. Executive will be elected at the  June General Meeting. Changes  in the present Constitution are  being considered but approximately the same number (15) of  people will be needed.  Nominations should be submitted  to Hanne Jensen, Nominations Officer, Vancouver Status of Women,  2029 West 4th Avenue, Vancouver,  by the end of May. Nominations  should include a biography and  agreement to stand should be obtained from the nominee. Members  are encouraged to nominate themselves.  If you have the time and  energy and interest to devote to  the executive, V.S.W. needs you!  Nominees must be active individual members in good standing for  at least six months.  In the case  of President and Vice-President  nominees must have served at least  one term as an officer of the society.  Highways Minister Graham Lea has  announced appointments to his Department's Task Force on opportunities  for women in the engineering professions .  Chairperson of the Commission is  Linda Shuto of Vancouver, Executive  Assistant for the Status of Women  Program, B.C. Teachers Federation.  Other members of the Commission are:  Dan C- Lambert, P. Eng. of Vancouver,  Managing Director and Registrar, Assoo  iation of Professional Engineers of  B.C.; Robyn Smith of West Vancouver,  who has experience as a draftsperson  working in engineering offices; and  Veronica Holtby of Fort Langley.  Ms. Holtby is a teacher §nd has been  actively involved in women's rights  groups.  The Minister discussed the terms of  reference for the Task Force in an  address delivered at the opening of  a special seminar on women in engineering at the University of British  Columbia.  The seminar is jointly  sponsored by the B.C. DepartmentTM'of  Highways, the Association of Professional Engineers of B.C.; the Faculty  of Applied Science, UBC; the Office  of the Dean of Women, UBC; and the  Vancouver Status of Women.  - reprinted from News Release  issued by B.C. Dept. of Highways,  March 20, 1975.  "Stop oppressing your sister!"  gQl^ll    CALHCAR OF EVBITS  TUES., APRIL  TUES., APRIL 1  1st' MEETING OF  NEW CONSCIOUSNESS-  RAISING GROUP,  7:30 PM OFFICE.  ALL INTERESTED  PEOPLE WELCOME.  ■ NEWSLETTER  MEETING; 7:30 PM  OFFICE.  - VERBAL SELF-  DEFENCE GROUP,  8 PM OFFICE.  APRIL 10- ORIENTATION,  8 PM OFFICE. NEW  MEMBERS WELCOME.  FRIDAY, APRIL 11-  10:30 AM OFFICE,  LETTER LOBBY.  FRI. APRIL 18 - SUN. APRIL 20, B.C.  FED. OF WOMEN VICTORIA ACTION WEEKEND.  SEE PAGE 14 FOR DETAILS.  OPEN EVENING,  DROP BY THE OFFICE  BETWEEN 8 & 10:30  PM AND VISIT.  EVERYONE WELCOME.  receivii^fvnc/iftf  ,B!7