 2 VSW's tenth birthday  party. In high spirits, we  look back at the last  decade and forward to the  next.  W  1 1 Women bear the  burden of the high cost of  living. Enough is enough!  March 8,1981.  3 What women want and  what we won't get in that  Charter of Rights and  Freedoms.  12 This March 8,250,000  workers in B.C. are out on  strike. We examine the  issues from a women's  perspective.  <  <  <  4 Cheekeye-Dunsmuir:  fight B.C. Hydro's  transmission system by  blocking the bulldozers.  i 4 In Canada, the push  for equal pay for work of  equal value is on. An  overview for you.  <  O For some it was  Operation Butterfly. For  others, a clenched fist  was a more appropriate  symbol.  1 8 Same as in Shelagh's  day: UBC women are still  getting the short end of  the stick.  8 Women Against Prisons  discuss reformism vs.  revolution, and the fear of  prisons within the local  women's community.  22 Robin Morgan at  UBC Women's Week. Did  she go too far or not far  enough?  SUBSCRIBE TO KiMMJiJ  Published 10 times a year by Vancouver Status of Women  1090 West 7th Ave., Vancouver, B.C. V6H 1B3  Subscriber  Member/Subscriber  Institution  Sustainer  $10  By donation  $20  $50  Name  Address  Payment Enclosed  Phone  Please  remember that VSW operates on  inadequate  funding —we need member support!  MARCH 1981  KMESIJ  news about women that's not in the dailies  c/)  oi      -^  The high cost of living was theme for this year's  INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S DAY  CAN/  CANAC^ Kinesis    March 1981  -^^_    VSW  Vancouver Status of Women  is ten years old  and proud  "Our involvement in the women's movement  completely changed our lives," explained  Joan Wallace, a founding member of Vancouver Status of Women and our first president .  She's right. That's why were came together  on February 21 at the University Women's  Club at Hycroft to remember and celebrate.  For it was at Hycroft, exactly ten years  ago, that the Vancouver Status of Women  was born.  We didn't realise what a long struggle  it was going to be  Joan Wallace spoke about those early days:  "When we first started, many of us had the  naive idea that we would simply spend a  year or two persuading the government to  implement the 167 recommendations of the  Royal Commission on the Status of Women  and then go back to our regular lives."  "Gradually, it came to us that women had  to go much further than merely lobbying  the government."<  Nevertheless, she recalled, the first few  years were unforgettable ones of "tremendous enthusiasm and optimism." Back in  1972, at VSW, we were full of "the sweet  smell of success."  One of our brightest successes was the  election that year to the legislature of  two VSW activists, Rosemary Brown and Phyllis Young. Both women were at the birthday party, honoured among sisters.  Rosemary Brown, who received a tremendous  standing ovation, commented that neither  she nor Phyllis Young expected for one  moment that they wouldn't be followed into  the legislature by an ever-increasing number of feminists. We must carry on that  battle, stressed Rosemary Brown, because  until we control the decision making, w§  do not control our lives.  We're also poorer than we were ten years  ago, Rosemary Brown added. The wage gap  is growing wider. The cost of living escalates while women's wages fall behind.  VSW must continue to struggle around those  issues, too, she concluded. And to remember that, whether we like it or not, we  are fighting together as "sisters, family."  Jan Lancaster, a member of the current VSW  executive, outlined to the gathering at  least a dozen ways in which we can all take  part in VSW's work of outreach into the  community at large.  The final speaker on the birthday party  program was Gene Errington. As a VSW ombuds  woman and later as the Provincial Coordinator on the Status of Women, Gene Erring-  ton is a well-known friend. Like so many  other VSW alumni, she has taken her feminism into other struggles and is now a researcher with the Canadian Union of Public  Employees. It was in this capacity that  she outlined the issues in the civic workers strike. The strikers are demanding  equal base rates for inside and outside  workers, a demand all feminists support  because it would serve to narrow the wage  gap between the job ghettoes.  Reva Dexter, who emceed the evening with  characteristic elan, pointed out that the  city's equal employment opportunities program — which she was instrumental in developing — should never have been dismantled, precisely because it was geared tr  address the wage inequalities of female  and male civic employees. -  Songwriter and singer Carol Street entertained us with her own songs, and Sylvia  Spring closed the formal part of the evening with her slide/sound look at Canadian  women. Spring's production, which combines  songs and images of women's lives, is a  superb celebration.  We had a wonderful party. See you all at  the same time, 1991. Cj  Birthday celebrations HUMAN RIGHTS  What constitutional rights we women want—and won't get  are the ones raised by the  Women's Research Centre and the Vancouver  Status of Women in a presentation to the  Special Joint Committee on the Constitution. The joint brief was presented by Jan  Barnsley of the Research Centre and Marg  Cunningham from VSW.  We print thrm here because March 8 is  traditionally our time for voicing our  demands,  knowing full well that it will  be a long struggle before any of them  are implemented.  AH women have the right to control over  their reproductive lives  Freedom of choice is fundamental to the  health of the individual. Women who are  taking on the twenty year responsibility  of raising a child must have to right to  decide when, and at what intervals they  will bear children, and how many they will  have.  The right to equal pay for work of equal  value  We know that women work because it is an  economic necessity. Half of all adult  women are working outside the home, and  they make 58%  of men's wages.  The objection may be made — "but the man  is the principal breadwinner." What are  the facts? Sixty-one per cent of women  who work outside the home are single, divorced, separated or married to men  making less than $10,000 a year.  In spite of the dramatic rise in the number of women working outside the home in  the last ten years, the numbers of them in  low-paying clerical, sales and service  jobs is increasing. Between 1971 and 1979,  the number of women in service occupations  increased from 45% to 54%; and in clerical  occupations, from 68%  to 77$.  Women in Canadian society are socially and  economically dependent on men as women  have been traditionally in western societies.  It is no accident. Women are kept  in the worst jobs, the lowest paid jobs,  as a result of women's socially ascribed  responsibility for maintaining the family  and employers■ understandable desire to  maintain a docile and cheap labour force.  In addition, families traditionally invest  less in a girl's education because it will  bring a lower return in the labour force.  So, we have the existing situation whereby  women who participate in the labour force  are found in job ghettos — positions that  have been defined as "women's work" —  that are likely to be non-unionized and  where they are much more subject to layoff at short notice.  Thirty-four percent of women in the labour  force are in clerical positions, 18%  in  service, 11$ in sales and only 5%  in managerial or administrative posts.  Even  fewer women are to be found in technical  or skilled trades. Women's wages relative  to men's are steadily declining; for  example, the wage gap was $2,700 in 1965,  and $6,000 in 1975. And this when approximately 4-00,000 women are looking for work,  according to recent estimates.  Ironically these accelerating trends  we're referring to above, are taking place  at a time when the average single woman  spends 48 years working outside the home;  the woman with one child, 38 years; and  the woman with two children, 34 years.  How many women realize that, due to necessity, they will probably stay at home  with their children for only 7 years (or  less, if these trends continue)?  Why is this tradition not being altered,  but reinforced at present — with the wage  gap widening, and the numbers of women in  job ghettos increasing? Equal pay legislation, enacted in every province in the  50's, has proved to be easy for employers  to work around.  Why? One reason may be that employers are  able to save billions of dollars by this  practice (estimated at $7 billion in one  year).  The consequence is the maintenance of a  secondary class of persons forced to continue in their relationship of economic  dependence.  Every adult person has the right to a guaranteed annual income sufficient to meet a  minimum adequate standard of living as  defined by the Statistics Canada poverty  line  In 1978 the poverty line for a single person  in a large city was $4,844; in a rural  area, $3,500. For a family of four,  in a  large city, it was $10,654; in a rural  area, $7,747.  Nowhere in Canada does the welfare family  with two children receive this minimum  decent income.  In Montreal,.families  struggle with an income 40% below the poverty line. And this with an unemployment  rate for women of 9%  (6.6% for men), at  one point in 1980. This, of course, does  not include those women who have given up  looking for work, and consequently are not  registered.  The Old Age Security payments plus guaranteed income supplements do not meet the  poverty level for unmarried senior, citizens.  The guaranteed annual income for all adults could provide a salary to the dependent homemaker, who could receive the  cheque in her/his own name with a corresponding deduction from the spouse's income  through income tax, given the enabling  legislation.  We now have the anomalous situation of the  husband being able to claim married exemption with no guarantee of money going to  the wife. In'only one province, Manitoba,  is the husband required to give his wife a  reasonable cash allowance to be spent as  she decides.  This right, supported by enabling legislation, would also permit a homemaker to contribute to the Canada Pension Plan, thus  avoiding the present unjust, inequitable  situation, where a widower over 65 years  of age continues to receive 100% of the  CPP, whereas a widow, over 65, who has  been previously a dependent homemaker,  has the CPP payments cut to 50%.  those doctors who feel their incomes are  too low — and this at a time when doctors  again lead all other occupational groups  as the highest income earners.  Also at a time when the three largest urbar  areas of Canada have a doctor surplus,  while many rural areas, especially in the  Atlantic provinces and in the north, are  without doctors.  Every person shall have the right to equal  access to adequate health care  The constitutional protection would ensure  that "Medicare" is not dismantled, despite  All children have the right to equal access  to quality, free childcare  The benefits of group child care are  obvious. For those children who are fortunate enough to experience it, group  child care is their initial encounter with  the formal educational process.  Therefore,  governments must ensure, in their traditionally accepted responsibilty for education, the provision of equal access to  quality, free child care.  Single mothers with children form the  group most disadvantaged by the serious  lack of day care centres. Many of them  are forced to stay at home on welfare, well  below the poverty line, or to go to work  at poorly paid jobs and make private,  often unsatisfactory, arrangements for  this care — by non-professionals, also  underpaid. Day care facts haven't caught  up with the 80's.  Between 1969 and 1979  women joined the work force at a dramatically accelerating rate, and as we have  seen, the majority did so for real economic need.  However, in British Columbia today, only  one child in ten has access to a licensed  r  approved day care centre.  The great  majority of these centres in Vancouver,  Victoria and the Lower Mainland have long  waiting lists despite average fees of $180  to $200 per month per child.  All persons have the fundamental right to  protection from physical assault, including  within the family  This right to protection is not questioned  outside of the family. However, we are  aware that husbands assault their wives in  approximately one family in ten.  It is  clear that wife assault has tragic and  horrifying,physical and emotional consequences for women.  It is equally clear that women's attempts  to get help and to change their situations  are thwarted by policies and practices of  institutions and agencies that deny the  consequences and realities of wife battering and instead blame the victims.  They  reinforce women's imprisonment in the  privacy of the family as an institution.  Lack of protection in cases of wife assault  is a major short-coming of law enforcement and legal services in Canada.  Either parent is guaranteed the right to  parental leave of one year without loss of  salary and with the right to return to the  same or equivalent position Kinesis    March 1981  ACROSS B.C.  Cheekeye-Dunsmuir: fighting the transmission system  By Cole Dudley  On February 15,  Women Against Nuclear Technology sponsored an immensely successful  one-day workshop on nuclear issues.  Inspired by that day, Kinesis decided to adopt  its spirit,  and to present here an introduction to an important local struggle.  The Cheekeye-Dunsmuir Transmission System  is a B.C. Hydro project that will connect  Cheekeye (several miles north of Squamish)  across the Sechelt Peninsula, Nelson and  Texada Islands to Vancouver Island at Duns-  muir (near Qualicum). In this way, the mainland is connected with the Vancouver Island  grid.  Future plans propose "another system. This  one will stretch from Cheekeye to Kelly  Lake, thus connecting Cheekeye-Dunsmuir in  to the provincial grid, which in turn extends into the Bonneville grid in the United States.  Other B.C. Hydro plans for our future include building a nuclear thermal generating facility on Vancouver Island by 1998.  The Cheekeye-Dunsmuir system would enable  Hydro to connect with the nuclear plant  and export nuclear-generated energy to the  U.S.  This proposed system has earned the wrath  of Vancouver Island citizens for many reasons.  First and foremost is B.C.Hydro's  lack of public accountability — rarely are  there public hearings over Hydro's use of  public land for energy matters.  Concerning B.C. Hydro's case for the large  increases in the power requirements for  Vancouver Island, even the experts are now  questioning their claims.  The B.C. Energy  -  Commission's estimates are only three-fifths  those of B.C.Hydro.  Moreover,  Hydro does not encourage conservation of energy.  This is apparent through  their policy of charging lower prices per  unit of energy as more energy is consumed.  To pay for the massive expenditures, B.C.  Hydro obtains financing from Canada Pension Plan Funds, provincially-trusted pension funds and international loans. The  borrowing by Hydro on international markets  encourages a worsening of Canada's overall  balance of payments.  What's more, the capital-intensive projects  pursued by Hydro do not create jobs. B.C.'s  unemployment rate continues to rise.  Alarmed by this information and encouraged  by the victory of the people of Lasqueti  Island — who previously halted Hydro's  plan to set power lines across their island  — a group of people on Texada Island have  organized to block the construction of  the Cheekeye-Dunsmuir transmission system.  After meetings with B.C.Hydro representatives, where they received only the professional brush-off, the Texada Island opponents of the Cheekeye-Dunsmuir project  turned to threats and minor acts of sabotage, such as removing the survey stakes.  B.C. Hydro then obtained a Supreme Court  injunction, hoping to keep away possible  trouble and costly delays.  In August 1980, Texada citizens began to  block the bulldozers every day  In August 1980 daily demonstrations began  to block the bulldozers constructing access  roads on Texada Island in an effort to  bring the issue to public attention.  B.C.Hydro laid "contempt of court" charges  against nine people who participated in  the demonstrations, claiming they had  broken an injunction prohibiting interference with construction of the Cheekeye-Dunsmuir system.  The trial began in the B.C. Supreme Court  in November of last year. This February,  the court found seven people guilty of  "opposing authority." The seven — Susan  and Carl Rising-Moore, Paula Laurie, John  Lennerd Leres, Marguerite Mueller, Murray  Kennedy and Iris Griffith — are now awaiting sentencing.  However, the fight to force a full-scale  governmental hearing into the economic and  social costs of B.C.Hydro's Cheekeye-Dunsmuir exploits will continue.  B.C.Hydro's costly adventures must be  forced out of the back rooms of big business into the light of public scrutiny.  You can become involved:  * Contact the Cheekeye-Dunsmuir Alliance.  In Vancouver, write to 3409 Prince Edward  Street.  * Contribute to the Cheekeye-Dunsmuir Defence Fund, Account #18285, Powell River  Credit Union, 6239 Walnut Street, Powell  River, B.C.  * Ask to receive their newsletters by contacting the Cheekeye Dunsmuir Alliance at  Box 8, RR #2, Craig Road, Powell River,  V8A 4Z3. 9  Why I got involved in  the Cheekeye-Dunsmuir action  By Paula Laurie  In the spring of 1980 I went to the local  community hall to view a video on the attempts of three women to stop 'snuff movies in New York City.  The three women in that video came together  without any prearranged plan or knowledge  of each other. They chained the doors of  the offending theatre together and wrote a  message on the display case. .They were  charged with vandalism.  During the subsequent interview one of the  women made a statement which affected me  profoundly. When asked why she had taken  that action, she responded with an answer  which I believe is crucial to us all, female and male. She said, if we know something is wrong and do not act upon it, it  is an act of death.  I believe that failure to act engages us  in both physical and spiritual death. By  physical death I do not mean the death  which may occur with the spraying of herbicides etc, but the death which occurs  within our bodies when we are placed in an  untenable situation.  On August 13, 1980, when I committed an act  of civil disobedience on Texada Island, it  was the image of these three women that  was foremost in my mind.  With a group of seven women I halted the  work of two D8 bulldozers employed by B.C.  Hydro in the construction of the Cheekeye-  Dunsmuir transmission line.  By this action we were voicing our disapproval of the transmission lines for the  following reasons:  * Thousands of acres of agricultural land  will be flooded in the process of providing electricity for the line;  * Potentially dangerous herbicides will  be used to destroy vegetation along the v  transmission line;  * The development of alternative energy  sources including conservation will be  slowed down on Vancouver Island;  * The line will possibly be used to transmit energy generated by a nuclear plant  from Vancouver Island to the mainland;  * The line will result in a loss of jobs  to B.C. residents, because massive power  projects produce fewer jobs than any other  capital investment.  We did not take this action lightly  We did not take this action lightly. We  were aware that it is a criminal offence,  punishable by a maximum jail sentence of  two years. We took this step as a last  resort. It was the culmination of a series  of frustrating attempts to prevent the  Cheekeye-Dunsmuir line from being built.  Over a period of seven days of obstructing  the work of the bulldozers, nine people  were arrested. Five of us are women.  I would like to share with you some of my  thoughts on civil disobedience, and on  being a woman involved in civil disobedience .  The basis of civil disobedience is for me  located in the Canadian Criminal Code  which states that a person is negligent  who in doing anything or in omitting to do  anything that is his  (her)  duty to do  shows wanton disregard for the lives or  safety of other persons.  However, I believe that civil disobedience  is valid only after you have exhausted all  other legal avenues. In order to validate  any act of civil disobedience, it is important to keep a record of all the avenues you have explored, including letters,  petitions and meetings.  Secondly, in order to be credible and  'safe', those people taking action should  be local residents. After the initial  excitement is over, those arrested will  need support. And in practical terms it  is difficult to support someone who lives  hundreds of miles away.  I do not believe numbers matter. Twelve of  us had considerable impact, which is still  being felt.  It is a matter of commitment.  It's still a patriarchal society  What about being a woman involved in civil  disobedience? For all its changes, ours  is still a patriarchal society. In breaking the law as a woman you will become  acutely aware of this. If a man commits'  an act of civil disobedience he is taken  as a serious citizen voicing his objection.  You, on the other hand, will be cast in  the role of child, and a silly child at  that.  You will hear such statements as, Don't  get excited; Don't worry; We know. And  if you are not strong you might crumble  beneath them.  In the dark hours of the night I wondered  if I had not in fact been foolish, caused  everyone a lot of bother. It is difficult  to hold on. Our roots of insecurity are  deep and our sense of power undeveloped.  And yet I am convinced that we can place  absolutely no trust  in either corporate  leaders or politicians.  It is only when  we, as common people, act,  that our civilization will right itself. Perhaps, you  will say, it is too late...I say that for  our own personal salvation we must act.  Silence is a death wish.  0. ACROSS CANADA  One thousand women gather in Ottawa to discuss constitution  On the weekend of February  14 and 15,  more  than a thousand women met in Ottawa to  present their demands on the constitution  to the government.    The conference was organized by an ad hoc committee after the  cancellation of the ACSW-sponsored conference .  By Marg Cunningham  Friday, February 13. Chelsea Club, Ottawa.  Dinner. Flora MacDonald comes to our table.  Her mission: politicking. Tragic cutbacks  in support to higher education will be announced by the Liberals this spring.  Flora leaves. Tense conversation ensues.  Five of the women at the table will be  panelists next day. We discuss the problem  of shared jurisdiction in social services,  family law. We discuss custody and maintenance .  Evening in Margaret Mitchell's office. A  small group from Ottawa and Toronto assembles 400 conference kits for the next day.  Wine, Scotch and work. We learn that there  may be up to 700 delegates coming.  Saturday, February 14. West Block, Parliament Buildings. More than a thousand women have shown up! Women from every province, and from the Yukon. Women crowd in  to three large rooms. Two television monitors are used to let us all know what's  going on. Women line the walls, sit on the  floor.  There is anger. We were denied a hearing  in September 1980.  The constitutional conference planned for that time was cancelled  due to the translators' strike. But the  translators themselves had offered to work  for it. We were again denied a conference  on the constitution in February 1981. But  we're having one, anyway.  We can embarrass the government, but  can we do anything more?  What can we achieve? We can embarrass the  government.  Can we do anything more?  For some women, this conference is Operation Butterfly. Maureen McTeer, for one,  has butterflies on iced cookies at the  Stornaway reception Saturday evening. For  other women, a clenched fist is a more appropriate symbol.  But all are joyful at  our numbers.  The agenda unfolds. The organizers are  young, articulate, uppity, Anglo, middle  class, concerned, patient. They tell the  story of how the conference was conceived.  It all started at the Cow Cafe, Toronto  It started over lunch at the Cow Cafe, Toronto. The Ad Hoc Committee for Canadian  Women sprang from various networks of women in Toronto and Ottawa. From there, it  spread across the country.  Among the participants in the ad hoc committee are the National Action Committee  on the Status of Women (NAC), the Canadian Conference on Learning Opportunties  for Women (CCLOW), the National Association of Women and the Law (NAWAL), Women  for Political Action (WPA), CARAL , the  YWCA and various political parties and professional groups.  Within three weeks, the organizers have managed to produce an agenda of twenty speakers, conference kits, meals, billetting,  background papers and translators. MPs  Flora MacDonald and Pauline Jewett booked  rooms in the West Block of the Parliament  Buildings — the original conference site.  There are four delegates from Vancouver,  plus at least half a dozen observers. Our  objective: that the conference pass a resolution demanding an amendment to Clause  7 of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms  to give women control over our reproductive lives.  The organizers struggle womanfully with  the usual frustrations: individuals with  microphonitis, women with vested political  party interests to pedal....  A passionate woman takes the mike, "I  strongly object to the Tories trying to  take over this conference." Much clapping.  Then there are the debates of Roberts Rules  vs. the collectiv  Attention is given first to corporate women's needs, second to the most disadvantaged. What about women in the middle?  The problem of other regions, other cultures, other languages persists. Despite  the translation, the conference is mainly  an Anglo event.  Would the conference endorse sending the  Charter to London with the rest of the  constitutional package? Or would it  agree with the position adopted by the  Conservatives and by some provinces (notably Saskatchewan) that the Charter should  be determined after 'matriation'?  The verdict: to discuss the Charter clause  by clause and decide later.  Broadsheet  Deborah Acheson, a lawyer from Victoria and  a representative from NAWAL, objects strongly to the sloppy language in the Charter  of Rights and Freedoms.  Slipshod wording,  Acheson points out, begets litigation.  Here's some of our major resolutions for  constitutional change:  We resolve that persons be used throughout  the Charter instead of any other word. At  the moment the Charter refers to 'everyone',  to 'individuals', to 'persons' to 'anyone'  and more. The result: a field day for lawyers.  The conference also resolves that any limitation to Clause 1 of the Charter -- which  guarantees rights and freedoms — should  follow the format and content of Article  4 of the United Nations International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.  This provides for very stringent tests on  a government's abrogation of civil rights.  The government has to prove, under Article  4, that there is a threat to the health  of the nation  To Clause 7, which reads, "Everyone has the  right to life, liberty and security of the  person," the conference recommends three  changes. 'Everyone' should be changed to  'all persons' and 'all persons' must have  the right to reproductive freedom and the  right to equality of economic opportunity.  Success!  Sexual orientation, political belief and  marital status, we decide, must be included in Clause 15's list of prohibited  grounds of discrimination.  Should we vote to entrench the Charter of  Rights and Freedoms within the constitution? Yes or no?  It's a hot debate at the end of a long day.  It's 10:30 p.m. and the translators have  already given us an extra half hour.  The pro-entrenchment supporters argue that  the Charter will be the ultimate defence  of the citizen against the arbitrary power  of the state, or, in Debroah Acheson's  phrase, against "the tyranny of a transient  legislative majority."  Entrenchment opponents stress the inadequacies of the present document, the unseemly haste with which it has been thrust  upon us and the greater power it gives  the courts, especially the Supreme Court.  Speakers for and against. An amendment  passes which would permit entrenchment only  with our resolutions added to the Charter.  More speakers. A vote. Entrenchment it is.  Sunday was Doris Anderson's day  Sunday, February 15. Ottawa City Hall.  Today we discuss the Advisory Council on  the Status of Women. To be or not to be?  Whether one likes it or not, this is Doris  Anderson's day. Gruff, forthright, ex-Liberal candidate, Anderson proclaims: "The  next time a cabinet minister tries to tell  women to go home and shut up, they'll think  twice about it." Three weeks of front-pagi  front-of-camera, cross-country slanging of  Lloyd Axworthy culminates here. A cheering  standing ovation.  Doris has two recommendations. We should  reform the Advisory Council on the Status  of Women. We should not allow the government to dismantle it.  Women line up at the mikes.  The ACSW research staff should be expanded  because several excellent studies have  been published and more are in progress.  The ACSW should send out information to  women, possibly in the mother's allowance  cheque.  A women's convention centre should be created in Ottawa.  The ACSW must choose as chairperson a woman  well known for her work with women's groups.  The number of ACSW vice-presidents (three  — with large salaries) should be reduced.  ACSW members should be appointed to represent specific groups : unions (a million  Canadian women), immigrants, native women,  academic women and so on.... The ACSW members should be selected by women's groups,  by an all-party parliamentary committee....  The ACSW should report to parliament, not  to a cabinet minister. The ACSW should be  set up by statute, not by an Order in  Council (which can be dismantled at the.m  whim of government).  An agreement is reached: a delegation from  ten women's organizations will present  these demands to Lloyd Axworthy tomorrow.  Excitement mounts. A resolution to demand  Lloyd Axworthy's resignation passes. Claps  and cheers.  Doris has called her three vice-presidents  'moles' and 'patsies'. Now the conference  demands their three heads. Is there another side to this story?  Ho hum in the House  Next week in the House of Commons the Prime  Minister offers to consider the conference resolutions if the Conservatives will  support the Charter. The Minister of Justice states that there is now little chance  of amendment to the Charter. He adds that  there are no plans to change the laws on  abortion. Q Kinesis    March 1981  INTERNATIONAL  Soviet feminist Tatyana Mamonova is coming to Vancouver  By Linda Grant, for the Mamonova Tour Committee  On March 14,   Tatyana Mamonova,  an exiled  socialist from the Soviet Union will be  speaking in Vancouver.     Editor of the first  feminist journal to appear in the USSR in  fifty years,  she is in Canada to inform  her sisters in the West of the condition of  women in Russia and to defend her sisters  in jail there.     In this article,  Linda  Grant,   of the Mamonova Tour Committee,  talks about the rise of feminism in the  Soviet Union.  Women in the Soviet Union.  For years many  feminists, particularly those of us who  define ourselves as also socialists, have  studied the position of women in this, the  first country to make a revolution.  However we define the politics of the Soviet Union as it is now, we know that for  women the revolution meant a huge step forward.  We know that the struggle for free  abortion on demand and the fight to escape  the traditional female job ghettoes have  been won long ago.  But what is life in the USSR really like  for women? What struggles remain?  Thanks to the courage of a collective of  Soviet women who, in December 1979, produced Almanach, the first feminist samiz-  dat (dissident journal), the fifty-year-  old silence has been broken.  Mot since the journals, discussion bulletins and pamphlets of the Zhenotdel  (the women's commission of the Bolshevik Party)  were silenced in the late 1920s has the  voice of Soviet women been heard so clearly.  We are witnessing, it seems, the birth of  a women's movement.  But if there has been a birth it has been  a difficult one.  No sooner had the first  ten hand-typed copies been secretly distributed" in Leningrad than the Committee for  State Security (KGB) told the members of '"  the collective that if they continued with  their activities, they would be arrested.  Others were offered the choice of unspecified charges or exile to the West.  Four have chosen exile: Tatyana Mamonova, .  Yuliya Voznesenkaya, Tatyana Goricheva  and Natalya Malakhovskaya. All have refused silence.  Mamonova, who will be speaking in Vancouver  March 14, has found a temporary home in  Paris. In the hope that she will be able to  return openly one day, she continues to  edit Almanach from Paris, and tries to  carry on the work of building a women's  movement inside the Soviet Union.  Born in Leningrad in 1943, Mamonova is an  artist, and was, during the 1960s", an organizer of the dissident Painters' Union.  Those of us who have read Almanach  (recently translated and published in Britain under the title Women and Russia ) have been  excited, puzzled and sometimes dismayed by  its contents.  Almanach has six major themes  Almanach  has six major themes: motherhood  and health care for women; women in prison  and other detention centres; gay women; women in art and culture; the larger dissident movement; Marxism and Christianity.  The articles depict a world of filthy  health care facilities, of massive alcoholism among men, of daycare workers who steal  food intended for children and of incarceration in mental hospitals of lesbians and  gay men.  These are some of the objective conditions  Soviet women face. But already a split has  developed in the collective as women struggle to identify the source of their oppression.  Some women, the Maria group, have turned  to the unofficial Orthodox Church and have  elaborated a Virgin Mary cult which lays  heavy emphasis on chastity.  Others, however, of whom Mamonova is a representative, describe themselves as socialists and feminists.  Their quarrel is  not with socialism but with the lack of democratic rights in general and the lack of  rights for women in particular.  Ninety per cent of Soviet women, Mamonova  says, are not religious, and they know that  the Orthodox Church can offer them nothing.  Mamonova's concerns are with far more basic  issues such as abortion, contraception and  health care.  Tatyana Mamonova speaks March 14 at the Ironworkers Hall,  2415 Columbia, 7:30 p.m.  Also at SFU on March 12,12:30 p.m. in Rm A9201, and at UBC  on March 13 at noon, Rm 202 Buchanan Building.  Although the editorial collective of Almanach  is composed of artists and intellectuals — like the women's movement in Europe and North America fifteen years ago  — Mamonova emphasizes that they direct  their ideas not to the dissident movement,  nor to women in the dissident movement,  but to all  women.  Both Mamonova's feminism and her activities in the dissident movement have always  been within the' left-wing current and not  the right, whose adherents, like Solzhen-  itsyn, believe that capitalism can be  restored.  But at the same time, Mamonova says that  feminists in the Soviet Union have been  forced to take an increasingly independent  stance. The dissident movement, she says,  is led almost exclusively by men and it.  has failed consistently to take up women's  demands or to treat them seriously.  On the "woman question", it has proven to  be totally conformist.  Its male members  state that civil rights must come first  and women's rights will "naturally" follow.  As we see these women beginning to focus  on their own demands, tentatively moving  towards the formation of an autonomous  movement, we can find glimpses of what  socialism and feminism means for them. But  they are uncertain glimpses at best.  Though the women have terms such as sexism  and phallocracy  in their vocabulary — a  recent development — the editors seem to  have had little contact with the Western  women's movement.  Thus we find contradictions. They affirm  that the revolution effected a tremendous  change in women's lives. But they also  assert that in the West, the "woman question" (as they call it) is well on its way  to being solved, citing as evidence women's  participation in the European parliament.  What kind of vision of socialism and feminism can these women have when they are  daily told that they live  under socialism  and that women have been granted their  rights?  How do they equate "socialism" with the  detention centres and "women's rights"  with mental hospitals for lesbians?  The issues are familiar; the struggles are  different  We also find that while the issues  are familiar to us, the struggles are different.  Abortion was legalized in the Soviet Union 'as one of the first acts of the October  Revolution but outlawed in the 1930s when  Stalin forced women back'-into their roles  as mothers and homemakers. Since its reinstatement in 1955 it has clearly become  a substitute for birth control.      »  The two most accessible methods of contraception are condoms and vaginal foam. The  foam doesn't work very well and Soviet  men, like men everywhere, are reluctant  to take responsibility for birth control  by using the condoms.  Thus the abortion rate is extremely high.  Estimates say that an average of eight  million abortions a year have been performed in the USSR, and Mamonova says that  she knows of women who have had as many  as fourteen.  While free abortion on demand has been made  available, the quality of the treatment is  extremely poor. Abortion clinics are run  on assembly-line principles, and abortions  are often performed without anaesthetics.  So, like the women's movement in welfare  states such as Britain, the issues are not  so much ones of fighting for basic rights,  but of fighting for the improved quality  of existing services, particularly around  health and housing.  The journal's work is not just theoretical  Because these demands are grassroots  issues, the voice of the Almanach  is not  a theoretical one. It speaks in an everyday language that all women can understand.  Soviet women resemble their sisters here  in that they have started from the point  where feminists everywhere have started:  a profoundly personal sense of bitterness  and betrayal. In their journal they comment: "We cannot believe that life should  so punish innocent beings, simply for  being born women....Nothing changes by itself.... It is by coming together to talk  about our bitterness and suffering, by  understanding and exchanging our.own experience, that we shall be able to find  a solution."  The Mamonova Tour Committee, which is  organizing Tatyana Mamonova's appearance  in Vancouver, hopes that on March 14 some  of the many questions we have wanted to  ask for so many years will be answered.  Meanwhile, inside the Soviet Union, another member of the Almanach  collective, Nat-  sha Mal'tseva, is in prison awaiting her  trial. Her crime is that of participating  in the publication of the Almanach.  She is liable to five years for subversion.  She has said, "What the authorities are  doing is criminal, not what I'm doing.  There's nothing anti-Soviet about my actions. I believe in the possibility of  socialism — a socialism which implies and  includes democracy. We don't have it yet.  We still have to struggle."  We urge everyone to come to hear Mamonova  and to help build a solidarity campaign  both for the Soviet women's movement and  for Mal'tseva.  Free Our Sisters'. Q Kinesis    March 1!  INTERNATIONAL  What is life like for women in the Soviet Union today?  By Jan De Grass  In 1973 and 1974 I travelled in the Soviet  Union as a Russian language student.  I've been thinking about that time a lot  lately as I read of the forthcoming visit  of Tatyana Mamonova (see article p.?).  At the time of my visit my consciousness  of the women's movement had just dawned.  I was somewhere between two worlds: I had  thrown away my hair curlers, but I was  still using the shampoo that would make  him say, 'wow'.  At the time of my visit I had no illusions  about the benevolence of the ruling state,  but I had retained some ideals about the  aims of the revolution. Rights were guaranteed to the working class, I understood.  I expected that those rights would extend  to women.  After all, had not Lenin himself pontificated on "the woman question"? The literature of pre-revolutionary Russia — in  which I was constantly steeped, as a student — spoke of the "new woman" as long  ago as 1860.  Turgenev wrote stories full  of strong women.  Cherniashevsky's novel,  What is to be done?,   featured articulate  women sharing a communal lifestyle with  like-minded men.  Equality of the working class surely included women. After the Second World War  devastated the greater part of Russia and  the Ukraine, it was the women who played  the major role in reconstruction.  The young male populuation of the Soviet  Union had been so decimated by the war  that in some parts of the country women  outnumbered men by five to one.  The wheels of the great state bureaucracy  clanked into gear to mechanize the country.  But until the bulldozers and tractors arrived it was the women who hauled bricks,  repaired bomb-damaged homes and harvested  the fields.  That tradition of hard labour persisted  into the 1970s.  In 1973-4 I saw women  construction workers, women aircraft maintenance technicians, bus drivers and security guards.  At least a dozen suntanned women waved at  me as1 they spread asphalt on the streets  of Kazan.  Women do the labour intensive work  In the museums and art galleries, in any  public place, old women sat, unsmiling,  staring into space all day, rousing themselves only to wag a finger at any tourist  who threatened the nation's artwork.  At sunrise in Moscow the women street-sweepers were at work. They clucked and scolded  if you got in their way.  It seemed that any labour-intensive job,  any thankless or vigorous job, would be  done by women in the Soviet Union.  Naively, whenever I saw a woman construction worker I hastened to point this out to  the men in my tour group. My educational  program backfired. Several men deduced that  since the road crews were all women, they  were to be blamed for the bumpiness of the  streets!  In Leningrad (where Tatyana Mamonova and  the others in her group produced the Almanac ) the streets were absolutely jammed.  Even in a huge city shopping is a major  operation in the Soviet Union. Most of it  still falls to women.  Women hurried from their jobs at lunch hour  to catch the stores'before the smaller ones  close for their early afternoon "rest."  Some of the shelves were bare although  others would be stocked plentifully with  maybe two or three kinds of an item. My  Soviet friend and I hurried from store to  store along with the women, trying to find  a certain kind of sardine that we'd seen  A Statement of Aims.  At tenth,  Dear Si  tcr.  We have scarcely begun living when we become conscious thai all  the burdens of life are kept tor our shoulders. At first, everything  which is painful and harmful to us — containing us in a dense circle  — seems to happen by chance. It is impossible to believe that life can  punish completely innocent individuals just because they are born  female.. All suffering is felt to be unbearable to human life, and its  immediate removal urgent —except for the suffering of women. Out  situation is so unbearable that it surely must disappear o\' itself.  dissolve as would a nightmare. But nothing changes of itself. And we  are convinced that no-one will help us except we ourselves. Only  when we write, to talk about our sufferings, our bitterness, only  when we have made our experiences know n to each other, made  politicized, can we find a way through, can we help ourselves and  thousands of women suffering as much as ourselves.  Precisely for these reasons we have decided — in our free country  — lo put out a magazine for women. On the pages of this magazine,  we are reporting on t he situation of women in the family. at work, in  the hospital, in childbirth, on the situation of our children, on the  position of our theoretical reflections. We will publish the artistic  and journalistic work of women. We will write realistically of the  fate of our contemporaries. We ask of you: write to us of everything  which disturbs and moves you. Send us your work, stories about  your sisters, mothers, friends. If it is necessary. the correspondents  of the magazine will go to you to help you with this as much as  possible. We hope that we will, with our strength united, set ourselves in motion and. with that, the liberation of women.  A Statement of Aims from the Almanac by h  1, with two of its publishers  the week before, but alas, were never to  see again.  In 1973 our tour guide informed us that  the average family rented an apartment for  20 roubles a month.  Some of my Soviet  friends rented for even less. By contrast  a pair of shoes at that time was 30 roubles. A woman's nightgown cost between 8  and 14 roubles and a litre of milk half a  rouble.  Women's underwear and stockings  — when they were seen in the stores —  were heavy and utilitarian, although reasonably priced. Generally they came in  one size, one style and one colour. I  was told that tampons were not available  at any price and I certainly never saw any  in the stores. Apparently shortages of  food and household items are still commonplace.  One muggy day in Moscow our group joined  the line-up waiting to see Lenin's tomb.  As privileged Western tourists we were not  forced to go to the end of the quarter-  mile queue that stretched through Red  Square and beyond.  Some Soviet tourists had waited since 6  o'clock that morning in the gathering heat  for this privilege, but we were encouraged  to push in front of them, our places  assigned to us by an officious guard.  "Are you married?" —a popular question  With a male student, I was squeezed in  front of an older peasant couple.  They  were stony-faced at our sudden arrival in  front of them, and to stimulate goodwill  we began chatting.  Finally the older fellow shuffled his feet and asked me the  second most popular question directed to  tourists, "Are you married?" (The most popular question is, "How much do you earn?")  Before I could answer, my stalward Canad- ,  ian male friend had smirked: "No, she's  a free woman", translating 'free woman'  literally from the English to Russian. Concerned by what this term might imply in  translation, I rushed to explain things.  "Many people in Canada believe in the equality of women," I said.  "The Soviet Union  believes in this, too, isn't that true?",  I asked, turning to the woman.  "Yes, it's true," she answered, with as  little expression as possible. Her eyes  avoided mine. That should have-been my  first clue that all was not well with wo  men's rights in the-USSR.  We were told by our tour guide that 80/5 of  doctors in the Soviet Union are women. This  overworked fact is often pointed to as evidence of the high regard the state pays to  women.  On analysis I realized that this statement  assumes importance only to Westerners who  see medicine as a status, top-paying profession, not traditionally held by women.  When the state diminishes the status and  paycheque of the profession, then It really  offers no particular benefit. My tour  guide didn't offer an example of a doctor's  salary.  I don't know anything about the abortion  clinics or hospitals, so grimly described  in the Almanac by Mamonova and her group.  Naturally, they were not on the tourist  itinerary.  Alcoholism is rampant  But one phenomenon was easy to observe.  One night in Red Square I watched an unaccompanied woman hurry towards us.  The  smell of alcohol reached us long bei'ore  she did; and when I looked at her eyes I  realized she was dead drunk. Although she  was staggering, she was staggering rapidly,  and instead of being.rowdy, she was silent  and grim. She didn't want to be noticed.  In the Soviet Union, everyone drinks.  In the last few years, according to Soviet  statistics, there has been a 33% increase  in spirits production against a population  growth of only 9%.  Statistics about infant mortality have not  been published since 1975, a sure sign that  it is on the rise. Some observers have concluded that alcoholism among women has contributed to infant death, for women seem  to drink as much as men.  In the Soviet Union, women's rights are  constitutionally guaranteed. But perhaps  they have no more substanoe than the natty  outfits displayed in the window of GUM department stores. From the window the tailoring looks good, but chances are that the  suit is poorly made, comes in only one size  and has been sold out last week.  Women's rights are supposed to exist. But  perhaps Mamonova and other Soviet feminists  can tell us why and how they cannot be  exercised. WOMEN AGAINST VIOLENCE  Women Against Prisons outline the nature of their work  Women Against Prisons is a Vancouver-based  anti-prison group.     Cole Dudley of Kinesis  speaks with the group about its feminist  work against the violence and injustice  within women's prisons.  KINESIS: How  long has Women Against Prisons been together as a group?  WOMEN AGAINST PRISONS:  We formed during  the Wood-Hoon trial, which was in  of 1979.  It's been exactly two years. But  the work around the situation of women in  prisons has been going on, in other forms,  since about 1976.  KINESIS: Why did you come  together as a  group?  WAP:  There were a lot of women involved  in the Wood-Hoon defence committee. We  attended the trial and we realized that  there was a chance that Betsy Wood and Gay  Hoon would go to prison.  We began to think about what that would  mean -- having these two women in prison.  From there we started thinking more about  the women already in prison. We didn't  know them personally, but we knew that  their lives are pretty horrendous. We rea-  lized that work around women in prison is  a neglected part of women's struggle against our oppression.  Within the prison system, women are overlooked. There aren't many programs that  go into prisons for women.  This neglect  towards women in prison administratively  is reflected in outside society — and that  Includes the feminist community.  KINESIS: Do you see yourself as a service  group,  or as a reform group,  or as both?  WAP: There are so many daily problems for  women in prison. Things to do with medical  care, visiting and mail privileges and  nutrition. Any group working on prisoner's  rights has to deal with these things, because they're part of the daily life in  prison.  If people say, "Well, that's just reformist work", they have a theoretical mindset about what you have to do to be a revolutionary. It's just as revolutionary to  try to change what's happening in the daily  lives of prisoners as it is to fight on a  larger scale.  We are part of the anti-prison movement,  not just the prisoner's rights movement.  That means we're concerned about the rights  of the prisoners but we're also against  the whole concept and reality of prisons,  and the society that creates those prisons  — most of us are involved in other political struggles, too.  It's a matter of practical reality  It's a matter of practical reality. You  can't work with people in prison towards  abolishing prisons if you don't recognize  that prisoners are suffering daily.  It's too abstract to think that there  could be any kind of communication between  us on the outside and women on the inside  without our acknowledging that women in  ■ prison need medical care, for example.  And help with legal matters. And support  around being single mothers in prison. What  happens to their children?  There are times when being a service group  is important.  KINESIS: What political actions has the  group Women Against Prisons been involved  with?  WAP: We like to see ourselves as being  action-oriented, rather than sitting back  writing manifestos. We do educational  work, to help change people's attitudes  towards prisons. We've done a lot of  workshops at universities and conferences.  We did a workshop for the annual convention of BCFW. So far, most of our work  shops have been done within the women's  community.  That's not because we want to  work only within that community, but because 'that's where the openings have been.  We also organized an evening of video and  slides for the women's community. We  thought that a first step in spreading  information about the situation of women  in prison would be to start with the  women's community.  The same evening, we also did the presentation with the Mental Patients Association. We see a connection between women  locked in prison and women locked in  .mental institutions.  It's the same problem, just a class difference. Streetwise  and working class women end up in prison;  middle class women freak out and up in  mental institutions.  MPA asked us for the workshop.  They're  aware of those connections themselves.  For the workshop and slide/video presentation we had two women from anti-prison  groups in Seattle - Washington Women  Against Prisons and Through the Looking  Glass (an anarchist group which also puts  out a publication under the same name).  A lot of our work has to do with legal  matters, like working around courts and  arrests.  Recently there was a woman who  was assaulted by three male staff while  she was in Oakalla — her case came to  court and we publicized it.  We put a lot  extreme disciplinary measures that Peacock  uses.  KINESIS: Do women inside know there are  anti-prison groups outside?  WAP: Last year Women Against Prisons was  largely working under the name of BCFW as  the prison subcommittee. Through BCFW's  name we were able to get the support and  cooperation of most of the women's groups  in town. The women's groups agreed to  take the workshops into Twin Maples which  is the minimum security prison for women  in Haney.  There are women who don't get involved —  when they're in prison they do their time.  But there is a whole community of street  women and women prisoners who are very  aware of what's happening — they move back  and forth from outside to inside. They  always keep in contact with each other.  They know the different currents. They  know that there are anti-prison groups,  they know there's a feminist movement.  Addressing the reformist question  I want to address the ridiculous question  of whether or not these anti-prison groups  are reformist or revolutionary, whether or  not prisons are the best place to put our  efforts now.  Unquestionably none of us in the group  of effort into into publicizing it with  the straight media — sending out press  releases, talking to the press and tv  about what has been happening with women  in Oakalla. The press has been really cooperative and concerned about reporting  what's happening in prisons.  Women are subject to violence when  they're locked up  Women are still subject to violence while  they're locked up. We wanted to draw  public attention to the issue which was  brought up initially during the Proudfoot  inquiry a few years ago. There are still  male staff members who have access into  the women's living units in the prison.  Officially, they're not guards. But actually, they have the power of guards.  Every year there's been riots and disturbances in the women's prison at Oakalla.  New year is a time where most people are  more sharply aware that they're locked up  — imagine yourself having a 10 o'clock  curfew New Year's eve.  It's ridiculous.  It tends to be a time where women's anger  explodes. So as New Years comes up we  prepare ourselves to be ready for a picket  and demonstration to protest poor medical  care, poor food, harassment, and the  would be working around women in prison if  it didn't touch our lives really strongly  and if we didn't think it was an area of  work that is really vital. We see the  possibility, through this work, to really  attack and break down the whole system  we're opposed to.  Society has its laws and it enforces those  laws through the police. The courts  process those cases and those people who  have supposedly come up aginst the law and  the prisons are the places where those  people who have acted against society are  kept and reconditioned. We think it's  really the cornerstone to making or  breaking the system.  Any group that works towards abolishing  prisons is aware that prisons reflect the  conditions of society.  There's a class  war in society, there's a race war in  society and prisoners are the victims of  these class and race wars. They're from  the street, they're from the working class,  they're the poor people. They're the  native Indians, they're the blacks, they're  people of colour. You can't work against  prisons without dealing with class and  race issues.  I really feel that it's the area in which  every other aspect that the women's Kinesis    March 1981  WOMEN AGAINST VIOLENCE  movement tries to work around — violence  against women, the oppression against  people of colour — prison is where it-  shows up in the extreme, it's where it is  the most clear-cut.  There will be no revolution — you can't  proceed — until you figure out how to  deal with prisons.  Every country that's  been victorious with its revolutionary  government has had to deal with its prisons.  In Nicaragua they opened up the  gates to the prisons.  Repression is  prevalent in society.  Not all of us feel  it. But it's there and it's going to  increase and we have to figure out how  prisons are'part of it.  KINESIS: Are there more women being sent  to prison now than there were five or ten  years ago?  WAP: Statistically it seems that there  are more women being sent to prison, being  prosecuted that there were in the years  past. There are different reasons for  that.  Part of it is due to what they say  in the press — there are more avenues  open to women. Women realize that they  are entitled to more, and crime (what  they call crime ) is going to be an area  that women realize they can turn to.  Also, that statistic can be a red herring.  It ignores the fact that women have to  survive in increasingly hard economic  times. So women are turning more to areas  such as prostitution, forgery, shop  lifting — what they call petty crimes.  They bulk of women in prisons are there  for those sorts of "crimes".  Also, when society becomes aware that  women are capable of anything, then they  realize that women have been up to things  they don't approve of in order to survive.  Therefore they are finding more people  to throw into prisons.  KINESIS: What has been the reaction of  prison officials to your group?  WAP: We weren't able to get into Oakalla  because the warden there (Marie Peacock)  is so outrageously against any kind of  programming of anything to the benefit of  prisoners. She vetoes everything.  We took some programs into Twin Maples  We focused on Twin Maples last year, even  though the staff and administration  clearly didn't want the women's groups  coming in and did their best to dissuade  the women living there from going to the  workshops.  Through some negativity on the staff's  part and lack of insight on our part the  women weren't particularly turned on by  the form of what we were offering.  Unfortunately right now most of the members of our groups aren't even allowed  visiting rights — to do that we'd have  to get rid of the warden.  One woman has been subjected to a lot of  harassment within the prison. She was  really strong about standing up for her  rights and that's not tolerated within  the prison. That kind of strength works  towards uniting the prisoners, and they  really try to squash it.  So her case was really important in that  her persistence in what she thought was  her right as a human being was important  while she was inside.  It gave her the  strength to lay charges against one of the  male guards who was involved in an assault.  This male person assaulted her — punched  her, stripped her clothes off, and  dragged her into an isolation cell where  she was left handcuffed for twenty-four  hours.  She was a very brave woman to lay those  charges and carry through with the trial.  Unfortunately, the male guard was acquitted — the system doesn't convict its  own people. But she set an example for  other women — she was trying desperately  to have some way of getting her story out.  And we were desperate to find out more  about what was going on inside because we  knew that things were really building up  in the prison at that time and that things  were going to explode. And they did.  There was a case of assault, other women  being ill-treated. . Things built up to a  riot.  It was invaluable at that point  to have the contact between the women  prisoners, the press and the anti-prison  Vancouver feminists have a fear deep  down around prisons which prevents  them from examining their position  activist groups. Unfortunately that contact is hard to maintain, because the  prison population moves and the straight  press is not committed and interest drops  off when there's not "really big" things  happening.  One issue that women's anti-prison groups  focus on is the presence of male guards  in the women's prisons — it focuses on  the violence women receive in prison,  specifically from men on staff in the  women's prisons.  It ties in with many  cases in North America. It's an issue  These acts of self-defence are being  classified as violent.  Like Rita Silk  Nauni — she defends her son, and is  given 150 years.  One thing that's happening in the States  that people should be aware of is that  they are using this statistic about more  women committing more violent crime to  incarcerate more and more women in heavier  and heavier prisons.  Repressive governments know that the  worse things get, the more people will  fight back, so they are building federal  maximum security prisons for the future.  Some of them are now almost empty - they  have twenty or thirty women in prisons  built to hold two hundred.  Who are the  women they intend to put in these prisons?  You and me.  KINESIS: Do you think you have the support  of the feminist movement in your work?  WAP: We've found a lot of problems in  reaching the women in the women's community here in Vancouver. We have found a  lack of understanding about the severity  of prisons and how they affect women. A  woman who has been in prison is affected  forever by her experience.  In the U.S. there has been a greater  awareness in the women's communities of  what's happening to women in prisons —  the issue has been out in the open for  longer. There is more contact between  the feminist community and prisons.  We''ve tried to understand how this can be  different to the situation in Vancouver  and what we've come up with is that there  is more radical activity in the United  States.  There, the women's movement is  larger and has got into more areas of  activity.  There have been more prominent  cases in the U.S. of women who have been  locked up who have had the support of the  women's community before going to prison  — women active in revolutionary armed  groups.  There has been FBI-CIA harassment and  intervention into the women's communities.  Also there is an active network of Black,  Chicano, Puerto Rican activist groups and  women's groups around the situation of  women in prisons.  In Vancouver there have been very few —  almost no — 'political' prisoners. There  haven't been cases that reach women at  the level women are at in the feminist community right now.  that many people seem to be able to understand and support.  KINESIS: There is an opinion in the  straight press that women  — because of  women's liberation or whatever  — are  becoming more violent.    Is that true?  WAP: Women are doing what they have to  do to survive. Women are proceeding  somewhat from forgeries to armed robberies.  There are a lot more women who get involved in revolutionary movements that are  based on illegal activity directed towards  overthrowing the imperialist, system.  A lot of violent crimes, so called, are  acts of self-defence. A women has been  battered for years by her boyfriend or  her father or her neighbour or whoever,  and it will eventually build up to the  point where she defends herself — shooting him, throwing boiling water over him.  We feel that's changing and it's inevitabli  that it will continue to change as things  get rougher, as people find themselves  breaking the law more and more in their  own activities. We want to put a lot of  time and effort into reaching the women's  community here around the situation of  women in prisons.  We have found that a lot of women here  have a fear deep down around prisons that  keeps them from really examining their  position about it. Somehow we have to  reach beyond the fear.  Prisons are a hard thing to tackle. It's  difficult even thinking about the reality  of prisons. But we have to.    All of  us can get through the blocks we have and  feel the connection towards our sisters  who are in prison now and any of our  sisters who may end up in there. That's  the struggle. Kinesis   March 1981  OUR BODIES, OURSELVES  Being pregnant at fourteen or younger is a risky business  By Maxine Boag  Adolescent pregnancy has reached epidemic  proportions in Canada and the United  States. Although the pregnancy rate has  declined for girls aged fifteen to nineteen, the rate for girls fourteen years  old and younger in B.C. has risen by  thirty per cent in the last seven years.  Only a small proportion of the sexually  active girls under fifteen receive contraceptive information, even though this age  group is most vulnerable to health risks  if they become pregnant.  One factor contributing to this tragedy is  that adolescent girls are becoming fertile  at a younger age. Older women's fertility  has been declining in the last few years,  but between 1974 and 1975, the fertility  rate for girls between ten and sixteen  years old increased by eight per cent.  A hundred years ago, the menarche (the  age at which menstruation begins) was at  sixteen. Today, the menarche is at twelve  and a half years, by which age 95$ of  girls are fully fertile.  Sexual fertility occurs before physical  maturity, however, and adolescent girls  are not physically, socially, and mentally  equipped to bear the babies they are  capable of conceiving.  Both the adolescent  who gives birth, and her infant, face a  greater risk of death, illness, or injury  than do women in their twenties.  The maternal death rate for adolescents  shows that women under the age of fifteen  are much more likely to die of blood  poisoning than mothers at any other age;  and to suffer prolonged labour and iron-  deficiency anemia. Physical immaturity,  combined with inadequate prenatal care  and poor nutrition make adolescents the  group mostly at risk.  Social repercussions are disturbing  The social repercussions of adolescent  pregnancies are just as disturbing. Eighty  per cent of teenage mothers keep their  babies, and seven out of ten teenage  mothers drop out of school.  The report of the Vancouver Social Planning  and Review committee describes the plight  of the adolescent mother: "Early parenthood ... means that the mother, lacking  coping and parenting skills due to her  immaturity, is thrust into an extremely  demanding role. Usually unable to complete her education, she is often con-,  demned to a life of poverty and instability with few resources to help her through  the difficulties."  This alarming social phenomenon has been  attributed, by the experts, to several  causes, including the non-use or ineffective use of contraceptives, and the  lack of contraceptive information and  services for young people.  Both have generated widespread debate;  but remarkably little has been said about  the primary cause of adolescent pregnancy:  namely, the increase in young people's  sexual activity. Pregnancies are,  naturally, the result of sexual intercourse; and the fact that so many adolescent girls are sexually active raises the  most important question: why?  Rape and incest account for a proportion  of sexual experience for teenage girls.  Rape has become a more common occurrence  in recent years, and already there has  been an increase of nineteen percent in  reported rapes in B.C. this year. Fifty  percent of all rape victims are under  eighteen, and twenty-five percent are  under the age of twelve.  Three independent surveys conducted in  the United States found that between  twenty and thirty-five percent of all  women are sexually molested as children.  The fact that last year, in Chicago alone,  900 eleven-year-olds gave birth suggests  that at least some adolescent pregnancies  are results of child abuse.  Less violent forms of coercion are likely  to push some girls unwittingly into sexual  involvement. The current conditioning of  adolescent girls, combined with the fact  that their sexual partners are often older  than themselves makes them very vulnerable  to being pressured into sex by boys who  have little knowledge or concern for  contraception.  'An example of this is Jenny, whose story  was told recently in the "Today" magazine.  Jenny is fifteen, and the mother of a  little girl.  The father is Brian, aged  don't know when or where to start with  their own children. A lot of parents and  teachers withhold contraceptive information  from children in the fear that sex education will encourage sexual behaviour, and  stimulate the desire for experimentation.  Although research shows that adolescents  actually prefer to learn about sexuality  from their parents, in practice their  primary sources of such information are  their peers and the media.  If these two sources — peers and the  media — hold a monopoly on children's  sex education, then both deserve close  examination to determine their influence  on children's attitudes and behaviour,  and the nature of the knowledge they impart.  Peers, of course, can only share their  limited knowledge with each other, and  are likely to be equally inexperienced and  misinformed. What, then, about the media?  Does the media influence children's behaviour? If so, what kind of information  does the media give children about sex?  The mass media, and television in particular, plays a powerful role in children's  lives for they spend more time watching  television than they do in any other activity.  Mass media is information source about sex  A 197<4 family planning communication study  showed that the mass media contributed  more to teenagers' family planning knowledge than all other sources, including  parents, peers, or schools. However, the  researchers' analysis of the media coverage  revealed that television provided little  contraceptive information; an average of  only eight minutes of family planning-  related programming in the entire month.  While advertising contraceptives is banned  from Canadian television, pornography isn't.  With children spending one quarter of their  waking hours in front of the television  set, from which they derive most of their  knowledge about sex , then the content of  television programs deserves critical  scrutiny.  The sexual roles played by women and men  on television demonstrate to children how  twenty-one, who has not seen Jenny since  she found out she was pregnant. Brian and  Jenny used no contraception: the subject  never came up, and Jenny said that she  hadn't anticipated intercourse.  "Each  time, it just happened. We were so much  in love. It sounds crazy, but I just felt  pregnancy couldn't happen to me." And when  it did, she made the decision that many  pregnant adolescents do: to have the baby,  and to keep it.  Today, pre-teenagers are unlikely to have  been given the information and skills  they need to make responsible decisions  relating to their sexuality.  Some schools attempt to dispel this ignorance with family life programs, but schools  vary from district to district in the  quality and quantity of this education,  and few start classes before grade nine.  Parents, on the whole, are also ill-  equipped to handle their children's sex  education, for many of them have had little  family life education themselves, and they  adults relate to one another. Women are  typically shown, in commercials and  programs, either as sweet, superficial  mindless ninnies, as seductive sex objects,  or as mothers, gloriously obsessed with  unnecessary housework.  Men play the powerful and authoritarian  roles, and are shown to be strong, sexually aggressive and always the instigators  of violent acts. The interaction between  the heroes and heroines is often charged  with sexual innuendo; men unmistakably  dominant, and women the passive helpless  recipients of their advances. But no  mention is made, in all these televised  sexual encounters, of contraception; or of  abortion or teenage motherhood — the  real-life consequences of unprotected  intercourse.  With irresponsible sexual behaviour being  glorified in prime-time television, why  are we so surprised that adolescents are  re-enacting such scenarios themselves? And  that 1000 Canadian girls become pregnant  every week? Kinesis    March 1981 11  INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S DAY  International Women's Day theme  Women bear the burden of the high cost of living  March 8,  1908: Women garment workers in  New York's lower east side marched in the  streets to demand an end to sweatshop  conditions.  In Coperhagen at a conference in 1910, attended by 100 women from 17 countries, it  was proposed that March 8 be set aside as  International Women's Day to commemorate  this event.  International Women's Day was to be a day  of world-wide solidarity and action among  women. In 1911, March 8 was celebrated for  the first time in Austria, Denmark, Germany and Switzerland. These were large and  militant demonstrations. In Austria alone,  30,000 women and men marched in the street.  In 1913, women in Czarist Russia celebrated the day, even though it was illegal to  hold meetings. March 8 1917 saw Russian  women and men 90,000 strong demonstrating  in demand of food.  With the rise of this wave of feminism,  March 8 has been revived in Canada as a  day to raise our demands and make our  voices heard.  Women bear cost of a double work day  The high cost of living was the theme for  March 8, 1981. This theme applies quite  literally to the incredible rise in prices  for food, shelter and clothing.  It also applies to the double work day  which women continue to bear. We work in  the home and we work on the job. We get  paid nothing for the first and not enough  for the second. We work in job ghettoes  without hope of advancement. Lack of maternity benefits and daycare facilities  make it hard for women to take jobs and to  keep them.  Another focus for this year's March 8 celebration was government spending cuts, which  are made at the expense of women.  Services such as women's hostels, employment agencies and welfare have been cut.  .As well, there are fewer jobs in the social  Enough. It is time to cry: enough. And form a block with our bodies.  services, a sector traditionally employing  large numbers of women.  Business automation in offices and factories will eliminate women's jobs. By 1983,  80$ of operator assistance jobs with B.C.  Tel will have been replaced by computers.  Over the next five years, with the increased use of word processors, 4-0$ of all  clerical jobs will be wiped out.  Harassment at home and on the job  Men express frustration at increased economic hardship and unemployment by venting  their anger on women. Increased awareness  of wife-battery and child abuse in the  home has also focused attention of its  counterpart, sexual harassment on the job.  At home and at work, women bear the brunt  of this anger.  In response to rape and sexual assaults  on the street, women across the country  have organized Take Back the Night marches in defiant protest.  The rise of the right also targets women.  Economic trouble has given rise to new  strength on the right. People turn to the  right out of fear of catastrophe. Our of  their fear comes social repression.  Racism keeps immigrant women at the bottom of the economic ladder, whether in  factories on in domestic labour. There  is the constant threat of deportation in  the face of high unemployment.  Sexism keeps control of women's bodies in  the hands of doctors and the state. The  fight to legalize abortion is losing ground  and hospitals are performing fewer abortions. Organized anti-abortion groups such  as the "Right to Life" are successfully in  fluencing goverment policy.  These same forces see lesbians and even  single women as threat to the nuclear family. This makes keeping custody of their  children an issue for all single mothers.  — material from the IWD Committee.  For the crime of fighting poverty, Florence Kemp is jailed  By Gillian Marie  Florence Kemp has been sentenced.  You may remember her case. She was found  guilty by the court of defrauding the  Ministry of Human Resources in July, 1980.  Sentencing was put off on several occasions as probation reports and court  paraphenalia were put in order. During  that time, Florence attempted to put her  life together, and the Ministry (on the  recommendation of the jury) permitted her  to do an upgrading to grade 10 course.  Prior to her, three day ordeal in court,  she had requested on three different  occasions that she be permitted by the  Ministry to do such courses. Meantime,,  she waited for sentencing to be passed.  Florence's crime, from which we are now  protected, was to supplement her inadequate  welfare cheque by working as a homemaker  for $4.00 an hour. You don't have to be  a genius to understand the problem of  attempting to live on the inadequate wages  usually paid to women. It's at times as  bad as living on welfare because with a  paid outside job we work double the work  day, and have double the stress and additional financial committments, such as  bus fares and work clothes.  Florence's alleged crime was to ensure that  her child had adequate nutrition and  clothing by earning just over the allowed  $100 a month for eighteen months. She  has been sentenced to serve ninety days in  Oakalla and perform two hours a week of  community work.  Jailed every Saturday for two years  For almost the next two years Florence  will be serving her sentence. Each Saturday she will be in Oakalla from 8 a.m. to  7 p.m. During this'time she can not be  bonded, a necessary step before she can  obtain another job as a homemaker. Her  sentencing (she1 now has a criminal record)  will make it even more difficult for her  to get off welfare, and live on a decent  income with dignity.  Florence, like nfany other women living on  welfare, has been intimidated and sexually  harassed by a male social worker. As a  welfare recipient, she had no protection  from the loss of her G.A.I.N. benefits.  She lived with the fear that her daughter  would be apprehended if she complained of  her social worker's harassment.  Florence refused to buckle under to the  intimidation of the welfare system. Many  welfare mothers have to defraud the Ministry of Human Resources to survive.  Friends may help out with a few extra  dollars to cover the cost of food. Women  do babysitting and don't declare their  cash incomes.  Florence's crime was to accept a payment  by cheque, and this was the evidence used  to prove her guilty of welfare fraud.  At the time that Florence was charged, her  welfare cheque was $440 a month. Statistics Canada three years ago set the poverty line at $638 a month.  The evidence is clear. It is the welfare  system that needs to be put on trial for  its crime against single parents, not women like Florence, who are attempting to  make do on atrociously inadequate benefits.  As we go to press we learn that Florence  has been subjected to further harassment  by the welfare system. Her child has been  apprehended on a temporary basis.  And because she doesn't have her child with  her, the social worker tells her, she will  not receive her full welfare cheque this  month!  VSW launches Florence Kemp defence  fund  Vancouver Status of Women is launching a  defence fund appeal for Florence Kemp. She  needs the money to pay for her appeal. If  the appeal fails, she hopes to be able to  take her case to the Supreme Court of Canada. Send in a dollar or two — whatever  you can afford — to THE FLORENCE KEMP  DEFENCE FUND, Status of Women, 1090 West  7th Ave, Vancouver. V6H 1B3. 0. 12 Kinesis    March 1981  THE RISING OF THE WOMEN  Civic workers strike in Lower Mainland  Demand equal pay for work of equal value  B.C. Tel strike: 11,000 out  Telling the B.C. Tel sit-in story  This is a militant spring in British Columbia.    More than 250,000 people across the  province are either out on strike or in  limited job action.     To celebrate International Women's Day,  we examine  the strike  issues from the point of view of some of  the women involved.  By Gillian Marie  Since the end of January, more than 10,000  civic workers in the Lower Mainland have  been out on strike. A major issue in the  strike is a demand for equal pay for work  of equal value.  The unions, the Canadian Union of Public  Employees (CUPE) and the Vancouver Municipal and Regional Employees Union (VMREU),  argue that clerical workers — mostly female — must have a base'wage rate equal  to that of the mostly male outside workers.  The female clerical workers earn about  $5.85 an hour while the outside male labourers earn about $8 an hour, at current  base rates.  At last we are seeing strikes being fought  with women's issues at the forefront.  As women we are well aware that traditional  women's work, such as clerical work, is  paid a great deal less than traditional  men's work.  Instead of narrowing, the wage gap between  women and men has in fact been widening.  In 1965 women averaged $2964 less than  men. By 1975 this gap had widened to $6060.  The consequences of wage settlements that  are proportinate (such as those set out  by the Anti-Inflation Board and those negotiated with many union settlements) are  that those workers who already earn more  receive a greater wage increase.  The civic workers strike is of great importance because that out-and-out discrimination against women at the bargaining  table is being militantly addressed.  CUPE B.C. division secretary-treasurer Ber-  nice Kirk comments, "We're serious. CUPE  clerical workers are not going back to  work until this matter of discrimination  against women is cleared up."  But the civic employer, the Greater Vancouver Regional District (GVRD) has unamin-  ously rejected the concept of equal pay  for inside and outside workers.  Labour relations chairperson John Parks has  said, "The market place, not the union,  determines the wage rates" for clerical  workers.  "Women could do something else,"  Parks added, "If women didn't wish to work  for those wages they could do something  else. We have got women in our outside  workforce sitting on grass cutters and  planting bulbs."  He concluded, "There are enough stenos in  our labour force right now to tell us they  are being paid enough."  VMREU president Rick Gates comments, "We  are assured that the employers have given  the proposal serious consideration and decided on total rejection of the concept.  Apparently the concept of inside workers  earning up to a third less than outside  workers is perfectly acceptable to them."  Gates explains that the GVRD has made a  wage offer of 15$ which is supposed to include a 4% catch-up. "They are prepared to  give an W% basic increase to help us with  Y}%  inflation. Or, looked at in another  way, they are only offering 2%  catch-up,  at which rate it would only take about ten  years to catch up to the community average  rates."  CUPE researcher Gene Errington says that  the GVRD proposals for inside workers will  further widen the wage gap between inside  and outside workers. Now at 21%,   that  gap would go up to 34%.  Using Burnaby as an example, the GVRD offer  would mean that 51% of all inside workers  would be below the outside base rate. Almost 80% of the inside workers are women.  And the lowest paid inside workers would  get a lower percentage increase than the  higher-paid outside workers. As a result,  91% of the women inside workers in Burnaby  would get a lower dollar increase than  the outside workers'.  Whichever way you look at it, it's discrimination against women workers. Support the  civic workers . Explain the concept of  equal pay for work of equal value to your  family and friends. Join the picket lines.  Phone your politicians and pressure them  to stop this discrimination.  We spoke with three women civic workers,  all unionized with the VMREU,   to learn  how they saw the complex strike issues.  Sara: "The clerk typists are 12% behind  the private sector.'  Sara is a single parent with one child.  She has worked as an office supervisor in  one of Vancouver city's health units for  three and a half years.  She's a senior  clerk who sees three issues as central to  the strike.  Firstly, a proposed management clause in  the GVRD contract with VMREU stipulates  that Sara must cross any picket line, including a legal picket. She can't accept  that because it is just one step away from  losing the right to strike.  Secondly, as a supervisor of clerical workers, the issue of equal pay for work of  equal value is crucial to her. Junior  clerks earn $24 a day less than the outside  workers at a comparable level.  Sara comments, "The clerk typists are 12%  behind the private sector, and this issue  affects several hundred women who are employed by the city."  Thirdly, says Sara, the city is negotiating  for the right to force people to work overtime. The city also wants the right to demand that people work evenings and weekends, when deemed necessary. With inadequate daycare, this is an impossible demand  for a single parent.  Kathryne: "The public must know that  not all the thousands of civic workers now  on strike are garbage collectors."  Kathryne Holm is a planning assistant in  the Planning Department at City Hall. She  has been a civic employee for almost 30  years.  She now earns between $18,000 and $19,000  in a job in which she's had 25 years experience. She's spent six years going to  night school, and doing part-time courses  at university.  The carrot of job promotion recedes each  time she obtains one of the required diplomas. Vacancies are filled by applicants  with university degrees. She gets to assist in their training.  When Kathryne began working for the city,  back in 1952 as a stenographer, all the  clerical workers were men. She was one of  the first female  Clerk 2s hired in 1957.  It was not until 1955 that city policy  changed to prevent the automatic firing of  women who married.  Although it does not directly touch her  own working life, the central issues of the  Jew Directions for Women  strike for Kathryne is the $300 difference  between the base level of clerks and stenos in the city and open market.  She says that more opportunities must be  open to women in all jobs. Women should  be considered for jobs that present hiring  practice-reserves for university graduates,  although there is an option for considering an employee who has years of experience  and the equivalent in training.  She adds that the city must provide opportunity for women, particularly in those  job classifications now dominated by men.  Kathryne's third concern is the city's proposed medical plan. The new proposal includes a review board composed of male management. This board will decide the percentage of salary that a sick person will receive. She points out that an all-male  board may not consider problems which some  women experience around menstruation and  menopause sufficiently serious to receive  full compensation.  "The public is annoyed about their garbage," comments Kathryne. "They must realize that the thousands of civic workers  now on strike are not all garbage collectors.  "The present system ensures that stenos  leave their jobs more often and have to  be replaced at a greater cost to the taxpayer. The solution is to increase the  base rate of their salary."  Jane:  time."  'I won't vote for Harcourt next  Jane Johnson is a clerical worker and typist. She's been a civic employee since '74.  When she began working for the city, she  made $540 gross. She says that with three  children and her double work load she would  have been better off on welfare. At least  on welfare, she points out, you have your  dental work paid for. Today her gross pay  is $1024.  For Jane, one of the central issues of the  strike is the demand for equalization of  the base rates for inside and outside workers.  She explained that while $8.00 an hour is  the base rate for outside workers, $5.65  is the base rate for clerks.  Clerks need grade 12, have to pass a typing  test at 50 words a minute, and have had at  least two years previous experience.  Outside workers need only grade 10 and do  not have to have previous experience. They  are trained on the job.  Older staff, Jane comments, are angry with  the attack on sick benefits. They see the  principles they'd fought for years ago  now being eroded.  And the GVRD package, Jane emphasizes, is  unfair because the percentage increase is  weighted to the top end of the pay scale.  People employed at the bottom are getting  a much lower percentage increase.  She is also very much opposed to the GVRD's  new clause attacking workers' rights to  honour a picket line. She is critical, too,  of the proposal that workers cannot 'bank'  overtime (in the form of days off) beyond  one week. And she doesn't think that workers should be forced to work overtime.  The argument that private sector clerical  jobs pay even less than those with the  city just doesn't wash, Jane told Kinesis.  Since the strike began, the head clerk in  her office has been offered a job which  pays $300 a month more. "The city is going  to lose a lot of clerks in this strike,"  Jane said.  "I won't vote for Harcourt next time," she  concluded. "Two of my children — 14 and  12 years — worked for him in the last  city elections. They are both pretty angry,  too." 0  By Janet Berry-  It was Thursday, February 5. I had been  down at the Women's Bookstore visiting  with my friend, Gloria Greenfield. Around  three I dashed to my car to start my journey to work. My job is at B.C.Tel's compound at 6969 10th Ave in Burnaby, in the  warehouse.  I knew about the sit-in at Nanaimo by B.C.  Tel workers.  But I didn't know that at  10 that morning my co-workers had taken  over the compound on 10th Ave.  Sit-ins are unusual but not without precedent in Canadian labour history. Sit-  ins have been used to direct attention to  gross injustices.  Sitting in as a directory assistance operator  That same Thursday B.C. Tel workers occupied the Tel buildings at 758 Seymour Street  — the main nerve centre of B.C. Tel.  Operator and directory assistance were main  tained throughout the entire sit-in at the  various locations.  Employees in other job categories were asked to help the operators, who themselves  worked extra long hours. Various union  officials and other Telecommunications  Workers Union (TWU) members had first-hand  experience of the job of being an operator,  most of them for the first time.  On Monday February 9 I volunteered to do  a shift as a directory assistance operator  in New Westminster.  I'd never done this work before and I was  a bit nervous. One woman trained me and  throughout the evening offered assistance  to rookies like myself. By six in the evening this woman had been on the job for  twelve hours. Another woman had been there  ever since Thursday, going home only for a  few hours.  These two women, and many others like them,  were working all-out in support of the  union.  Washroom harassment is absurd  I found being a directory assistance operator very stressful. The work is done on  a computer system, using video display  terminals. The calls come in fast. As soon  as one call is completed, another starts.  During a normal working shift, the operators are constantly supervised. They  are monitored and timed for the number of  seconds they take to answer a call. The  company estimates that each call should  take no more than 38 seconds.  Even visiting the washroom has, in this  job, been subject to harassment. At one  time the operators had to post a flag if  they needed relief.  Recently, I spoke with a woman, now a business agent with TWU, who had worked in  'traffic' for 16 years. 'Traffic' is trade  jargon for directory and long distance assistance. She explained to me that the computer keeps track of every call. A supervisor can come and plug in a headset be-  sie the operator and listen in. If that  happens, the worker knows she is being  monitored.  But a supervisor can also listen in on one  of the phones in the work area. When that  happens, the operators know that one of  them is being monitored, but they don't  know which one.  There is also a monitor in the supervisor's  work area which monitors all the VDTs. If  an operator puts her VDT on hold (to take  a second or two to blow her nose, for example), the supervisor can come in on the  worker's headset and tell her to make herself available.  Periodically, a time test is done on an  operator with a stop watch, during actual  calls. If she's below average on those particular set of calls, she's called in for  a review of her work.-  Operators are beginning to rebel. In the  summer of 1979 they walked out in New Westminster over procedures for being relieved  to go to the washroom.  The base rate for traffic work is $38.83  a day. The top rate is $53.53.  One man I was working with during the  sit-in said he made $87 a day. In the warehouse, I make $63 a day.  The base rate for B.C.Tel clerical workers  under the old contract was only $36:10 a  day. Think about raising a family on that.  On the other hand, the base rate for a  Tel journeyman was $50.76 a day,, moving up  to $83.61 a day.  During the sit-in, workers in different  jobs classifications, who have their own  job stresses, got to experience first-hand  the particular stresses of the operator's  job. While work environments often have  inherent stresses, operators suffer a compound stress by having management applying pressure.  At the rally on February 10, after the sit-  in had been forced to a close by a court  order, TWU President Bill Clark said that  those in higher-paid classifications who  had been helping out as operators during  the sit-in now realized how badly paid the  operators are for the work they do.  It is common for work done by women to  have a pay scale that nowhere reflects the  value of the job.  Women in B.C. Tel work mainly in the traffic and clerical sections, with a minority  in plant jobs.  Federal mediator Ed Peck, who in the summer of 1980 met separately with representatives from the company and the union,  drew up a report.  Peck ruled in favour of the union in issuer  such as control of scheduling. He also  recommended an across-the-board increase  of 75 cents, plus percentage increments.  Company response is adamant in its rejection of the across-the-board increase suggestion, calling it "too expensive." A  substantial number of the 11,000 union  members work at the bottom end of the pay  scale. So the company favours the percentage increase concept only.  TWU wants to close the wage gap  The across-the-board increase would be a  small step towards narrowing the wage gap  between women and men. The TWU is committed to closing that gap.  Hopefully, the workers' takeover of the  B.C. Tel directory assistance and long distance services was a consciousness-raising  experience for all involved.  There must be group support and group act-  tion for the changes that need to be made.  The B.C. Federation of Labour has announced  plans to coordinate province-wide rotating  strikes in support of the TWU, if the B.C.  Tel company fails to reach settlement soon.  The regional, one-day general strikes will  kick off in Nanaimo, on Vancouver Island.  B.C.Tel, incidentally, made profits of  $62 million last year. Yet the workers  have had no wage increases since January  1, 1979. They have been working without  a contract for 14 months. B.C. Tel has just  received a rate increase from the C.R.T.C.  .Support the B.C.Tel workers who are out on  strike. Respect their picket lines, which  are going up outside facilities which have  used scab management labour for repairs  and maintenance. HUMAN RIGHTS  In Canada, the push for equal pay for work of equal value is on  By Kinesis staff writers  The push for equal pay for work of equal  value is on. That's because the average  man earns 42% more than the average woman.  The 1978 Statistics Canada report indicates  that the average annual wage for a woman  in this country is $9,874. For a man, the  average wage is $17,038.  All the Canadian provinces have had equal  pay legislation since the 1950s. It has  not done women much good. Such legislation  does not address the fact of job ghettoes.  In order to avoid the issue completely,  all employers have to do is employ the  women in a job category where no men work,  and pay them all the same low wage.  Equal pay for work of equal value is a concept which recognizes the injustices of  female job ghettoes. In recent years  the struggle for 'equal value' has met ■  with some successes.  In December 1980 the Canadian Human Rights  Commission announced at $2.3 million equal  pay settlement which brought 470 federal  librarians — mostly women — parity with  the mostly male historical researchers.  The librarians and the researchers were  found to be doing work of equal value.  This settlement was the first involving a  group of workers claiming equal pay for  work of equal value.  Section 11 of the Canadian Human Rights  Act says that it is discriminatory for  an employer "to establish or maintain differences in wages between male and female  employees...who are performing work of  equal value."  Since that legislation took effect on March  1, 1978, 25 women have won wage increases.  All but one were nurses who were paid less  than men doing the same work in federal  penitentiaries.  The other was a claim by Sister Cecile Gau-  vin, a former nursing director at St Anne  de Bellevue veterans' hospital near Montreal. She won wage parity with departmental heads earing up to $10,000 and more.  In mid-1980 the Canadian Human Rights Commission found that 3,000 federal government  workers in cafeteria, laundry and personal  service work groups were being discriminated against because they did not have wage  parity with the building, custodian and  warehouse work groups.  But the federal government has yet to pay  Quebec is the only province to have enacted equal pay legislation which promises  equal pay for work of equal value. In one  of the settlements, the Quebec North Shore  Pulp and Paper plant at Baie Comeau had  to pay typists, receptionists and IBM operators .the same as its male wood measurers,  draftsmen and inventory clerks. These dissimilar jobs were judged to have equal  value.  Due to vigorous lobbying by the Equal Pay  Coalition, the Ontario legislature nearly  "equal value" legislation in..the  winter of '79 - '80. At the moment Ontario is still dickering with the issue of  equal pay, trying to pass off the present  inadequate laws as sufficient.  British Columbia's Human Rights Code prohibits discrimination between female and  male employees doing "similar, or substantially similar work."  NDP MIA Rosemary Brown has introduced a  private member's bill which would add  "work of equal value" to that list.  More and more, unions are raising equal  value demand  The Canadian Union of Public Employees  (CUPE), a union with 265,000 members, declared in 1979 that every local should be  prepared to go to strike action for equal  base rates for inside and outside workers.  CUPE's membership is 43% female.  In Vancouver last June, the Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Union Local 580  made equal pay a successful strike issue.  Union representative John Squire said at  the time, "Approximately 60 women clerical  and plant workers do not receive equal pay  for work of equal value. Our members are  not prepared to accept this inequality in  the 1980s."  The seven-month strike by the Canadian Association of Industrial, Mechancial and  Allied Workers (CAIMAW) at Kenworth's Burnaby plant was a struggle for equal pay for  work of equal value.  At Kenworth, .data processors started at  14.8% less than the plant starting rate.  The top data processing rate was 18.2% less  than the top plant rate.  But when workers voted to end the strike  last December 23, they had won data processor wage increases of between 61% and 72%  over three years. The settlement puts the  data process operators either within a few  cents of the plant base rate or well above  it. The general wage increase was 45% for  the same period.  Two curious conclusions of human rights complaints  Jorgensen was victim of discrimination, but not on the basis of sex, says board  Susan Jorgensen, who was denied a higher  paying job at B.C.Ice and Cold Storage,  was the victim of discrimination. But it  was not discrimination on the basis of  sex.  So ruled a B.C. human rights branch board  of inquiry recently, nearly four years  after the complaint had been lodged.  Jorgensen had charged that, in her five  years at B.C.Ice, there were many occasions on which she racked fish at the  rate of pay for light work (Group 2 work)  next to men who received the higher rate  for heavier work (Group 1 work).  Jorgensen charged she had been denied opportunity to qualify for the higher, Group  1 wages, even though she had performed  the heavier job at times.  Two of the three-member board agreed that  Susan Jorgensen was "discriminated against  because of her employer's belief that her  physical condition exposed her to risk  of...injury."  The board members were in agreement that  Jorgensen's occasional wrist and back problems were irrelevant to her work performance.  In the majority decision, John A. Bourne,  Q.C. and C.J.Alcott (an old Mac-Bio management type) ruled that the "consideration  of the sex of Susan Jorgensen was not a  factor" in the discrimination.  But Lynn Smith, in her dissenting opinion,  suggests otherwise. When Jorgensen laid .  the complaint, all Group 1 work at B.C.  Ice was done by men. All Group 2 work was  done by women. Smith says that Jorgensen  "An assessment was made of the productivity of women... / conclude that the  complainant was discriminated against,  by reason of sex, without reasonable  cause."  —dissenting opinion of Lynn Smith,  Board of Inquiry  was not treated as an individual, but was  assessed on the basis of her sex. Because  she was a woman, B.C. Ice thought that  she should only be doing "women's work"  — for the lower wages.  The board has ruled that Jorgensen should  be given an opportunity to perform Group  1 work. There was no monetary settlement.  It was just a slap on the wrist  for Alcan  At the moment the B.C. Human Rights Code  has provision in Section 6 for equal pay  for women and men doing 'similar or sub  stantially similar' work.  But what happened in the Alcan case?  Was Alcan Canada Products violating the  human rights code by paying a man more than  two women doing similar work?  Barbara Caldwell was a sales administrator  who had been with Alcan for 29 years. Fran-  cie McLellan had spent two .years as an ad-  ministator.  Then Alcan hired one Wayne Spinks in January 1978 at $1085 a month. He was to replace Francie McLellan whom they paid $825  a month.  After 10 years in her job as administrator,  Barbara Caldwell was making $925 a month.  So Caldwell went to the Human Rights Branch  A board of inquiry is finally appointed,  and just as the case is about the begin,  the branch and Alcan come to an agreement:  a cash settlement of a measly $2700.  This takes place with Alcan making no admission of guilt and with the branch making no ruling.  Caldwell comments on the $2700. "It is by  no means equivalent to the difference in  back wages." She is disappointed in the  performance of the branch, which recommended to Caldwell that she accept the cash  settlement. "Perhaps when you start a  fight," Caldwell points out, "you should  fight it to the finish." Kinesis    March 1981  OLDER WOMEN  VSWs brief to NDP Taskforce on Older Women  How this society gives older women the boot  The NDP Taskforce on Older Women has been  travelling throughout B.C.,   listening to  community groups and individuals as they  explain their perspectives on the reality  of life for older women.    VSW presented a  brief to the taskforce during its Vancouver hearings.    First, a VSW member's  story.  Then some analysis from a VSW  staffperson,Gillian Marie.  Rebecca tells her story  After 23 years as a comptometer operator  and seven years of psychiatric nursing, I  now find myself in Vancouver with no marketable skills.  Comptometers have become obsolete. In 1971,  I was working for an auto parts firm which  changed from comptometers to the new calculators. At the time of the change-over,  I was forced to leave. My bosses became  obnoxious and complained that I smoked too  much and that I spent too much time in the  washroom. And they gave me unfavourable  references, which affected my job possibilities.  My nursing skills from Quebec are not accepted in B.C. because my training was for  one year and B.C.'s training for a psychiatric nurse is for two years.  I worked five nights at, the Burnaby General as a nurses' aide, but could not do  the heavy lifting that was necessary.  They were willing to take me on in the  office there if I brushed up my typing.  I went to Manpower and they refused to  give me a retraining course in typing because of the references from the auto  parts firm.  From there I could only go to social assistance. I've been on it since 1973, when my  UIC ran out. As I am separated pd have a  young daughter, I felt it would be good  for her to have me home. She is now 15  years old and capable of managing with  minimum supervision.  So I am ready to go back to paid work.  Over the seven years at home I have done  volunteer work and once I was hired by Manpower for three months to set up a filing  system. I felt that because of my age  they would not hire me on permanent staff,  although a young woman I worked with was  eventually hired on a permanent basis.  I find I have lost my self-respect by having to accept welfare. I am gradually improving in this respect by doing volunteer  work as a Community Incentives Program  worker. For this, I receive $50 extra on  the social assistance cheque for working  20 hours a month. Also, I do some babysitting as I'm allowed to earn an extra  $100 a month. These extra monies go mostly  to keeping my daughter.  I fear for the future, when my daughter  leaves home and I lose her portion of the  welfare cheque. As soon as she leaves, I  will receive only $130 a month for shelter.  But at present my rent is $309 a month.  I have to find work, but where?  How will I learn a new skill and be accepted in spite of my age? I still have ten  good years to work, but where do I start?  The older woman who calls us  is usually angry and alone  One of the functions of Vancouver Status  of Women is to act as a resource and information centre. Much of this work is  done over the telephone. Recently, we  have had an increasing number of calls  from older women — women who are recently  separated, divorced or widowed; women who,  out of economic hardship or emotional need  are seeking assistance.  Typically, such a woman is on her own.  Often, this is not a choice she has made.  For example, her husband, in his fifties  or early sixties, may have fallen in love  with a younger woman and wants out of the  35-to-40-year marriage.  The woman feels very powerless and alone,  with no knowledge of her legal rights. She  feels emotionally hurt and is afraid for  her future.  In many instances, the house and all the  family assets are in the husband's name.  And until a separation agreement is drawn  up, or until the divorce is settled, she  has no financial assets.  She is angry at how she has been misused.  She sees how she has devoted her life to  her husband, his career, and her family's  well-being, and how she has worked in the  home for all those years with nothing to  show for it except final rejection.  Often such a woman will have faced battering from her husband, and will have gone  through bad years in the marriage which  have added to her low self-esteem.  She might have gone to the family doctor .  for advice. Too often she is diagnosed as  hysterical, compulsive, or neurotic —  and is "calmed down" with tranquillizers.  These pills keep her isolated, keep her  emotions dulled and keep her unable to  act and improve her life situation.  There is a total lack of services available  for older women. Older women who are battered have no transition house to go to,  as the existing emergency shelters are for  women with children. There are too few  support programs. And the attitude of government is that such services should be  provided by volunteers — by the free labour of women.  Older women coming out of marriage have a  multiplicity of needs. At Vancouver Status  of Women, we don't have the resources necessary to do the one-to-one counselling  and advocacy work that would assist such  older women redefine their lives.  Government bodies are not dealing with the  problems these women have. In fact, we are  receiving an increasing number of calls  from women who have been referred to us  by the ministry of human resources or by  the crisis lines.  Meeting these women, hearing their stories,  leaves me feeling despair, frustration and  anger at the injustices we, as women, face  because we perform valuable work in the  home.  Why are women punished with poverty for  doing the work which benefits all society?  Why is it that employers benefit from the  work of two people, yet pay only one wage?  Why are women punished for believing that  they would be taken care of when they signed a contract 20 or 30 years ago; when  custom and often laws prevented women from  retaining a job in the paid work force  upon marriage?  For many, break-up means instant poverty  For many a woman, marriage break-up means  the loss of her only source of money.  The fact that the woman has no income in  her own right during marriage keeps many  a woman in a bad living situation. If she  leaves the marriage she may be leaving a  middle class lifestyle for an old age of  poverty.  Job opportunities are few. The homemaking  and organizational skills she has acquired  in 35 years of work in the home are not  valued in the work force.  Encouraged to improve her chances of a job  by acquiring marketable skills, she is inevitably steered into courses which train  her for limited fields with few job vacancies -- such as work as a welfare aide  or a childcare assistant.  These jobs will  ensure her a low salary, little chance of  a pension on retirement, and almost no  chance of advancement.  Older women need a guaranteed income  Older women at the present time need a  form of guaranteed income.  Too many women  find themselves widowed or divorced or  poor. A husband can die before pension  age, which means that the widow is left  ineligible for benefits. Or a couple can be  divorced before the husband becomes eligible for his pension.  Women in'their fifties can find themselves  with only a welfare cheque.  In B.C., that  amounts to $130 shelter allowance, plus  $165 maximum support.  Because women in the home do not make a  salary, they are not eligible for unemployment insurance and pensions.  A retirement system must provide  A retirement system must provide for the  legitimate needs of all who have worked  — whether in paid or unpaid work.  More structured part-time work is essential  for older women — part-time work that provides a liveable income and Includes health  benefits.  We must create new jobs, jobs that use the  nurturing skills women have acquired in  the home.  There is a great need for home health workers, lay advocates and counsellors, plus  community workers who would provide information, organize neighbourhoods, and make  our communities safer and better places to  live. The quality of our life generally  would be improved if we paid women to extend their nurturing skills to a broader  social setting.  There has to be more reliable funding for  women's centres. It is these centres that  can provide the necessary support services  for older women. We need more centres,  like ones set up in other countries, that  focus on the needs of older women.  Young women are not educated to anticipate  marrying and then working, on average, 34  years in the paid labour force.  Until women are educated to the reality of  their adult lives, short-term measures to  protect women from a life of poverty are  essential. OLDER WOMEN  Caring for one another when we're 65: a fine feminist fantasy  Want to spend your last twenty years safely surrounded by your sisters?  Dutch feminist Corrie Van Dijk,  aged 67,  does.    She comments,   "Being myself an older woman wishing this fantasy to become  fact,  I filled the story with events which  might have come true.  From my own experience I know that many things which t  impossible before the women 's movement      ,.  have now been realised.    Apart from loving  to write the story for its own sake,  I  wanted to inspire women of my own age by  writing a fantasy story about what older  women might have accomplished and...may  still accomplish yet."  Spare Rib ran Corrie's story last July.  The translation is by An Dekker.  Writing to Broadsheet,   Corrie Van Dijk says  that she wants to hear from any groups of  women who have in fact done what she and  others dream about.  She says she'll join  them.  We've already lived here for a year and a  half; since we started some have gone, more  have arrived. One of us has died here. Our  youngest inhabitant is 55, the oldest is  just 80.  It's a bit more messy here than we're used  to and we have problems from time to time.  We live independently and yet not alone.. .  Something is happening all the time, some  really good things; not the least finding  new women friends. And we laugh a lot more  than we used to!  Each of us has chosen communal living with  older women who are also "old" or "older."  Sometimes we get someone who feels upset  over the mess or a quarrel and we say finally, "Would you like to go back?" And  then it's generally, "No, not that."  For me it started like this. My daughter  who often goes to her local Women's House  said, "Mother, there's a notice in the hallway about a discussion group for older women: you should take part in that. Shall I  put your name down?"  Much later I had a call from Lida, the woman who'd put the notice up: only two women  had responded. Nevertheless we arranged to  meet, the three of us.  Lida and Sannie, who had worked outside the  home and who knew a lot of people, talked  with their women friends and colleagues  about the things which we were discovering  about our lives.  I talked about it with my sister. I was a  housewife at the time so I didn't get too  much chance to talk intimately with others.  Dying alone or in the presence of others?  From time to time we had an evening with  a "special subject," which was always  about the future of the older woman. We  had an evening about "dying alone or in  the presence of others, and if so, who?"  Then, "what does a hobby do for you?" And  also, "do you want to be part of the women's movement and do you think you'll  still be able to?"  For these meetings, we invited all the  women we knew and' who had shown interest,  even if only a little bit. On one of these  evenings the subject was, "do we have a  future? What can we do with the years  that are left to us?" More than 20 women came and it was the noisiest and most  confused evening we'd had till then.  No more ifs and buts: we'll all live together  Every time someone was considering a point,  her story got stuck at "but." We got fed  up with that after a time. We didn't want  to hear another "but" and we started shouting at each other.  In the silence that followed an idea was  suddenly born. No more "Ifs and buts" —  we would club together and go and live in  a large house, organize our lives together  as we wanted.  Suddenly we had a working party of more than  10 women, all of whom wanted to live in our  future house. At first our plan looked simple. After all, individually, we already  paid rent with money we received from Social  Security, Old Age and other pensions — Some  had salaries and insurance. All new outgoing costs could be covered.  But then came the long business in between:  discussions with councils in the vicinity,  my memory for the rest of my life. I won't  say any more about it than that I saw, for  the first time, the sky spread wide above  the roofs, that the doors of houses had  colour, that the streets led somewhere and  that I never wanted to return to the house  I had just left.  At last all ten of us were there.  Kl.aar  had come in her car and brought Dien and  Heleen. Roosje had managed in her motorized wheelchair. We'd agreed that we  wouldn't talk about how we had just freed  talking with housing societies and charities  — with no success.  Of all the refusals, those of the banks were  the clearest: no loans to women, no loans to  people over sixty. And so we made a decision. Everyone was to look for a suitable  empty house which we'd squat together.  After 40 years of marriage, I was leaving  For me it was a nervous time. I'd been married for forty years. The last ten years  of the marriage had been almost impossible.  He had never really wanted to talk with me,  and I had simply stopped not just talking  but even wanting to.  It got worse when the last of the three  children left home. And once I could imagine going away with Lida and Sannie and  Roosje and all the others, I couldn't bear  my marriage any longer.  When he told me, loudly and clearly, "Now  you've got to stop talking nonsense," the  last thread snapped. I thought, "I'm going  away. Now. To Ans." (That's my sister.)  Then the phone rang. "Be ready for Sunday,  come tonight, we'll arrange everything."  And I could bear it for another two days.  I went to pack a big suitcase straight away.  Apart from a change of clothes I packed  candles, tea towels, cups, sugar, tea and  a saucepan. We had agreed what everyone  should bring to start. Lida had a hammer,  a pair of pincers and those kinds of things  with her.  Cycling away never to return  That Sunday afternoon I packed a rubbish  bag with sheets and blankets on top of my  suitcase. The saucepan, which I'd managed  to squeeze in, I tied to my bicycle. I  cycled away. That moment is engraved in  ourselves by our action, so we kept quiet  after the first restrained greetings.  Until someone said, "So we're going ahead  with it!" It was like a confirmation for  all of us and suddenly we all burst out  — "Have you brought this?" and, "Have  you got that with you?"  Sannie and Marjan, who lived in the neighbourhood and had explored the situation,  strolled up to the mansion; we stayed at  a distance behind a group of trees and  looked on.  Suddenly we were in the middle of our carefully prepared plan. It looked as good as  we had imagined: two old ladies on a Sunday stroll. Of course it was a little  crazy when one of them took a pair of special safety tongs from her nicely embroidered bag and cut through the barbed wire  and then through a plain wire. When the  tongs were put away and they walked on  through the neglected private grounds at  that back of the mansion, they looked quite  reassuring.  We lost sight of them when they went around  the corner of the house, but a little later  we saw them again, and they motioned, "hurry, hurry." We ran, with two of us pushing Roos because the motor of her wheelchair couldn't run on the rough ground. The  back door had only two locks and together  Sannie and Ank knew what to do about them.  As soon as we were inside we started to repair the locks, check the windows and  search for the water, gas and electricity  mains. Three women started to make one of  the rooms cosy with some old furniture that  had been left behind, and handy use of  dusters — as they shook them out, they  called: "Hey, it's amazing here!"  Marjan went around to all of us, collecting OLDER WOMEN  the letters we'd written to friends. Some  gave her up to six letters; it was quite  a pile she took'to the nearest postbox.  Okkie and Heleen ran across the open space  between the house and the woods with Roos's  wheelchair and so maintained a transport  service until all the suitcases were inside  Roos sat on an airbed and unpacked an amazing collection: screwdrivers, drawing  pins, first aid box, a couple of bags of  colourful cloth, a carpet_sweeper, a primus stove, two teapots — everything that  makes starting to live in an old, deserted house possible.  The police came to visit, too  During the following week, the women we'd  written to came to visit and seven of them  soon came to live with us.  The police  came too, and asked us what we were doing  here.  But there was no further trouble once we  said, "we live here." The owner of the  property, an Institute which hadn't been  able to let the house profitably and had  not been able to find a buyer yet, first in  sisted that we leave, and later demanded an  impossible rent.  But now that about thirty  of us live here, we're able to pay a regular rent, which they've accepted.  This is my story of how a number of old  women gained a victory over oppression.  What was our oppression?  All kinds.  I'm not the only one who has  run away from an oppressive marriage. Two  of us came from an elderly people's home.  Heleen was there "too young" after her  elderly husband had died.  Okkie had got  there after her house had been pulled  down. Neither of them could stand fussing  or being cut off from the world of initiative and activity.  Several women were living alone and were  lonely and saw the time approaching when  in a couple of years- they couldn't manage  on their own anymore.  One woman had gone to live with her children and this had been disappointing for  both sides.  Oh yes, and Mieke had run  away from two grown-up children, a son and  a daughter, who still expected her to cook  for them and pick up their dirty clothes  and put them in the washing machine.  We all intended to help each other and  were convinced that with a limited amount  of help from outside, such as every "normal" family needs, we could manage.  Two  of us still worked outside the house.  Every morning they left for town in Lida's  care.  Most of us now wanted to be active in the  struggling world of women. That becomes  more and more difficult when your energy  and ability to move around becomes limited through ageing. Being together makes  a difference, let me tell you.  We took part in the March 10 "Women  Demand Work" marches  Those of us who read the papers cut out  the pieces that concern us and other women.  And then we decide what we can get involved in and help with.  You'd have been able to see us on March 10  when five of us took part in the "Women  Demand Work" marches. Grey hair and dark  circles under the eyes, to be sure, but  excited that we could take part.  That's what I mean by 'together'. With two  days in succession at demonstrations, nobody can manage. So we share the effort.  Those who stay at home receive those who  have gone with tea or food and listen to  their stories. We go by car, or by bicycle and-train if it's during the day. We  contact women in the neighbourhood over  abortion marches so we can go by minibus.  Of course we read all the women's papers  from our home town.  I mustn't forget how we have been helped  by the Women in Technical Trades Group,  who together with some other handy \  spent a few days replacing windows, repairing pipes, reinforcing a ceiling and painting. That would have taken Sannie and Ank  and Egberta a year. We have been helped  and supported by many more women; it makes  us feel very warm.  We are really living  And from time to time we have also received younger women, have looked after them  and supported them when they sought refuge  with us. We like that. But not everyone  wants to come to us: surrounded by all  these old women you are of course looking  at your own future.  Most of us wanted to be active in the  struggling world of women... being  together makes a difference, let me  tell you  Our planning meetings with "outside" workgroups in our house are very popular —  we bake lovely biscuits and often have  good ideas. We keep a diary, just as they  do in other Women's Houses, and we're going  to write a short piece for the women's paper very soon about tensions in our house.  Many problems have to be solved, women comforted, conflicts resolved. But they are  our  experiences. We're really living in  our last years.  We have made the house cosy, we play cards  and make music and we sit outside in the  summertime. We look after those of us who  are ill and cheer them up. And we repair  leaking taps. Cleaning the large staircases is an enormous task. But together we  are practical, handy and experienced.  The death of Ellen was a great shock for  all of us and during her short illness we  couldn't occupy ourselves with anything  else. Now that half a year has gone by we  can think how happily she walked around  .here in those last four months of her life.  I have left out the placenames. Those who  know us know where to find us. The name of  our house is painted in large letters over  the front door. One evening with cheerful  squabbling and laughter we chose from  about twenty names. The house became Woodruff (a little plant) and everyone can see  the name on a banner which lies ready for  the next demonstration.  Just as a kind of PS, because it makes me  so happy, I want to say that I passed my  driving test last week.  Just imagine: behind the wheel myself, after  forty years of being a passenger!    Q  Pensions for women: it's going  to be a big issue in the 80s  Pensions for women is going to be a major  feminist issue of the 1980s.  Within the next 30 years, the majority of  the population will be over 60 years of  age.  Put that together with the fact that  three out of every five poor adults is a  woman and you have the issue.  Georgina Cordes, a volunteer worker -at the  Winnipeg YWCA has put together an excellent  10-page pamphlet on women and pensions in  Canada.  It'n available free  from Checklist, YWCA of Canada, 571 Jervis Street,  Toronto, Ont. M4Y 2J1.  Here are some comments and facts from her  pamphlet, about poverty and elderly women.  * In 1975, 81%  of single women over 65  had no private pension at all.  * Only 27% of employed women participate  in private pension plans, compared to a  40% participation rate for all waged workers.  Participation in these programs is  largely confined to upper-income workers.  Less than 10% of Canadian widows over 65  receive any benefit from the Canada Pension Plan (CPP). Of those 10%, benefits  averaged $859 per year. Less than 45%  of widows aged 50 - 64 received survivor  benefits from the Canada Pension Plan.  The Canada Pension Plan was created in the  . 1960s and is compulsory for nearly all  paid members of the labour force.  As a result of pressure from women's organizations, the federal government has  allowed homemakers into the CPP — but  only at the time of divorce.  This "divorce and divide" concept, Cordes  points out, focuses on the dissolution of  the marriage, and denies the homemaker  her right to full and equal community  of property during the relationship.  According to "divorce and divide", the  homemaker receives half of the wage earner's accumulated pension plan credits accrued during the time of the marriage.  The OAS: something to grow thin on  With women largely excluded from the present system of private pensions, and denied full participation in the CPP, most  of us will have to look to government  pensions, such as the Old Age Security  pension. This is paid to all Canadian citizens at the age of 65. Right now, it's  $202 a month.  Cordes points to some interesting pension  facts prepared by Valerie Johnson, education officer with the Alberta Union of  Provincial Employees. Did you know that:  * A divorced woman does not have access  to her estranged husband's private pension, even though she may have supported  him during all his contributing years?  Pensions are not considered family assets  and thus are not split between wife and  husband.'  * Consider a woman who spent 20 years in  the labour force and contributed to the CPP  During that time she earned a total of  $180,000 (a healthy estimate; she might  well earn significantly less).  This figure would then be averaged over 40 years  (time she could have spent in the labour  force less 15% drop-out time) to give an  average yearly earning of $4,500.  Full  pension benefits per year would equal one-  quarter of this amount, or $1,125 per year.  Shocking?  * Even for those of us able to save some  money in a registered retirement savings  plan, there is more bad news. If a woman  and man, aged 65, took the same amount of  money saved in the plan (or in any other  way) to an insurance company to buy a pension, the woman's pension would be less  than the man's. Why? Actuarial tables show  that women live longe"-, so receive smaller  payments.      Q Kinesis    March 1981  EDUCATION  Same as in Shelagh's day  UBC women are still getting the short end of the academic stick  By Julie Wheelwright / Ubyssey  "What we have found is that women at UBC  are a small proportion of the faculty,  that they are paid less than men in every  academic rank . ..  and that the university  educates fewer women than men,  and educates them less. "  A Report on the Status of Women at UBC,  by Shelagh Day, 1973  "In addition to the inequalities women  face as students,   the number of women faculty the university hires does not represent the talents available in the total  female population. "  Voices of Women Students, UBC, 1974  "Clearly,  women in Canadian universities  are close to being invisible in the internal power structure at its various  levels. "  But Can You Type? by Jill Vickers- and  June Adams, 1977  "I really think it's still quite a myth  that options for women are open at the  top. "  Pauline Weinstein, assistant education  professor at UBC, 1980  Women faculty members are still a minority  in Canadian universities. Though they now  make up almost 50 per cent of the undergraduate, fulltime students at UBC, 1979-  80 figures show that only 12 per cent of  the university's more than 2,000 faculty  members are women.  In faculties that have a higher percentage  of female students, the number of female  professors is still low. In some faculties  and schools at UBC there are still no  women teaching as assistant professors and  above, although the number of female  students has greatly increased. Here are  some 1979-80 figures:  * in the faculty of forestry 22 per cent of  the students were women, but there were no  women professors;  * in commerce and business administration,  29 per cent of students were women, and  three per cent of the faculty;  * in medicine, 36 per cent of the students  were women, and 14 per cent of the faculty;  * in sciences, 32 per cent of the students  were women, but only four per cent of the  faculty;  * in pharmaceutical sciences 51 per cent  of the students were women and four per  cent of the faculty;  * in agricultural sciences, 51 per cent  of the students were women, and five per  cent faculty;  * in law 29 per cent female students, seven  per cent female faculty;  * and in arts 60 per cent female students  and 14 per cent female faculty.  The figures were roughly the same in UBC's  schools. In the school of community and  regional planning, 1979-80, there were no  female professors. In architecture with  24 per cent female students, six per cent  female faculty; in librarianship there  were 71 per cent female students and only  30 per cent faculty. In social work with  74 per cent female students, there were  only 37 per cent female faculty.  At Simon Fraser University, where in 1980  women made up 49 per cent of the undergraduate total, of all regular faculty  13 per cent were women.  SFU staff stacked with males  In the fall semester, of its 105 positions  the science faculty had three women professors; in arts with 254 positions there  were 37 female faculty members; in education, with 37 positions 10 were filled by  women and in interdisciplinary studies,  which includes women's studies, there were  10 women professors.  At the University of Victoria, where 55.9  per cent of the full-time undergraduate  students this year are women, of the full  professors only 6.7 per cent are women.  Of the associate professors, 9.9 per cent  are women; 24.8 per cent of the assistant  professors and 33.3 per cent of the lecturers are women.  Majority of students are women  At Capilano College where women are the  majority of the full time students in the^  social sciences division there are 12  male and 5 female full-time faculty members.  One of the reasons that there are so few  are, on the average, lower than men's.  So in economic terms it is difficult for  women to remain simply as undergraduate  students. When they do reach the graduate  level, they are a minority in the Canadian  university system. In 1978-79, according  to statistics Canada, women in graduate  school made up only 34.5 percent of the  nation's total enrolment.  In Saskatchewan, with the smallest number  of women in the masters and doctorate  program in the country, women made up 26  per cent of the total.  In Nova Scotia  women made up 37.9 per cent of the total,  the largest in the country.  women in the university and college faculties is because fewer women enter graduate school. At UBC in 1979-80 women were  37.5 per cent of the students on the  masters program and 28 per cent on the  doctoral program. At SFU the figures were  at the masters level 37 per cent women,  at the doctoral level 26 per cent. At  UVic the total percentage of women in  graduate school was 37.4.  But studies have found that even though  in some areas there are no women with doctorates, in areas where there are more  women candidates they are still disadvantaged.  As the statistics at B.C.'s universities  indicate, the further down the scale of  employment one travels, the more women are  found. Women at the top are still few  and far between.  "There are so many factors mitigating  against women getting into the higher  echelons," says Weinstein.  "We know that it's a very long, hard  struggle for women to get a doctor's degree," she says and one of the mitigating  factors is certainly economics.  A 1980 statistics Canada summer employment  survey of returning students found that  fewer women than their male counterparts  found jobs.  It should also come as no surprise that women students' summer earnings  The trend is clear. The higher up the educational ladder one climbs, the fewer  women one encounters. But few women at  the graduate level is not the only problem.  The women who do make it and receive a  university position, suffer from a myriad  of problems.  "The women who make it, that is who get a  job in a university on a full-time basis,  encounter lower salaries, slower advancement, less likelihood of being granted  tenure, and, in'many cases, heavier work  loads at the undergraduate level. By and  large their presence is tolerated, and,  in a profession which is in general  buffeted by cruises and alarms and fixated  on internal status, being tolerated means  being to 'be grateful you have a job at  all and don't complain'," according to  Vickers and Adams, in their 1977 study on  Canadian women in post-secondary institutions.  Weinstein says women at the university  level involved in women's issues still  don't get the respect they deserve.  "I  think women have to fight for equal opportunities on campus."  Capilano College history and women's  studies professor Marlene Legates says part  of the problem is university administrators who do little or nothing to encourage  women to join their institutions.  "There is no commitment on the part of the EDUCATION  university to do anything about it.  There  is no concern at all."  She adds that it will take a concerted  effort on the part of administrators to  rectify the current situation.  "I think  the only possilbe beginning is to launch  an affirmative action program.  I don't  know what else could be done. Ideally,  I'd like to see more people more supportive  of women's issues."  Without a base of support at the academic  level, many women feel isolated from their  colleagues and are often excluded from informal information sources: the lunches,  the opinions exchanged over cocktails..  "Many women also don't have the socializing  factors, the Friday afternoon beer drinking  (that men have)," according to SFU history  and women's studies professor Mary Lynn  McDougall.  She adds another problem for women with ■  faculty careers is that often the criteria,  especially in the humanities, for lectureship renewals or recommendations for tenure  are fairly subjective.  Women tend to get diverted from their scholarship and more emphasis is put on thei^  committee and teaching experience, a recent study of American universities in Ms.  magazine found.  Hard to gauge what you're supposed to do  "It's very hard to gauge exactly what you're  supposed to do at university," says McDougall.  She adds that in her own undergraduate career she had only one female professor and her image as an academic was  distorted.  Images.and lack of role models still remain a problem for women students considering an academic career.  The old stereotype, according to McDougall'  of the woman professor with "horned rimmed  glasses and sensible shoes" still persists.  It becomes a vicious cycle. Without women as role models in leadership positions  fewer women students see themselves in  those positions.  Consequently, there are  fewer women who go into academic careers  where they could encourage the next' generation.  Aside from the lack of encouragement at the  undergraduate level, women currently in the  faculty at universities like UBC still experience slower promotions than men even  though they have the same qualifications.  Accordingly to associate English professor  Lorraine Weir, women who become faculty  members, especially in the language departments, are judged on more subjective criteria than faculty in sciences.  "I think  that has been a common experience of women  in the arts," she says.  Many women have less time to publish  As there is an emphasis on teaching and  committee work, many women have less time  to concentrate on publication which is necessary for any academic hoping for promotion. Although there are some guidelines  for tenure recommendation or lectureship  renewal, Weir says, "when you get to interpretation in individual cases it's not  so clear cut."  Often women opt out of the battle and go  on to teach high schools-, college or work  as sessional lecturers. At UBC in 1978,  women make up approximately 50 per cent of  the sessional lecturers.  In this area,  and in the statistics concerning the number of women faculty, UBC is "about the  same or more favourable than other universities," according to Bill Tetlow, UBC's  planning and analysis department head.  Says Weir: "These are jobs where there is  virtually no future. Lecturers are not  given trust or recognition and this can be  said of the lower echelons of tenured  faculty as well."  "Traditionally, the lower echelons of faculty have been women."  According to Vickers and Adams' study, "the  deck of cards is clearly, well stacked  against women at the level of doctoral education. The stacking however, rarely  reflects deliberate discrimination on the  part of the faculty."  "Generally, once they obtain a place in  the doctoral program, female students are  fairly treated on academic grounds.  This  is not the case however, with regard to  the treatment of women in the hiring process and within the academic profession  itself."  Women, because their positions in the  university are often precarious to begin  feel they've been discriminated against.  When asked about the small percentage of  women in faculty positions at UBC Shaw  points to the small number of women who  enter graduate school. When asked why  the numbers of women graduate students are  so small, Shaw says, "I don't really know  why it exists, it's the way of the world,  it's the way these female students think."  But Shaw adds, "we have some very outstanding lady professors." He says he has  known "lots of girls" who have done well -  in their masters program but have decided  against going on to do their doctorate  work.  with, are nervous about complaining.  "If  you're not in a strong bargaining position  to begin with, then you're going to be  held back. Women are much more reticent  to walk into a department and say, "I'm  being ripped off." Women will wait years  to say that," says Weir.  "It happens and I don't think it is just a  UBC disease.  I think It's a paradigm of  helplessness," she said.  There is a downgrading of confidence  Myrne Nevison, a UBC education professor  and head of counselling psychology says  although the situation is changing, "there  is a climate that downgrades a woman's  competence."  "It's funny because it's not just in terms  of top administration. A woman would be  criticized if she were as outspoken as a  man.  He would be praised for those  qualities," she says.  Nevison recounts a story about a man she  met 17 years ago with a recently acquired  doctorate. He asked her what her opinion  of counselling psychology was and she  proceeded to explain it.  "He interrupted me to say, 'wait, you're  indicating power.' He went on to say a  woman should never express an idea unless  it was dropped casually over coffee so a  man could pick it up."  Nevison says she was very angry with the  man who immediately afterwards asked her  for a favour.  "It's ridiculous that something like that  could exist in Canada.  I really don't  think men see these things."  Nevison adds that these attitudes are so  pervasive that men don't see them. "When  women see it, they get angry.  It's like  a fish is the last thing to know that it's  in the water."  It seems that Canadian universities are not  immune to the negative patterns that society in general practices against women.  "Canadian universities reflect and reinforce the general societal patterns which  limit the participation of women in the  professional and public life of our society," say Vickers and Adams.  UBC vice president brushes off charges  But UBC acting vice-president for students  and faculty affairs Michael Shaw, "just  brushes off" claims by Vickers, Adams and  others that women are hindered by the old-  boys network.  Shaw also says "if you take two people,  one man and one woman at a university,  they're going to do equally well." He  adds it is is unfortunate that some women  And he says the situation is better than  it used to be, "the world is changing,  society is changing," but don't expect any  radical, overnight changes.  "There are more important things", Shaw  Unfortunately Shaw has the attitude of many  in the university community.  He says,  "there are more important things" than  looking into the numbers of women teaching  at UBC.  He assures us the situation is  changing.  In 1973 Shelagh Day found the same situation that exists today; that women were a  smaller proportion in the faculty, that  the university educates fewer women and  educates them less than men.  That -was  eight years ago.  What will women be saying another eight  years from now when the current evidence  is that the situation must be changed if  the university is serious about bringing  more women into the academic system?  The problem at UBC is not unique either;  it is symptomatic of women's status in Canadian universities as whole.  The problem doesn't start at this level.  But for an institution that prides itself  on exploration of the intellect and its  democratic principles, talent and energy  are being wasted. Women are continuing to  be silenced by our institutions of higher  learning.  According"to McDougall, "it's not easy for  people to point to discrimination because  it's so systematic.  There's something more  complex here than most types of discrimination."  UBC is not unique in its reinforcement of  our male dominated society; but it's time  that the situation must change. The first  step towards that goal is recognition that  the problem exists. 0.  Repeal 251 cancels March 8 rally  In support of the CUPE strike, the Repeal  251 Committee cancelled their pro-choice  rally, scheduled for March 8, IWD.  The decision to cancel, the committee explains, "was based on the fact that the  Queen Elizabeth Theatre — the rally site  — is one of the locations presently being  picketed by CUPE. The strong possibility of  a prolonged labour dispute and the unavail  ability of alternate facilities did not  allow us to proceed with arrangements essential to the success of the rally."  The committee's campaign to lobby MPs for  repeal of the abortion laws got off to  a successful start February 14, when over  2,000 cards were mailed to 128 MPs. sis    March 1981  WOMEN AGAINST IMPERIALISM  Latin American women struggle against their oppression  l\  By Charby Slemin  WOMEN IN LATIN AMERICA, the second in an  ongoing series of educationals on women  and imperialism, took place in Vancouver  last month.  Speakers from the Central American Support  Committee, the Committee for the Defense  of Human Rights in Chile and a woman who  has recently returned from Nicaragua fielded questions ranging from the effect of  feminism on Latin American women to the  role of the Church in revolutionary movements .  Two excellent films were shown: Women In  Arms, recently released from Nicaragua  and examining the immense changes for women who have fought both during the revolution and since liberation; and Double Day,  describing the double work load of women  labouring inside and outside the home.  The similarities and in particular the differences between our lives and those of  Latin American women helped to point out  and define the ways in which imperialism  operates.  The last 50 years have been times of great  change in Latin America. The peasant populations, forced from their land by expropriation and higher living costs, are teeming to the cities in search of work and  food.  A great majority are women: young women expected to supplement their family's income;  mothers, widowed or deserted by their men,  or striving to add some extra income so  their children will not go-hungry.  By far the largest number of women are em- '  ployed in the service sector, mostly as  domestics.  Latin America has the highest  percentage of household employees in the  world.  Even lower middle class families  can afford servants.  There is almost no legal scarcity of jobs  and the isolation of domestic work keeps  the workers from protesting. One woman  worked as household help , from the age of 11  without pay.  Her room and board and "training" were seen as her reward.  Women are driven into prostitution  Women searching for work in the urban ghettoes or "misery belts" are often driven  into prostitution.  In Sao Paula, Brazil,  there are 100,000 prostitutes alone, or  one for'every 60 inhabitants.  When interviewed, many replied they would like to  get out of prostitution but the background  they had left was even more miserable.  Traditionally, women have made up a very  small portion of the industrial workforce.  But with the takeover of national industries by transnational corporations, this  is changing.  Says a personnel manager: "Girls are educated to obey at home.  It is easier to  get their confidence. They are loyal to  the company. It's not so with men."  And, of course, women will work for lower  wages. Regulations are strict on the "global assemblyline." Personnel managers are  only looking for young, single women, between the ages of 17 to 25, with no dependents and at least six years of education.  Some companies even have a compulsory pregnancy test. They are making certain that  they will not have to deal with pregnancy  leaves or childcare programs. And if the  company decides to pack up and move to an  area where labour is even cheaper, well,  it's only women who are being put out of  work.  Women's control over their own bodies and  population control are controversial topics  for feminists and leftists in Latin America.  There is good reason for the wide mistrust  of such birth control programs as International Planned Parenthood'and AID (USA). In  the words of one American official, "It is  more hygenic and effective to kill guerrillas in the womb than in the mountain or the  street."  The links between big business and supposedly 'philanthropic' cause of population  control are many, and include the Chase Manhattan Bank, Duponts and the Rockefellers.  The Ford Foundation alone has contributed  more to population control than any other  public or private agency: $15 million since  1952. 37% of all Puerto Rican women have  been sterilized. In Brazil, one million  women have been sterilized since 1965.  The totalitarian junta in Chile spends 40%  of its total annual health budget on population control.  Many women are coerced into sterilization  programs with gifts of lipstick, money payments and promises of free medical care  (the only way to have access to a doctor).  Poor Latin American women have consistently  been used a guinea pigs in tests of new  Nicaraguans celebrating thei  birth control methods before being allowed  ■ on the North American market.  Mexican women were injected with a contraceptive after  it was found that women with  ,nutritional anemia — a condition prevalent  among the poor — could suffer severe bleeding.  The birth control pill was first tested in  Puerto Rico and Haiti. The three deaths  that resulted.from the tests were not followed up as the researchers claimed "the  tested women were so unhealthy anyway that  three deaths during the tests were not unusual."  In Guatemala an experiment was conducted  injecting para-formaldehyde into women's  fallopian tubes and uteruses to cause sterilization. The doctors were warned to wear  gloves to protect their hands from the  caustic chemical.  Because of sharp class differences in Latin. America, most women have chosen to organize within class-related groups. Connections between women's oppression and  class oppression are still being argued.  Yet within most of the autonomous women's  movement, there is a commitment to struggle for broad revolutionary change.  Marta Lamas, member of the Movement for  the Liberation of Women (Mexico) says,  "the name, 'women's liberation movement'  does not imply that it intends only to  liberate women, or that women must oppose  themselves to men, but that they must start  with their own interests, uniting with all  other oppressed sectors which are also seeking a revolutionary change for all."  But there has been cooptation from the  right.  In Chile the right was successful  in mobilizing upper and middle class women  to take to the streets in massive protests  against the Allende government and food  shortages.  This disruption helped in the  overthrow of the government by the military  junta.  - Within the peasant and working class women's  groups the issues are more likely to be  linked to working and living conditions:  access to jobs, housing, medicine and education. Wife beating, rape and abortion  may be discussed but the options remain unclear for women to whom the added income  of a husband or the tradition of the Church  remain the few avenues to security.  In Bolivia, in the tin mines, the Siglo XX  Housewives Committees organize women as  mothers and housewives. The women, acting  separately, but in accord with the men's  unions, mount 24-hour guards and warn the  union leaders of the approach of the army  by blowing on football whistles.  After women were beaten by their husbands  for occupying a company management office  until one in the morning, a Siglo XX spokesperson denounced the men over the radio as  lackeys and military supporters.  Women throughout Latin America are looking  with hope to Nicaragua as a model. Since  the civil war and victorious overthrow of  the Samoza regime, women have been active  in the revolutionary movement.  One quarter of the Popular Sandinista Army  and half of the police force are women.  Nicaraguan women hold powerful positions  Women hold positions of power in almost  every government office. They control two  out of five secretariats.  On International Women's Day last year, the Association of Nicaraguan Women (AMNLAE) brought  35,000 women out into the streets to celebrate.  The AMNLAE had set up a list of  priorities for the immediate future.  At the top of the list is childcare. Over  12 centres have been up within eight months,  Mobile health units provide health and  maternity care even in remote areas. Trade  unions are being established in the female  job ghettoes, particularly domestic work.  To alleviate unemployment, cooperative  projects and training programs are under  way. Political education is being carried  out through the association's newsletter.  The legal system is being revamped to  end sexual exploitation. A paternity law  is going into force to demand that fathers  support their children.  Women participated in the Nicaraguan revolution in greater numbers than in any  other peoples' movement to date. They  fought in the streets and in the mountains.  They worked as medics and couriers  and manufactured home-made bombs in kitchen tubs.  Four out of seven commanders  of the final battle were women.  After so much sacrifice and involvement,  it seems unlikely that Nicaraguan women  will passively accept any attempts to  send them back into the home. A domestic  worker who raised nine children alone explains, "Women weren't aware of anything.  They only washed, ironed, cooked and had  children. And that was it.  But now, I  tell you, we're awakened.'"  The next workshop on Women and Imperialism  will focus on Women in the Middle East.  The film, We the Palestinian People, followed by discussion, will be shown on  Friday, March 27 at the First United  Church, 320 East Hastings, Vancouver. On  Sunday, torch 29 at 2:00 p.m. at the YWCA  580 Burrard St, Vancouver, there will be  a slide/tape presentation on the history  of U.S. involvement in Iran. Laura Brown,  who visited Iran last year, and an Iranian woman currently living in Vancouver  will be speaking.  For childcare and more information, call  the group at 253-5654.        0. Kinesis    March 1981  MOVEMENT MATTERS  Lesbian Conference 1981  Unity and visibility; developing goals for our community  By Janet Beebe and Janice Pentland Smith  Vancouver will host the fourth national lesbian conference, titled "Lesbians Take Power"  May 16, 17 and 18. There we'll talk about  how to be open and gain power as lesbians -  on the job, within our families, in every  area of our lives - and how to form support  groups that can help us do that.  We need to open new ways and new places for  lesbians to meet, expanding our movement  in ways that will make our presence visible  in society.  Lesbianism is often seen only as a "personal  issue"; however, the conference organizers  feel this response is an indication of our  lack of organization and political power  as lesbians. There have been slow gains in  our freedom to be open, but we still lead  narrow, confined lives because of our power-  lessness as lesbians. This will change only  by organizing, and the conference is part  of that process.  The organizers hope that this conference  will result in plans for action which will  generate theory, articles, music and art -  the whole range of lesbian creativity - out  into the larger community.  The conference will be held in conjunction  with a 2-week art show called "Woman to  Woman", to be held at Carnegie Centre at  Main and Hastings. There will also be  showings of lesbian films at the Ridge  Theatre and Vancouver East Cinema. During  the conference, there will be films, arts  and crafts, music, sports events and dance  performances. The organizers hope to create  an impact beyond the conference itself by  emphasizing publicly a lesbian sensibility  and presence in the visual arts.  Lesbian politics will include  workshops on the women's movement, the  gay movement/human rights, the left, and  separatism.  Workshops will be facilitated by individual lesbians and .organizations. Several  groups who have done workshops in their  own communities will bring them to the  conference.  HA  Of^i—  Conference workshops  Workshops at the conference will examine  lesbians at work, the lesbian body, spirituality, lesbians and our children, lesbian  sexuality, culture, and political organizing.  The category lesbians at work, for example,  will encompass workshops on lesbian mothers,  lesbians in trade unions, in professions,  on welfare, lesbian students and prostitutes.  Workshops on the lesbian body will discuss  self healing, madness, alcoholism, and  The Vancouver Women's Health Collective,  for example, will give a workshop on  artificial insemination. Saskatchewan  Women in Trades will talk about non-  traditional jobs. The Lesbian Mothers  Defense Fund will be doing a workshop  on custody and how to build a defense  campaign, while LAFMPAG (Lesbian and  Feminist Mothers Political Action Group)  will offer their renowned workshop on  lesbian mothers and children. The Vancouver Welfare Coalition will do a workshop on organizing, and Women in Prisons  will be talking about women prisoners.  In the arts, Persimmon Blackbridge will  be facilitating a workshop on art and politics, and Eileen Brown will be leading  one on music.  Every workshop will bring forth resolutions to be presented at plenary Monday  afternoon. Key resolutions will be announced publicly at a press conference.  Mama Quilla is coming  On the Friday evening leading off the  conference, Robin Tyler will be entertaining at the Quadra. Saturday night,  the Toronto women's band Mama Quilla  and other performers will be playing at  a women's dance. Sunday evening there will  be poetry and music by performers such as  Cyndia Cole, Eileen Brown, Boo Watson,  Heather Bishop and April Kassirer.  Sunday morning, there will be a soccer  match, followed by a fun run.  A turnout of 400-500 lesbians is expected  at the conference. The organizers have  applied for grant money to provide travel  subsidies for out-of-town women. The aim  of the conference is to speak to the needs  of all lesbians.  Registration  Women will be expected to pre-register for  the conference. Fees will be on a sliding  scale.  Registration kits including final information on workshops and other events will be  available by mid-April. Registration fees  should be sent to: P.O. Box 65563, Stn. F,  Vancouver, or women may register at pre-  conference events.  The Lesbian Conference organizing committee desperately needs financial  ..assistance. They would also like women  to submit ideas for a conference poster.  The conference committee is still open to  suggestions of resource people, performers  films and other events. Help is needed  to organize conference activities, billeting, and especially the art show, from the  beginning of April through the end of the  conference. Contact the committee at the  above address.  PRE-CONFERENCE EVENTS  MARCH 21 - Dance with "The Volcanics", a  live band from Seattle  APRIL 24 - A concert with Swing Shift, a  band from San Francisco  Why it's too costly to eat and sleep, much less travel to work  The theme of this year's International Women's Day was the high cost of living.  Here's why:  Statistics Canada reports that fresh vegetables showed the biggest price increase  between October 1979 and October 1980.  They went up by 29.8 per cent.  In the same period, cereal and bakery products went up by 16.6 per cent.  Dairy products went up 16.4 per cent.  Other food prices, including meat, poultry  and fish went up by 10.2 per cent.  Also in that one-year period, health costs  escalated by 10 per cent and clothing prices went up 9.5 per cent.  A basket of goods that used to cost $100  in 1971 now costs $200, according to Statistics Canada.  Bus prices went up in the lower mainland  from 50 cents to 60 cents a ride.  Gas prices increased by 24 per cent between October 1979 and October 1980.  tooftSWo {oo'/, W  ICBC premiums are going up be 35 per cent  in 1981.  Rents are going up in Vancouver, the city  with the most expensive housing market in  Canada. The first to feel the brunt of  the housing costs are, of course, the poor  — single parents with children.  If you make enough to entertain fantasies  about buying a house, you're in up to your  neck.  Federal government statistics use  the example of a $50,000 mortgage (not  high by Vancouver standards) to show that,  at 16 per cent interest,, monthly mortgage  payments would be $660 a month.  Just to qualify for that mortgage, you  have to have a monthly income of $2,500.  In the year between October 1979 and October 1980 fuel oil went up by 125 per cent.  Natural gas went up by 16 per cent. Electricity costs rose by 9.7 per cent. And  the cost of cleaning supplies went up by  15.3.  Thanks to CUPE and the VMREU for these  figures. 22 Kinesis    March 1981  CULTURAL WORK  Women's Week at UBC  Robin reads poetry, prose and probes feminist perspectives  By Joey Thompson  Robin Morgan did go too far during some  parts of an evening spent with several hundred women at UBC on February 27. But other  moments were soft with understanding and  the spirit that soars when women meet to  share their treasured experiences.  Morgan — with her insights and readings —  did please and pleasure.  But she also puzzled. Some of her words hit like a term  paper. Others touched gently like the petals of the peony flower she describes so  lucidly. The words she read from her 'up  and coming' book of prose, entitled Anatomy of Freedom  — Feminism in the New Age  — are confusing. She plays with word puzzles; academic jargon that twists and winds  and, in struggling to reach out — fails.  Her readings are philosophical releases;  sentences that weave and wind their way  back to a beginning I did not understand  in the first place.  But her poetry/words speak differently. She  released feminist feelings that held a captive women's audience in awe.  Says Morgan, "Men have been inserting their  penises into poetry for hundreds of years."  She says that women's creative process has  been silenced and made invisible, the "time  has come to stop writing about writing and  write."  All art is political  "Art without politics is a misconception of  terms. Art is a political expression, a  religious experience based in politics."  And she adds, "A women's study course or  program that thinks of itself as being not  political is profoundly political."  From a recently-written poem, White Sound,  she poses the question, "If a woman falls  in the forest and no one hears, is there  sound?"  Morgan, despite the fact that it "made me  nervous to write a flower poem" wrote about  a peony bud, encased in a waxen coat which  only the faminished ants can unfurl. She  says the ants eat away the wax cover to  unfist the flower. Without the ants, the  finest hot house growers cannot make the  peony bloom.  Is she saying, through this image, that  without accepting our power, creativity  and expression through feminism, women cannot bloom?  without vision. Real art has never been  apolitical."  Says Morgan, "What men have done is called  art. What women have done is called crafts.  Women artists spend much of their time  "being useful." We make baskets and blankets, and quilts to keep a child warm.  But, she says, "Women are in the process  B^^3  ■.:-'"::/■:":■;  ^r    jm   j^^ *  lltsa.  Br              1>^|                 ^V^l  ^H<  fttag^.-jj*'  •   ,. ^5|  "The moment of a poem's coming to life,"  she explains, "is quite mysterious...and  has something to do with the power of the  soul that speaks so rarely and is often  vulnerable."  "Art and feminism are the two forces which  seem to have taken over my life." Art is  politics — the two are inseparable. And  poetry is a religious experience, a kind  of prayer.  "Politics or revolution without art is'  of redefining what is art and what is craft  What is happening now is extraordinary...  the beginning of the birth of real feminist  criticism... We are developing excellence  which is our own."  Morgan also said that women writers such  as Elizabeth Browning did not simply write  passionate love poems, which high school  English teachers might have us believe.  Browning, and other women artists of he£  day, wrote some highly political work. *  We all got out to Getting Out  By Joan Woodward  Westcoast Actors at the Waterfront Theatre  on Granville Island continued their extraordinarily good season of plays by and/or  about women with February's offering of  "Getting Out."  Rosemary Dunsmore does an excellent rendition of "Arlene", the ex-tough kid, ex-  jailbird, who is trying to go straight.  After doing eight years for the murder of  a cabbie in a bungled hold-up, she is at  last free. In "Getting Out", playwright  Marsha Norman shows some of the problems  of readaptation to society.  Arlene has high hopes as she steps out  into what she sees as the free world.  Inside her is the ever rebellious "Arlie",  the old Arlene.  Brenda Robbins does an  equally good interpretation of "Arlie",  Arlene's former self. Both characters  are no stage during most of the performance.  The dialogue is occasionally  difficult to follow because of this, but  for the most part, it is an interesting  and effective means of providing historical background to the character of Arlene,  at the same time as it depicts her  struggle to keep Arlie under control.  The world outside is not what she thought  it to be. A series of disappointments  present themselves to her as one person  after another reappears from her past.  First, there is the prison guard who, with  ulterior motives, offers to drive her •  from prison to her new home. As Arlene  rejects his patronizing paternalism, he  becomes more and more aggressive, culminating in a rape scene at the end of act  one.  Next, there is her mother, who, although  she exhibits a superficial interest in  Arlene, constantly berates her. Her  statement, "I ain't hateful; why have I  got such hateful kids?" sums up her  attitude.  Then there is Carl, her ex-pimp, who points  out, rather forcefully, that a woman like  her can't earn a decent living anywhere,  except on the street.  Finally there is Ruby, another ex-con,  who, although she reminds Arlene of the  past and confronts her with reality, proves  to be her only solace.  All roles are well portrayed, and it is  from this fine acting that the play takes  its realism. The script itself is loosely  written and at times almost tedious.  Its  striking resolution at the end of act two  is its major salvation.  Nevertheless, this is an important piece  of what could be termed "political theatre"  Its only failing in this regard is that it  does not show any solidarity among those  on the inside. Otherwise, it carries a  clear message about the meaning of freedom, and was well worth seeing.  0  "Waiting for the Parade" is Westcoast's  next production. It runs at the Waterfront  from March 5 to April 11. What was life  like for five Calgary women who found themselves alone — and together — when the  men had all gone off to World War II?  "Waiting for the Parade" sounds promising,  and would be worth checking out. Times  are Monday to Friday at 8:30 and Saturday  at 6 and 10 p.m. Call 685-6217 for reservations . 0_  VSW   Vancouver Status of Women is looking for  a legal researcher. The legal researcher  organizes advocacy programs relating to  women and the law, and prepares position  papers and recommendations on present  and proposed legislation. If you are interested in applying for this full-time  position, call VSW at 736 1313 for more  details. Kinesis    March 1981  CULTURAL WORK  Discussing A Wives' Tale, Inco women discovering strength  A WIVES TALE is a 73-minute colour documentary about the strike against the International Nickel Company (INCO) by Local  6500 of the Steelworkers of America in  Sudbury, Ontario, beginning September  '78.  INCO owns the world's largest nickel deposit and controls the world's market.  The successful ten-month strike touched  the lives of the women of Sudbury,  because  INCO employs a quarter of that city 's 160  thousand population.  A Wives ' Tale is about the politicization  of these Sudbury women, who organized  themselves into Wives Supporting the  Strike.  When the film was shown in Vancouver on  February 22 by Pacific Cinematheque as  part of their labour series.  Saralee James  Jillian Ridington and Sylvia Spring were  there.  Here is a dialogue among these three women about the film and what it meant to  them.  SYLVIA SPRING: We've just seen A Wives'  Tale, .made by Joyce Rock and Sophie Bis-  sonnette, with Martin Duckworth as the  cameraperson. The film is basically about  the issue of women's role as supporters  of their husbands and children or  women  as equal partners, equally involved in  what concerns their family, including the  man's work and the strike against Inco.  JILLIAN RIDINGTON: There were a few women  — 30 women among 11,700 men — who were  themselves on strike. But mainly the film  is about the wives' solidarity group,  Wives Supporting the Strike.  The film achieves what it sets out to do  — to create the story of the women's  struggle The struggle is at first within  women themselves, to accept that they have  the right to express their own opinions.  To say, "Yes, this is what we believe in."  Then they have to struggle with their husbands. There is one wonderful scene where  a man is going on and on about how husbands  should be number one. And his wife turns  and looks at him and says, "You know, you  are just a male chauvinist pig!"  SYLVIA: And he continues talking. It's as  if he hadn't even heard her.  The women have to struggle with the union  JILLIAN: At another level, the struggle is  with the union. One of the issues is whether the wives' committee should have the  right to distribute the funds the women  have raised in ways they see fit, or whether the money should be handed over to the  union, which would appoint a signing officer.  When the wives issue a press release criticizing a proposed contract offer, the union  is very angry at them. The union says that  the women don't have any right to issue  press releases without permission.  So the whole question comes up: can the women determine what they want or does the  union control them?  SYLVIA: This is a central issue because  in 1958 the women of Sudbury had come out  against a strike, saying that they wanted  their men to go back to work.  The press and management made a lot of  that and for twenty years, the women have  been seen as betrayers. So the Wives Supporting the Strike had to live down that  reputation.  These women enter the struggle with the  double burden of that history. They want to  show the union, the men, and-the management  that they're behind the strike.  The irony is that in the process they discover their own power and want to support  each other.  In several instances it comes down to this:  do they support each other or do they support their men? When the men are in conflict with the women's group, who do you  go for?  JILLIAN: You have some women saying, "I'm  going to support my husband no matter what."  You have other women saying, "We've got to  do what we believe is right no matter what."  Choosing between the group or a husband:  it's a serious dilemma  SARALEE JAMES: I could really emphasize  with the one woman who said, "If my husband  wants to go back to work, I support him."  The whole idea of the solidarity committee  was to support the striking husbands. If  what her husband wanted was different from  what she was working for in the group, she  .is caught in a serious dilemma.  SYLVIA: What the men said when the women  came out with their own press release was,  "We've got to have solidarity. It's not  the camera of Joyce and her crew was there  when the women were making these discoveries, saying things they'd never said before  In the film we were involved in that process of self-discovery. One woman was saying, "I found out that an eight-hour day  means that the man works eight hours and  the woman works 24, because the kids don't  turn off at five o'clock."  The film is full of these candid moments  of women making connections.  SARALEE: Another woman said, "I used to be  afraid to go into a room by myself." I  can remember that myself. And now that woman can say, "I can walk into a room without having to be with somebody." That's  such a small thing and yet it's such a big  thing.  The filmmaker has to make herself jinvisible  SYLVIA: It's so difficult to be in the  right place at the right time with the mike'  solidarity when the women are saying one  thing and,the men are saying another."  So under this heavy guilt trip of "we've  got have solidarity," the women are told  they're the bad guys if they have a different opinion.  JILLIAN: The film sets the stage for this  conflict in an eloquent way. There are some  fine archival shots of Sudbury which suggest  that Sudbury has always been a place to  which, literally, the women have followed  the men. Even before the days of the mine,  there was a CP station there. It's always  been a place where the men have gone for  work, and women have followed.  SARALEE: The most exciting thing for me  in the film was the growing awareness on  the part of some women that they had power.  They were taking responsibility for their  own decisions.  They were really disappointed whan the  on and the camera going — to catch those  moments. You have to make yourself invisible, really, and be very trusted by the  women you're with.  SARALEE: You were never aware of self-consciousness in front of the camera except  at one point where a miner is going out to  work on the night shift.  I didn't feel the  presence of the camera at any other time.  SYLVIA: The hardest thing in film making,  and which you never see on the film, is  getting to that point where there is no  self-consciousness. What you need is time,  patience, commitment and love. And it's  clear that the film makers of A Wives' Tale  had that. Joyce Rock worked on the film  for two years. With no money, no encouragement, no guarantees that it would ever come  out....  JILLIAN:  I do wonder what effect that  strike has had in the long-term on the hus-  Thefilm is full of candid moments of women makingiconnections  strike was over and they had to go back to  the kitchen, without anywhere to put that  energy that had caused so much growth.  JILLIAN: The women had been able to get out  of Sudbury, some of them for the first time.  They'd travelled to rallies in Toronto and  Montreal... they'd been real people, telling  their story. One woman said, "I used to  be kind of ashamed and mumble that I was  the wife of an Inco miner. Now I say, I'm  the wife  of an Inco miner,  and people know  who I am and what that means."  It was Sudbury but really.it could have  been so many places. It could have been  any one of those towns that Bonnie Kreps  filmed in No Life for a'Woman. It's a single industry town. Inco controls all the  production. Those miners have made, one  billion, three million dollars for Inco  over the past ten years.  SYLVIA: The most interesting thing for  me as a feminist and a film maker was that  bands, particularly those husbands who stay  ed at home while the wife went out to'work  I can't see that men who have been made  aware of the work there is in housework  could ever go back to totally ignoring it.  SYLVIA: The saddest thing was that six  months after the strike, the film makers  go back to talk with the women about what's  happened since the men went back to work.  One of the women who'd been really vocal  and strong during the strike said that it  had been really hard on her, staying at  home again. She'd been able to get out but  only to things like make-up parties and  tupperware parties.  But the group of Francophone women had saic  "We want to continue doing this." They had  gone out looking for other struggles. That  was a very positive part of what is a very  positive film. Make sure you see it.  0_  Contact DEC Films, 121 Avenue Road, Toronto for more information. Kinesis    March 1981  BULLETIN BOARD  Resources  VANCOUVER WOMEN'S BOOKSTORE has a new  home: 322 West Hastings.  New hours are  Monday thru Saturday, 12:00 to 5:30  p.m.  Thursdays till 9:00. The new  store has space for women artists to  hang their work for sale. Call 684-  0523 for details.  LESBIAN INFORMATION LINE is open for calls  two nights a week, Thursday and Sunday  from 7:00 to 10:00 p.m. at 734-1016.  Drop in every second Sunday. LIL is accepting new volunteers for a training  course in February.  Call Sue between  10:00 p.m. and 12:00 a.m. at 874-4582,  or call LIL Sunday or Thurs, 7-10 p.m.  Events  W0MANSIZE: Coming attraction at.the Women  in Focus Gallery's new location at 456  West Broadway. Womansize: Large scale  renderings of women's imagery, comprised of three two-week exhibits:  Fabric Arts/ Soft Sculpture: March 16  to April 4  Two Dimensional/ Multi Media: April 10  to April 25  Word/Metal/Clay/Stone Sculpture: May 1  to May 16.  WOMAN'S BODY AND HEALTH series is ongoing  at noon at the YWCA, 580 Burrard.  March 16:  Jacquie Allan, Thema Goudron  and Nadine Gilfillan discuss mastectomy.  March 23: Rosemary Gander on motherhood.  March 30: Susan Mendelson on creative  cooking.  MEET TATYANA MAMONOVA on March 14 at the  Ironworkers Hall, 2415 Columbia, 7:30.  Call 255-8836 for details and childcare  Tatyana Mamonova also speaks on March  12 at SFU, 12:30 p.m. in Rm 9201, Academic Quadrangle. And at UBC on March  13, at noon in Rm 202 of the Buchanan  Building.  VANCOUVER WOMEN'S HEALTH COLLECTIVE pres-  sents historical and practical information on birth control. Tuesday, March  17, 7:30 p.m. at SFU, Room C900. At  UBC, Room 130 in SUB on Friday, March  20.  LESBIAN CONFERENCE BENEFIT DANCE, March  21, at the Teamsters Hall, St George  and Broadway. Employed: $5.50, Marginal, $4.50, unemployed $3.50. Live band  from Seattle: the Volcanics.  WOMEN'S POETRY READING - EIGHT VOICES at  SFU, Rm C9001 on March 24 from 3:30  to 8:30. Admission free.  WOMEN AGAINST PRISONS can use the support  of all of you. Come to the coroner's inquest into the suicide of Maureen Richards in Oakalla!  March 24 and 25 in New Westminster Coroner's Court, Royal Columbian Hospital,  330 E. Columbia, New Westminster.  Laurie Leifer-Helman/LNS  WOMEN IN THE MIDDLE EAST is the focus for  discussion by the Women and Imperialism  group. The movie, We The Palestinian  People, will be shown Friday, March 27  at First United Church, 320 East Hastings at 7:30 p.m., followed by a discussion.  Sunday, March 29 at 2:00 p.m. at the  YWCA, 580 Burrard, there will be a  slide/tape presentation about the U.S.  involvement in Iran.  PROGRAMS FOR WOMEN AT DOUGLAS COLLEGE  Feminist Issues at New Westminster  Times: 7:30 — 9:30 p.m.  April 2    : Family Relations  April 23   : Sexual Harassment  May 14     : Play as Re-Creation  Problem Solving for Women, Port Coquit-  lam on Saturday, March 14  Emotional Self-Defence in Langley, Saturday/Sunday, March 28 and 29.  Stress Management Courses  March 13  March 14  March 28  New Westminster  Langley  Delta  Phone 525-?075 for full details.  VANCOUVER STATUS OF WOMEN, 1090 West 7th  Ave, Vancouver V6H 1B3, phone 736-1313.  VSW is open 9:00 — 5:00 Monday - Wednesday, and 9:00 to 9:00 on Thursdays.  WOMEN AND MONEY, a one-day workshop sponsored by Continuing Education of Langara  Campus. Saturday, March 28 from 9:30  to 5:30. Fee: $5.00.  Five workshops: income taxes, personal  budgeting, money as a political tool,  dymystification of economics, and women  in business.  Kathy Ruffen and Mary Schendlinger are  featured speakers. Both are active in  CCEC. For childcare and more details,  call 324-5323 or 324-5324. Bring a lunch.  Conference takes place at Langara, 100  West 49th Ave, Vancouver B.C.  NEED CHILD TAX CREDIT information? Vancouver Status of Women can assist you for  free. Call Cat at 736-1313 for details.  KINESIS  KINESIS is published ten times a year by Vancouver Status  of Women. Its objectives are to enhance understanding  about the changing position of women in society and work  actively towards achieving social change.  VIEWS EXPRESSED IN KINESIS are those of the writer and  do not necessarily reflect VSW policy. All unsigned  material is the responsibility of the Kinesis editorial group.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status of  Women, 1090 West 7th Avenue, Vancouver, B.C. V6H 1B3.  MEMBERSHIP in Vancouver Status of Women is by  donation. Kinesis is mailed monthly to all members. Individual subs to Kinesis are $10.00 per year. We ask members  to base their donations on this, and their own financial  situations.  SUBMISSIONS are welcome. We reserve the right to edit,  and submission does not guarantee publication. Include a  SASE if you want your work returned.  DEADLINE: 15th of each month  WORKERS ON THIS ISSUE: Janet Beebe, Janet  Berry, Jan DeGrass, Cole Dudley, Penny Goldsmith, Gillian Marie, Gayla Reid, Joey Thompson,  Cat Wickstrom, Joan Woodward.  Groups  DROP-IN FOR LESBIANS OVER 40, Monday nights  ■at 8:00 p.m. at 322 West Hastings. Make  friends and socialize in a non-threatening atmosphere.  A NEW LESBIAN FEMINIST PROBLEM SOLVING  group is being formed. Each week we meet  to give and receive support in solving  specific problems. We meet with a paid  facilitator until ready to continue as  a self-help group.  Fees are on a sliding scale. Time: Monday evening at CRS warehouse, 1239 Odium. To sign up or receive more information, call Cyndia at 251-2534.  INCEST SURVIVORS support group. Have you  ever been sexually assaulted by your  father, brother, uncle, step-father or  other family member?  If so, and you would like to talk about it in a support group, call Marsha  or Lorie at the West End Community Care  Team, 687-7994. Group meets at the Care  Team offices, 1230 Comox, Wednesdays  from 6:00 p.m. to 7:30 p.m.  WRITING FOR YOURSELF, a one-day, intensive  workshop on journal writing for women.  Release creative energy and discover  your own core strength. Finding your own  voice can be a feminist act.  Sunday, March 29 or  Saturday, April 25.  From 10:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Fee is 4%  of your net monthly income. Information  and registration call Cyndia Cole at  251-2534.  Classified  CITIZENS, TOO: Research is under way for  a film with the working title, Citizens, Too : Indian Women at the Turning  Point, a study of discrimination against Indian women for the Professional Native Women's Association. Anyone  with relevant resources or information  could contact Peg Campbell or Joy Hall  at 683-2689.  BONNIE H. RAMSAY, Accounting Services, Income tax, financial statements and bookkeeping. 738-5349.  KARATE FOR WOMEN classes are being taught  in Coquitlam by Lynn Calvert (black  belt Shotokan). Emphasis on self-defence.  Call 521-6491 for details. More  classes in other areas can be arranged.  . FEMINIST MUSIC COMPOSER is searching for  a pianist to work with. Leaning towards  jazz (loosely-defined). Call Eileen at  873-1190.  On the Air  W0MANVISI0N SHOWS  March 16: Report on the visit of Russian  feminist Tatyana Mamonova, plus historic  tape of Cora Hind's visit to Russia in  the 1930s.  Report on women in Latin Am-  March 22:  erica.  March 30: Interview with Robin Morgan  and excerpts from her speech at UBC.  Womanvision on Co-op Radio, 102.7 FM  Mondays, 7:00— 8:00 p.m.  THE LESBIAN SHOW  March 12: Lesbian artists — how they  see themselves and how we see them.  March 19: Robin Morgan — highlights  from her visit to Vancouver and readings  from some of her work.  March 26: Lesbians and music — spotlight on feminist music for children.  The Lesbian Show on Co-op Radio, 102.7  FM, 7:30.— 8:00 p.m. 1he,  Colle^cttv/e*  Vie       cvcd,       a*      ColUJrwc       o\-     I3>  p<Jrrv^0  2.^0C  Vsle     o,rC       lookup  access     +b     porlc    <^  d)   Co^-V-^cV    Pro<^    o~tt^r Qro^P^  Lcdb -  -EcUArN     <rr   Cot    1^S"1«7Y. r  AN EXHI8IT10/S/ /TTTHE UBC, Bate/^GAIAERY  APRIL 1-MAY Z  3a(|erv hoors:   I ue-Sat |o-5~ N  (located rn the^qsetren^iaortWrncj of Ma/n Library)  Tfce e*tobi4ioi> PRens March 3t,  %-\o m On Wea-ApMl S/there  will be a s(Me (ecmre oh+hc  fmajrfe of worneiOo cac*<?ons  rf 6 Wk s«tt4K of ubc otchtor  0 SHOOU) KMOW THAT Tm  TV €rl ARE A RUBBER STAMP,  AlsID THAT THE (3AUERY   |S  HAVlMfc A CAPTION C0N/7EST7  50 Trf/WIC OP ^CME FABUIjCOS  PBMlWlSrLlliiES FOR OS —  FOR Orv/e, FRAM& OR A STRIP.  DEAb/-lM£_ FORSoei^lSSlOIV-S IS  THANJK  YO0,CAMAbA COONCAU